CHAPTER III.

PRESENT STATE OF THE DARWINIAN THEORIES.

Sec. 1. _The Theory of Descent._

The historical retrospect of the Darwinian theories, from their purely
scientific side, leads us of itself to a critical review of their present
state. We can briefly indicate in advance the result to which it will lead
us, viz.: that the descent theory has gained, the selection theory has lost
ground, the theory of development oscillates between both; but that all
three theories have not yet passed beyond the rank of hypotheses, although
they have very unequal hypothetical value. We can best arrange our review
by beginning with that theory which is the most common, and which perhaps
may still have value when both the others find their value diminished or
lost: _the theory of descent_. From that we proceed to the _theory of
evolution_, and from this to that of _selection_.

The theory of descent is indeed at first sight exceedingly plausible, and
will probably always be the _directive_ for all future investigations as to
the origin of species. The organic species show, besides the great variety
of their characteristics and the unchangeable nature of these
characteristics, many other qualities which are common to them; and these
common characteristics are precisely those which are most essential. {62}
Moreover the higher the structure of the organisms which are
differentiated, the more numerous and more valuable will become the
evidences of similarity, and the greater also will be their distance from
the inorganic and from the lowest organisms of their class, their type, or
their kingdom. For instance, rose and apple-tree, elder and ash, wolf and
dog, goat and sheep, ape and man, are not only a great deal farther removed
from the mode of existence of inorganic bodies than the algae, the monera,
and other low organisms, but they have also, in spite of the great interval
which separates them from one another and especially which separates man
from every animal, much more numerous and important points of contact than,
for instance, two families or genera of algae or of mosses, of polyps or of
infusoria, have among one another. Now our imagination refuses to accept
the theory that the Creator, or nature, or whatever we wish to call the
principle generating the species, in producing the new species, laid aside
all those points of contact which are continually becoming more numerous
and more important, and produced instead, by ever widening leaps, the new
and higher species from the inorganic, which lies farther and farther from
them. On the other hand, the theory appears to us all the more plausible,
that every new species came into existence on that stage which is the most
nearly related to it, and which was already in existence. If we add
further, that the two old maxims of the natural scientists, _omne vivum ex
ovo_ and _omne ovum ex ovario_, have not been invalidated, in spite of all
the searching for a _generatio aequivoca_, and that, even if the origination
of the lowest organisms out of the inorganic could in future be {63}
proved, yet the truth of these maxims for all the higher organized
individuals is established as a fact without exception. Moreover, if we
take into consideration the fact that we can not at all imagine either the
origin or the first development of a higher animal or a human organism
without the protecting integument and the nourishing help of a mother's
womb, we may venture to say that each and every attempt to render the
origin of the first individuals of the higher species conceivable, leads of
necessity to the descent theory. We have either to reject, once for all,
such an attempt, as an unscientific playing with impossibilities, or to
accept the idea of descent. It is certainly the lasting merit of Darwin,
even if his whole structure of proofs should in the course of time show
itself weak, that he not only had the courage (as others had before him),
but also inspired scientists with the courage to trace the idea of a
descent of species in a scientific way.

To be sure, so long as we have no other proof of the descent theory than
the circumstance that we can imagine it, it will continue to be nothing
more than an ingenious hypothesis. We have, therefore, to look to the realm
of nature for more direct proofs; and we are there furnished with them.
They are presented to us by geology in connection with the botanical and
zooelogical systems, by geology in connection with vegetable and animal
geography, by comparative anatomy, and by the history of the embryonic
development of animals.

_Geology_ finds in the strata of the crust of the globe a large number of
extinct plants and animals of extraordinary variety; but all of them,
however much they {64} may differ from the organisms of to-day, are
completely in harmony with the _botanical_ and _zooelogical systems_ in
which we divide the still living organisms. Not only have by far the most
of the now extinct genera and species their family and stem-companions, and
many even their genera and species companions, in the living world, but
also those genera whose nearer relations are now extinct--as, for instance,
the club-moss-trees, the trilobites, the ammonites, the belemnites, the
sauria, the nummulites,--show still a very perceptible relationship with
living genera, and can be quite accurately included in the botanical and
zooelogical systems; nay, they even fill up gaps in it. The anatomical,
morphological, and, so far as we can judge, the physiological and
biological relationship of the fossil with living organisms, is so great
and comprehensive that in the present state of science a systematic botany
or zooelogy, that should only treat of the fossils or of living organisms
alone, would be imperfect. But the relationship of the fossil organisms
with the natural systems of botany and zooelogy is apparent not only in this
respect, but also in the fact that the single species during the long
periods of time which are shown by geology to have elapsed, came into
existence in a series, which again pretty closely corresponds to the
natural system of the organic kingdoms; and that the fossil representatives
of all classes and families, the nearer they come to the present world,
appear the more nearly related to the living organisms, so that the fauna
and flora of the ante-human time are lost in those of the human period by
transitions gliding from the one to the other. For instance, in the Miocene
formation of the tertiary epoch {65} we find thirty per cent. of species
still living to-day; in the Pliocene, even sixty to eighty per cent., and
toward its end even about ninety-six per cent. of species which are
identical with those now living.

A brief glance may still more closely illustrate this analogy between the
geological series and the organic systems. Plants and animals seem to have
appeared nearly at the same time, and at first in the form of the very
lowest organisms. The earliest plants found by geology belong also to the
lowest stage of the vegetable kingdom; they are the algae. They are followed
again by higher cryptogamous plants, especially ferns and club-mosses. Only
at a later period flowering plants appear, among them being first the
plants with naked seeds standing lower in the systems, as the cycad-trees
and pine-forests; later, those with enclosed seeds, among them being again
first the monocotyledons, last the dicotyledons,--all of them precisely
corresponding to the botanical system. The same thing is true in the animal
kingdom. If the eozoon Canadense, found in the laurentian slate of the
Cambrian formation in North America, is really an organism and not an
inorganic form, the earliest vestiges of animal life we can find are the
rhizopodes or foraminifera; and these organisms belong to the lowest stage
of life--to that stage which forms a kind of undeveloped intermediate
member between the vegetable and animal kingdom, Haeckel's kingdom of the
protista. The next oldest animal organisms found in the Cambrian formation
are the zooephytes, and immediately above them the mollusca and the
crustacea. In the following Silurian period we find corals, radiata, worms,
mollusca, and crustacea, in {66} great number, also all the main-types of
the invertebrates; and in the highest Silurian strata there are also to be
found representatives of the lowest class of vertebrates, of fish, but
still of very low organization and little differentiated. That the five
main-types of the invertebrates seem to have appeared quite
contemporaneously, yet that the zooephytes really appeared first, does not
contradict the before-mentioned law of a progress in the appearance of the
organisms from the lower to the higher. For in the zooelogical system also
these main-types of the invertebrates do not stand one above the other, but
by the side of each other: at most, the radiata, the worms, the mollusca,
and the articulata, take their places above the zooephytes. Only within the
main-types, in the classes, orders, etc., do differences in rank take
effect; and even here, not without exception. What difference in rank, for
instance, is there between an oyster and a cuttle-fish? between a cochineal
and a bee or ant? and yet the first two belong to one and the same
type--the type of mollusca; and the last three to one and the same
class--the class of insects. The vertebrates rank decidedly above the
invertebrates; and in a manner wholly corresponding to this, the
vertebrates also appear after the invertebrates. Just as decidedly as to
their rank, the main classes of the vertebrates do not stand beside, but
above one another: above the fish stand the amphibia, above them the
reptiles, next the birds, and above them the mammalia. To this series of
succession also the geological facts seem to correspond pretty closely;
only long after the fish do the first amphibia and reptilia
appear--although it can not yet be decided which of these {67} two classes
has left its earliest traces. If the interpretation of the gigantic
foot-steps in the colored sandstone of North America, as belonging to the
cursorial birds, is correct, the first appearance of birds falls in the
time between the reptilia and mammalia; otherwise the first mammalia would
have appeared before the first birds. For if we find the first real bones
of birds only in the Jura and in the Chalk-formation, they are birds with
tail-spines and with teeth in the beak--hence still related to the reptilia
or the sauria. The first traces of mammalia to be found in the Upper Keuper
formation, and in the Jura, belong to the order of opossums or marsupialia;
_i.e._, to that order which (excepting the echidna and the ornithorhynchus
that, as so-called monotremeta, stand the very lowest in the class of the
mammalia, but are very scarce) occupies the lowest stage among the
multitude of mammalia. Only after them do the higher orders of mammalia
appear; and last of all organisms, man.

If we follow more in detail the appearance of the single organisms, some
remarkable modifications show themselves in the course of their appearance
and growth. We have heretofore mentioned the possibility of the appearance
of the mammalia before the bird. Another fact which deserves attention is,
that frequently the lowest representatives of a class or an order do not at
first appear where the highest representatives of the next lower class or
order are in existence, but with lower representatives of a preceding class
or order, viz.: such representatives of the same as are still less
differentiated and unite in themselves comparatively still more generic and
less specific characteristics--as for instance, the lowest and {68}
earliest amphibia, which do not appear at the same time and place with the
most highly organized fishes, but with fishes of still lower organization.
Moreover many groups of organisms show in earlier geological periods a
richness of development from which they have now fallen far away. For
instance, among the mammalia the pachydermata, among the reptilia the
salamander and newt, among the articulata the cephalopoda, are at present
remarkably reduced;--compare with the legions of ammonites and belemnites
of the secondary period the small number of nautilus and cuttle-fish of the
seas at the present day. A similar fortune was experienced by the ferns and
club-mosses which formed whole forests in the carboniferous period. Other
groups which once played a great _role_, are now wholly extinct; for
instance, the trilobites of the primary, the sauria of the secondary, the
nummulites of the tertiary periods. Now, all these modifications of
geological progress would entirely correspond to the idea of a pedigree to
which the descent theory traces back the whole abundance of forms of
organisms. As soon as we seriously accept the idea of a pedigree, each of
the two organic kingdoms would throughout form for its classes and species
not only one single straight line of descent, but a tree, the branches of
which are again ramified in a manifold way; a tree on which single
branches--as perhaps that of the class of birds--may leave the main-stem or
a main-branch, possibly being a branch destined to a higher development,
and on that account held back in the process of development; a tree,
finally, on which also branches and twigs can wholly or partly die off, as
those of the extinct or reduced groups of organisms. {69}

From the point where the geological formations approach the present time,
_plant_ and _animal geography_ also assists _geology_ in increasing the
weight of the reasons for an origin of organisms through descent. With the
tertiary period, the fauna and flora of the globe, which in former periods
had a nearly uniform character all over the earth and showed no climatic
differences, begin to separate according to climate, zones, and greater
continents. This separation becomes distinctly evident in the middle
tertiary formations, the Miocene, and much more distinctly in the higher
tertiary formations, the Pliocene. The animals, especially the higher
vertebrates, of the Pliocene formation on each continent or each larger
group of islands, correspond very closely to the now living animals of the
same geographical limit, with the exception of being generally of a much
larger size. The Pliocene animal world of mammalia of the three old
continents, for instance, corresponds exactly, through all its orders, to
the present fauna of Europe, Asia and Africa; and that on an average it was
built up more stupendously than that of to-day, we can see from the
cave-bear and the mammoth. South America is the home of a peculiar order of
mammalia--of the edentata, to which belong the sloth, the armadillo, and
the like. All its predecessors are to be found also in the Pliocene strata
of South America, and only there; and mostly in gigantic, but otherwise
completely related, forms. New Zealand has no indigenous mammalia, but in
their place great cursorial birds with but rudimentary wings. Exactly the
same thing is found by geology in its tertiary and post-tertiary strata:
nowhere a mammal, but gigantic birds with rudimentary {70} wings, down to
the dinornis, which probably died out in man's time. New Holland has merely
marsupial and some monotrematous, but no placental, mammalia; even its
tertiary strata give no placental mammalia, but marsupialia, in analogy
with all living genera, herbivorous, and carnivorous. Indeed, the analogy
goes so far that the same line which through the Indian Archipelago
separates the present Australian animal and plant world from the Asiatic,
forms also the separating line for the geological zones of the Pliocene
epoch. All these are facts which render quite inevitable the idea of an
origin of the higher organic species of to-day through descent.

But still, from another side, animal geography, though it does not yet
speak for a common pedigree of the whole animal world, as the facts just
mentioned also do not, still at least speaks for a descent of related,
though at present separated, genera and species from common forefathers.
The continents of the Old and New World are so constructed that toward the
North Pole they approach one another very closely, and toward the South
Pole they withdraw from one another. Without doubt there existed in the
North, through long periods of time, a land-connection of America with Asia
and with Europe. Now, both continents have their more or less
characteristic animal world, and these characteristics are distributed over
the two halves of the globe in the following extremely remarkable way: The
fauna of the Old and the New World, in those groups of animal genera which
live only in the warmer or tropic zones or only south of the equator, and
have no associates of genera or families in the higher North, is in each
hemisphere entirely characteristic, and differs in a {71} marked way from
the fauna of the other half of the globe. For instance, the rhinoceros, the
hippopotamus, the giraffe, the antelope with undivided horns, the hedgehog,
the mole proper, are only inhabitants of the Old World, whence also the
horse originally came, the striped ones in Africa and the non-striped in
Asia; on the other hand, the lemur, the ant-eater, the armadillo, and
others, are limited to South America. The apes of the Old World have five
molar teeth on each side of the jaw, narrow noses, tails usually short and
never prehensile, and fleshy protuberances for sitting; the apes of the New
World have six molar teeth, flat noses, and long prehensile tails. And on
the contrary, where closely related species are found on both parts of the
globe, they belong only to genera of which single species live or have
lived in the far North; as, for instance, the rein-deer, still common to
the Old and the New World in this very North which once formed a bridge
between the two halves of the earth. The same is true in regard to cattle,
the deer, the cat, the dog, the hare. Similar facts can also be shown of
other animal classes. The farther the different species of these genera
withdraw from the North Pole, the greater become the differences between
the species on the one half of the globe and the analogous species of the
other. Compare on this point K. E. von Baer's "Studien aus dem Gebiete der
Naturwissenchaften, ueber Darwin's Lehre," ("Studies from the Realm of
Natural Science upon Darwin's Teachings"), p. 356 f. If we add, further,
the before mentioned fact, that those genera which are exclusively peculiar
to one or the other continent, have their related predecessors in the
tertiary strata of these continents, {72} the hypothesis of a separate
origin for each single species, without genealogical connection with the
anatomically and physiologically related species, becomes neither more nor
less than a scientific impossibility.

Moreover, there are several facts of _comparative anatomy_ which have long
been the joy of all zooelogists and have rewarded the toilsome labors of
detailed investigations by a delightful view over the whole realm of the
organic world, but which find a scientific explanation only in the descent
theory. They are the _homology of the organs_, and to a certain degree also
the so-called _rudimentary organs_. By homology of organs we mean the fact
that within one and the same class-group of organisms all the organs, and
especially the organs in their most solid constituents, in the skeleton,
are built after one and the same fundamental plan, and therefore are even
in their most widely separated modifications varied after this one and the
same plan. This is especially true of the vertebrae and the limbs. This
homology goes so far within one class, particularly within the class of
mammalia, that, for instance, the hands and feet of man, the hands of the
ape, the paws of the beast of prey, the hoof of the horse and of the ox,
the paws of the mole, the fins of the seal and of the whale, the
wing-membranes of the flying-squirrel, correspond to one another in their
smallest parts and ossicles, and can all be registered with the same
numbers and letters; _i.e._, they are homologous to one another even to the
minutest detail. The _ideal_ plan and connection in the organisms,
disclosed by these facts, and long ago acknowledged and admired, receives
at the same time its simple _material_ basis through the acceptance of a
common descent. {73}

A similar relation is observed in _rudimentary organs_.

Many of them, as the nipples of males, point, if not to a common descent
from a lower form, at least to a common plan of the sexes. But when the
embryo of the whale still has its teeth in the jaw, the grown up whale its
hip-bones, when the eye of man still has its winking membrane, the ear and
many portions of the skin their rudimentary muscles of motion, the end of
the vertebral column its rudimentary tail, the intestinal canal its blind
intestine; when sightless animals, living in the dark, still have their
rudimentary eyes, blind worms their shoulder-blades; when in like manner
the plants, especially in their parts of fecundation, show in great number
such rudimentary organs as are entirely useless for the functions of life,
but which are never misleading in determining their relationship with other
plants:--how simply are all these facts explained by the descent theory,
how not at all without it!

Finally, if we now mention the _history of the development of animals_, we
shall have to postpone to the next section the consideration of the most
essential facts furnished by this science; for the individual development
of animals is a process which could speak not only for a descent of the
species, but also for a descent of them through gradual development. But
where, as in the present section, we treat the descent theory apart from
the evolution theory, we have also to think of the possibility that the
species or groups of species are not originated through gradual
development, but nevertheless do originate through descent--namely, in
leaps through metamorphosis of germs or a heterogenetic generation; and for
such an idea we find confirmation in the {74} observation of the history of
development of animals, which we call _change of generation_ or
_metagenesis_.[4] By this is meant the following phenomenon: Certain
animals, as the salpa and doliolum of the order of the tunicata, as well as
certain mites and many tape-worms, produce offspring which are wholly
dissimilar to the mother stock. These offspring have the capacity of
reproducing themselves--if not by sexual means, as at the first generation,
still by the formation of sprouts; and it is only the animals originated by
the second generation (with many species, even those by the third) which
return again to the form of the first generation. The plant-lice transmit
themselves through six, seven, even ten generations by means of sprouts,
until a generation appears which lays eggs. Now it is indeed true that the
change of generation forms a circle in which the form of the last
generation always returns to that of the first, and therefore leaves the
species, as species, wholly unchanged. But it is nevertheless a process
which shows that the natural law of an identity between generator and
product, observed in other relations, is not without exception; and if we
once have reason to suppose that the generation of new species took place
in past periods of the globe, but has ceased in the present, such processes
in the single period open to our direct observation--namely, the present
(in which, however, according to our knowledge, the species remain
constant)--are {75} nevertheless hints worthy of notice. For they refer us
to ways in which in those former times, when certainly new species did
originate, this formation of species might possibly have taken place.

This consideration leads us to treat of the main objection raised to every
descent theory: namely, that never yet has the origin of one species from
another been observed, but that, on the contrary, _all species_--so far as
our experience goes, stretching over thousands of years--_remain constant_.
We will give no weight to the fact that the constancy of species seems by
no means to be absolutely without exception; for on the whole, they
certainly remain constant. The only example which goes to prove such an
evolution of species as taking place to-day--viz: the natural history of
sponges--seems not to have this bearing. The transitions of form, proven by
O. Schmidt in the siliceous sponges and by Haeckel in the chalk-sponges,
seem to show, not the genetic coming forth of a new species out of another,
and especially not the evolution of a higher species out of a lower, but
rather the uncertainty of the idea of species in general and the
worthlessness of the skeleton-forms, for this idea, in such low
organizations as the sponges. But that objection already loses its chief
force from the consideration that we have not only never observed the
origin of one species from another, but never even the origin of a species
itself; and that nevertheless all species have successively originated in
time. If we, therefore, are not able to observe directly their origination,
we have a right to make all possible attempts at approaching the knowledge
of it in an indirect way. But we see this objection invalidated by still
another {76} fact. From all observations, it seems to be evident that those
agencies which originated the species in general have ceased since man
appeared. Now this fact is inconvenient for all those who, on metaphysical
grounds, reject aim and purpose in the world and accept an aimless motion
in the universe, a circle in which only identical powers are ever active to
all eternity. From this standpoint, the scientists cannot, except by very
artificial hypotheses, escape the conclusion that, if new species once
originated through descent, new species ought still to originate through
descent. In like manner, it is true, they are also obliged to accept the
other conclusion: that if new species once originated through primitive
generation, new species ought still to originate through primitive
generation. On the other hand, those scientists who recognize aims in the
world for which the world and each part of it is destined, and which are
attained in the world through the processes of coming into existence, have
to expect in advance that the organic kingdoms are also planned with
reference to those aims. They naturally see the aim of the origin of
species attained, where in the organic world beings appear who combine with
the highest physical organization a self-conscious and responsible
spiritual life, and who are capable of conceiving the ideal, even the idea
of God. For, with the appearance of these beings, there enter upon the
theatre of the world beings who go beyond the value of a purely physical
organism and of a purely somato-psychical life, and in like manner
represent again a higher order of beings; just as the first appearance of
organic life on earth once introduced a new and higher stage of {77}
existence in contrast to the inorganic world. Scientists who take this
standpoint can readily adopt the fact that we do not now observe the
origination of new species; for it is in full harmony with their
metaphysical doctrines, without the same being on that account essentially
dependent upon the confirmation or rejection of the hypothesis of the
present constancy of species. With this very fact, the maxim that if new
species once originated through descent, new species must still originate
through descent, has lost for them its truth, and therefore its power of
demonstration. So we see even here, while in the midst of the discussion of
a purely scientific problem, in what close correlation metaphysics and
natural science stand, and moreover--since the metaphysical view is most
closely connected with the religious--in what close relationship religion
and natural science stand. At the same time we also see how little the
metaphysical interest, and much more how little the religious interest, has
reason to avoid the investigation of facts in nature.

Sec. 4. _The Theory of Evolution--Archaeology, Ethnography, Philology._

The evolution theory teaches that the species have developed themselves one
from another in gradual transitions, each of which was as small as the
individual differences still observed to-day among the individuals of the
same species. It is not without support, especially in the _history of the
development of plants and animals_.

Each organic being becomes what it is by means of organic development. Each
plant, even the highest organized, begins in its seed-germ with a simple
cell, {78} and is differentiated in constant development up to the fully
perfected individual. Each animal, even the most highly organized (man
included), begins the course of its existence as an egg; and each egg has
no greater value of form than that of a single cell. This egg-cell is
differentiated, after fecundation, in gradual and imperceptible
transitions, farther and farther, higher and higher, until the individual
has reached its perfect organization. No organ, no function of the body, no
power or function of the soul or of the mind, appears suddenly, but all in
gradual development. Since we see all individuals thus originating by means
of gradual development, the possibility lies very near that the different
organic formations of all the organic kingdoms could also have been
originated by the same means.

In still another direction does the history of the development of single
plants and animals make this possibility plausible to us. In the animal
world, and partly also in the plant world, the single individuals of higher
species in their embryonic development pass through states of development,
in the former stages of which not only the individuals of the most
different species look confusingly similar to one another, but also the
embryos in their organization remind us of the perfected state of much
lower classes of beings. In order to give a clear idea of the first
mentioned facts, Haeckel, for instance, in his "Natural History of Creation"
and in his "Anthropogeny," represents by engravings the embryos of
different vertebrates and also of man; representations which--although,
according to the judgment of competent scientists, unfortunately not exact,
but modified, after the manner of stencil plates, in favor of {79} greater
similarity--yet make it quite clear that the similarity of the different
embryos must be very great. We see, for instance, on one table the embryos
of a fish, a salamander, a turtle, a fowl; on a second, those of a pig, an
ox, a rabbit, a man; on a third, those of a turtle, a fowl, a man; and we
find the similarity really great. Examples of the second fact--that
individuals of higher classes or orders in former states of their embryonic
development represent an organization which corresponds to the full-grown
individuals of the lower classes--are: the tail of the human embryo, the
gill-arches of the embryos of reptilia, of birds, of mammalia, and of man.
Now Haeckel here takes up again an idea first suggested by Fritz Mueller, and
derives from these observations the "biogenetic maxim," as he calls it:
"The history of the germ is an epitome of the history of the descent; or,
in other words, ontogeny (the history of the germs or the individuals) is a
recapitulation of phylogeny (the history of the tribe); or, somewhat more
explicitly: that the series of forms through which the individual organism
passes during its progress from the egg-cell to its fully developed state,
is a brief, compressed reproduction of the long series of forms through
which the animal ancestors of that organism (or the ancestral forms of its
species) have passed from the earliest periods of so-called organic
creation down to the present time." In his latest publication, "Ziele und
Wege der heutigen Entwicklungsgeschichte," ("Aims and Methods of the
Present History of Evolution"), he admits into the formulation of his
biogenetic maxim also the consideration of those phenomena in the
ontogenetic development which are no recapitulation of the history {80} of
the stem, but originated by adapting the embryo to its surroundings. In the
description and explanation of this theory, he uses a term which throws
upon nature a peculiar reproach, never before made, namely: cenogeny, or
history of falsifications, in contrast to palingeny, or history of
abridgments. This amended formula now reads: The development of germs is an
abridgment of the development of stems, and is the more complete according
as the development of the abridgment is continued by inheritance, the less
complete according as the development of the false is introduced by
adaptation.

Now, we ask: Is this biogenetic maxim correct? and moreover, from the fact
of the organic individuals originating through development, are we entitled
to draw the conclusion that even the species must have originated through
development? To this question we can no longer get an answer from the
life-processes of living organisms; for we have already mentioned the fact
that, according to the present state of our knowledge, we can no longer
observe the origination of a new species. Moreover, the embryonic states of
development show also, in all their similarity, even in the very first
stages, and with especial distinctness in these first stages, many
differences between the single species; and this is true especially of
those species which, according to the followers of this so-called
biogenetic maxim, should lie in the same stem-line,--so that the direct
scientific value of the embryological results to the palaeontological
investigation, or of the latter to the former, is so far very slight. Such
a problem, however, as the one contained in that biogenetic maxim, which
only gives to investigators the _direction_ in which possibly an {81}
interesting and profitable path can be opened, does not at all deserve the
name of a "_law_." K. E. von Baer, the founder of the whole present science
of the history of development, has certainly a most competent judgment of
the correctness of this so-called biogenetic maxim; and he convincingly
shows, in his essay on "Darwin's Doctrine," that the embryos never
represent a former animalic form, but that their development follows the
principle of representing first the common characteristics of the class,
then those of the order, etc., until finally the individual characteristics
appear in the formation. Those who wish more information about embryology
can find it in Heinrich Rathke's "Entwicklungsgeschichte der Wirbelthiere"
("History of the Development of Vertebrates"), edited by A. Koelliker,
Leipzig, Engelmann, 1861; and those who wish to inform themselves as to the
influence of the ontogenetic results of the solution of the phylogenetic
problems, will find, besides the before-mentioned work of Wigand, rich and
clearly elaborated material in the publication of Wilhelm His--"Unsere
Koerperform und das physiologische Problem ihrer Entstehung, Briefe an einen
befreundeten Naturforscher" ("The Form of our Body and the Physiological
Problem of its Origin; Letters to an Associate Scientist"), Leipzig, Vogel,
1875. The latter writer, although he advocates the descent theory, rejects
the hasty assertions of Haeckel with direct and convincing arguments.

Thus embryology, having from the simple fact of an origin of single plants
and animals through descent at least confirmed the idea of the
_possibility_ of an origin also of species through development, forsakes us
in the {82} inquiry as to the _reality_ of such a genealogy of development,
and refers us to other sciences.

Such a science, from which we certainly are entitled to expect a decided
answer, is _geology_. For if the evolution theory is right, those periods
of the history of our globe in which new species originated--namely, the
periods of geology--_must_ show us also the _forms of transition_ between
the different species. And, indeed, geology gives us an answer; but it
reads contradictorily: It says yes, and it says no.

Geology does show us forms of transition, and, indeed, most frequently in
the lower classes of animals. Who that has once studied petrifactions, does
not know the mass of forms of the terebratulae, the belemnites, and the
ammonites, in the Jura formation? Wuertemberger has brought light into the
perplexing division of species of the ammonites by simply showing their
temporary and systematic transitions into one another. In the fresh water
chalk formation of Steinheim, near Heidenheim, in Wuertemberg, scientists
have found, on the same place, in an uninterrupted series of strata, the
snail valvata or paludina multiformis in all imaginable transitions--from
the flat winding, showing the form of a chess-board, up to the sharp form
of a tower. And it was not, as Hilgendorf thought, in a series which can be
traced in the strata according to time, but, as Sandberger says, in quite a
varied mixture, yet in all imaginable modifications. But even among the
higher and the highest classes of animals, we can trace the transitions.
The flying sauria, if not in their organs of flying, which remind us more
of the bat, at least in head, neck, and toes, are closely connected with
the {83} birds--the oldest birds of the Jura and chalk formations, with
their tail-spines similar to the reptilia and their teeth in the beak to
the sauria. The tertiary formations especially show the primitive history
of many vertebrates in very instructive forms of transitions--which, for
instance, Ruetimeyer, a scientist who is very cautious in his conclusions,
very distinctly traced to the horse, to the ruminating animals, and lately
also to the turtles. Still more in detail, W. Kowalewsky has lately shown
us the primitive history of the horse, and Leidy and Marsh have further
completed it by the addition of American forms, the former having at the
same time described the forms which have led to the tapir.

But to such facts there are, on the other hand, experiences directly
contradictory. Many lower and higher forms of animals and plants appear in
the geological strata, so far as they have been explored, in a wholly
independent way. We have mentioned, in the foregoing section, that the main
types of the invertebrates appear somewhat contemporaneously and without
any traceable intermediate form. The trilobites, a quite highly organized
order of crustacea, appear in the strata of the silurian epoch almost
suddenly, in very many and very distinctly marked species. The uncertainty
of our knowledge shows itself most clearly when we ask for the geneologic
relationship of the vertebrates. In Chap. II, Sec. 1 and Sec. 2 we have already
referred to the value which Darwin, and more especially Haeckel, lays on the
relationship of the larva of the ascidia to the lancelet fish. Now the
important testimony of K. E. von Baer, in his "Memoires de l'Academie de
St. Petersbourg," Ser. vii, Vol. 19, No. 2, tells us that the
nerve-ganglion {84} of the ascidia lies on the side of the stomach, and on
that account can not be homologous with the spine of the vertebrates, but
that the cord in the larva of the ascidia is nothing more than a support
for the tail in swimming, which afterwards disappears, as with many other
larvae. As to the course of reasoning in reaching these genealogical
conclusions, he says: "The hypothesis is indeed flexible. According to
common reasoning, that which shows itself early in the development is an
inheritance of the first progenitors. Therefore the ascidae ought to descend
from the vertebrates, and not the reverse. But it was necessary to show the
descent of the vertebrates from the lower forms. In order to respond to
such a necessity, men sometimes reverse their conclusions. Although
favorably disposed to the doctrine of the transmutation of the animalic
forms, I want a complete proof before I can believe in a transformation of
the vertebrate type into that of the mollusca." Moreover, the zooelogists
Semper and Dohrn find in the embryonic development of the sharks, the
scates, and other cartilaginous fishes, organs which would bring them
rather into a nearer relationship with the ringed worms than with the
crustacea. When, on the other hand, we look around in palaeontology, the
oldest fossil fishes remind us neither of the crustacea nor of the ringed
worms, but of the crabs: a class of animals which lies entirely outside of
Haeckel's stem-line of vertebrates. Also the first appearance of mammalia
does not show transitions. Thus far we have not found in the geological
strata any vestiges of the half-apes, which, according to the hypothesis of
the evolutionists, as a common stem-line for the lines of ape and man
development, once played such an {85} important _role_, and which have
quite numerous representatives.

But the answer which geology gives to our questions as to the probable
confirmation of the evolution theory, naturally becomes most interesting
where the _origin of man_ is treated of. Our attention is, therefore,
especially directed to the most recent formations of the globe which show
us the oldest remains of man. The most instructive are those parts of the
skeleton which allow us to draw the most convincing conclusions as to the
degree of mental development of an individual, namely: the parts of the
skull. Although human bones seem to have been less easily preserved than
those of animals, and are, comparatively speaking, very scarce, especially
more so than prehistoric implements, still there are not wanting such
remains, which go back far beyond historical time. The oldest known skull
is the celebrated one of the Neander cave near Duesseldorf, with its large
vault of the forehead, and its low height. Although Virchow finds on it
evidences of rachitis in youth and of gout in old age, as well as of
injuries, it nevertheless can not have been changed in its _fundamental
form_ by any sickness, even according to Virchow. This very skull now
indisputably shows a still lower formation, which, although quite
essentially different from the type of the ape, stands nearer to it than is
the case with the skulls of men in later times. Of a later date, and of a
correspondingly higher form, are the skull of Engis, of Cannstatt, the
skulls of the Belgian caves (especially Chauvaux), of France, and of
Gibraltar. According to the weighty authority of Schaaffhausen (note his
opening address at the Wiesbaden Congress of the {86} Anthropological
Society, 1873), the skulls and the remaining parts of the skeleton show
more indications of a lower formation the older they are. He especially
calls attention to a certain bone of the roof of the skull--the _Os
interparietale_ or the so-called _Os Incae_--which has only recently been
recognized as a characteristic of a lower formation of skulls, standing
nearer to that of animals. As late as the summer of 1873, two human
skeletons were found at Coblenz in a volcanic sand, of which Schaaffhausen
says: "No less than eight anatomic marks of a lower formation, which
probably have not heretofore been found together, indicate the great age of
these remains." With all these traces of a difference between the former
and the present state of the physical condition of man, the differences
between the type of man and that of the animal are still great enough to
leave wide open the possibility of the origin of man through some other
means than that of gradual development. On the other hand, it is more or
less in favor of the evolution idea, that so far such old remains of man
have been found in places which certainly can not have been the cradle of
mankind, and that those parts of the earth which we would naturally suppose
to be the first dwelling place of the earliest human genera have been
little or not at all investigated. And also the hypothesis of Haeckel, that
the cradle of mankind was a land between Africa and Asia, now sunk in the
sea, and called Lemuria, can be neither proved nor denied. Such vague
possibilities have indeed not the least scientific value.

In considering these contradictory results of geological investigation, we
dare not overlook three points: First, our knowledge of the crust of the
globe is still {87} very fragmentary, and does not yet extend over the
whole globe. Further, it lies in the nature of the case that the strata in
mountain formations can only give a very incomplete picture of the whole
variety of the real organic life which may have populated the earth and the
sea. What a poor picture of the present plant and animal life would be
offered, for instance, by the soil of our continents, the slime, sand, and
pebbles of our coasts and of the bottoms of our lakes and seas, if we had
to construct from them alone the fauna and flora of the present! A third,
but purely hypothetical, consideration is rendered of importance
particularly by Darwin and Haeckel; namely, that the forms of transition
without doubt existed for a shorter period than those forms whose
organization has established itself in fully developed species.

Thus far we have directed our attention to inquiring how the organic
individuals were originated--and have throughout observed a successive
development; next, we have questioned geology--and here also have observed
a progress in the appearance of the species, but have received at the same
time contradictory answers to the question whether this progress presents
itself as a gradual development of one species from another or as a sudden
appearance. So the reasons for and against the evolution theory almost
balance one another; and it is not improbable that the hypothesis of an
origin of species through development will have to share its authority with
the hypothesis of a descent of species through heterogenetic generation, as
well as with the hypothesis of a primitive generation of lower organisms,
still repeating itself at a later time. Thus for the origination of {88}
groups lying nearer together, we have the evolution theory; for the other
groups, and especially for the origination of types where no transitions to
other types can be traced, the theory of the heterogenetic or primitive
generation recommends itself; and both theories thus far are of a purely
hypothetical nature.

But there is still a third realm, which is just as open to our observation
as the history of the development of organisms and as geology, and of which
we can also ask, whether it does not open for us an indirect way to the
knowledge of the origin of species, and especially of man--a knowledge
which we can no longer approach in the direct way of observation. This
realm is _natural history_ and the _history of the development of the human
race_. For mankind also is engaged in a process of development, and its
present members do not stand on the same height. Now the question is, to
what beginning can we trace backward the development of mankind, and to
what succeeding stages of development from this present condition? And do
we find in these earliest periods, and on these lowest stages, points that
are connected with still earlier conditions and organizations, and
especially points which could genealogically join together mankind and the
animal kingdom? Three sciences, still young, favorite children of the
present generation, participate in investigating this realm, namely,
_archaeology_, _comparative ethnology_, and _comparative philology_.

_Archaeology_ leads us back to far-off times. It is a fact that,
chronologically speaking, man lived in the glacial period--according to
French scientists, even before it; and that, palaeontologically speaking,
man and {89} mammoth lived at the same time, and, according to a discovery
made some thirty years ago at Denise in Middle France, probably even man
and another older and defunct form of pachydermata, the elephas
meridionalis, in North America man and the mastodon. The reader may compare
the discoveries regarding the age of mankind, as they are described most
recently by Sir Charles Lyell in his work upon this subject, in the
publications of the Anthropological Congress at Brussels in the year 1873,
and in those of the fourth General Assembly of the German Society for
Anthropology, Ethnology and Primitive History, at Wiesbaden, in the year
1873.

Now, to be sure, from the oldest human _tools_ and _utensils_ that are
found, we can expect still less than from the oldest human bones that they
will throw direct light upon the answer to the question of the _origin_ of
man. For where man not only uses tools, but _manufactures_ the same for
use, a wide breach already exists between man and animal. Manufactured
articles, therefore, can only throw some light on the history of the
development of the already existing human race. And even this light is less
clear than we perhaps expected in view of the first interesting
prehistorical discoveries. It is true, all these discoveries show us an
ascent from the simplest and roughest forms to the more perfect; from the
split but unpolished stone to the polished, and from stone to bronze and
iron. But a progress of the human races in manufacturing and using
articles, from the simple and rough form to the more artificial, lies so
much in the nature of the case, and is so taken for granted with every
conception of the origin of man, even with that contradictory to Darwinism,
that from this simplicity of {90} the earliest tools we can not at all
conclude that there was a condition of mankind lying near that of animals;
and especially we can draw only general and uncertain conclusions as to
that which makes man _man_, as to the spiritual and moral qualities of
those prehistoric men. Moreover, in discoveries belonging to the very
oldest, we come upon drawings and engravings from which we recognize the
man of those primitive times as a creature whose life was not entirely
taken up in the animalic struggle for existence, but was already adorned
with those ideal pursuits and enjoyments which we are accustomed to ascribe
to the height of civilization. Examine, for instance, the drawing of a
mammoth on a mammoth tooth of Dordogne, which the French scientists Lartet
and Christy have reprinted in their Reliquiae Aquitanicae (1868), and which
Sir Charles Lyell has copied in his "Age of the Human Race." How much
spirit and life in this primitive work of art! Or read what Fraas, in the
"Journal of the German Society for Anthropology," March, 1874, reports
about the picture of a grazing reindeer, engraved on a knife handle made of
the horns of a reindeer, which was lately found in the cave of Thayngen
near Schaffhausen, and which surpasses in beauty all rough drawings thus
far found. The whole bearing of the animal--the muscles of the legs and the
head, the form of the many-branched antlers, with the wide-spread eyes, the
representation of the hair upon the body and under-jaw--all disclose a real
artist among those savages.

This is also to be taken into consideration: that those men, whose traces
we find, could possibly have been the descendants of more noble
predecessors, driven {91} off and degenerated, just as well as they could
have been representatives of the whole former condition of culture of
mankind. In England, where the questions of the first condition of culture
of mankind are very warmly discussed, the Duke of Argyll particularly, in
his "Primeval Man," advocates these views, and very forcibly calls
attention to the fact that thus far the places of the discovery of the
earliest traces of man undoubtedly lie very far from the original home of
the human race; while Sir John Lubbock, in his "Origin of Civilization" and
in his "Prehistoric Times," and also Tylor in his "Beginning of Culture"
and in his "Early History of Mankind," take the opposite view of a progress
of mankind from the most uncultivated beginnings.

Archaeology, as a whole, seems to do no more than admit that its results can
be incorporated into the theory of an origin of the human race through
gradual development, _if_ this theory can be shown to be correct in some
other way, and that its results can just as well be brought into harmony
with a contradictory theory.

_Comparative ethnology_ gives us quite a similar result. It is true, there
are races of mankind in the lowest grades of human existence. It is well
known how Darwin, in his voyage on board the "Beagle," got one of his first
vivid impressions of the possibility of an evolution of man from the animal
world, by seeing the inhabitants of Tierra del Fuego; and it is remarkable
that the arms, tools, and furniture, used by the lowest savages, are very
similar to the earliest remains of civilized races found on earth. The
conclusion lies extremely near, that the savages simply remained in earlier
stages of human culture; and an ethnographic picture of mankind {92} at
present would in a similar way give an approximately correct view of its
former development, as the natural zooelogical and botanical system of the
present fauna and flora must give us at the same time the key to their
pedigree; supposing the Darwinian theory to be correct.

If it were so, ethnology would be an altogether inestimable help for the
exploration of the descent and development of the human race. For the
extremely few and rare fossil remains of man--which, moreover, do not give
us any answer to the most important questions in regard to the mental and
moral quality of the primitive man--would be rendered complete by living
examples of the kind, which remained at the old stages of development.

But much is still wanting, before the followers of an evolution theory dare
to use ethnology directly as a primitive history of the development of
mankind, prepared and preserved for them. Especially the before-mentioned
objection of the Duke of Argyll--that the lowest savages of our time can
just as well be depraved as be men who remained stationary in the process
of development--has here increased weight. Moreover, even with the savages
of to-day, a rude state of their tools and a low condition of their mental
and moral life are not so nearly parallel as to allow unrestricted
conclusions to be drawn. Finally, we still know too little about the state
of culture of the savages; and the deeper and higher the intellectual and
ethical possessions of mankind are, the presence of which among the savages
is in question, the more uncertain is our knowledge.

This is especially true of the most important question in this
connection--the question as to the existence {93} or absence of an idea of
God, and the different stages of development of religious ideas. While some
assume as an established fact, that there are savage tribes without any
idea of God or any religion, and even give the names of these tribes,
especially of some from the interior of South America; while Sir John
Lubbock systematically enumerates seven stages of religious development,
from atheism to the connection of religious with moral conceptions, and
lets each single race run through these stages in an identical series until
it either remains on one of the seven stages or arrives at the highest:
yet, on the contrary, other equally trustworthy scientists assert that
there is not a single human race without some idea of religion and of a
God--indeed, not a single race without a monotheistic presentiment--and
that all heathenism, down to its most degenerate stages, consists not so
much in a non-recognition of a God as in ignoring him. They call especial
attention to the difficulty of getting acquainted with the ideas of a
savage tribe without living with it through many years and being intimate
with its language and customs, and especially without enjoying the
unrestricted confidence of the tribe. Mutual misunderstandings, a
suspicious reserve, evasive and untrue answers to questions, are entirely
unavoidable without those conditions. At any rate, the fact deserves
attention, that those who have been longest and most active among savages,
and who enjoyed their confidence to the fullest extent, all reached this
result: they found them not only not without religion, but also not without
a presentiment of the monotheistic idea of God. Livingstone, for instance,
expressed this idea decidedly of all the African tribes {94} with which he
became acquainted; and Jellinghaus gives the same evidence in regard to the
Kols in South Asia.

The _anatomic_ results of ethnology are more favorable to the descent
theory, although they too lead no farther than to the conclusion that the
skull-forms of the lowest tribes represent a lower stage of formation than
those of the higher, and that these lower skull-forms are relatively nearer
to the ape-form than the higher, but that they are still separated from it
by a wide interval.

It appears, then, that even ethnology does not lead us essentially nearer
the solution of the question than archaeology and geological anthropology.

The relatively strongest support to the evolution theory is given by
_comparative philology_; and since language is the most important and most
decisive of all the distinctive characteristics which separate man and
animal[5], this science deserves especial consideration.

In the realm of the natural sciences, the enormous progress of palaeontology
on the one hand and of systematic zooelogy and botany on the other took
place step by step together, and thus prepared the way for Darwin's
idea--which, from the rich material of analytical investigations, only
tries to draw the simple synthesis, and to show at the same time in the
zooelogical and botanical _system_ a representation of the zooelogical and
botanical _history of development_. In quite an analogous way, a process
took place in the linguistic realm which in independent investigations
prepared the way for Darwinism, and now, since Darwin's theory has sought
{95} acknowledgment in the realm of natural history, brings again Darwin's
ideas to the support of philology.

Linguistic and ethnographic investigations, especially the linguistic works
of the missionaries, long ago resulted in gathering rich material from the
storehouse of the language of races now living, and the latest works in the
realm of historical, etymological, and comparative philology had traced the
branches and twigs of the better known languages to stems and roots lying
far back. The result of the comparison soon became the same as in the realm
of the organic world: what presented itself in the system of the living
languages as a lower form, seemed to represent itself as the older and more
original form also in the history of languages. Therefore, all the
prominent linguistic investigators found themselves more and more urged to
accept a theory which declares language, this entirely specific
characteristic of man, to be subject to the same laws of development from
the simpler and most simple forms as the world of the organic. Long ago so
celebrated a man as Jacob Grimm,--"Ueber den Ursprung der Sprache" ("The
Origin of Language"), Berlin, Duemmler--following the footsteps of Wilhelm
von Humboldt, had established a theory, according to which language is "not
created, but produced by the liberty of the human will;" and judging from
many of his Darwinistic utterances concerning the origin and development of
language, he had traced its development in such a way as to arrive at the
conclusion that artless simplicity in the unfolding of the senses is the
first period of its appearance.

The scientists divide all the languages of the earth into three great
groups: first, the monosyllabic, {96} isolating, radical, or asynthetic
languages; second, the agglutinant, terminational, or polysynthetic
languages; third, the inflectional languages. They are of the opinion that
even the languages of highest rank--the inflectional--very probably took a
starting-point from the asynthetic languages, and a course of development
through the agglutinants, and that in like manner the agglutinants have
behind them an asynthetic period. Thus they trace all the languages back to
certain _roots_, which are more or less common to the different groups of
languages.

To the question that now arises--_How did these roots originate?_--the
linguists give us three different answers. The onomatopoetic theory, called
by Max Mueller the Wow-Wow Theory, traces them to imitations of the sound
(W. Bleek, G. Curtius, Schleicher, Wedgewood, Farrar); the interjectional
theory, called by Max Mueller the Pooh-Pooh, or Pah-Pah Theory, traces them
to expressions of the senses (Condillac); a third theory declares the roots
to be phonetic types (Max Mueller, Lazar Geiger, Heyse, Steinthal); while it
is still an open question, whether the attempts at explanation of these
types must here come to a stand-still for the present, as Max Mueller
thinks, or whether, according to Lazar Geiger, we can trace the first
root-expressions especially to impressions of light and color.

The reasons from which Max Mueller, in his "Lectures on the Science of
Languages" (Vol. I, Lect. IX), rejects the first two theories and proves
the third, are quite convincing. Even if, in a purely hypothetical way, a
language could be thought of _in abstracto_, the roots of which only
consist in imitations of sounds or interjections, still in the _really
existing_ languages, {97} so far as we can trace back and uncover their
roots, the roots imitating sounds and the interjectional roots form only a
small and entirely isolated minority, which neither shares in, nor is
capable of development; they stand like "dead sticks in a live hedge." By
far the greater number of roots, and all which are capable of development,
express abstractions from visible objects, conditions and activities, and
therefore presume a human intelligence, reflecting with self-consciousness,
which formed and used the roots.

Now Max Mueller sees, back of this period, still open to science, in which
the root-elements of the human languages were fixed, a long period of
exuberant and unhindered growth of the elements of language, in which the
roots were separated from the multitude of nascent tones by elimination or
natural selection in the struggle for existence. In this realm, which is no
longer open to investigation, the naturalistic and the linguistic friends
of the evolution theory are now in entire accord. Wilhelm Bleek, in his
small, but very noteworthy essay, "Ueber den Ursprung der Sprache" ("Origin
of Language"), Weimar, Boehlau, 1868, p. 11, uses this ingenious figure:
what the animal world possesses analogous to language, takes about the same
position as, in the art of printing, the block-print does in relation to
printing with movable types. On page 12, he sees in the communication of
the emotions among animals the sources from which under favorable
conditions (in consequence of which the separation of language into
articulated parts became possible) human language might have originated.
This idea, which is closely joined to the interjectional theory, Darwin
meets {98} with a related idea, depending upon the onomatopoetical theory,
when he says, in his "Descent of Man": "Since monkeys certainly understand
much that is said to them by man, and when wild, utter signal-cries of
danger to their fellows, may not some unusually wise ape-like animal have
imitated the growl of a beast of prey, and thus told his fellow-monkeys the
nature of the expected danger? This would have been a first step in the
formation of language."

But philology, from the point where it goes farther back in search of the
roots of language, leaves the safe ground of knowledge and commits itself
to the fluctuating ocean of conjectures; and since also the scientific
evolution theory has only a hypothetical value, the support of a hypothesis
in the one science by a hypothesis in the other naturally adds no weight to
its probability, either for the one or the other. Besides, we must not
overlook the fact that the very point in the history of the development of
languages on which the investigation, as it looks backwards, must at
present pause--namely, the existence of linguistic roots--presumes a
faculty of abstraction which can not be thought of without
self-consciousness.

Therefore archaeology, comparative ethnography, and comparative philology,
show us quite clearly a _development_, but not an _origin_ of mankind
through development. Yet they do show an already existing development of
mankind; for all three sciences lead back to starting-points, where mankind
already existed with all the essential attributes of mankind, and leave us
without answer to our questions as to the conditions lying still farther
back. Their results we can {99} without difficulty harmonize with a theory
which supposes mankind to have originated by evolution, provided such a
theory could be confirmed from another side; but they agree just as well
with a contrary theory, which excludes the origin of mankind by gradual
development.

Taking, thus, everything into consideration, we come to the conclusion that
the evolution theory, like the descent theory, is so far only a
hypothesis--and, indeed, a hypothesis which as such has a much more
problematical character than the descent theory. For while in regard to the
latter we had to say that we have either this explanation or none of the
origin of the higher species, with the evolution theory there is not even
room for this alternative. For even in case of its failure, a descent of
one species from another through heterogenetic generation is certainly very
possible. Besides, it is not only possible, but even probable, that both
theories--that of heterogenetic generation and that of gradual
development--may have to share with one another in the explanation of the
origin of species; and even that, especially for the lowest species and for
the beginnings of the main types, primitive generation also has its share
in the establishment of the paternity.

The evolution theory could only pass beyond the rank of a hypothesis, if we
should succeed in showing the impelling forces of such an origin of species
through development. Such an attempt can be made in two ways--the
metaphysical and the scientific-empirical. The first, the metaphysical,
although it may be justified in its general principles, will always, from
the point at which it attempts to approach the concrete questions as {100}
to the origin of single species, expose itself to the fate of being _a
priori_ rejected by science as unjustified, and of being _a posteriori_
confuted by facts--a fate which it has richly and clearly experienced in
the first half of our century. But the discussion of the metaphysical way
does not belong to the present purely scientific part of our investigation;
it will, however, be shortly taken up again in Book II. The other way, the
scientific-empirical, will have to be looked upon as correct when it can
show the impelling forces of development in such powers and laws as are
either still active to-day or at least have their points of connection in
powers and laws active to-day. Such an attempt is the selection theory. We
have already in Chap. II, Sec. 1 and 2, given an outline of this theory, and
have only yet to discuss its present state of tenability.

Sec. 3. _The Theory of Selection._

The selection theory also is not entirely without support in the realm of
observed facts. How simply it explains the fixedness of the differences of
closely related species arising from their geographical and climatical
home! how simply the similarity of the color of many animals from the color
of their abode, through which they have protection against persecution! how
simply the so-called _mimicry_--_i.e._, the similarity of certain species
in form and color with form and color of entirely different species in the
midst of which they live, a similarity which often gives them protection
against persecution! The best known examples of this, in our regions, are
the spinning caterpillars, which in a state of rest look strikingly like a
twig of a tree or a shrub on which {101} they live. In other regions there
is a multitude of the most striking freaks of nature of this kind--for
instance, butterflies and other insects, which at rest look like the leaves
of plants under which they live; butterflies living among other butterflies
which, by an offensive odor, are protected against persecution, and
although they are themselves a favorite food for birds, carrying the form
and color of that badly-smelling family of butterflies. We can also add the
orchideae, and their resemblance to bees, flies, butterflies, spiders, etc.
A. R. Wallace and Darwin themselves recur often to these striking
appearances.

But herewith we have mentioned nearly every support which the selection
theory has on the ground of observed facts. More numerous and more weighty
are the objections to it. First of all, we have to state that the selection
theory no longer enjoys that protection which the descent and evolution
theories can justly claim, against the main objection, mentioned in Chap.
III, Sec. 1, to all the ideas of descent, development and selection. That main
objection is the permanence of species, observed through thousands of
years; and the defense with which the descent and evolution theories
successfully weaken it, is the statement of the fact that, since man
appeared, no new species has originated, and that therefore the principle
of the generation of species seems to have come to a stand-still. Now this
fact is no longer in favor of the selection theory, but directly repugnant
to it. For the selection theory expressly declares the origin of species
through agencies that are all active still, and, therefore, if they really
suffice to explain the origin of species, would not only have to generate
new species, {102} but also to develop _all_ the existing species. All
those circumstances which, according to the selection theory, have led to
change of species, are just as active to-day as they are supposed to have
been from the beginning of organic life; and the effect which we observe is
not change but permanence of species. The individuals still have individual
qualities; they still have the tendency to inherit, in addition to the
qualities of the species, those of the individual; the individuals still
change their abode, and therewith also their conditions of life; a natural
selection still takes place in the struggle for existence; and what is the
result? From an observation stretching over thousands of years, we find
nowhere an effect of natural selection going farther than alterations in
growth and color and purely external changes in form. All the dispositions
of organisms and their reciprocal action aim not at increasing the
individual differences, but at reducing them to the average character of
the species. When the species change their abode or their conditions of
life, they either perish or remain constant; at least, with the exception
of the slight modifications before mentioned. Even those alterations which
artificial breeding produces, have a tendency to return to the original
species: as soon as cultivated plants and domestic animals are left to
themselves, they run wild, _i.e._, they reassume their original qualities.
Even the bastard-formations either cease to be fertile, or, remaining
fertile, finally return to one or the other stem-form of the originally
crossed species. Nor can we oppose to these facts the consideration that
the period of time during which mankind has observed the organisms is too
short. For the permanence of very many {103} species can be traced through
thousands of years, and the shortness of the period of our observations is
amply counterbalanced on the one hand by the multitude of species from all
parts of the organic systems which come under our notice, on the other by
the immense alterations in the conditions of existence to which man submits
plants and animals. How great, for instance, are the alterations in the
conditions of existence which tropical plants undergo in our hot-houses and
gardens! And the only alteration they show is that they are stunted and
only bear blossoms with difficulty and fruits with still greater
difficulty.[6] Now, if the ever-active selection principle does not produce
in thousands of years even minimum alterations which can be observed,
science certainly is justified in doubting for the present the asserted
effect of that principle.

Thus not only are the _facts_ directly opposed to the autocracy of the
selection principle; but _logic_ is also none the less so. For, under the
most favorable circumstances, selection would only explain the
_preservation_ and perhaps also the _increase_ of useful qualities and
organs, _if_ the same are already in existence and have shown themselves
useful to the individual; but would not explain their _origination_. This
would rather most emphatically be left to _chance_. According to the strict
selection theory, it would be _pure chance_ that among the thousands and
thousands of individual qualities of the individuals of a species, such
qualities are always existing as offer advantages to the individual in his
struggle for existence. And it would be a second series of chances, which
from generation to generation would {104} have to coincide with the first,
that among the individual qualities advantageous to the individual and
making it victorious in the struggle for existence, there should be found
always just those qualities which develop the species and raise it to a
higher rank and order in the zooelogical and botanical systems. But the
total of improbabilities which would have to be overcome continually in
this theatre of chance, would in the course of generations necessarily
amount to infinity. Thus, in the very beginning, insuperable doubts arise
as to how we can explain from two causes the world of organisms which is so
richly, beautifully, and systematically arranged. The first of these causes
is the inclination to individual alteration, inherited indeed in the
organisms, but in itself absolutely indifferent, for the systematical idea
in the framework of the organic systems and for the progressive element in
the development. The other is the struggle for existence and natural
selection, which approaches the organisms purely from without like
individual variability, must as a whole appear a necessity, but in each
single case in the concrete mixture of coinciding circumstances, would seem
a work of chance for the individual which is to be changed.

Moreover, it is a demonstrable impossibility to explain the origin of just
those organs and members in the structure of organisms which are
systematically the most significant and functionally the most important, by
means of natural selection. It is true that many of these organs and
members, in their perfected state, offer to the organism an immense
advantage over lower organisms; but if they had been originated through
gradual development, they would have been in their first {105} beginnings
and earlier stages of development at least quite indifferent, often
directly obstructive to the individual in its struggle for existence, and
therefore would have been called into existence and developed by agencies
which had an effect directly counteracting natural selection. How high, for
instance, stand the vertebrates above the invertebrates! Yet how could the
first deviation from the ganglionic system of the nerves of the
invertebrates to the cerebro-spinal system of the vertebrates have
occurred?--and, especially, how could the first deposit of the vertebral
column have procured any benefit to the individual in the struggle for
existence? We quote this objection from Karl Planck's "Wahrheit und
Flachheit des Darwinismus," ("Truth and Platitude of Darwinism"),
Noerdlingen, Beck, 1872.

Still more striking is the insufficiency of the selection theory for the
explanation of the origin of the organs of motion in the higher classes of
vertebrates. A. W. Volkman says of it, in his instructive lecture, "Zur
Entwickelung der Organismen," ("Development of the Organisms") Halle,
Schmidt, 1875, p. 3 ff.: "Without doubt, animals with extremities will come
from animals which lacked extremities. Now if the metamorphosis originated
in the course of one generation, the animals with extremities would have an
advantage over the rest, which ought to show itself in the natural
selection; but if the development of an extremity needs 10,000 generations,
the individual in which the process of the development begins produces
1/10000 of the extremity and the advantage, resulting therefrom is reduced
to zero. For an organ can only be of advantage when it performs its
functions; and on {106} the first of the 10,000 stages of development the
extremity can not perform its functions. Just think of the cetacea! Of the
hind extremity, only its carrier, the pelvis, has been developed; and even
this is only represented by the two hip-bones, hanging in the flesh. As to
the python, the hind extremities are more complete, but they lie hidden
under the skin, and therefore are of no use for local movement. Such
examples show that in the history of the development of an organ thousands
of years may pass, and numerous generations may arise and disappear, until
it reaches that grade of perfection where it is of use to its owner. How
therefore, can we look upon such an organ, when finally it is perfect, as a
product of selection in the sense of Darwin?"

We find the scientific objections to the selection theory collected in
detail in the before-mentioned works of Wigand, Blanchard, His, von Baer,
and especially in Mivart's "Genesis of Species," (London, MacMillan, 1871);
and it is a praiseworthy testimony of Darwin's love of truth, that lately
he himself, the originator of the selection theory, willingly admits these
weak points in his theory,[7] while Haeckel and many of his followers {107}
in Germany still stoutly reject every doubt of the autocracy of the
selection principle.

In summing up all we have said thus far about the theories of descent, of
evolution, and of selection, we still find all three solutions of the
scientific problems to be hypotheses, but hypotheses of very different
value. The idea of descent has the most scientific ground; it will, as a
permanent presupposition, govern all scientific investigations as to the
origin of species, even if it does not exclude the idea of an
often-repeated primitive generation of organisms--especially of those that
stand still lower in development. More uncertain and less comprehensive is
the position of the evolution theory; in all likelihood, the idea of an
origin through development will have to share the sovereignty with the idea
of origin by leaps through metamorphosis of germs. Still more unfavorable
is the state of the selection theory. It possesses the merit of having
started the whole question as to the origin of species; it may explain
subordinary developments; natural selection may have cooeperated as a
regulator in the whole progress and the whole preservation of organic life.
Ed. von Hartmann, in his essay, "Truth and Error of Darwinism," (Berlin,
Duncker, 1875), on page 111, compares its functions with those of the bolt
and coupling in a machine; but that the driving principle which called new
species into existence lay or originated _in_ the organisms, and did not
approach them from without, seems to be confirmed more and more decidedly
with every new step of exact investigation as well as of reflection.

       *       *       *       *       * {108}


