CHAPTER II.

HISTORY OF THE DARWINIAN THEORIES.

Sec. 1. _Darwin._

In order to explain the development of higher species from lower ones in a
natural way, Darwin starts from two facts. The first fact is, that all
individuals of the same species show, besides their specific similarity,
individual differences: a fact which we call the _law of individual
variability_. The other fact is, that each individual inclines to transmit
to his offspring all his qualities--not only the characteristics of the
species, but also those of the individual: a fact which we call the _law of
heredity_.

To show how the whole basis of explanation of the evolution of one species
from another is given in these two facts, Darwin calls attention to the
rules according to which the often extraordinarily great varieties of
domestic animals and cultivated plants are obtained and preserved; namely,
the rules of _artificial breeding_. The breeder simply selects from a
species those individuals having such individual qualities as he wishes to
preserve and to increase, and refrains from breeding those individuals
which do not possess the characteristics he wants or which possess them
only in a small degree. He continues the same process with the next
generation; and by the constant and effectual agency of the two {39}
before-mentioned laws, he will, after the lapse of a few generations, have
breeded a variety in which the characteristics originally belonging only to
a single individual have become common and permanent.

It is now important to consider whether nature, in _natural selection_
(whence the name "Selection Theory") does not act unconsciously according
to the same rules, and attain the same results, as man with his artificial
and intentional selection; and, furthermore, whether she does not reach
results which, according to that principle of natural selection, finally
explain the origin of all, even of the highest and most complicated
organisms, from one single original form or a few original and simplest
forms. Darwin finds these questions answered in the affirmative; and
arrives at this answer through the following conclusions.

The English political economist Malthus (1766-1834), in his "Essay on the
Principles of Population," established a law in regard to the growth of the
human race, which may be applied just as well to all the species of the
entire organic world: that population tends to increase in a geometrical
ratio, although the conditions of life for the individual remain the same
or at most increase in an arithmetical ratio. The consequence is that if
the species is to be preserved and the individuals of future generations
are to continue to find sufficient food and other means for sustaining
life, a great many individuals of each generation must perish very early,
and even as germ and seed, and only a minority will be preserved and
reproduced. This exuberant prodigality of life-germs, of which
proportionately only a few are preserved and reproduced, takes place in the
plant and {40} animal world in a very marked degree. There a continual
_struggle for existence_ prevails; each individual has to get access to his
conditions of life by wresting them from a whole series of other
individuals of his own or other species; and now the question arises: which
individuals will survive in this struggle? which will more probably be
preserved and procreate offspring? Evidently, the answer is, those
individuals which possess individual characteristics more favorable to the
preservation of the individual than those possessed by other individuals.
These individual characteristics are transmitted to the next generation. In
this there will be again individuals that have in a still higher degree the
characteristics thus transmitted and favorable for the preservation of the
individual, or that add to these favorable characteristics new
characteristics favorable in another direction to the survival of the
individual in the struggle for existence. While these individuals, with
more probability than the others, are thus preserved and reproduced, they
transmit to their offspring not only the old favorable characteristics
increased, but also those newly added. Among the favorable individual
qualities, Darwin reckons the divergence of character, the perfection of
organization, and the law of correlation; the latter, however, can not be
explained by natural selection, since according to this law a variation in
an organ brings about a corresponding variation in entirely different
organs (_e.g._, cats with white fur and blue eyes are also deaf).

This is _natural selection by means of the survival of the fittest in the
struggle for existence_. Changes in the conditions and surroundings of
life, and more or less {41} perfect adaptation of the organisms to the new
conditions of form, color, food and habit, are the main causes of those
individual variations, the accumulation of which through many generations
produces so great effects. If we only have behind us periods long enough to
permit us to imagine each step in the development as an extremely small and
hardly appreciable one, natural selection offers us not the exclusive but
the main means of explaining the evolution of the whole animal and plant
world out of one or a few simple organized original forms.

This is the outline of the selection theory, as given by Darwin in 1859,
and still retained in all its essentials. It is true, in his work on the
origin of man he added as supplemental the _sexual_ to the common natural
selection, and made it of special importance for the presentation of the
_beautiful_ in nature--for the production of beautiful forms, colors, and
tones, and for the development of power and intelligence. And in the same
work he said that there are many circumstances of structure which seem to
be neither beneficial nor detrimental to the individual, and that to have
overlooked this fact was one of his greatest mistakes in his former
publications. But for the rest, he maintains the selection theory
unchanged, with the single modification that it explains, if not the whole
development of the species through descent, at least that which is of most
importance in it.

That it was only one step in the course of reasoning to extend the
selection theory to the descent of man, was seen by many as soon as
Darwin's work on the origin of species was published and began to attract
{42} attention; although not a syllable upon this question was presented in
this work. Various persons manifested their presentiment or perception
according to their point of view--partly by the most violent opposition to
the new doctrine, partly by scientific development or modification of their
anthropogonic views, partly also by revelling in imagination in the
consequences hostile to religious faith which they thought could be drawn
from this doctrine. We remind the reader of the itinerant lectures of Karl
Vogt about the ape-pedigree of man, and of the echo they found by assent or
dissent in press and public; also of Huxley in England, Karl Snell,
Schleiden, Reichenbach, and others; of the materialists, L. Buechuer and
Moleschott, and of the publications of Ernst Haeckel. Finally, Darwin
himself made us fully certain of the importance which from the beginning he
had attributed to his theory, by publishing his work on the "Descent of
Man," in the year 1870.

In this work he explained the descent of man fully from the before-named
principles of the descent, evolution, and selection theories, of which we
have given all the essentials in the foregoing presentation. He carefully
enumerates everything in the structure of the human body that reminds us of
our relationship with the animals--especially those embryonic phenomena and
rudimentary organs in man which are still to be found in use and in a more
developed state in different animal species, and which led him to imagine
our ancestors now with a tail, then with sharp ears, now living in the
water, then being hermaphrodites. He reviews the spiritual qualities of
man, and finds for them all analogous qualities in the animal world. He
finds in his work on {43} "Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals,"
published in 1872, new confirmation of the genealogical relationship of
both. He looks over the whole course of the zooelogical system and of
palaeontological discoveries, and searches for the points where the branches
and twigs of the animal pedigree of man must have diverged. To begin with
the lowest branches, he thinks the most important divergence took place
where the series of vertebrates may have been developed out of the
invertebrates. Here he adopts the investigations of A. Kowalewsky, and the
deductions of Haeckel founded upon them, concerning the larva of the
ascidiae, a genus of marine mollusca of the order tunicata, and sees in a
cord, to be found in this larva, most decided relationship to the spine of
the lancelet fish or amphioxus, the lowest of all the vertebrates, it being
yet doubtful whether it belongs at all to the vertebrates. In the
transition that once took place from one species of ascidian larva to a
form similar to the lancelet fish, he sees the new branch diverging in the
series of vertebrates. Out of the fish he concludes that the amphibia were
developed, and out of those the reptilia, out of one of them the
marsupialia, and from them the lemurs or half-apes, the representatives of
which yet live in Madagascar and the southern part of Asia. From these
there branched off on the one side the platyrrhini, or apes with a flat
nose, on the new continent; on the other, the catarrhini, or apes with a
narrow nose, on the old. Among the ancestor of the last, he searches for
the common progenitors, from which again two branches started--on the one
hand the ignoble branches of the catarrhine species of apes, always
remaining lower in {44} development, to which also belong the
anthropomorphous apes, like the orang outang and gibbon in Asia, the
gorilla and chimpanzee in Africa; on the other hand, that branch which
represents the ascent of animals to man.

The refining agencies which finally raise the animal up to the man are
essentially the same that on the lowest scales of the pedigree have caused
the development of the lower organisms into the higher, namely: favorable
individual variations, inheritance, acclimatization, survival of the
fittest in the struggle for existence, natural, and especially, sexual
selection. These are, if not the exclusive, still the main agencies which
finally led the primate of the earthly creation upon the stage and
furnished him with his superior faculties. But it is particularly by means
of his social life, and of the forces which determine, transmit, increase
and ennoble the various impulses and instincts promoting it, that man has
become what he is. Through the need and faculty of reciprocal help, through
sexual selection--which of course is a very essential factor of social
life--there originated language, and reflection, and all the intellectual
qualities; and through these again originated the moral qualities, which
are most important in constituting the specific worth of man, and which
were finally developed into self-consciousness and free moral
responsibility.

But with the description of this attempt to explain more in detail these
specific characteristics of man, we leave the ground of pure natural
science and enter the region of philosophy, in which we have to take up the
{45} question again (in Book II, Ch. I) at the same point where we here
leave it.

Sec. 2. _The Followers of Darwin.--Ernst Haeckel._

Darwin's theory soon found an enthusiastic corps of followers--on the
continent, and especially in Germany, almost more than in his own country.
The outlook into an entirely new explanation of the origin of man, and the
probable use of this theory for attacks upon faith in a Creator and Master
of the world, called wide-spread attention to it; and the theory opened to
natural science itself entirely new impulses and paths, and promised the
solution of many problems before which it had hitherto been compelled to
stand in silence. To be sure, it threatened likewise to allure the mind
from the slow but sure ways of solid study to the entertaining but insecure
and aimless paths of imagination and hypothesis.

Among all the German followers of Darwin who adopted not only the idea of
an origin of species through descent and evolution, but also the
explanation of evolution by natural selection, and extended it so as to
make the principle of selection of exclusive value, Ernst Haeckel occupies
the most prominent rank.

In his "General Morphology," published in 1866, and in his "Natural History
of the Creation," the first edition of which appeared in 1868, and finally
in his "Anthropogeny"[2] (why he does not say Anthropogony, we are nowhere
informed), 1874, this scientist brought the new theory, which had been
presented by Darwin in an almost bewildering flood of details, into
connection and order, and, analyzing the powers active in natural
selection, combined them into an entire system of laws. He {46} at once
drew the origin of man also into the course of reasoning on the new theory,
and sustained the theory by the discovery of the _monera_ and other low
organisms of one cell, as well as by special investigations of the
calcareous sponges. For these labors, he was rewarded by the warm and
unreserved acknowledgment which Darwin made to him in his work upon the
origin of man, which was published subsequently to the "Natural History of
the Creation." There Darwin says: "If this work had appeared before my
essay had been written, I should probably never have completed it. Almost
all the conclusions at which I have arrived, I find confirmed by this
naturalist, whose knowledge on many points is much fuller than mine."
Haeckel's labors rendered still greater service to the Darwinian theory by
dividing the organic world into three kingdoms: the protista kingdom, the
vegetable kingdom, and the animal kingdom,--a division which solves in a
most simple way the difficulty that was felt more and more of securing for
the lowest organisms a place among the animals or plants. He further aided
the theory by leaving the choice open to adopt either a uniform or
multiform pedigree of the organisms and their kingdoms and classes, and by
treating each class under both points of view; and finally, by fascinating
experiments to bring before us in detail the hypothetical pedigrees of all
classes of organisms from the protista kingdom up to man.

We will try to reproduce briefly the pedigree which is of most
interest--the hypothetical _pedigree of man_. Haeckel divides it into
twenty-two stages, eight of them belonging to the series of the
invertebrates, and fourteen to that of the vertebrates. On this ladder of
{47} twenty-two rounds, he leads us from the lowest form of the living
being, in slight and mostly plausible transitions, continually higher and
higher, up to man; and makes our steps easy by mentioning at each stage, on
the one hand the corresponding state in the embryonic development, on the
other the still living creature through which, in his opinion, the former
organisms of the corresponding round of the ladder are still represented,
and which accordingly has been a creature that remained on its round, while
other members of its family have been developed up to man and to many other
genera and species.

He begins with the monera, the organisms of the lowest form, discovered by
himself, which have not so much as the organic rank of a cell, but are only
corpuscules of mucus, without kernel or external covering, called by him
cytod, and arising from an organic carbon formation. The lowest and most
formless moneron is the bathybius, discovered by Thomas Huxley, a network
of recticular mucus, which in the greatest depths of the sea, as far down
as 7,000 metres, covers stone fragments and other objects, but are also
found in less depths, in the Mediterranean Sea, for instance. From the
moneron he proceeds to the amoeba--a simple cell, with a kernel, which
still corresponds to the egg of man in its first state. The third stage is
formed by the communities of amoebae (synamoebae), corresponding to the
mulberry-yolk in the first development of the fecundated egg, and to some
still living heaps of amoebae. To the fourth stage he assigns the planaea,
corresponding to the embryonic development of an albumen and the planula or
ciliated {48} larva. When these ciliated larvae are developed, they contract
themselves so as to form a cavity; and this fifth stage--especially
important for his theory--he calls gastraea. In this form, he says, the
progaster is already developed, and its wall is differentiated for the
first time into an animal or dermal layer (ectoblast), and into a
vegetative or intestinal layer (hypoblast). At the sixth stage, there
branched off the prothelmis, or worms, with the first formations of a
nervous system, the simplest organs of sense, the simplest organs for
secretion (kidneys) and generation (sexual organs), represented to-day by
the gliding worms or turbellaria; as the seventh stage, the soft worms, as
he called them at first--the blood worms, or coelomati, as he describes
them in his "Anthropogeny"--a purely hypothetical stage, on which a true
body-cavity and blood were formed; the eighth stage are the chorda-animals
with the beginning of a spinal rod, corresponding to the larva of the
ascidiae. At the ninth stage, called the skull-less animals (acrania), and
corresponding to the still living lancelet, we enter the series of the
vertebrates. The importance of the eighth and ninth stages for the theory,
we have already pointed out in our remarks upon Darwin, p. 43. The tenth
stage is formed by those low fishes in which the spinal rod is
differentiated into the skull--and the vertebral-column, called the
single-nostriled animals (monorrhini), and represented by the cyclostoma of
today (hag and lampreys). The eleventh stage is formed by the primaeval fish
or selachii (sharks); the twelfth by the mud fish, of which there still
live the protopterus in Africa, the lepidosiren in the tributaries of the
Amazon, and the ceratodus in the swamps of Southern {49} Australia. On the
thirteenth stage, there are the gilled amphibians (sozobranchia), proteus
and axolotl; on the fourteenth, the tailed amphibians (sozura), newt and
salamander; on the fifteenth, the purely hypothetical primaeval amniota or
protamnia (amnion is the name given to the chorion which surrounds the
germ-water and embryo of the three higher classes of vertebrates) on the
sixteenth, the primary mammals (promammalia), to which the present
monotremes (ornithorhynchus and echidna) stand nearest; on the seventeenth,
the pouched animals or marsupialia; on the eighteenth, the semi-apes or
prosimiae (loris and maki); on the nineteenth, the tailed apes, or menocerca
(nose-apes and slender-apes, or semnopithecus); on the twentieth, the
man-like apes (anthropoides) or tail-less catarrhini (gorilla, chimpanzee,
orang outang and gibbon). And now we come to twenty-one--ape-like men or
speechless primaeval men (alali)--of whom we are reminded to-day by the
deaf, and dumb, the cretins and the microcephali; and number twenty-two is
_homo sapiens_, the man. The Australians and the Papuans are supposed to be
the only remaining representatives of his first stage-development. In like
manner, Haeckel also gives us the stem-branches of all the types, classes
and orders of the organisms, and forms from them a very acceptable
hypothetical pedigree; or--if we prefer to suppose a polyphyletic rather
than a monophyletic origin of species--hypothetical pedigrees of the whole
organic world.

The perspicuity and clearness of Haeckel's deductions, the extent of his
knowledge, and the singleness of his aim, to which he makes them all
subservient, lend {50} to his works a great charm. But on the other hand we
dare not conceal that, even on the ground of explanations belonging purely
to natural history, the character of hypothesis is often lost in that of
arbitrariness and of the undemonstrable. Even the unlearned in natural
science often enough get this impression when reading his works, and will
find it confirmed by scientists who not only contradict his assertions in
many cases, but disclose plain errors in his drawings--errors, indeed,
exclusively in favor of the unity-hypothesis; and in other cases they show
that drawings which are given as pictures of the real, represent merely
hypothetical opinions. There is especially evident in his works an
extremely strong tendency to impress on his hypotheses the character of an
established and proved fact, by giving them the alluring name of laws.
Entire systems of laws of the selection theory are produced, and all
imaginable assertions are also immediately called laws. For example,
Huxley, in his anatomical investigations of apes and men, arrives at the
conclusion that the differences between the highest and the lowest apes are
greater than the differences between the highest apes and man. This purely
anatomical comparison, Haeckel calls repeatedly "Huxley's Law." We are well
aware that the idea of law is capable of great extension in meaning, and in
that respect we can refer to nothing more instructive than the
well-meditated inquiry upon this idea in the "Reign of Law" of the Duke of
Argyll (London, Strahan & Co.). But if we may venture to call purely
anatomical comparisons of this nature _laws_, such a use of language
destroys all logical reasoning; and this mistake appears again in Haeckel's
philosophic {51} discussions, of which we shall have to speak hereafter. We
shall have to refer also hereafter to an additional embellishment, which
Haeckel thinks himself obliged to give to his works--namely, that he makes
on every occasion the strongest attacks upon faith in a personal God, a
Creator and Lord of the world; that he traces all the motives of human
action to self-interest; that he denies the liberty of man and the moral
system of the world; that he makes consent to his view of things the
criterion of the intellectual development of a man; and that he thinks to
render a service to civilization by such a view of the world and of ethics.

In the consequent carrying out of the selection principle as the
satisfactory key in explaining the origin of all species and also of man,
Haeckel is indeed, in spite of the approval of his works by the British
master, more Darwinian than Darwin himself, who expressly refuses to give
exclusive value to this theory of explanation. Hence there are among
scientists only a few who go with him to this extent. In Germany, aside
from the materialists, we only know of Seidlitz and Oskar Schmidt--who in
the thirteenth volume of the "International Scientific Series" treats of
"The Theory of Descent and Darwinism," and advocates not only the autocracy
of the selection theory, but also all the monistic and atheistic
consequences which are deduced from it. Perhaps Gustav Jaeger, Schleiden,
Bernhard Cotta--at least judging from their earlier publications--should be
mentioned as followers of the pure selection theory; although they do not
all draw from it the before-mentioned philosophic consequences. On the
other hand, the number of those is very great who, although inspired {52}
by Darwin to adopt the idea of an origin of species through descent and
evolution, yet have more or less modified, laid aside, or entirely refused
the very doctrine which is especially new in Darwin's theory--the selection
theory. In the following section we shall briefly give an account of them.

Sec. 3. _Modifications of the Theory--Moriz Wagner. Wigand._

One of the most prominent objections to the selection theory, which strikes
us at once from the standpoint of natural history, is the following: The
varieties of a domesticated species, obtained by artificial breeding, are
lost, and return to the original wild form of the species as soon as they
are crossed long enough with other varieties or are left to themselves and
to the crossing with individuals of the original form of their species; and
hence we can not see how individual characteristics, even if favorable to
the individual, will not be lost again by the crossing which is inevitable
in a state of nature, with such individuals as do not possess those
characteristics. Besides, it is an established fact, confirmed by all our
observations stretching over thousands of years, that the characteristics
of species are preserved in spite of all individual modifications, and that
this preservation of the characteristics of species has its cause
essentially in the free crossing of individuals.

This objection induced Moriz Wagner to take up again an idea already
expressed by Leopold von Buch, and to complete the principle of a selection
through natural breeding by another, and partly, indeed, to supplant it by
the principle of _isolation by migration_. Isolated individuals, who, from
any reason naturally to {53} be accounted for, leave the mass of their
fellows, can from the very consequence of this isolation transmit to their
offspring common individual characteristics which are not destroyed again
by the crossing with other individuals. They will especially fix and
transmit these individual characteristics, when they are favorable to them
for the conditions of existence in their new place of living, and these
individual characteristics will so much the more be increased and developed
in a direction favorable to the subsistence of the individuals in their new
place of living, as there are more closely connected with this isolation
variations in the conditions of existence, in climate, geographical
surroundings, food, and so on. He very attractively applies this theory
also to the explanation of the origin of man. According to his opinion,
even the nearest animal progenitors of man were isolated, and the isolating
power was the rise of the great mountains of the Old World, which took
place previous to the glacial period. One pair, or perhaps a few pairs, of
those progenitors were driven away from the luxurious climate of the torrid
zone to the northern half of the globe, and found their return cut off by
glaciers and high mountains; in place of a comfortable life on the trees,
necessity urged them to gain support from conditions less favorable to
existence, and necessity, this mother of so many virtues and achievements,
finally made man what he is. In following out these ideas, Moriz Wagner has
gradually and more and more decidedly given up the selection theory, and
opposed it by sharp criticisms.

This _migration_ or _isolation theory_ also found a degree of favor, but
subordinate in its nature. For it {54} can not and will not pretend to
solve the main problems. It only tries to explain how the individual
variations, already in existence, might have been preserved and perhaps
increased, and how new conditions of existence could have roused latent
powers; but not how these variations and these powers originated. Just as
little is the selection theory able to explain this; but it pretends to do
it, and hence we can easily comprehend how during the last few years a
constantly increasing number of voices, and more important ones, have been
raised against the selection theory. This opposition came not only from
those who--like Agassiz, Barrande, Emil Blanchard, Escher von der Linth,
Goeppert, Giebel, Sir Roderick Murchison, Pfaff, and others--directly reject
each and every idea of descent on account of the difficulty in defending
the selection theory; or who--like Karl Ernst von Baer,[3] (the {55}
pioneer in the region of the history of individual development), like Oskar
Fraas, Griesebach, Sandberger, and others--generally take a more reserved
and neutral position, because of the uncertainty of the facts and the
inaccessibility of the problems; but it comes especially from those
scientists who are inclined to adopt an origin of species through descent
and even through development, yet refuse to explain it by the selection
principle, and look for the essential cause of the development in the
organisms themselves, without claiming to have themselves found these
causes. Among the most prominent advocates of this view, we may name the
late Sir Charles Lyell, Mivart, and {56} Richard Owen, in England; and in
Germany, Alexander Braun, Ecker, Gegenbaur, Oswald Heer, W. His, Naegeli,
Ruetimeyer, Schaaffhausen, Virchow, Karl Vogt, A. W. Volkmann, Weismann,
Zittel, and here also Moriz Wagner, and among the philosophers, Eduard von
Hartmann. Many of these men are but little aware of the difference between
the two questions: whether, on the one hand, the adoption of the origin of
species through descent does not of itself involve the idea of a gradual
development of one species from another, almost unobservable in its single
steps; or, on the other hand, whether a descent of species through
heterogenetic generation in leaps and through a metamorphosis of the germs,
could be imagined. They consider descent and evolution as identical; and
this identification is explainable so long as we are not in a condition to
come nearer to the eventual causes of the supposed variation of species.
But men are not wanting who put these questions clearly and plainly, and
separate them distinctly from one another. Among them we may mention K. E.
von Baer, Ed. von Hartmann and Wigand; of the latter we will have occasion
to speak more in detail hereafter. Among them we find also scientists who
answer the question in the sense of a new-modeling of the species, of a
heterogenetic generation, and of a metamorphosis of germs. To this class
belong especially Oswald Heer--"Urwelt der Schweitz" ("Antediluvian World
in Switzerland"), Zuerich, 1865, p. 590-604; Koelliker--"Ueber die
Darwin'sche Schoepfungstheorie," ("Darwin's Theory of Creation"), Leipzig,
1864; "Morphologie und Entwicklungeschichte des Pennatulidenstammes nebst
allgemeinen Betrachtungen zur Descendenzlehre," {57} ("Morphology and
History of the Development of the Stem of the Pennatulidae, together with
General Remarks on the Descent Theory"), Frankfurt, 1872; and Heinrich
Baumgaertner--"Natur und Gott" ("Nature and God"), Leipzig, Brockhaus, 1870.
Heer has introduced into scientific language the term "new-modeling of the
species," Koelliker that of a "heterogenetic generation," and Baumgaertner
that of a "transmutation of the types through a metamorphosis of germs."
Baer also is not averse to adopting the latter.

The botanist, Albert Wigand, of Marburg, takes a peculiar position. On one
hand, the observation of the relationship of organic beings with one
another leads him to adopt a common genealogy, a descent; on the other, the
objections to adopting a descent of the species one from another appear to
him insurmountable. In the first place, he sees all the species everywhere
strictly limited--although in the second volume of his work, which appeared
after the preceding lines were written, he again warns against a one-sided
emphasizing of the invariability of species. In the second place, he sees
so clearly, through the whole organic world, the differences, nay, the
contrasts, of the species, in their building plan, in the numbers and
conditions and positions of their parts, and in their mode of development,
that it appears to him impossible to assume in the perfected organism a
production of germs which in a course of generations, by a process even as
gradual as possible, would grow into such an entirely new phenomenon as a
new, even closely related, species would be. But if we adopt the theory of
a heterogenetic generation, we explain by it the variety but not the
similarity of species; {58} for a heterogenetic generation would in the new
species make everything different from the old one--a conclusion, the
necessity of which it would be difficult to show. For these reasons, he
refers the descent of the organic beings, not to the series of the species,
with their individuals already specified and defined, but to the series of
_primordial cells_ living free in the water. The earliest primordial cells
represented only the common character of the _whole organic world_, and out
of them the primordial cells of the _animal_ and those of the _vegetable
kingdom_ were produced by dividing the cells; so that the first ones
embraced only the general and primitive characteristics of the whole
animal, the last ones those of the whole vegetable kingdom. Out of these
primordial cells of the two kingdoms, those of the _main types_
proceeded--(for instance, the primordial cells of the radiated animals, the
vertebrates, etc., the gymnosperms, the angiosperms, etc.); out of them
those of the _classes_--(for instance, the mammalia, the dicotyledons); out
of them those of the _orders_--(for instance, the beasts of prey,
rosiflorae); out of them those of the _families_ (canina, rosaceae); out of
them those of the _genus_ (canis, rosa); and out of them those of the
_species_ (canis lupus, rosa canina). Only when the primordial cells of the
species had been produced, were they developed into finished
representatives of the species; and when once these primordial cells of the
species had been developed into finished and full-grown individuals of the
species, their transmission took place in the manner well known to us.
Wigand published his criticism of the Darwinian Theories in his larger
work, "Der Darwinismus und die Naturforschung Newtons und Cuviers,"
("Darwinism {59} and the Natural Science of Newton and Cuvier"),
Braunschweig, Vieweg, Vol. I, 1874, Vol. II, 1876, and his own attempt at
explanation in a smaller book, published at the same place in 1872: "Die
Genealogie der Urzellen als Loesung des Descendenzproblems oder die
Entstehung der Arten ohne natuerliche Zuchtwahl" ("Genealogy of the
Primordial Cells as a Solution of the Problem of Descent; or the Origin of
Species without Natural Selection").

Whether this _genealogy of the primordial cells_ found any followers, we do
not know. None of the hypotheses thus far mentioned are so very far from
having analogies in experience. The idea of a first development of the
higher organisms out of their specific primordial cell, through all kinds
of conditions of larvae up to the finished form, demands of us the
acceptance of monstrous improbabilities--(think, for example, of the first
men, who, originating from a human primordial cell, grow in different
metamorphoses of larvae, first in the water and then on the land, until they
appear as finished men). Moreover, the hypothesis, in claiming that a
heterogenetic generation of one species from another must necessarily
nullify all similarity between the organism of the child and that of the
mother, is so little convincing, and shows--in the necessity of conceiving
the universal type of organisms, the type of kingdoms, of main types, of
classes, of orders, of families, of genera, and of species, as but
individual existences which, in the form of cells and before the existence
of the developed species, partly through many thousands of years, lead a
real empiric and concrete life--such an abstract synthetical construction
of nature, that {60} we are not astonished that the theory of the genealogy
of primordial cells stands almost alone. On the other hand, Wigand's larger
critical work rendered great service in clearing up the problems. It is
true, his judgment appears in many single cases not at all convincing,
since he often enough fights his adversaries with sophisms and deduces from
the views of Darwin and Haeckel conclusions to which they certainly do not
lead. But in the majority of cases, his work is full of real convincing
power, and with the breadth of its philosophical view and with the
sharpness of its definitions, as well as with its abundance of philosophic
and especially botanical teachings and their ingenious application, it is
directly destructive to the use of the selection theory as the principal
key to the solution of the problems. Eduard von Hartmann describes the work
in his publication, "Wahrheit und Irrthum im Darwinismus," ("Truth and
Error in Darwinism"), as a mile-stone which marks the limits where
Darwinism as such passed the summit of its influence in Germany.

       *       *       *       *       * {61}


