BOOK II.

THE PHILOSOPHIC SUPPLEMENTS AND CONSEQUENCES OF THE DARWINIAN THEORIES.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PHILOSOPHIC PROBLEMS.

Although, in accordance with the requirements of the task before us, we
have to restrict ourselves to giving the results of natural science only in
their general outlines, still we believe that we have not overlooked any
essential result which is of importance to the question of the origin of
species and of man. We have now finished our scientific review; and the
conclusion to which we see ourselves brought is that natural science, in
its investigation of the origin of species, has arrived at nothing but
problems which it is not able to solve. There is a very great probability
of an origin of species, at least of the higher organized species, through
descent; but whether through descent by means of gradual development or of
metamorphosis of germs, or whether with one group of organisms it is in
this way, with another in that, is not yet decided. The attempt to explain
their entire origin exclusively by the selection theory, must be regarded
as a failure; all indications rather show that, supposing the descent
principle correct, the deciding agencies which formed new species did not
approach the old species out of which the new ones originated from {109}
without, but that they originated or were already in existence within them.
But what these agencies were, natural science is at present unable to
state; and not only those scientists who reject every idea of a descent,
but also those who are favorable to the ideas of descent and of evolution,
rejecting only the selection theory, are at one in silent or open
acknowledgment of this limit of our knowledge, be it permanent or
temporary.

But now the question arises: does the search after these agencies
henceforth remain the exclusive task of natural science, and have we
therefore simply to wait and see whether it will succeed in finding them?
or have we to look for the answer to these questions, which natural science
can no longer give, in another science--namely, philosophy? The first
question we will have to answer in the affirmative, the second in the
negative. It is certainly understood that _metaphysical_ principles must
underlie all _physical_ appearances; and the right to define these
principles, so far as they can be known, is willingly conceded to
philosophy by the scientists, with the exception of those of materialistic
and naturalistic tendencies. This mutual re-approaching of philosophy and
natural science is one of the most gratifying, and, to both, most fruitful
evidences of the intellectual work of the present generation. But these
metaphysical principles themselves become cognizable only when the physical
effects, whose cause they are, become accessible to our knowledge; and
every attempt to find them _a priori_, or only to extend them _a priori_,
will always fail through the opposition of empirical facts; or even if this
attempt accommodates itself to the existing state of knowledge at a given
time, it will always be overcome by the {110} progress of the empirical
sciences. In the most favorable case, it can claim the value of a
hypothesis which has to be put to the proof, whether it can be empirically
confirmed and whether we can successfully operate with it in knowing the
world of realities. But herewith it leaves the realm of pure philosophy,
and makes the question of its right to exist dependent upon the decision of
natural science.

Since the decline of the doctrines of nature held by Schelling, Steffens,
and Hegel, there has come to our knowledge, from the domain of philosophy,
but one earnest attempt to explain the origin and development of organisms
down to the concrete differences between single types, classes, and even
orders and families, from one single metaphysical principle; and this
attempt has been made by an antagonist of the descent doctrine. K. Ch.
Planck, in "Seele und Geist, oder Ursprung, Wesen und Thaetigkeitsform der
physischen und geistigen Organisation von den naturwissenschaftlichen
Grundlagen aus allgemein fasslich entwickelt" ("Soul and Spirit, or Origin,
Nature, and Form of Activity of Physical and Intellectual Organization,
Clearly Developed from a Scientific Basis"), Leipzig, Fues, 1871, and in
"Wahrheit und Flachheit des Darwinismus" ("Truth and Platitude of
Darwinism"), Noerdlingen, Beck, 1872, makes the "inner concentration" the
moving principle of the whole development of the world. He thinks that what
belongs to the organism and to the soul has originated and developed up to
man and his spiritual nature thus: that the creating centrum of the earth
produces individual centra on its periphery, which tend more and more to
bring into view the principle of {111} centralization, in its contrast to
the purely peripheral form of existence, until it reaches its goal in man,
with his centralizing spirit. We have no reason to reject the idea of a
principle of concentration in the world and its parts; it is confirmed by
observation, and shows itself fruitful in many respects. But in spite of
the many ingenious and often suggestive ideas in the works of Planck, we
have some doubt about a system which tries to explain the whole concrete
abundance of the richness of formations and life-forms in the world, rising
higher and higher up to spiritual existence and moral action, from the
single idea of concentration, and makes this principle the mystical and
mysteriously acting cause of a whole world and its contents. We doubt at
the outset the success of this argument. We have especially the strongest
objections to a philosophical system which submits all the contending
physical theories of the present to the measure of that concentration
principle, and from these purely metaphysical reasons takes side
exclusively with the one or the other of the theories, or establishes new
theories--from the theories of atoms and ether, of light and heat, down to
geological questions as to whether universal revolutions of the world or a
continual development took place. The solution of all these questions, in
their full extent, we do not attribute to philosophy, but to natural
science; although to a natural science which permits philosophy to define
the ideas with which it operates and the general principles to which it
comes. For this renunciation--which philosophy, however, can not at all
escape--it will be the more richly rewarded in this, that it obtains the
more certainly for its own work sure and sifted material. But all attempts
which can not {112} submit to this renunciation, give only an apparent
right to that view which Albert Lange, in his "History of Materialism,"
defends, when he banishes speculative philosophy to the realm of
imagination.

But in rejecting philosophy in the question of the causes of the
development and organization of the organic kingdoms, we did not reach the
end of the philosophic problems with which we are confronted. This whole
question is itself only a segment of the problems before which we stand,
and leads of necessity to other questions.

Already within the series of development of the organic world, so far as it
is investigated by natural science, we have found and named a point (at the
end of Sec. 1, Chap. II, Book I), where the competency of pure natural science
comes to an end, and the question arises whether another source of
knowledge--_i.e._, even philosophy--can not take up the investigation where
natural science completes its task. This point was the _origin of
self-consciousness_ and of _free moral self-determination_; consequently,
the origin of that which makes man _man_. Going still farther back on the
temporal and ideal scale of organic beings, we arrive at another point,
which natural science no longer can explain, and that is the _origin of
sensation_ and of _consciousness_. With the appearance of sensation and
consciousness, the _animal world_ came into existence. Moreover, the whole
scientific question as to the origin and development of species, so far as
we have hitherto treated it, started from initial points where the organic
and life already existed; it, therefore, leads of necessity to the further
question as to _the origin of the organic and of life itself_. D. F.
Strauss, {113} in his "Postscript as Preface," thus clearly and simply
characterizes these still unfilled blanks in the evolution theory: "There
are, as is well known, three points in the rising development of nature, to
which the appearance of incomprehensibility especially adheres (to speak
more categorically: which have not been explained thus far by anybody). The
three questions are: How has the living sprung from that which is without
life? the sentient (and conscious) being from that which is without
sensation? that which possesses reason (self-consciousness and free will)
from that which is without reason?--questions equally embarrassing to
thought." But even the question as to the origin of the organic and of life
can not be discussed without an investigation, leading us farther back to
the question as to _the elements of the world_ in general. The _doctrine of
atoms_, and the _mechanical view of the world_, are the scientific
evidences of the efforts in this direction.

So far as the attempts to solve these four questions start from the results
of natural science and, from this starting-point of the known, try to solve
the unknown, we will have to assign them in the encyclopaedic classification
of the sciences, to that department of philosophy which treats the
doctrines of nature; and since our whole investigation starts from the
Darwinian theories, and only tries to treat of what is properly connected
with them, the attempts to solve these four questions offer themselves as
the _naturo-philosophic supplements of the Darwinian-theories_.

After concluding our treatment of them, we shall have to speak of still
another view, which presupposes all these attempts at solution to be wholly
or nearly {114} successful, and draws an inference from them which no
longer belongs to the realm of natural science, but is a purely
_metaphysical_ hypothesis; it is the _abolition of the idea of design in
nature_. In connection with this, finally, we shall have to discuss the
name which this view has lately assumed, viz: "_Monism_."

Whatever further questions may arise, belong either to the special
subdivisions of natural science and philosophy, or to theological and
ethical problems.

       *       *       *       *       * {115}


