CHAPTER I.

THE NATURO-PHILOSOPHIC SUPPLEMENTS OF THE DARWINIAN THEORIES.

Sec. 1. _The Origin of Self-Consciousness and of Free Moral
Self-Determination._

If sensation, and its most developed form, consciousness, is a reflex of
the material in something immaterial, which feels itself a unit in contrast
to the material, and, where sensation rises into consciousness, is opposed
as a unit to the material--self-consciousness again is the reflex of this
sentient and conscious subject in a new and still higher immaterial unity;
and this again makes this sentient and conscious subject, together with the
sum of its feelings and ideas, its object, changing it from a sentient and
conscious subject into a felt and presented object. Therefore it is clear,
and will be the result of all thought upon these concepts, that as with
sensation and consciousness, so also with self-consciousness, something new
always comes into existence--a higher category of being, different from the
merely material. The first is the form of being of the animal world; the
latter that of mankind.

It is exactly the same with the first appearance of voluntary movement, and
again with that of free moral self-determination. The reaction of the
sentient subject upon his sensations is something qualitatively different
from the purely mechanical and physical action and {116} reaction of pure
matter; although, in order to understand the possibility of a sensation as
well as of a voluntary movement, we must admit that the physical qualities
of matter must be such as to afford a basis and condition for sentient and
reacting beings. That reaction is the reaction of something immaterial upon
the material, even if it is entirely caused by the material and bound to
the material. Now, with free moral self-determination a new subject comes
into existence and activity in the individual, which makes that subject,
reacting upon mere sensations and ideas, its object, and, as a new
immaterial subjective unity, acts determiningly upon that subject which has
just become object. This new subject, considered from the side of its
receptivity, we call _self-consciousness_; from the side of its
spontaneity, _free moral self-determination_. Whether we consider this
freedom predetermined or not, does not at all alter the described fact and
the qualitative difference between the form of human moral agency and that
of purely animal spontaneity. For even those advocating determination must
admit that the morally acting subject distinguishes itself from its object,
and does not take its motives to action from the material and from the
instinctive life which is bound to the sensual and dependent on it.

Now it is true that all these circumstances in organized individuals which
serve self-consciousness and free moral self-determination as their
condition, presupposition, and basis, all the dispositions of the soul and
the manifestations of life found in the animal world, will be worthy of the
closest attention even on this account: because they form the basis, the
condition, and (if self-consciousness and freedom are once present) an
essential {117} part of the contents and object of self-consciousness and
moral self-determination. But where the origin of man is discussed, the
central point of the investigation is no longer the enumeration of those
activities of the soul of man whose analogies we also find in the animal
world, but rather in the answer to the question as to how that entirely new
manifestation, self-consciousness and moral self-determination, came into
existence or could have originated. This question is the more decidedly the
central point of the investigation, since this new form, when once in
existence, has for its object not only what already appears in the life of
the soul of animals, but also receives a new object, which can only be an
object of self-consciousness and of moral self-determination, and not of
mere consciousness and instinctive life. These new objects are the ideas
leading up to the conception of God and moral ideals.

Now this very question as to the origin of self-consciousness and of free
moral self-determination is wholly misjudged as to its importance, and
given remarkably little attention by those evolutionists who are well
versed in the realm of natural science. The question as to the origin of
self-consciousness is either entirely ignored--as if self-consciousness
must originate wholly by itself, if only those first steps of an
intellectual and social life which the animal world also shows, are once
present and properly developed--or the solution is put aside with the most
superficial analogies. The question regarding free moral
self-determination, on the other hand, is either likewise ignored, and for
the same reasons, or it is supposed that it must fail of itself, if {118}
only this self-determination is explained in a deterministic way.

It is true, Darwin devotes several chapters of his work, "Descent of Man,"
to a comparison of the intellectual powers of man with those of animals,
and these chapters are full of the most interesting facts and comparisons;
but although his work comprises two volumes, he devotes to the origin of
self-consciousness, individuality, abstraction, general ideas, etc., only a
single page, and justifies his brief treatment with the assertion that the
attempt at discussing these higher faculties is useless, because hardly two
authors agree in their definitions of these terms. What he says about
self-consciousness is really contained in two sentences, namely: "But how
can we feel sure that an old dog with an excellent memory and some power of
imagination, as shown by his dreams, never reflects on his past pleasures
or pains in the chase? This would be a form of self-consciousness." On the
other hand, as Buechner has remarked in his "Lectures about Darwin's
Theory": "How little can the hard-working wife of a degraded Australian
savage, who hardly ever uses abstract words, and can not count above four,
how little can such a woman exert her self-consciousness, or reflect on the
nature of her own existence!" And in Darwin's _resume_ of his chapters on
the intellectual powers of man and animals, he says, on page 126: "If it
could be proved that certain high mental powers, such as the formation of
general concepts, self-consciousness, etc., were absolutely peculiar to
man, which seems extremely doubtful, it is not improbable that these
qualities are merely the incidental results of other highly-advanced
intellectual faculties: {119} and these again mainly the result of the
continued use of a perfect language."

If Darwin is thus not able to show us in the animal world a single real
analogy which at all approaches self-consciousness, and, in order to supply
this want, must have recourse to the purely hypothetical _possibility_ that
it is not certain whether an old hunting-dog does not reflect upon the past
joys of the chase; if by the uncertainty of the expression that
self-consciousness might be an "_accompanying_" result of other faculties,
he nevertheless gives us to understand that he can not find the
_sufficient_ cause of the origin of self-consciousness in those other
faculties; and, finally, if he closes the last mentioned quotation with a
sentence which has for its premise the wholly illogical thought that
language might have been able to reach "a high state of development" before
the origin of self-consciousness and without its assistance: then, indeed,
the result of all this certainly is that he has given no adequate
consideration to the specific nature of self-consciousness. It is only
under this supposition that it is possible for him to say: "Nevertheless,
the difference in mind between man and the higher animals, great as it
certainly is, is one of degree and not of quality." The authors may
possibly not agree in the definitions of the idea of self-consciousness--we
ourselves perhaps are only an additional example in confirmation of this
fact--; but whatever the definition may be, the fact itself remains, that
self-consciousness does not stand as one of the intellectual faculties
beside the others and cooerdinate with them, but, as an entirely new form of
being, introduces a qualitatively new and valuable factor into the subject.
That which precedes the {120} origin of self-consciousness--the purely
conscious and not yet self-conscious life of the soul, as it shows itself
with higher animals, especially with mammals--_may_ have been the necessary
condition and requirement for the origin of self-consciousness. It
certainly _has_ been so; and from this point of view, all these
psychological studies of animals and psycho-physical investigations which
are a favorite object of modern science, have a high value; but what has
been called into existence by _means_ of conditions is not on that account
the _product_ of those conditions. This very fact is one of the greatest
mistakes of most of the modern evolution theories: that very often--and
especially where they wish to draw metaphysical conclusions from their
scientific results or hypotheses--they confound condition and basis with
cause.

Now it appears to us that, in quite an analogous way, Darwin overlooks or
contests the fact that with _free moral self-determination_ something
specifically new comes into existence. He certainly discusses the origin of
the moral qualities of man more in detail than he does the origin of his
intellectual qualities. He derives them, in their first beginnings, from
the fixity, transmission and increase of the _social_ impulses and
instincts. These, being the basis of the whole moral development, and
leading in their more mature form to love and to sympathy, originated by
natural selection; and the other moral qualities, such as moral sense and
conscience, progressed more by the effect of custom, by the power of
reflection, instruction, and religion, than by natural selection. Higher
and lower, common and special, permanent and transitory instincts come into
collision {121} with one another. The dissatisfaction of man when any of
the lower, special, and transitory instincts have overcome the higher,
common and permanent, and the resolution to act differently for the future,
is _conscience_. Darwin considers that one a _moral being_ who is capable
of comparing with one another his past and future actions and motives, of
approving some of them and of disapproving others; and the fact that man is
the only creature who can with certainty be ranked as a moral being is,
according to Darwin, the greatest of all differences between man and
animals.

Here, again, the whole central point of the investigation as to the origin
of man does not lie in the question of the origin of the instincts between
which the moral subject, acting in moral self-determination, has to choose.
For it is clear that the beginnings of these instincts are also present in
the animal world. But the main question is, how did this faculty and
necessity of choosing, this conscience and responsibility, this "moral
sense," as Darwin calls it, originate? Now to this question we have a plain
answer in the before-mentioned utterances of Darwin: It originated not as a
_product_ of the social instincts--it only has these instincts for its
preceding condition, object and instrument; but it originated as a product
of other agencies, which act upon these impulses and instincts, operate
with them, choose between them; and as these other agencies Darwin mentions
the high development of the intellectual powers. That this is his opinion,
we can clearly see from an expression with which he introduces his essay on
the origin of "moral sense": "The following proposition seems to me in a
high degree probable--namely, that {122} any animal whatever, endowed with
well-marked social instincts, would inevitably acquire a moral sense or
conscience, _as soon as its intellectual powers had become as well, or
nearly as well developed, as in man_." These intellectual powers which
moral feeling and conscience require at their birth, are certainly,
according to Darwin the power to distinguish oneself as subject from one's
impulses and instincts, and to choose between them; _i.e._,
self-consciousness. We shall have to admit fully this intimate connection
between moral self-determination and self-consciousness; but we must admit,
at the same time, that moral self-determination--this new form of activity
in which moral activity distinguishes itself from all _merely_ instinctive
activity--finds its sufficient explanation in the previous stage of the
animal world as little as self-consciousness; and that moral
self-determination has the condition and presupposition, but not the cause,
of its existence in that which is also found in the previous stage of the
animal world. The proof that the origin of moral self-determination finds
its sufficient explanation in that which the previous stage of the animal
world also has, would appear to have been given by Darwin only when he had
succeeded in explaining the origin of self-consciousness from animal
intelligence; but that he did not succeed in it, we think we have clearly
shown. On the other hand, we willingly admit that the study of the social
and all other instincts and impulses which are common to man and animals,
and which in man form the object and instrument of his moral activity, has
for us the highest interest, inasmuch as the only problem is to explain the
conditions and prerequisites of moral self-determination--or, historically
speaking, the conditions {123} and prerequisites of the origin of morally
acting beings. Furthermore we have to say here also that condition and
prerequisite are not identical with cause, and it is precisely the _cause_
of moral responsibility and of the origin of such morally responsible
beings, which has not yet been discovered by the Darwinian theory.

The followers of Darwin enter still less into the discussion of the
question as to the origin of self-consciousness and of moral
self-determination. Haeckel--who, in his "Natural History of Creation" and
in his "Anthropogeny," expounds his whole evolution theory in all its
antecedent conditions and consequences--has, indeed, much to say of the
different faculties of the soul of man and animals. He traces these
faculties in the case of man down to the lowest state of the most degraded
races, and in the case of animals from the kermes up to the bee, from the
lancelet-fish to the dog, ape, elephant and horse; and he also treats of
the so-called _a priori_ knowledge which "arose only by long-enduring
transmission, by inheritance of acquired adaptations of the brain, out of
originally empiric or experiential knowledge _a posteriori_," (Vol. II,
345). But we look in vain in his works for a treatment of the question as
to the origin of the Ego--of self-consciousness. Nowhere does he enter into
the analysis of the psychological ideas; he only compares the psychical
utterances of different creatures, and thinks the whole problem solved when
he says: "The mental differences between the most stupid placental animals
(for instance, sloths and armadillos) and the most intelligent animals of
the same group (for instance dogs and apes) are, at any rate, much more
considerable than the differences in the {124} intellectual life of dogs,
apes, and men." Or: "If these brutish parasites are compared with the
mentally active and sensitive ants, it will certainly be admitted that the
psychical differences between the two are much greater than those between
the highest and lowest mammals--between beaked animals, pouched animals and
armadillos, on the one hand, and dogs, apes, men, on the other." The fact
that in the human individual consciousness and self-consciousness are
gradually developed, is to him a proof that in the organic kingdom also
consciousness and self-consciousness came into existence gradually, and,
indeed, hand-in-hand with the development of the nervous system; and with
this result he thinks that he has relieved himself from the task of showing
the "how" of the origin of self-consciousness. This becomes clearly evident
from a remark about the origin of consciousness, in his "Anthropogeny,"
where he says that, if DuBois-Reymond had thought that consciousness is
developed, he would no longer have held its origin to be a thing beyond the
limits of human capacity. Haeckel likewise seems to regard the question of
the origin of moral self-determination as solved or rejected, if only
freedom is denied--which, indeed, is repeatedly done by him.

A similar defect in the treatment of this question by evolutionists we find
in the works of Oscar Schmidt, Gustav Jaeger, and others. Even Emil
DuBois-Reymond, who, in his celebrated and eloquent lecture on "The Limits
of the Knowledge of Nature," given before the assembly of scientists at
Leipzig, 1872, asserts so energetically that the origin of sensation and
consciousness is inexplicable (see next section), seems to {125} take the
origin of self-consciousness for granted, and as needing no further
explanation, if only consciousness is once present.

Since, then, the scientists leave us without a sufficient answer to the
question respecting the origin of self-consciousness and of moral
self-determination, we shall have to turn to the philosophers. Here,
indeed, we find rich definitions and genetic analyses, but none that lead
us any farther than to the information that consciousness is the necessary
condition of self-consciousness; that animal instinct is the necessary
antecedent condition of moral self-determination. Yet in the works of these
very philosophers who are inclined to a mechanical and "monistic" view of
the world, we find that they directly avoid the question as to the origin
of self-consciousness and of moral self-determination. As soon as they are
led near it, in the course of reasoning in their works, they suddenly turn
aside again to the quite different questions of the connection between
brain and soul, between physical and psychical, external and internal
processes, etc. Evidently they feel that with this question they have
arrived at the weak point of their system. That here is a weak point, we
clearly see in the case of D. F. Strauss, a leading advocate of modern
naturalism, and the greatest philosophic scholar of that school. It is
true, in his "Postscript as Preface," as we saw before, he mentions the
origin of self-consciousness as one of the points which need special
explanation; but he seems to have made this acknowledgment more with the
purpose of showing that DuBois-Reymond, in admitting the origin of
self-consciousness to be explainable, has no longer any reason to contest
the explicability of the {126} origin of sensation and consciousness; for
in his work on "The Old Faith and the New," he did not enter into that
question at all. On the other hand, he makes in his last-mentioned work a
remarkable confession. In answering the question--how do we determine our
rule of life?--he comes to speak of the position of man in nature, traces a
law of progress in nature, and says: "In this cumulative progression of
life, man is also comprised, and, moreover, in such wise that the organic
plasticity of our planet (provisionally, say some naturalists, but that we
may fairly leave an open question) culminates in him. _As nature can not go
higher, she would go inwards._ 'To be reflected within itself,' was a very
good expression of Hegel's. Nature felt herself already in the animal, but
she wished to know herself also." But still stronger is the following
expression: "_In man, nature endeavored not merely to exalt, but to
transcend herself._" In Sec. 1, Chap. II, we shall have to speak of this
important acknowledgment of teleology in nature, which such an antagonist
of teleology as Strauss makes in the above-quoted remarks about a progress
in nature and a will of nature; but here we are more interested in the
equally remarkable acknowledgment of the fact that man can not be explained
from nature alone--that he is something which transcends nature. For that
(according to Strauss) nature, in originating man, not only _intended_ to
transcend herself, but really did transcend herself and, that she succeeded
in her intention, we can infer from the moral precept which Strauss gives:
"Do not forget for a moment, that thou art human; not merely a natural
production."

The result of our investigation, therefore, is that {127} with
self-consciousness and free moral self-determination something specifically
new came into existence which had its antecedent condition in a previous
state of existence, but has not yet found its sufficient explanation in
this antecedent state.

Sec. 2. _The Origin of Sensation and of Consciousness._

The limits of our knowledge show themselves still more clearly in the
attempts to explain the origin of consciousness and its lowest
form--sensation. Self-consciousness is without doubt ideally nearer to
consciousness in this, that both are an immaterial activity; and yet we
found no demonstrable bridge which leads from consciousness to
self-consciousness. Still broader is the gulf between the material and the
immaterial, between the unconscious and the conscious,--or, to describe the
two realms with names which bring them nearest together, between that which
is without sensation and that which has sensation: a gulf to bridge which
philosophy also has vainly exerted its utmost efforts, as has been well
known since the "supernatural assistance" of Descartes and the
"preestablished harmony" of Leibnitz. Wherein lies the real necessity that
there should be sensation? How does the material become something that is
felt? What is the demonstrable cause (not the condition, but the cause) of
a sentient subject? To these questions, every science up to the present day
lacks an answer. As is well known, DuBois-Reymond, in his
previously-mentioned lecture upon "The Limits of our Knowledge of Nature,"
declares the origin of sensation and of consciousness to be one of two
limits, beyond {128} which we have not only to say "_ignoramus_," but
"_ignorabimus_."

_In abstracto_, we might think of two attempts at bridging over this gulf:
the first one is that we try to transform sensation itself into something
material, and the other is that we attribute sensation also to that which,
according to our observation, seems to be without sensation; namely, to
matter and its elements, the atoms. Both of these attempts have been
made--the former by D. F. Strauss in his "The Old Faith and the New," and
by the English philosopher, Herbert Spencer, in his "First Principles of
Philosophy;" the latter, first pointed out by Schopenhauer, was taken up
and farther developed by Zoellner in his work, "Ueber die Natur der Kometen"
("Nature of the Comets"), Leipzig, Engelmann, 1872, and with special
acuteness by an "Anonymus" in the work: "Das Unbewusste von Standpunkt der
Physiologie und Descendenztheorie" ("The Unconscious from the Standpoint of
Physiology and Descent Theory"), Berlin, Duncker, 1872.

Strauss says, in the previously-mentioned work: "If, under certain
conditions, motion is transformed into heat, why may it not, under other
conditions, be transformed into sensation?" And Herbert Spencer says, in
his "First Principles of Philosophy," (page 217): "Various classes of facts
thus unite to prove that the law of metamorphosis, which holds among the
physical forces, holds equally between them and the mental forces. Those
modes of the unknowable which we call motion, heat, light, chemical
affinity, etc., are alike transformable into each other, and into those
modes of the unknowable which we distinguish as sensation, {129} emotion,
thought: these, in their turns, being directly or indirectly
retransformable into the original shapes."

But motion--even the finest material motion, that of ether, (which, in
consequence of the very important discovery of the conservation of force
and of the mechanical equivalent of heat, made by Robert von Mayer, at
present is taken to be heat)--is so decidedly a material process, the
sensation of motion is so decidedly a reflex of the material in something
immaterial, that the assertion of a transformation of motion into sensation
seems to us only to change the point of view, and not to explain the
difference, but to efface it. And we think that the appeal of Strauss from
his contemporaries, who do not understand him, to posterity, who would
understand him better and esteem him, has but little prospect of being
operative.

If that which has sensation and that which has it not, are to be brought
genetically near one another, and hence the difference between the two at
the point where the lowest sentient being has found its first existence, is
to be made void or at least bridged over, then it is much more reasonable,
and also in the line of Strauss's solution, to deny the difference between
that which has sensation and that which has it not, and to do this in the
sense in which we also declare that to be sentient which we have hitherto
been accustomed to regard as without sensation; and we should likewise
attribute sensation to the original elements of the world, be they called
atoms or whatever one may wish. This is done by Zoellner and by the before
mentioned "Anonymus." This conclusion is logical; it is even the only
possible conclusion, if we once start from the axiom that the new, which
comes {130} into existence, must necessarily be explainable from agencies
previously active, and known to or imagined by us through abstractions and
hypotheses. Zoellner is certainly right when, in his work which appeared
before the lecture of DuBois-Reymond, he puts the alternative, "either to
renounce forever the conceivableness of the phenomena of sensation, or
hypothetically to add to the common qualities of matter one more, which
places the simplest and most elementary transactions of nature under a
process of sensation, legitimately connected with it;" as also when he says
(page 327): "We may regard the intensity of these sensations (of matter) as
little and unimportant as we wish; but the hypothesis of their existence
is, according to my conviction, a necessary condition, in order to
comprehend the really existing phenomena of sensation in nature." Only we
shall do well to choose the first alternative for the present, and, with
DuBois-Reymond, answer the question as to the explanation of the origin of
sensation with an "_ignoramus_"; indeed, we shall take a surer road with
his "_ignorabimus_" than by a plunge into that bottomless ocean of
hypotheses--in spite of the protest of Haeckel, who (Anthrop., page XXI)
sees that scientist who has the courage to admit the limits of our
knowledge, on account of this "_ignorabimus_", walking in the army of the
"black International", and "marshalled under the black flag of the
hierarchy," together with "spiritual servitude and falsehood, want of
reason and barbarism, superstition and retrogression", and fighting,
"spiritual freedom and truth, reason and culture, evolution and progress."
For a solution of the question which simply denies all sharply-marked
differences in the world, and explains {131} the new, which comes into
existence with sensation, by the assertion that this new element is not
new, but was already present, and that it exists everywhere, only we do not
see it everywhere,--such a solution seems to us not to be the true way to
interpret the problem of the sphinx. Even Ed. von Hartmann seems to
infringe the impartiality of the true observer, when, in his "Philosophy of
the Unconscious," he attributes sensation to plants. But when Zoellner says
(p. 326): "_All the labors of natural beings_ [and, as the connection
indicates, of all, even of inorganic natural beings] are determined by like
and dislike;" and when "Anonymus" attributes sensation to all atoms and to
all complexities composed of them, even to stone, then all reasonable
conception of natural things and processes certainly vanishes into thin
air.

It will be remembered, however, that in treating the question of the origin
of self-consciousness, although we were not able to solve the problem,
nevertheless we had to ascribe high value to the investigation of all
psychical processes on the low stage of sensation and consciousness, since
they show us not the cause, but the condition and basis, of
self-consciousness. Likewise, in the question as to the origin of sensation
and of consciousness, although we are not able to solve it, we will
willingly admit that we observe, even in that which has no sensation,
qualities and processes which furnish the absolutely necessary condition
and basis for sensation. For the same reason, we will also admit the
manifold analogies of sensation which we observe in that which is without
sensation. The whole system of symbols in nature which fills our treasury
of words and penetrates, in a {132} thousandfold way, our scientific and
popular, our poetical and prosaic speech, our thoughts and feelings, bears
witness to the fact that that which is without sensation is also a
preparatory step to sensation, and feeling both active and passive springs
from it. However, a preparatory step, as such, is not necessarily the
cause; and the fact and the acknowledgment of a correlation is not on that
account an explanation.

Sec. 3. _The Origin of Life._

The third problem to be solved is the origin of life. As is well known,
Darwin himself makes no attempt at explaining this problem, but is
satisfied with the idea that life was infused into one or a few forms by
the Creator ("Origin of Species," 6 ed., p. 429). His investigations and
theories only begin where organic life, in its first and lowest forms, is
already in existence.

But lately there have been made, in the realm of the organic, discoveries
of beings which take the lowest conceivable round on the ladder of
organisms, and which in their form and structure are so simple that from
them to the inorganic there seems to be but a short step. We can no longer
mention as belonging to the bridges which are said to lead from the organic
world to the inorganic, the often-named _bathybius_, discovered by Huxley,
and so strongly relied upon for the mechanical explanation of life--a slimy
net-like growth, which covers the rocks in the great depths of the ocean.
For after scientists like K. E. von Baer and others had already declared it
probable that this bathybius is only a precipitate of organic relics, no
less a person than the discoverer of the bathybius, in the "Annals of
Natural History," 1875, {133} and in the "Quarterly Journal of
Microscopical Science," 1875, has suggested that the whole discovery is but
gypsum, which was precipitated in a gelatinous condition. Likewise the
utterances concerning the simplicity and lack of structure of the lowest
organisms, are to be accepted only with great reservation; for most of
these organisms show very differently and very distinctly stamped
structures; of this fact, anyone may easily convince himself, who has had
the opportunity of observing with the microscope low and lowest organisms,
and to admire their striking and manifold forms. Nevertheless, there are
monera whose structure seems to be nothing but a living clod without kernel
and cover, and which in that respect represent the lowest conceivable form
of organic being and life.

Now, relying on these discoveries, as well as upon the successful
demonstration, by inorganic means, of organic acids in chemistry, and
starting from the supposition that the first appearance of life must
necessarily be explained by those agencies which are already active in the
inorganic nature, many scientists have attempted the so-called _mechanical
explanation of life_. This attempt has been made most logically and
systematically by Haeckel. He says that organic _matter_, organic _form_,
and organic _motion_, in the lowest stages of the organic, which are almost
the only ones to be taken into consideration when the problem of the origin
of life is discussed, contain nothing at all which does not also pertain to
the inorganic. In his opinion, organic _matter_ is an albuminous carbon
combination, of which we have to presuppose that, like all chemical
combinations, under certain physical and chemical conditions it can also
arise in the realm {134} of the inorganic in a purely chemical and
mechanical way. Organic _form_ which, in its lowest stages, is so simple,
like the moneron and the bathybius, and which stands still lower than a
cell, is, moreover, something which there is no difficulty in explaining
from inorganic matter. Finally, organic _motion_ which alone is the last
and lowest characteristic of the organic in its lowest stage--in which the
process of life properly consists, and in which, therefore, we have to
recognize the _punctum saliens_ of the whole question--is only an increase
and complication of the merely mechanical motion of the inorganic, likewise
explainable by mechanical causes. This view Haeckel expounds in the
thirteenth and partly also in the first chapter of his "Natural History of
Creation," and explains the origin of the first and most simple organic
individuals either through what he calls _autogony_ in an inorganic fluid,
or through _plasmogony_ in an organic fluid--a plasma or protoplasma. In
fact, according to him, the only correct idea is that all matter is
provided with a soul, that inorganic and organic nature is one, that all
natural bodies known to us are equally animated, and that the contrast
commonly drawn between the living and the dead world does not exist. This
is but a repetition, in a more rhetorical way, of the same idea which
"Anonymus" expressed in discussing the question as to the origin of
sensation.

DuBois-Reymond--who, in his lecture at Leipzig, pronounced the origin of
_sensation_ and of _consciousness_ a problem of natural science, never to
be solved--is also of the opinion that the explanation of _life_ from mere
mechanism of atoms is very probable, and only a question of time. It is
well known that the experimental {135} attempts at originating the organic
through chemistry are at present pursued with an eagerness that can have
its stimulus only in the hope of success.

It is clear that the main point of the question does not lie in organic
matter or in organic form, but in organic _motion_, for even the specific
of the organic _form_ originates only first through _organic motion of
life_. If, therefore, life is to be explained from mechanical causes, it
must also be shown that the merely mechanical motion of inorganic matter
produces that motion which we know as organic motion, and _how_ it produces
it. The idea of "increase and complication of the inorganic, merely
mechanical motion," with which Haeckel throws a bridge from the living to
the lifeless or from the organic to the inorganic, does not yet give us
that proof; it seems rather to be one of those pompous phrases with which
people hide their ignorance and make the uncritical multitude believe that
the explanation is found: a manipulation against which, among others,
Wigand, in his great work, repeatedly protests, as also does the Duke of
Argyll in his lecture on "Anthropomorphism in Theology," having especially
in his mind the deductions of Spencer. For we may review the whole known
series of mechanical motions and their mechanical causes, and imagine their
mechanical increase and their mechanical complication the largest possible;
and still the life-motion of the organic will never result therefrom. If
such a keen psychical and physiological investigator and thinker, and such
an authority in the realm of the motions of atoms and molecules, as Gustav
Theodor Fechner--"Einige Ideen zur Schoepfungs- und Entwicklungsgeschichte
der Organismen" ("Some Ideas about the History of the {136} Creation and
Development of Organisms"), Leipzig, 1873, p. 1, f.--can find the whole
lasting and effectual difference between the organic and inorganic in
nothing else than in the way and manner of _motion_--namely, that the
motion of the _organic_ molecules is different from that of the _inorganic_
molecules--and when he traces this difference with mathematical exactness,
then an assertion which simply denies that difference, without attempting
to show the identity of the two motions, to say nothing of proving this
identity, is nothing more than a clear evidence that the mechanical theory
has not yet succeeded in explaining the origin of life, and that those
scientists who so haughtily look down upon the abuse of "_vital power_," to
the efficacy of which their antagonists began to resort when their
knowledge came to an end, make exactly the same abuse with their
"_mechanism_." That organic motion, even the organic motion of molecules,
_once present_, comes into dependence on the well known laws of mechanism,
we naturally will not deny; any more than that the human body, when serving
the will of the mind, follows in its motions the laws of physiology and
mechanism.

Preyer seems to make a mistake similar to that of those who efface
sensation and motion, when, in an essay on the hypothesis of the origin of
life, in the "Deutsche Rundschau," Vol. I, 7, he even effaces the
difference between life and sensation, and simply identifies life and
motion. "Self-motion, called life, and inorganic movement of bodies by
agencies outside of themselves, are but quantitatively, intensively, or
gradually different forms of motion; not in their innermost being
different.... Our will changes many kinds of motion into heat, makes {137}
cold metal to be red-hot simply by hammering.... Likewise inversely, as the
law of the conservation of force must require, a part of the eternal heat
of the metal can be now and forever transposed into the living motion of
our soul." This whole manner of investigation and proof is one of those
numerous unconscious logical fallacies which, introduced by Hegel, have
gradually attained a certain title by possession. From the observation of a
process, they abstract a characteristic, as general as possible,--as, for
instance, from the observation of life the characteristic of motion; then
they find that the process has the characteristic in common with still
other processes--as, for instance, the self-motion of the living has the
general characteristic of motion in common with the objective motion of the
lifeless; and then they persuade themselves that the process which they try
to explain is really explained by having found a quality of this process as
comprehensive as possible. And in order to hide the falsity of the
conclusion, they also give to the general idea, which they have found to be
a characteristic of that process, the same name which the special process
has,--as, for instance, they call motion life, no matter whether it is a
motion of itself or a being moved, no matter whether it is performed from
within or in consequence of an impulse from without; and then they say:
"Behold, life is explained; life is nothing but motion." But it can be
readily seen that life is also motion, and has therefore this
characteristic in common with everything which is moved; but that the
specific of that motion called life--namely, self-motion in consequence of
an impulse renewing itself from within, and, as Fechner shows, {138}
self-motion in a rotatory direction of the molecules, precisely the same
thing which in distinction from other motions we call life,--is not
explained, but simply ignored.

There is still another bold hypothesis which we have to mention--namely,
_that the organic germs were once thrown from other spheres upon the earth
by aerolites_. Years ago this idea was declared by Helmholtz to be
scientifically conceivable; then it was formally asserted and brought into
general notice by Sir William Thompson, in his opening address before the
annual assembly of the British Association at Edinburgh, in 1871, but
rejected as formally and materially unscientific by Zoellner, in the preface
to his work, "Nature of Comets," and again defended by Helmholtz in his
preface to the second volume of a translation of Thompson and Tait's
Theoretical Physics. However, this hypothesis also only defers the solution
of the question, and, supposing its scientific possibility, leads either to
the remoter question, how life did originate in those other spheres, or to
the metaphysical assertion of the eternity of life and of the eternal
continuity of the living in the world, and shows therewith very clearly the
impossibility of its explanation.

This inexplicability would still exist, if what is quite improbable should
happen, namely, that the experimental attempts at _artificially producing
organic life_ should be successful, and if thus the question as to the
_generatio aequivoca_, which during the past decades so much alarmed the
minds of scientists and theologians, should be experimentally solved and
answered in the affirmative. For in view of the hopes of a possible
explanation of life, which is expected to be the reward for the success of
{139} these attempts, Zoellner is fully right in saying: "That the
scientists to-day set such an extremely high value on the inductive proof
of the _generatio aequivoca_, is the most significant symptom of how little
they have made themselves acquainted with the first principles of the
theory of knowledge. For, suppose they should really succeed in observing
the origin of organic germs under conditions entirely free from objection
to any imaginable communication with the atmosphere, what could they answer
to the assertion that the organic germs, in reference to their extension,
are of the order of ether-atoms, and, with these, press through the
intervals of the material molecules which form the sides of our apparatus?"

How little life is explained, at least according to the present state of
our knowledge, also follows from the _insufficiency of all attempts_ at
_defining it_. The latest and most thorough attempt at such a definition of
life, with which we are familiar, is that made by Herbert Spencer in his
"First Principles", Sec. 25, and in his "Principles of Biology," Vol. I, Part
I, Chap. 4 and 5. Having made thorough investigations, he arrives at the
general formula: "Life is the continuous adjustment of internal relations
to external relations." To this definition we will not make the objection
that it is nothing but a logical abstraction from the common quality of all
processes and phenomena of life; for it certainly lies in the nature of a
definition that it can be nothing else but that. Nevertheless, we will
state that such a definition of life not only does not lead us any nearer
to the comprehension of its processes, and especially of the richness and
the organization of its forms and functions, but that it {140} clearly
shows us how little the origin of life is explained. For this very
definition necessarily and obviously leads us to the questions: Whence do
those internal relations originate, whence their adjustment to external
relations, and whence the continuity of this adjustment? The answer to
these questions this definition still owes us.

Therefore, not only self-consciousness and freedom, not only sensation and
consciousness, but also life and the organic, remain a phenomenon which--at
least, according to the present state of our knowledge and
reasoning--enters into the realm of the world of phenomena as _something
new_ that can not be explained from the foregoing, although it presupposes
the foregoing as the _condition_, not the cause, of its appearance; and no
matter whether we have to think of the modality of its origin as a sudden
or as a gradual one.

Sec. 4. _The Elements of the World, the Theory of Atoms, and the Mechanical
View of the World._

The investigating and thinking mind, when it attempts to explain the
appearances and forms of that which exists, finds itself led further and
further back, until it finally arrives at the last elements of the world
and of matter. Whether we take the problem of life as solved or unsolved,
the living has matter and its subordination to the efficiency of all its
chemical and mechanical powers in common with the lifeless; and the
organic, in its first beginnings, stands extraordinarily near to, and is
grown on the ground of, the inorganic,--if not according to the category of
cause and effect, still according to that of condition and consequence, of
basis and structure. Therefore we stand at last before the {141} question
of the final elements of matter, which, indeed, constitutes organic as well
as inorganic bodies.

The answer to this question is attempted by the theory of atoms: the
doctrine which teaches that the whole material world is composed of simple
particles which are no farther divisible, and from whose juxtaposition the
chemical elements--and, in respect to their other forms of existence and
combination, the whole world of bodies, with all their forms, states, and
changes,--are composed.

This theory has not only the practical value that the physical (and
especially the chemical) sciences can make and use their formulas most
easily under the supposition of such simple primitive elements; but it also
has the great theoretical merit that it has broken down the old barriers
between _matter_ and _force_, and has thus promoted considerably our method
of regarding the world of material substances. Toward this result,
scientists and philosophers--and, among the latter, the thinkers and
investigators of both views of the world, the theistic and the pantheistic,
the ideal and the materialistic,--have worked with equal merit, and have
equally enjoyed its fruits, with perhaps the single exception of so pure a
materialist as Ludwig Buechner, who, it seems, does not like to give up his
old doctrine of force _and_ matter as the two inseparable, equivalent, and
equally eternal elements of the universe. That matter itself, even when
looked upon from a purely physical standpoint, has an incorporeal
principle; that the whole world of bodies, as such, has but a phenomenal
character; that not force _and_ matter are the two empirico-physical
principles of the world, but that matter itself must be a product of
elementary {142} force active in the atoms; these doctrines have now be
pretty nearly common property of natural science and philosophy.
Investigators who like Wilhelm Wundt, rise from natural science to
philosophy, or such as take their starting-point from philosophy--whether
they be theists, like Lotze, I. H. Fichte, Ulrici, or occupy the ground of
a pessimistic pantheism, as does Eduard von Hartmann,--all share this view
and its fruits.

But in spite of all these preferences for the theory of atoms, we should
not forget that it still has but hypothetical value--that it is but an idea
of limits, which indicates, where the scientifically perceptible ceases,
and that every attempt at moving this limit still farther on must either
fail and lead into unsolvable contradictions, or, if successful, only leads
to new difficulties and unsolved problems.

Already within that realm in which the theory of atoms is a supplemental
hypothesis directly indispensable at present--_i.e._, within their
application in physical sciences--we meet suppositions which raise great
doubts and difficulties. Such a scientific difficulty occurs when the
atomism of the natural philosophers supposes a double complexity of atoms,
material atoms and atoms of ether: complexities which both penetrate one
another, and are supposed to follow partly totally different, partly the
same, elementary laws of force. Material atoms are subordinate to the law
of gravitation, while atoms of ether are not; and yet both act legitimately
upon one another,--as, for instance, when heat passes into motion and
motion into heat, which certainly presupposes a law of power acting in
common for both. Another difficulty lies in the atomism of the chemists;
and still another {143} in the divergency of the aims at which the physical
theory of atoms on the one hand and the chemical theory of atoms on the
other seem to point. Chemistry is inclined to explain the difference of its
numerous elements from the original difference of the atoms; and yet it is
not at all certain that the elements of chemistry themselves are not
composed of still more simple and less numerous primary elements. Many
indications seem to point to such primary elements which are more simple in
number and quality, and investigators even mention an element--hydrogen--in
the direction of which we have to look for the way that will lead us to
those primitive elements of matter. The divergency of aims, finally,
consists in the fact that physical atomism prevailingly points to a
conformity of the atoms of bodies; chemical atomism, on the contrary,--at
least, according to its present state,--points to a dissimilarity among
these.

The hypothetical and problematical nature of the theory of atoms strikes us
still more clearly when we try to analyze it philosophically. First, we
meet that antinomy which we always find where we try to pass beyond the
limits of our empirical knowledge by means of conception. For, if the atoms
still occupy space, we can not understand why they should not be further
divisible, and if they do not occupy space, we can not understand how any
sum of that which does not occupy space, can finally succeed in filling
space. It is true, this very antinomy has led to the overcoming of that
dualism of force and matter which so long enchained science, and the
overcoming of which we greet as a progress of our theoretical knowledge of
nature. We no {144} longer look upon the atoms as material elements, but as
centres of force. The antinomy has the further merit that, in the realm of
the knowledge of nature, it brings to our consciousness the great advantage
of a concrete perception and reasoning over purely logical abstractions.
For Ulrici, in his "God and Nature," is right in calling our attention to
the fact that we must think about the atoms, not in an _abstractly_ logical
and an _abstractly_ mathematical way, but concretely; that we have to
consider them, not as mere quantities, but as qualities; and that we can
then easily arrive at the perception of something which occupies space, and
which therefore, according to abstract conclusions of logic and
mathematics, could still be thought of as divisible _in abstracto_, but
which, even as a consequence of its _quality_, of its concrete natural
form, is no longer divisible in reality. Nevertheless, in spite of all
these remarkable attempts at overcoming the difficulties of the theory of
atoms, that antinomy returns as often as we undertake to make that clearly
perceptible which we have at last gained a partial conception of; and thus
shows us, from this side also, that even with the theory of atoms we have
arrived at the limit where not only our observation, but also the
preciseness and certainty of our conceptions, ceases.

By the atomic theory, we do not gain anything for the ultimate explanation
of the world and its contents, not even if its present hypothetical value
should be changed into a complete demonstration. For the whole theory but
removes the question as to the origin of things from their sensible
appearance to the elements of that appearance, and leaves us standing just
as helpless before the elements as before the appearances. For {145} whence
does the whole richness of the appearances in the world come? If the atoms
are all alike, and their laws of force the simplest we can imagine, then
their grouping into all the developments and formations of which we observe
such an infinite and regularly arranged abundance, is not less unexplained
than if we had not gone back to the theory of atoms at all. But if the
atoms and their laws of force are different, the difficulty is not
simplified, but doubled. For, first, the theory then owes us an answer to
the questions wherein the difference of the atoms consists and whence it
comes; and, second, the question we have to consider in supposing a
uniformity of the atoms, is not disposed of or answered--the question,
namely, as to the causes which bring these different atoms together to form
precisely those complexities of atoms which we observe as the world of
phenomena.

This insufficiency of the theory of atoms in explaining the world and its
contents, is another proof to us that, however great the practical value of
this theory may be for the operations of physics and chemistry, its
theoretical value consists essentially in the fact that it formulates more
accurately the perception of the limits of our exact knowledge. Even the
idea of Lotze, that the atoms (in themselves different) are not really the
final elements of matter, but consist of still more simple but likewise
different elements, seems to us more a decoration than an extension of the
limits at which our perception has arrived; we stand before a double door,
but find both doors locked. We agree with DuBois-Reymond, when he declares,
in his before-mentioned lecture, the impossibility of perceiving the last
elements of the {146} world, matter and force, to be the other limit of our
knowledge of nature which, together with the impossibility of the
explanation of the origin of sensation and consciousness, remains forever
fixed.

Likewise, the peculiar modification which G. Th. Fechner gives to the
theory of the last elements of the world, cannot escape the charge of
leaving the problem of the world scientifically just as unsolved as before.
Fechner not only finds, as we have already mentioned, the difference
between the organic and the inorganic in the difference of the mutual
motions, but he also finds that the character of organic motions is exactly
the same as that which the bodies of the universe have among themselves in
their motions. Thus he distinguishes the _cosmorganic_ motion, which is
performed in the whole of the universe, and the _molecular-organic_ motion,
which we observe in the single organisms of the earth; he makes God the
personal, self-conscious soul of this cosmical organism; and, in using the
law of the tendency to stability, with which he completes the Darwinian
selection theory, asserts that the organic in the whole of the universe, as
well as in the narrow sphere of single bodies on the earth, is the first
thing from which the inorganic was separated and became gradually fixed.
Thus, in his opinion, the problem which up to the present has occupied
investigators,--namely, how did the organic originate from the
inorganic?--would have to be reversed to, how did the inorganic originate
from the organic?

Preyer would also reach a similar result with his above-mentioned theory of
the identity of life and motion. For according to this theory, the living
would {147} be as old and common as motion, and the organic but the dregs
of life.

We may, therefore, say that, without regard to the fact that neither
pantheism nor theism will ever harmonize with Fechner's solution of this
contrast which gives to God exactly the same position in the world as the
soul has in the body, natural science will certainly treat with great
reserve a cosmo-metaphysical system which so fully upsets all results of
exact investigations into the history of origin and development, and has no
other proof for itself than the identity, or at least the similarity, of
the abstract formula according to which the molecular motions of organisms
and the cosmical motions are performed. Although we thus have to deny to
the proof of this identity or similarity the weight which Fechner gives to
it, nevertheless it has still no small merit, since it throws new and
clearer light upon the old thought, always attractive and yet so difficult
to present,--of a macrocosmus and a microcosmus, which has been often
enough treated with so much natural mysticism.

Thus, in our inquiry into the development of things, we have successively
arrived at four points, each of which urged us to make the confession that
here something new came into existence, which can not be explained from the
preceding conditions of its being; these four points were: the origin of
self-consciousness, the origin of sensation and consciousness, the origin
of life, and finally the elements of the universe. Arrived at the last
problem, we see the confession of our ignorance increased to the still more
comprehensive confession that we are really not able _fully_ to explain
anything in the world. We are able to perceive a uniformity of law in the
states and {148} changes of things, and to abstract therefrom common laws
of nature; we can observe single objects, and perceive their states and
changes in their connection with one another and in their dependence on
those laws. But we are not able to explain scientifically either the origin
of these laws or the last physical causes of the qualities of things, which
follow these laws.

We should reach the same result if we had not started from the objective
world of the existing, as we were induced to do by our subject, but from
theoretical investigations. Here also we should immediately find ourselves
in a world of relations between subject and object, of a regularly arranged
abundance of subjective and objective qualities, states and processes, of
which the objective only come to our knowledge through the medium of the
subjective, and of regularly arranged laws to which both the subjective and
the objective are commonly subordinate. But why just these and no other
qualities of the subject and of objects exist, why just these and no other
laws reign, why just this and no other relation takes place between the
perceiving subject and the perceived object, would remain unanswered as
before.

Amidst a generation which is so fond of reveling in the thought of an
extension of all the limits of our knowledge, and is inclined to proclaim
as true that which it wishes and hopes, investigators are not wholly
wanting who very decidedly express their consciousness of these limits of
our knowledge, and at the same time combine it with the most logical
scientific reasoning and investigation. Even when in detail they reach
these limits from the most varying points of view, and draw {149} them in
different directions, they all agree in confirming the principle that it is
one of the first and most indispensable conditions of successful
investigation always to be conscious of the limits of its perception.
Voices which remind mankind of these limits, are perhaps less popular, for
man prefers to be reminded of the advances rather than of the limitations
of his knowledge; but they are on that account the more worthy of our
gratitude, for they keep us on the solid ground of the attainable from
which alone sure progress in knowledge is possible. Among such philosophers
we name Ulrici, and especially Lotze; among scientists, in the first place,
two pioneers in their departments--namely, in the department of the
mechanism of heat, Robert von Mayer--compare his "Bemerkungen ueber das
mechanische Aequivalent der Waerme" ("Remarks on the Mechanical Equivalent
of Heat"), and "Ueber nothwendige Consequenzen und Inconsequenzen der
Waermemechanik" ("Necessary Consequences and Inconsequences of the Mechanism
of Heat"), Stuttgart, Cotta;--and in the realm of the development of
organisms, K. E. von Baer--compare his "Reden und kleinere Aufsaetze"
("Addresses and Essays"), 2 vols., St. Petersburg, 1864 and 1876. In this
connection we have already mentioned the name of DuBois-Reymond. Otto
Koestlin published two remarkable dissertations in this direction--"Ueber
die Grenzen der Naturwissenschaft" ("Limits of Natural Science"), Tuebingen,
Fues, 2d ed., 1874, and "Ueber natuerliche Entwicklung" ("Natural
Development"), ib., 1875. In the latter he especially cautions against
hastily confounding the laws of development of planets, development of the
organic kingdom, and development {150} of the individual organisms.
Recently, Wigand, in the second volume of his work already frequently
mentioned, attempts, with an extreme energy which does too little justice
to the representation and investigation of the still unsolved problems, to
formulate the limits of the knowable.

A contrary extreme, and of its kind a still more one-sided corrective of
this too great stability, we have in those investigators who, by reason of
the great progress which has been made in the realm of the theoretical
knowledge of nature, allow themselves to be drawn on to the hope of still
explaining all states and processes in the world--the spiritual and the
ethic processes as well as the physical--from the pure mechanism of atoms;
and who see in that which thus far has been mechanically explained, the
only and the infallible way of explaining all that is still obscure. They
call this view the _mechanical view of the world_; and, as "monism," put it
in opposition to the "vitalistic, teleological, and dualistic view of the
world." In order to obtain a correct view of this standpoint, we quote from
Haeckel's "Natural History of Creation", Vol. I, page 23, the following
passage: "By the theory of descent we are for the first time enabled to
conceive of the unity of nature in such a manner that a mechanico-causal
explanation of even the most intricate organic phenomena, for example, the
origin and structure of the organs of sense, is no more difficult (in a
general way) than is the mechanical explanation of any physical process;
as, for example, earthquakes, the courses of the wind, or the currents of
the ocean. We thus arrive at the extremely important conviction that _all
natural bodies_ which are known to us are _equally {151} animated_, that
the distinction which has been made between animate and inanimate bodies
does _not_ exist. When a stone is thrown into the air, and falls to earth
according to definite laws, or when in a solution of salt a crystal is
formed, the phenomenon is neither more nor less a mechanical manifestation
of life than the growth and flowering of plants, than the propagation of
animals or the activity of their senses, than the perception or the
formation of thought in man." Here crystallization, organic life,
sensation, and formation of thought, are expressly put in one line of
mechanism with the falling of a stone.

In the following section we will have occasion to discuss this view as a
_view of the world_; but we believe that the presentation of this idea, and
the exclusive vindication of it as a complete view of the world, needs just
here, where we still stand on the ground of the philosophy of natural
perception, some critical sifting.

In the realm of material nature, _mechanical_ explanation and general
explanation is directly identical; _i.e._, a process of nature remains
obscure so long and so far as its mechanism is not yet perceived, and in
the same degree as its mechanism is perceived, the process also is
explained. The uniformity of law in the occurrence of events according to
the causal principle in the realm of material nature, can be approached by
us in no other form than in that of mechanism, provided we understand by
mechanism an activity according to law and which can be mathematically
estimated as to size and number. So far, therefore, every scientific
investigator in the knowledge of material nature takes his place on the
standpoint of a mechanical view of the world. {152}

But here we have gone to the full extent to which we are justified in
taking a mechanical view of the world, and have fixed its limits in its own
proper realm--the realm of the scientific perception of the material world;
even if we do not join with Wigand in resigning scientific inquiry in that
direction, and express the expectation that these limits are not fixed and
not to be designated in advance, but will be moved farther and farther, and
that not only in regard to the knowledge of the quantity of phenomena
(which even Wigand, as a scientific investigator, naturally admits), but
also in regard to their quality. In our researches hitherto we have often
met such limits. We have found that in the realm of the material world such
important phenomena and processes as life are at present not yet fully
explained. By the mechanical view of the world, we have been led back to
the last elements and to the most elementary forces of matter, but have
been convinced that we are no longer able to find them with scientific
certainty, and that consequently not a single quality of material existence
is really explained and traced back to its last material causes, to say
nothing of the transcendental causes which are entirely inaccessible to our
exact scientific knowledge.

Now there is another realm of existence, just as large as and, according to
its value, still larger than, that of the material world, which, not on
account of its scientific inaccessibility, but in conformity with its own
peculiar nature, entirely withdraws itself from the mechanical view. It is
the realm of _psychical life_; and, still more decidedly and more
evidently, the _realm of mind_. As far as our observations go, the law of
{153} causality reigns here also, and here also nothing takes place without
a cause. But as here the _realm_ in which the causal law reigns is no
longer material nature, so even the _form_ in which it is active is no
longer that of mechanism. For we certainly cannot understand mechanical
effect to be anything else than an effect of something material upon
something material, whose uniformity of law can be exactly estimated
mathematically as to size and number. Now if the application of mechanism
to the psychical and spiritual realm does not express anything except the
certainly quite insidious idea that here also causality reigns, it is
nothing else but the substitution of another idea for the word
mechanism--an idea which it never had in the entire use of language up to
this time, and by the substitution of which the proof for a mechanism of
the mind is not given, but surreptitiously obtained in a manner similar to
the before-mentioned attempt of Preyer, surreptitiously to obtain the proof
for the origin of life.

But if the mechanical explanation of the functions of the mind really means
that they also consist in an effect of the material upon something
material, and that this effect can be mathematically estimated as to size
and number, it is an assertion which has first to be proven, but which
cannot be proven and cannot be allowed even as an hypothesis, as a problem
for investigation, because it contradicts our whole experience. And it
contradicts not only the conclusions drawn from most natural appearances,
which, as is well known, are deceitful and even tell us that the sun goes
around the earth, but it contradicts the philosophical analysis just as
much and even still more directly and decidedly than {154} the direct
impression--as became clear to us at the lowest point of contact between
the material and the psychical, viz., at sensation, when we showed the
impossibility of scientifically explaining the origin of sensation.

It is easy to see what facts made it altogether possible to produce such a
materialistic psychology and to give it at the first superficial view a
certain appearance of truth; but it will not be difficult to detect its
want of truth. According to our whole experience, the human mind is bound
to the body; its proper activity, its whole communication with the material
and immaterial world outside of it, even its whole mutual intercourse with
the minds of fellow-beings, is performed by means of bodily functions
which, as such, are subordinate to mechanism. Therefore "physiological
psychology" certainly belongs to the most interesting of the branches of
science which at present enjoy special care, and works in this realm, like
those of Wundt, are worthy of the greatest attention. Now if these points
of contact once exist between the material and the psychical and spiritual
processes, so that material functions causally influence psychical and
spiritual ones, and psychical and spiritual functions similarly influence
material ones, there must also exist between the laws of material processes
and those of psychical and spiritual functions a relation which makes
possible such a mutual effect, and we must be able to abstract from it the
existence of a common higher law of which on the one side the material
laws, and on the other the psychical and spiritual, are but partial laws.
Precisely here lie the indications which appear to favor materialism in
psychology. But it is only an appearance. For, from the acknowledgment
{155} and scientific investigation of a reciprocal action, to an
identification of the two factors which act upon one another, is still an
infinite step. If science is not even able to identify material motion and
sensation, still less can it identify material motion and the spiritual and
ethic activities. When this is done, it is done only in consequence of the
same confounding of condition and cause which we had to expose on the
occasion of the assertion of the possibility of explaining the origin of
life or of sensation, and of consciousness or of self-consciousness. But we
here also willingly admit that the realm in which causality reigns in the
form of mechanism, aims at being the support, foundation, and instrument of
another realm where causality still reigns, but mechanism ceases. How far
investigation may still proceed in the direction of those interesting
points and lines where both realms touch one another in causal reciprocal
action, we do not know. We are hardly able to indicate the direction in
which the investigation must proceed, and this direction seems to be
assigned to it by the idea of _Ausloesung_.[8] The idea of _Ausloesung_,
which plays such an {156} important _role_ in physics, seems to be still
fruitful for the knowledge of psycho-physical life: bodily functions _loesen
aus_ spiritual ones, spiritual functions bodily ones. But so much the more
clearly does this theory show the limits of mechanism: mechanism reigns in
the world of bodies from the _Ausloesungen_ and to the _Ausloesungen_, with
which the mind induces the body to activity, and the body the mind; beyond
these limits causality still reigns, but no longer mechanism.

Now if thus the mechanical view of the world has within its own most proper
realm--the realm of material phenomena--its limits, even if they are
capable of being moved farther; and if it is without any scientific
acceptance in the realm of soul and mind: its usurpations reach the highest
possible degree when it pretends to {157} explain the last causes of
things. For from its very nature it follows that it is only able to explain
the reciprocal action of material things among themselves, when these
things in their finalities, or the causes of their qualities and
conditions, are already present, and the laws which they follow are already
active. As to the origin of those qualities or their causes, and of these
laws, this view leaves us entirely in the dark.

       *       *       *       *       * {158}


