CHAPTER III.

DARWINISM AND MORAL PRINCIPLES.

Sec. 1. _Darwinistic Naturalism and Moral Principles._

If we consider the ethical consequences of a view of the world which,
proceeding from Darwinism, permits the universe, man included, to be taken
up into a mechanism of atoms--a mechanism in which everything, even the
ethical action of man, finds its sufficient explanation--we certainly
cannot perceive how such a view of the world is able to arrive at firm
moral principles. If man, even in his spiritual life and moral action, is a
mere product of nature, originated through descent, and if his whole
spiritual life is fully consumed by these merely mechanical factors, then
all moral principles are also nothing else than inherited customs founded
upon those instincts which in the struggle for existence have proven to be
the most beneficial to man. Then their influence is subject to continual
change, always corresponding to the existing state of human development. As
these moral instincts have displaced the former instincts of the animal
predecessors of man--say, _e.g._, of sharks, of marsupialia, of
lemurides--so they must {380} also expect it any time to be displaced in
turn by new and still more useful instincts. And even in the same period of
the development of mankind, the moral or immoral principles which have
actual authority in each nation or tribe, have their full right of
existence as long as they are not displaced by still more advantageous
instincts. Moral principles in which infanticide, prostitution, and
cannibalism have a place, are inferior to the highest form of Christian
morality only so far as they do not hold their own in the struggle for
existence, when nations having those low views come into collision with
nations of higher moral culture; but in themselves they have full value and
full right, so long as they attain the end of all instincts, and so far as
we can speak of ends at all; in such naturalism, apart from human activity,
the end consists only in the preservation of the individual and the species
in the struggle for existence.

Under these suppositions, moral principles not only lose their objective
and solid consistency in the mass of mankind, but they also become
irrevocably subject to the arbitrariness of the single individual. An
individual who either has not, or asserts that he has not, a determined
moral instinct, or who allows it to be smothered by some other instinct
which in a normal individual is subordinate, but in him stronger, is fully
justified in his immoral action so long as he is successful with it. Every
individual is entirely his own master and his own judge. If man is morally
good, it may be the consequence of an especially happy individual
disposition, or of an especially clear perception, or of happy
circumstances and influences; but it is not the consequence of a free
subordination under the authority {381} of a moral law; for there is
neither freedom nor an objective moral authority. The single man is but the
product of a certain sum and mixture of powers of nature, acting of
necessity, which may with him turn out fortunately or unfortunately. If, on
the other hand, man is morally perverted, society may defend itself against
his perversity; wisdom may try to convince him of the bad consequences of
his perversity for himself and society; the effect of his perversity may
make him sensible of the bad consequences of his actions: but there is no
other objectively valid corrective of his perversity. If he is successful
in his immoral action, and if he silences his conscience, this voice of the
unobserved higher instinct in favor of the preferred lower--which
unfortunately, as is well known, succeeds oftenest and most easily in the
case of those whose perversity has become the most habitual, and in whom
another grouping of instincts would be most desirable--then the whole
affair is settled, and he is absolved. Let us be understood correctly. We
do not say that all advocates of mechanical or monistic ethics draw these
conclusions in reality; we know very well that many a man is better than
his system; but it seems to us inevitable that the logical pursuit of that
naturalistic principle leads to this dissolution of all solid fundamentals
of moral principles, and that it is but an inconsequence, certainly worthy
of honor and of notice, if all the advocates of naturalism do not profess
this dissolution of all moral principles with the same cynic frankness that
is shown by many of their partisans.

We do not say too much, when we charge ethical naturalism with dissolution
of _all_ moral principles. Let {382} us examine them, for a moment,
according to the old but still fundamental division into duty, virtue, and
highest good.

According to the principles of that ethical naturalism, there can be no
_duty_ at all, no objective moral law, binding absolutely and in general.
The motives of action are either the strongest and most durable instincts,
or, in case of high culture, conventional agreement of that which benefits
society. In the one as well as in the other case, when the duty is
neglected, the appeal is not made to something absolutely objective and
binding, but either to the highest instinct (and to this every individual
has the right to answer with a _Quod nego_), or to agreement and custom;
and as to this, every individual has the right to make his reformatory or
revolutionary attempt at change--of course only upon the condition that his
attempt is successful, and that it stands proof.

Relatively it is easiest for ethical naturalism to establish a principle of
_virtue_, inasmuch as we have to look upon virtue as the principle of
individual perfection, and inasmuch as even naturalism, by means of the
indestructible impulse of man to attain moral ideas, can postulate an ideal
of human action. But on closer examination even the naturalistic idea of
virtue vanishes under our hands. Virtue, as individual morality, is
constituted of the factors of duty and of the highest good, which form the
motives of virtuous action. Now a system of morality which, as we have
seen, is entirely wanting in an objective solid principle of duty as the
motive of action, and which likewise, as we shall see immediately, is
wanting in an objectively established highest good as the end of action,
cannot possibly {383} produce any other idea of virtue than an abstract
formal one. In ethical naturalism, even this form is subject to change.
For, according to this system, not only the motive and end but also the
form of moral action depend on that which in every circle of society and at
every time proves to be the most successful form. It is the proof of
success or failure which gives this form a certain traditional authority
and a relative solidity--but only a relative one, and only until it is
displaced by a still more successful form.

That, finally, ethical naturalism is also wanting in an objective end of
moral action, in the idea and meaning of the _highest good_, is indeed not
denied by naturalism itself. It is true it speaks with predilection of the
idea of species, which man is to represent and to realize, and in that
respect we can say that the highest good of naturalistic ethologists is the
species or the idea of species.[11] But the idea of species is only the
empty vessel which first becomes valuable by reason of its contents. Now,
if we ask ethical naturalism the properties with which that idea of species
is to be endowed, it certainly mentions properties, but those which are too
rich; namely, it mentions the idea of all that is good in human life and
the forms of human life, _in concreto_, the whole sum of all the conditions
and acquisitions of the culture of mankind, art, nature, and science: the
comprehensive idea of these acquisitions, the enjoyment of them, the work
at them, is the highest good. Now, since no human individual can enjoy them
all and work at them all at the same time, every individual, as {384} to
disposition, inclination, and circumstances, has to enjoy a part of them,
to work at a part of them, and to renounce a part of them. And since each
single one of these good things, however valuable to the individual, may be
refused to or taken away from him, he has again to learn to be satisfied
with that idea of species, however little it is able to offer him, when
separated from the empiric possessions of this earthly life. Thus with
naturalism the highest good is either mentioned in an abstraction which
does not offer us anything, or which, if we ask the meaning of that
abstraction, is instantly drawn down into the low sphere and the varied
multiformity of empirical and individual life, left to the chance of
individual taste, and confounded with that which is connected with the
highest good only in the second line and in a derived manner--namely, with
the formations and actions of life which strive at and serve the
realization of the highest good. Ethical naturalism is not able to produce
out of itself an objective highest good which is for each individual alike
attractive, rich, and comprehensive.

Moreover, since ethical naturalism proves itself insufficient for the
principles of any and all morality, it is but a natural conclusion that it
is still less able to produce those principles which are characteristic of
the highest representation of human morality known to mankind, namely:
_Christian morality_. Ethical monism has no room for three ethical
fundamental views, whose full possession morality owes to Christianity, and
which gives to Christian morality its highest motive power. One of these is
a deeper conception of evil as a sin, as a positive rebellion against the
good; another is faith in a future {385} absolute realization of the
highest good in an end sometime to be reached by mankind and the individual
and by means of a moral order of the world; and the third is the
acknowledgment of the full worth of personality. Evil--to which of course
no objective valid moral law, but only one conventionally established,
stands opposed--is to ethical naturalism nothing but the action of an
instinct which in this given case is not beneficial to man in his struggle
for existence; the category of good and evil is entirely replaced by the
category of the useful and detrimental. With the disappearance of the idea
of sin as a transgression of the divine law, the correlated idea of
holiness also disappears from the system of ethical naturalism. Besides,
blessedness, complete harmony of the outer and inner man with the ideal in
the state of mankind as well as of every individual, complete realization
of the highest good for the whole as well as for the single through the
means of moral work and perfection on the part of man and of holy and
loving guidance and endowment on the part of God, is an aim which
naturalism is not able to acknowledge, since, according to it, mankind and
individuals continue in the ever-flowing stream of earthly incompletion
until both reach their destiny in annihilation. A moral order of the world
is an impossibility to it, since no holy and loving Ruler and Governor of
the world, but only a blind mechanism, causes the course of things.
Finally, the personality of man can be only perceived in its worth and in
its full importance, when, in the first place, it is in the possession of
freedom, of full moral responsibility; and when, in the second place, it
lives beyond the span of its short earthly existence and may hope for a
full realization of {386} all its ideals of virtue and the highest good for
itself as well as for mankind. Both these points must be contested by
monism and naturalism. The place of freedom is taken by absolute
determinism; even man is only a natural product, the highest which
naturalism knows, but still no more than a product of nature; his
personality and his life, bound to the material body, cease with the death
of this body, and therefore never reach the ideal of either morality or
blessedness. All ideals are and must forever remain objective illusions
which came forth out of the power of the corresponding noble impulse,
imaginative objective conceptions of the moral impulses.

Sec. 2. _Scientific Darwinism and Moral Principles._

Whilst Darwinistic naturalism surely injures the moral principles, the
Darwinistic theories are friendly to them, if they, as mere scientific
theories, restrain themselves within the limits of natural science. But in
no other point of the entire realm of contact between the natural and
intellectual sciences is it more difficult to observe the boundary-line
than in reflecting upon the moral self-determination of man; here natural
science is always in danger of going beyond its limits.

In the question as to the relation of the evolution theories to religion,
the boundary-line can everywhere be easily drawn in theory and easily
observed in practice. For it is entirely natural for man to look upon the
phenomena of the visible world on the one hand, with a religious mind, as
works and actions of an almighty Creator and Ruler of the world, on the
other, with his observing and reflecting mind, as products of natural
causes. With this double view, man by no means feels {387} himself dragged
hither and thither between two conflicting views; he is able in his logical
contemplation of the world scientifically to establish and arrange each for
itself and both in their harmony, and has the full consciousness that the
one, like the other, has subjective as well as objective truth. Or, if a
single individual does not have this consciousness, he must at least admit
that it is not Darwinism primarily which created the difficulty of this
combined view of the world, but that the latter existed for man in the past
as well as in the present.

But the relation of the _Darwinian_ theories to ethical problems is quite a
different thing. Here, in the first place, it is not the same process which
is to be explained as well in regard to its natural conditions as to its
moral cause. It is true that this double view deserves attention in so far
as we can look upon every action which results from a moral determination
also in reference to its natural side. If I have to raise my arm in
consequence of a moral determination, then physiology and mechanism can
demonstrate with it the whole theory of the motion of members. But this is
not the question, when we treat of the relation between the natural and the
ethical. In this example, the moralist examines the motives of my action,
the scientist describes and explains the activity of the nerves and muscles
of my arm, and as long as the scientist is not guilty of going beyond the
boundary to which he is tempted, and which even now we are endeavoring to
make clear, as long as he does not include the ethical motives in his
physiological attempts at explanation, the one keeps himself neutral with
reference to the other; each of them knows that he is {388} operating in a
field which at first has nothing in common with that of the other. In a
moral action, _as such_, the question is no longer as to a process which is
to be explained as well in regard to its natural conditions as to its
ethical cause, but of a process which _either_ has its ethical cause, and
then in its ethical value _no_ natural cause, _or_ which even in its
ethical motives belongs to the causal connection of empirical nature with
its indestructible chain of natural causes and natural effects. Now at this
point the scientist, as such, is always exposed to the danger of denying
the first part of our dilemma and affirming the second. For, in moral
action, something which is elevated above nature and its causal connection
always makes its way into this causal connection of nature, and with its
action and the effects of this action wholly enters into this connection:
and natural science which has to deal particularly with this causal
connection of nature and with it alone, is on that account nevertheless
always tempted to explain everything that it sees coming into this
connection, in _all_ its causes (even in those which no longer belong to
this natural causal connection), out of it. It is therefore always tempted
to trace even ethical action which, with its deeds, makes its way and
enters into this causal connection, but which with its motives stands above
it, as to its motives, back to a natural causal connection; and thus to
contest the independence of ethical motives and their principles--which
independence is not dependent on nature, but, on the contrary, frequently
contradicts it. Ethics must adhere to the fact that the ethical
determination of the will has its origin not in a natural condition, but in
the ethical centre of personality; although all the conditions under which
the ethical motive {389} originates and acts, belong completely to the
causal connection of natural life, in which man himself stands as to the
whole natural part of his being. The ethical realm stands above the natural
realm, and shows its superiority partly by the category of moral demands
whose imperativeness cannot have grown out of the mechanical necessity of
the natural law, because it often enough contradicts the latter and carries
out its demands in opposition to it, partly by the consciousness of
individual responsibility which cannot be got rid of even by him who
mentally establishes a system of determinism that denies responsibility,
partly by the voice of the injured conscience which cannot merely be the
dislike of a dissatisfied higher natural impulse, when it can speak of the
same action for years, even for an entire human life, and even, where man
has counterbalanced that once felt dissatisfaction of the higher impulse,
by an oft-repeated satisfaction of it. In Book I, Chapter V, Sec. 1, we tried
to show that even Darwin seems not to have entirely avoided this danger of
explaining the moral from physical causes; while at the same time we
acknowledge that he otherwise esteems the realm of the moral, and that he
even finds the lofty position of man above the animal world still more
decidedly expressed in his moral than in his intellectual qualities.

But such an intrusion of the physical into the ethical is by no means a
necessary consequence of scientific Darwinism--only an ever-present
temptation of it. He who once admits that even by means of development
something new can originate, that even under the full influence of the
evolution theory there appeared in the series of creation entirely new
phenomena with the {390} appearance of life and the organic, and of
sensation and consciousness, and still more with the appearance of
self-consciousness and freedom, which phenomena no evolution theory is able
to explain; and he who takes into consideration the weight of that other
obvious fact that, in the origin and the growth of each single man, a time
in which he acts with moral responsibility follows in gradual development a
time in which he had but the value and the life of a cell,--such an one can
explain the whole origin of mankind according to the evolution theory, and
yet see something absolutely new coming forth with the appearance of moral
determination. All conditions of the moral determinations of the will may
be and are naturally conditioned, as, indeed, in this world the entire
spiritual life of man is certainly bound to the conditions of his corporeal
life; all preliminary stages of moral types which preceded the temporal
appearance of moral beings, and which surround us still, those stages which
appear in the animal world, may have preceded and prepared the way for the
introduction of morally responsible beings into the world: the moral
determination of the will itself nevertheless remains something new and
independent--something which transcends nature.

If this fact is once admitted, then ethics also has free play to establish
independently and render valid its principles. And then we have no longer
any reason to treat of the relation of the different ethical principles to
naturo-historical Darwinism; for this relation is that of absolute mutual
peace.

       *       *       *       *       * {391}


