CHAPTER XXI

THE FAT LADY'S LETTER

"WELL," remarked Nan Bobbsey, a few days after it had become known that
Danny Rugg was to blame for the fire in the boathouse, "I wish we could
find out, as easily as we found out about Danny, who has our cat Snoop."

"So do I," added Flossie. "Poor Snoop!  I do miss him so much."

"So do I!" exclaimed Freddie.  "But Snap is a nice dog, and I guess I
like dogs better than cats, anyhow."

"Why, Freddie Bobbsey!" cried Nan.

"Don't you love Snoop any more?"

"Oh, yes, 'course I do, but then he isn't here to be loved, and Snap
is."

"Yes, I guess that does make a difference," admitted Nan.  "I wonder if
papa wouldn't let us go down to the railroad office and inquire once
more about him?  Maybe, as it's getting cold weather now, Snoop will
come in from the fields where he may have been staying ever since the
railroad wreck."

"Let's ask," cried Freddie, always ready for action.

It was Saturday, and there was no school.  Bert had gone off coasting
on his new bob, but Nan did not want to go, her mother having asked her
to stay and help with the dusting.  But now the little bit of housework
was over, and Nan was free.

"We'll go down to papa's office," she said to Flossie and Freddie, "and
ask him if we can go to the railroad.  I know one of the ticket agents
and he can tell us of whom to ask about our cat."

Mrs. Bobbsey had no objections, and soon, with Flossie and Freddie at
her side, Nan set off for her father's office in the lumber yard.  The
smaller twins were delighted.

"And maybe we can find our silver cup, too," suggested Freddie, as they
trudged along in the snow, now and then stopping to make a white ball,
which he threw at the fence or telegraph pole.

"The fat lady has our cup--I'm sure of that," said Flossie.

"Well, we can ask papa if he has heard from the circus people,"
suggested Nan.

Mr. Bobbsey was rather surprised to see his three children come into
the office, but he was glad to meet them, for it made a break in his
day's work.  After a little thought he said they might go to the
railroad office to inquire about Snoop.  Nan and her brother and sister
went in a trolley car, and were soon at the depot.

But to their disappointment there was no news of Snoop.  The fat, black
cat seemed to have completely disappeared.

"I've had the switchmen and trackmen keep a lookout for some time
past," the agent told Nan, for Mr. Bobbsey did a large business in
shipping lumber over the railroad, and many of the men were his
friends.  "One of the switchmen near where the wreck was, caught a lot
of cats, that must have been living out in the fields all Summer," went
on the agent, "but they were all sorts of colors. None was pure black,
so I knew they could not be yours.  I'm sorry."

"Yes, so are we," replied Nan.  "Well, I guess Snoop is lost for good.
He has been away a long time now."

On the way back to Mr. Bobbsey's office, the trolley car got off the
track, on account of so much snow on the rails, and the children spent
some time watching the men get it back, the electricity from the wire
and rails making pretty flashes of blue fire.

"What luck?" asked Mr. Bobbsey, as the three came in his private
office, their faces shining and red with the glow of winter.

"None," said Nan sadly.  "Snoop is gone."

"Have you heard from the circus fat lady yet, papa?" asked Flossie.

"Yes, we want our cup back," added her brother.

"No word yet," answered Mr. Bobbsey.  "That circus is traveling all
over Cuba, and the letters I sent never seem to catch up to them.
However, I am sending one on ahead now, to a city where they will soon
give a show. The fat lady will find it there waiting for her, and she
may answer then."

And with this the children had to be content.  Getting back home,
Flossie and Freddie took out their sleds and went for a coast on a
small hill, not far from their home.  This was where the smaller
children had their fun, leaving the larger hill for the bigger girls
and boys.

"Well, after this I think we all need something to cheer us up," said
Papa Bobbsey, who came home from the office early that day.

"Oh, have you got something good?" asked Nan, for she saw a queer
little twinkle in her father's eyes, and she knew that this generally
meant a treat of some kind.

"I have some good news, if you would like to hear it," he said, as he
drew a letter from his pocket.

"Is it to tell that some of our friends are coming to see us?" asked
Bert.

"Well, yes, I think you will call it a visit from a friend--at least
part of it," said Papa Bobbsey.  "Now listen.  This is a letter from
the fat lady in the circus."

"What!" cried Flossie, "--the one who has our cup?"

"The same," said Mr. Bobbsey with a smile.  "And she has more than your
cup.  Listen," and he read the letter.

It was too long to put it all in here, but it went on to say how the
fat lady really had the valuable silver cup belonging to the twins.

"They loaned it to me to drink from," she wrote, "and when the train
stopped so suddenly, there was so much confusion that I put it in my
valise by mistake.  I have had it ever since and have been wondering
how I could send it back to you.  The circus went to Cuba soon after
that, and has been traveling around that island ever since.  I have
only just received your last letter asking me about the cup, or I would
have answered before.  If you will send me directions how to ship the
cup to you I shall be very glad to return it."

"Oh goodie!" cried Freddie.  "We'll have our nice cup again!"

"Is that all in the letter, papa?" asked Flossie.

"No, not quite," he said.  "I'll read a little more," and he read:

"When our circus was wrecked we lost a valuable trick dog.  He could
play soldier, say his prayers, turn somersaults, and do a number of
tricks.  The ringmaster feels very badly about losing him, and has
tried to locate him, but without success.  If you should hear of anyone
near you having such a dog we would be much obliged if you would send
him to us as he belongs to the circus."

There was a moment of silence after Mr. Bobbsey read this, and then
Freddie said:

"Why that must be Snap--our pet dog!  Oh, papa you won't give him back
to the circus; will you?"



