CHAPTER IX

OFF TO THE WOODS

WHETHER Danny Rugg was afraid the principal had seen him trying to
force a fight on Bert, or whether the unexpected fall that came to him,
caused it, no one knew, but certainly, for the next few days, Danny let
Bert alone.  When he passed him he scowled, or shook his fist, or
muttered something about "getting even," but this was all.

Perhaps it was the thought of what Bert had seen fall from Danny's
pocket that made the bully less anxious to keep up the quarrel.  At any
rate, Bert was left alone and he was glad of it.  He was not afraid,
but he liked peace.

The school days went on, and the classes settled down to their work for
the long Winter term.  And the thought of the snow and ice that would
comparatively soon be with them, made the Bobbsey twins rejoice.

"Charley Mason and I are going to make a dandy big bob this year," said
Bert one day.  "It's going to carry ten fellows."

"And no girls?" asked Nan with a smile.  She was walking along behind
her brother, with Grace and Nellie.

"Sure, we'll let you girls ride once in a while," said Charley, as he
caught up to his chum.  "But you can't steer."

"I steered a bob once," said Grace, who was quite athletic for her age.
"It was Danny Rugg's, too."

"Pooh!  His is a little one alongside the one Charley and I are going
to make!" exclaimed Bert.  "Ours will be hard to steer, and it's going
to have a gong on it to tell folks to get out of the way."

"That's right," agreed Charley.  "And we'd better start it right away,
Bert.  It may soon snow."

"It doesn't feel so now," spoke Nan.  "It is very warm.  It feels more
like ice cream cones."

"And if you'll come with me I'll treat you all to some," exclaimed
Nellie Parks, whose father was quite well off.  "I have some of my
birthday money left."

"Oh, but there are five of us!" cried Nan, counting.  "That is too
much--twenty-five cents, Nellie."

"I've got fifty, and really it is very hot today."

It was warm, being the end of September, with Indian Summer near at
hand.

"Well, let's go to Johnson's," suggested Nellie.  "They have the best
cream."

"Oh, here comes Flossie and Freddie!" exclaimed Nan.  "We don't want to
take them, Nellie.  That means--"

"Of course I'll take them!" exclaimed Nellie, generously.  "I've got
fifty cents, I told you."

"I'll give them each a penny and let them run along home," offered Bert.

"No, I'm going to treat them, too," insisted Nellie.  "Come on!" she
called to the little twins, "we're going to get ice cream cones, it's
so warm."

"Oh, goodie!" cried Flossie.  "I was just wishing for one."

"So was I," added her brother.

"And I'll ask you to my party next week," the little girl went on.
"I'm going to have one on my birthday."

"Oh, are you really, Flossie?" asked Nan.  "I hadn't heard about it."

"Yep--I am.  Mamma said I could, but she told me not to tell.  I don't
care, I wanted Nellie to know, as she's going to treat us to cones."

"And it's half my party, 'cause my birthday's the same day," explained
Freddie.  "So you can come to my party at the same time, Nellie."

"Thank you, dear, I shall.  Now let's hurry to the store, for it's
getting warmer all the while."

The ice cream in the funny little cones was much enjoyed by all.  Bert
and Charley walked on together eating, and talking of the bob sled they
were going to make.  They passed Danny Rugg, who looked rather
enviously at them.

"Hey, Charley," called Danny, "come here, I want to speak to you."

"I'm busy now," answered Charley.  "Bert and I have something to do."

"So have I.  I've got a dandy plan."

"Well, I'll see you later," spoke Charley.

He had once been quite friendly with Danny, but he grew not to like his
ways, and so became more chummy with Bert, who was very glad, for he
liked Charley.

The two boys went on to Bert's barn, where they were going to build the
bob sled.  The girls, with Flossie and Freddie, went on the Bobbsey
lawn, where there were some easy chairs.  They sat in the shade of the
trees, and Freddie had Snap do some of his tricks for the visitors.

"Can he jump through a hoop, covered with paper as they do in the
circus?" asked Nellie.

"Oh, we never thought to try that," said Freddie.  "I'm going to make
one," and, filled with this new idea, he hurried into the house.

"Dinah," he said, "I want some paper and paste."

"Land sakes, chile!  what yo' gwine t' do now?" asked the colored cook.

"Make a kite, an' take Snoop up in de air laik yo' brother Bert done
once?"

"No, we're not going to do that," answered the little boy.  "We're
going to cover a hoop with paper, and make Snap jump through it, like
in a circus."

"Mah goodness mustard pot!" cried Dinah.  "What will yo' all be up to
next?"

"I don't know," answered Freddie.  "But will you make me some paste,
Dinah?  And you know we haven't got Snoop, anyhow, so we couldn't send
him up on a kite tail," added Freddie.

"Deah me!  Yo' chilluns done make me do de mostest wuk!" complained
Dinah, but she laughed, which showed that she did not really mean it,
and set at mixing some flour and water for the paste.

Flossie and Freddie insisted on making the paper covered hoop
themselves.  They started, but they got so much of the sticky stuff on
their hands and faces that Nan feared they would soil their clothes, so
she insisted on being allowed to do the pasting for them.

"But we can help, can't we?" asked Freddie.

"Yes," said Nan.

Even for Nan covering a hoop with paper was not as easy as she thought
it would be.  Grace and Nellie helped, but sometimes the wind would
blow the paper away just as they were ready to fold it around the rim
of the hoop.  Then the paste would get on the girls' hands.

"What are you doing?" asked Bert, as he and Charley came from the barn.
They had to stop work on their job, as they could not find a long
enough plank.  They decided to get one from Mr. Bobbsey's lumber
yard, later.

"We're going to have Snap do the circus trick of jumping through a
paper hoop," explained Nan.  "Only we can't seem to get the hoop made."

"I'll do it," offered Bert, and as he and Charley had often pasted
paper on their kite frames they had better luck, and soon the hoop was
ready.

"Come, Snap!" called Freddie, it having been settled that he and
Flossie were to hold the hoop for the dog to leap through.  Snap,
always ready for fun, jumped up from the grass where he had been
sleeping, and frisked about, barking loudly.

"Now you hold him there, Charley," directed Bert, pointing to a spot
back of where Freddie and Flossie stood.  "Then I'll go over here and
call him.  He'll come running, and when he gets near enough, Freddie,
you and Flossie hold up the paper hoop.  He'll go right through it."

It worked out just as the children had planned.  Snap raced away from
Charley, when he heard Bert calling.  He ran right between Flossie and
Freddie, who raised the hoop just in time.

"Rip!  Tear!" burst the paper, and Snap sailed through the hoop just as
he probably had often done in the circus, perhaps from the back of a
horse.

"Oh, that was fine!" cried Flossie.  "Let's make another hoop!"

"Let's make a lot of 'em, and have a circus with Snap, and charge money
to see him, and then we can buy a lot of ice cream for our party!" said
Freddie.

"Oh, yes!" agreed his sister.

Well, they did make more hoops, and Snap seemed to enjoy jumping
through them.  But when Mrs. Bobbsey heard about the circus plans she
decided it would make too much confusion.

"Besides, you have to help me get ready for your party," she said to
the two little twins.

This took their mind off the proposed circus, but for several days
after that they had much fun making hoops for Snap to jump through.

Bert and Charley got a long plank from the lumber yard, and spent much
time after school in the Bobbsey barn, working over their bob sled.  It
was harder than they had thought it would be, and they had to call in
some other boys to help them.  Mr. Bobbsey, too, gave his son some
advice about how to build it.

Flossie and Freddie liked it very much in school.  The kindergarten
teacher was very kind, and took an interest in all her pupils.  "Oh,
mamma!" cried Flossie, coming in one day from school, "I've learned how
to make a house."

"And I can make a lantern, and a chain to hang it on, and I can put it
in front of Flossie's house!" exclaimed Freddie.  "And, please, mother,
may I have some bread and jam.  I'm awful hungry."

"Yes, dear, go ask Dinah," said Mrs. Bobbsey, with a smile.  "And then
you may show me how you make houses and lanterns and a chain.  Are they
real?"

"No," said Flossie, "they're only paper, but they look nice."

"I'm sure they must," said their mother.

After each of the twins had been given a large slice of bread and
butter and jam, they showed the latest thing they had learned at
school. Flossie did manage to cut out a house, that had a chimney on
it, and a door, besides two windows.

Freddie took several little narrow strips of paper, and pasting the
ends together, made a lot of rings.  Each ring before being pasted, was
slipped into another, and soon he had A paper chain.  To make the
lantern he used a piece of paper made into a roll, with slits all
around the middle of it where the light would have come out had there
been a candle in it.  And the handle was a narrow slip of paper pasted
over the top of the lantern.

"Very fine Indeed," said Mamma Bobbsey.  "Run out now to play.  If you
stay in the house too much you will soon lose all the lovely tan you
got in the country, and at the seashore."

"Children," said the principal to the Bobbseys and all the others in
school the next day, "I have a little treat for you.  Tomorrow will be
a holiday, and, as the weather is very warm, we will close the school
at noon, and go off in the woods for a little picnic."

"Oh, good!" cried a number of the boys and girls, and, though it was
against the rules to speak aloud during the school hours, none of the
teachers objected.

"But I expect you all to have perfect marks from now until Friday," Mr.
Tetlow went on.  "You may bring your lunches to school with you Friday
morning, if your parents will let you, and we will leave here at noon,
and go to Ward's woods."

It was rather hard work to study after such good news, but, somehow,
the pupils managed it.  Finally Friday came, and nearly every boy and
girl came to school with a basket or bundle holding his or her lunch.
Mrs. Bobbsey put up two baskets for her children, Nan taking one and
Bert the other.

"Oh, we'll have a lovely time!" cried Freddie, dancing about on his
little fat legs.

Twelve o'clock came, and with each teacher at the head of her class,
and Mr. Tetlow marching in front of all, the whole school started off
for the woods.



