Chapter I.


Schopenhauer points out that Plato and Kant agree in recommending, as the
method of all knowledge, obedience to two laws:—that of Homogeneity, and
that of Specification. The former bids us, by attention to the points of
resemblance and agreement in things, get at their kinds, and combine them
into species, and these species again into genera, until we have arrived
at the highest concept of all, that which embraces everything. This law
being transcendental, or an essential in our faculty of reason, assumes
that nature is in harmony with it, an assumption which is expressed in the
old rule: _Entia præter necessitatem non esse multiplicanda._ The law of
Specification, on the other hand, is stated by Kant in these words:
_Entium varietates non temere esse minuendas._ That is to say, we must
carefully distinguish the species which are united under a genus, and the
lower kinds which in their turn are united under these species; taking
care not to make a leap, and subsume the lower kinds and individuals under
the concept of the genus, since this is always capable of division, but
never descends to the object of pure perception. Plato and Kant agree that
these laws are transcendental, and that they presuppose that things are in
harmony with them.

The previous treatment of the principle of sufficient reason, even by
Kant, has been a failure, owing to the neglect of the second of these
laws. It may well be that we shall find that this principle is the common
expression of more than one fundamental principle of knowledge, and that
the necessity, to which it refers, is therefore of different kinds. It may
be stated in these words: _Nihil est sine ratione cur potius sit, quam non
sit._ This is the general expression for the different forms of the
assumption which everywhere justifies that question “Why?” which is the
mother of all science.




Chapter II.


Schopenhauer in this chapter traces historically the forms in which the
principle had been stated by his predecessors, and their influence. He
points out that in Greek philosophy it appeared in two aspects—that of the
necessity of a ground for a logical judgment, and that of a cause for
every physical change—and that these two aspects were systematically
confounded. The Aristotelian division, not of the forms of the principle
itself, but of one of its aspects, the causal, exemplified a confusion
which continued throughout the Scholastic period. Descartes succeeds no
better. His proof of the existence of God that the immensity of His nature
is a _cause or reason_ beyond which no cause is needed for His existence,
simply illustrates the gross confusion between cause and ground of
knowledge which underlies every form of this ontological proof. “That a
miserable fellow like Hegel, whose entire philosophy is nothing but a
monstrous amplification of the ontological proof, should dare to defend
this proof against Kant’s criticism of it is an alliance of which the
ontological proof itself, little as it knows of shame, might well feel
ashamed. It is not to be expected I should speak respectfully of people
who have brought philosophy into disrespect.” Spinoza made the same
confusion when he laid it down that the cause of existence was either
contained in the nature and definition of the thing as it existed, or was
to be found outside that thing. It was through this confusion of the
ground of knowledge with the efficient cause that he succeeded in
identifying God with the world. The true picture of Spinoza’s “_Causa
sui_” is Baron Munchhausen encircling his horse with his legs, and raising
himself and the horse upwards by means of his pigtail, with the
inscription “_Causa sui_” written below. Leibnitz was the first to place
the principle of sufficient reason in the position of a first principle,
and to indicate the difference between its two meanings. But it was Wolff
who first completely distinguished them, and divided the doctrine into
three kinds: _principium fiendi_ (cause), _principium essendi_
(possibility), and _principium cognoscendi_. Baumgarten, Reimarus,
Lambert, and Platner added nothing to the work of Wolff, and the next
great step was Hume’s question as to the validity of the principle. Kant’s
distinction of the logical or formal principle of knowledge—Every
_proposition_ must have its ground; from the transcendental or material
principle, Every _thing_ must have its ground—was followed out by his
immediate successors. But when we come to Schelling we find the
proposition that gravitation is the _reason_ and light the _cause_ of
things, a proposition which is quoted simply as a curiosity, for such a
piece of nonsense deserves no place among the opinions of earnest and
honest inquirers. The chapter concludes by pointing out the futility of
the attempts to prove the principle. Every proof is the exhibition of the
ground of a judgment which has been expressed, and of which, just because
that ground is exhibited, we predicate truth. The principle of sufficient
reason is just this expression of the demand for such a ground, and he who
seeks a proof, _i.e._, the exhibition of a ground for this principle
itself, presupposes it as true, and so falls into the circle of seeking a
proof of the justification of the demand for proof.




Chapter III.


In the third chapter Schopenhauer points out that the two applications of
the principle of sufficient reason distinguished by his predecessors, to
judgments, which must have a ground, and to the changes of real objects,
which must have a cause, are not exhaustive. The reason why the three
sides of a certain triangle are equal is that the angles are equal, and
this is neither a logical deduction nor a case of causation. With a view
to stating exhaustively the various kinds into which the application of
the principle falls it is necessary to determine the nature of the
principle itself. All our ideas are objects of the subject, and all
objects of the subject are our ideas. But our ideas stand to one another
as a matter of fact in an orderly connection, which is always determinable
_a priori_ in point of form, and on account of which nothing that is in
itself separate and wholly independent of other things can be the object
of our consciousness. It is this connection which the principle of
sufficient reason in its generality expresses. The relations which
constitute it are what Schopenhauer calls its root, and they fall into
four classes, which are discussed in the four following chapters.




