Chapter IV.


In the fourth chapter Schopenhauer deals with the first class of objects
for the subject and the form of the principle of sufficient reason which
obtains in it. This first class is that of those complete ideas of
perception which form part of our experience, and which are referable to
some sensation of our bodies. These ideas are capable of being perceived
only under the forms of Space and Time. If time were the only form there
would be no coexistence, and therefore no persistence. If space were their
only form there would be no succession, and therefore no change. Time may
therefore be defined as the possibility of mutually exclusive conditions
of the same thing. But the union of these two forms of existence is the
essential condition of reality, and this union is the work of the
understanding (see “World as Will and Idea,” vol. i. § 4, and the table of
predicables annexed to vol. ii., chap. 4). In this class of objects for
the subject the principle of sufficient reason appears as the law of
causality or the principle of sufficient reason of becoming, and it is
through it that all objects which present themselves in perception are
bound together through the changes of their states. When a new state of
one or more objects makes its appearance it must have been preceded by
another on which it regularly follows. This is causal sequence, and the
first state is the cause, the second the effect. The law has thus to do
exclusively with the _changes_ of objects of external experience, and not
with things themselves, a circumstance which is fatal to the validity of
the cosmological proof of the existence of God. It follows also from the
essential connection of causality with succession that the notion of
reciprocity, with its contemporaneous existence of cause and effect, is a
delusion. The chain of causes and effects does not affect either matter,
which is that in which all changes take place, or the original forces of
nature, through which causation becomes possible, and which exist apart
from all change, and in this sense out of time, but which yet are
everywhere present (_e.g._, chemical forces, see _supra_, vol. i., § 26).
In nature causation assumes three different forms; that of cause in the
narrow sense, of stimulus, and of motive, on which differences depend the
true distinctions between inorganic bodies, plants, and animals. It is
only of cause properly so called that Newton’s third law of the equality
of action and reaction is true, and only here do we find the degree of the
effect proportionate to that of the cause. The absence of this feature
characterises stimulation. Motive demands knowledge as its condition, and
intelligence is therefore the true characteristic of the animal. The three
forms are in principle identical, the difference being due to the degrees
of receptivity in existence. What is called freedom of the will is
therefore an absurdity, as is also Kant’s “Practical Reason.” These
results are followed by an examination of the nature of vision, which
Schopenhauer sums up in these words: “I have examined all these visual
processes in detail in order to show that the understanding is active in
all of them, the understanding which, by apprehending every change as an
effect and referring it to its cause, creates on the basis of the _a
priori_ and fundamental intuitions or perceptions of space and time, the
objective world, that phenomenon of the brain, for which the sensations of
the senses afford only certain data. And this task the understanding
accomplishes only through its proper form, the law of causality, and
accomplishes it directly without the aid of reflection, that is, of
abstract knowledge through concepts and words, which are the material of
secondary knowledge, of thought, thus of the Reason.” “What understanding
knows aright is reality; what reason knows aright is truth, _i.e._, a
judgment which has a ground; the opposite of the former being illusion
(what is falsely perceived), of the latter error (what is falsely
thought).” All understanding is an immediate apprehension of the causal
relation, and this is the sole function of understanding, and not the
complicated working of the twelve Kantian Categories, the theory of which
is a mistaken one. A consequence of this conclusion is, that arithmetical
processes do not belong to the understanding, concerned as they are with
abstract conceptions. But it must not be forgotten that between volition
and the apparently consequential action of the body there is no causal
relation, for they are the same thing perceived in two different ways.
Section 23 contains a detailed refutation of Kant’s proof of the _a
priori_ nature of the causal relation in the “Second Analogy of
Experience” of the Critique of Pure Reason, the gist of the objection
being that the so‐called subjective succession is as much objective in
reality as what is called objective by Kant: “Phenomena may well follow
one another, without following _from_ one another.”




Chapter V.


The fifth chapter commences with an examination of the distinction between
man and the brutes. Man possesses _reason_, that is to say, he has a class
of ideas of which the brutes are not capable, _abstract_ ideas as
distinguished from those ideas of perception from which the former kind
are yet derived. The consequence is, that the brute neither speaks nor
laughs, and lacks all those qualities which make human life great. The
nature of _motives_, too, is different where abstract ideas are possible.
No doubt the actions of men follow of necessity from their causes, not
less than is the case with the brutes, but the kind of sequence through
thought which renders choice, _i.e._, the conscious conflict of motives,
possible is different. Our abstract ideas, being incapable of being
objects of perception, would be outside consciousness, and the operations
of thought would be impossible, were it not that they are fixed for sense
by arbitrary signs called words, which therefore always indicate _general_
conceptions. It is just because the brutes are incapable of general
conceptions that they have no faculty of speech. But thought does not
consist in the mere presence of abstract ideas in consciousness, but in
the union and separation of two or more of them, subject to the manifold
restrictions and modifications which logic deals with. Such a clearly
expressed conceptual relation is a judgment. In relation to judgments the
principle of sufficient reason is valid in a new form: that of the ground
of knowing. In this form it asserts that if a judgment is to express
knowledge it must have a ground; and it is just because it has a ground
that it has ascribed to it the predicate true. The grounds on which a
judgment may depend are divisible into four kinds. A judgment may have
another judgment as its ground, in which case its truth is formal or
_logical_. There is no truth except in the relation of a judgment to
something outside it, and intrinsic truth, which is sometimes
distinguished from extrinsic logical truth, is therefore an absurdity. A
judgment may also have its ground in sense‐perception, and its truth is
then material truth. Again, those forms of knowledge which lie in the
understanding and in pure sensibility, as the conditions of the
possibility of experience, may be the ground of a judgment which is then
synthetical _a priori_. Finally, those formal conditions of all thinking
which lie in the reason may be the ground of a judgment, which may in that
case be called metalogically true. Of these metalogical judgments there
are four, and they were long ago discovered and called laws of thought.
(1.) A subject is equal to the sum of its predicates. (2.) A subject
cannot at once have a given predicate affirmed and denied of it. (3.) Of
two contradictorily opposed predicates one must belong to every subject.
(4.) Truth is the relation of a judgment to something outside it as its
sufficient reason. Reason, it may be remarked, has no material but only
formal truth.




