VII

CONCLUSIONS


1

In order to retain a livelier image of all this and a more exact memory,
let us give a last glance at the road which we have travelled. We have
put aside, for reasons which we have stated, the religious solutions and
total annihilation. Annihilation is physically impossible; the religious
solutions occupy a citadel without doors or windows into which human
reason does not penetrate. Next comes the theory of the survival of
our ego, released from its body, but retaining a full and unimpaired
consciousness of its identity. We have seen that this theory, strictly
defined, has very little likelihood and is not greatly to be desired,
although, with the surrender of the body, the source of all our ills,
it seems less to be feared than our actual existence. On the other
hand, as soon as we try to extend or to exalt it, so that it may appear
less barbarous or less crude, we come back to the theory of a cosmic
consciousness or of a modified consciousness, which, together with that
of survival without any sort of consciousness, closes the field to every
supposition and exhausts every forecast of the imagination.

Survival without any sort of consciousness would be tantamount for us to
annihilation pure and simple, and consequently would be no more dreadful
than the latter, that is to say, than a sleep with no dreams and with
no awakening. The theory is unquestionably more acceptable than that of
annihilation; but it prejudges very rashly the questions of a cosmic
consciousness and of a modified consciousness.


2

Before replying to these, we must choose our universe, for we have the
choice. It is a matter of knowing how we propose to look at infinity. Is
it the moveless, immovable infinity, from all eternity perfect and at
its zenith, and the purposeless universe that our reason will conceive
at the farthest point of our thoughts? Do we believe that, at our death,
the illusion of movement and progress which we see from the depths of
this life will suddenly fade away? If so, it is inevitable that, at our
last breath, we shall be absorbed in what, for lack of a better term, we
call the cosmic consciousness. Are we, on the other hand, persuaded that
death will reveal to us that the illusion lies not in our senses but in
our reason and that, in a world incontestably alive, despite the eternity
preceding our birth, all the experiments have not been made, that is
to say that movement and evolution continue and will never and nowhere
stop? In that case, we must at once accept the theory of a modified
or progressive consciousness. The two aspects, after all, are equally
unintelligible but defensible; and, although really irreconcilable, they
agree on one point, namely, that unending pain and unredeemed misery are
alike excluded from them both for ever.


3

The theory of a modified consciousness does not necessitate the loss
of the tiny consciousness acquired in our body; but it makes it almost
negligible, flings, drowns and dissolves it in infinity. It is of course
impossible to support this theory with satisfactory proofs; but it is
not easy to shatter it like the others. Were it permissible to speak
of likeness to truth in this connexion, when our only truth is that we
do not see the truth, it is the most likely of the interim theories
and gives a magnificent opening for the most plausible, varied and
alluring dreams. Will our ego, our soul, our spirit, or whatever we call
that which will survive us in order to continue us as we are, will it
find again, on leaving the body, the innumerable lives which it must
have lived since the thousands of years that had no beginning? Will
it continue to increase by assimilating all that it meets in infinity
during the thousands of years that will have no end? Will it linger for
a time around our earth, leading, in regions invisible to our eyes, an
ever higher and happier existence, as the theosophists and spiritualists
contend? Will it move towards other planetary systems, will it emigrate
to other worlds, whose existence is not even suspected by our senses?
Everything seems permissible in this great dream, save that which might
arrest its flight.

Nevertheless, so soon as it ventures too far in the ultramondane spaces,
it crashes into strange obstacles and breaks its wings against them. If
we admit that our ego does not remain eternally what it was at the moment
of our death, we can no longer imagine that, at a given second, it stops,
ceases to expand and rise, attains its perfection and its fulness, to
become no more than a sort of motionless wreck suspended in eternity and
a finished thing in the midst of that which will never finish. That would
indeed be the only real death and the more fearful inasmuch as it would
set a limit to an unparalleled life and intelligence, beside which those
which we possess here below would not even weigh what a drop of water
weighs when compared with the ocean, or a grain of sand when placed in
the scales with a mountain-chain. In a word, either we believe that our
evolution will one day stop, implying thereby an incomprehensible end
and a sort of inconceivable death; or we admit that it has no limit,
whereupon, being infinite, it assumes all the properties of infinity
and must needs be lost in infinity and united with it. This, withal,
is the latter end of theosophy, spiritualism and all the religions in
which man, in his ultimate happiness, is absorbed by God. And this again
is an incomprehensible end, but at least it is life. And then, taking
one incomprehensibility with another, after doing all that is humanly
possible to understand one or the other riddle, let us by preference
leap into the greatest and therefore the most probable, the one which
contains all the others and after which nothing more remains. If not, the
questions reappear at every stage and the answers are always conflicting.
And questions and answers lead us to the same inevitable abyss. As we
shall have to face it sooner or later, why not make for it straightway?
All that happens to us in the interval interests us beyond a doubt, but
does not detain us, because it is not eternal.


4

Behold us then before the mystery of the cosmic consciousness. Although
we are incapable of understanding the act of an infinity that would have
to fold itself up in order to feel itself and consequently to define
itself and separate itself from other things, this is not an adequate
reason for declaring it impossible; for, if we were to reject all the
realities and impossibilities that we do not understand, there would be
nothing left for us to live upon. If this consciousness exist under the
form which we have conceived, it is evident that we shall be there and
take part in it. If there be a consciousness somewhere, or some thing
that takes the place of consciousness, we shall be in that consciousness
or that thing, because we cannot be elsewhere. And as this consciousness
or this thing cannot be unhappy, because it is impossible that infinity
should exist for its own unhappiness, neither shall we be unhappy when
we are in it. Lastly, if the infinity into which we shall be projected
have no sort of consciousness nor anything that stands for it, the reason
will be that consciousness, or anything that might replace it, is not
indispensable to eternal happiness.


5

That, I think, is about as much as we may be permitted to declare,
for the moment, to the spirit anxiously facing the unfathomable space
wherein death will shortly hurl it. It can still hope to find there
the fulfilment of its dreams; it will perhaps find less to dread than
it had feared. If it prefer to remain expectant and to accept none of
the theories which I have expounded to the best of my power and without
prejudice, it nevertheless seems difficult not to welcome, at least, this
great assurance which we find at the bottom of every one of them, namely,
that infinity could not be malevolent, seeing that, if it eternally
tortured the least among us, it would be torturing something which it
cannot tear out of itself and that it would therefore be torturing its
very self.

I have added nothing to what was already known. I have simply tried to
separate what may be true from that which is assuredly not true; for, if
we do not know where truth is, we nevertheless learn to know where it is
not. And perhaps, in seeking for that undiscoverable truth, we shall have
accustomed our eyes to pierce the terror of the last hour by looking it
full in the face. Many things, beyond a doubt, remain to be said which
others will say with greater force and brilliancy. But we need have no
hope that any one will utter on this earth the word that shall put an end
to our uncertainties. It is very probable, on the contrary, that no one
in this world, nor perhaps in the next, will discover the great secret of
the universe. And, if we reflect upon this even for a moment, it is most
fortunate that it should be so. We have not only to resign ourselves to
living in the incomprehensible, but to rejoice that we cannot go out of
it. If there were no more insoluble questions nor impenetrable riddles,
infinity would not be infinite; and then we should have for ever to curse
the fate that placed us in a universe proportionate to our intelligence.
All that exists would be but a gateless prison, an irreparable evil and
mistake. The unknown and the unknowable are necessary and will perhaps
always be necessary to our happiness. In any case, I would not wish
my worst enemy, were his understanding a thousandfold loftier and a
thousandfold mightier than mine, to be condemned eternally to inhabit a
world of which he had surprised an essential secret and of which, as a
man, he had begun to grasp the least tittle.




