VIII

THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE FUTURE


1

What is known as premonition or precognition leads us to mysterious
regions, where stands, half-emerging from an intolerable darkness, the
gravest problem that can thrill mankind, the knowledge of the future. The
latest, the best and the most complete study devoted to it is, I believe,
that published by M. Ernest Bozzano under the title _Des Phénomènes
prémonitoires_. Availing himself of excellent earlier work, notably
that of Mrs. Sidgwick and Myers,[9] and adding the result of his own
researches, the author collects some thousand cases of precognition, of
which he discusses one hundred and sixty, leaving the great majority of
the others on one side, not because they are negligible, but because he
does not wish to exceed too flagrantly the normal limits of a monograph.

He begins by carefully eliminating all the episodes which, though
apparently premonitory, may be explained by self-suggestion (as in
the case, for instance, where some one smitten with a disease still
latent seems to foresee this disease and the death which will be its
conclusion), by telepathy (when a sensitive is aware beforehand of the
arrival of a person or a letter), or lastly by clairvoyance (when a man
dreams of the spot where he will find something which he has mislaid, or
an uncommon plant, or an insect sought for in vain, or the unknown place
which he will visit at some later date).

In all these cases, we have not, properly speaking, to do with a pure
future, but rather with a present that is not yet known. Thus reduced
and stripped of all foreign influences and intrusions, the number of
instances wherein there is a really clear and incontestable perception
of a fragment of the future remains large enough, contrary to what
is generally believed, to make it impossible for us to speak of
extraordinary accidents or wonderful coincidences. There must be a limit
to everything, even to distrust, even to the most extensive incredulity,
otherwise all historical research and a good deal of scientific research
would become decidedly impracticable. And this remark applies as much
to the nature of the incidents related as to the actual authenticity
of the narratives. We can contest or suspect any story whatever, any
written proof, any evidence; but thenceforward we must abandon all
certainty or knowledge that is not acquired by means of mathematical
operations or laboratory experiments, that is to say, three-fourths of
the human phenomena that chiefly interest us. Observe that the records
collected by the investigators of the S. P. R., like those discussed by
M. Bozzano, are all told at first hand, and that those stories of which
the narrators were not the protagonists or the direct witnesses have
been ruthlessly rejected. Furthermore, some of these narratives are
necessarily of the nature of medical observations; as for the others,
if we attentively examine the character of those who have related them
and the circumstances which corroborate them, we shall agree that it is
more just and more reasonable to believe in them than to look upon every
man who has an extraordinary experience as being _a priori_ a liar, the
victim of an hallucination, or a wag.


2

There could be no question of giving here even a brief analysis of
the most striking cases. It would require a hundred pages and would
alter the whole nature of this essay, which, to keep within its proper
dimensions, must take it for granted that most of the materials which
it examines are familiar. I therefore refer the reader who may wish to
form an opinion for himself to the easily-accessible sources which I have
mentioned above. It will suffice to give an accurate idea of the gravity
of the problem to any one who has not time or opportunity to consult
the original documents if I sum up in a few words some of these pioneer
adventures, selected among those which seem least open to dispute; for
it goes without saying that all have not the same value, otherwise the
question would be settled. There are some which, while exceedingly
striking at first sight and offering every guarantee that could be
desired as to authenticity, nevertheless do not imply a real knowledge of
the future and can be interpreted in another manner. I give one, to serve
as an instance; it is reported by Dr. Alphonse Teste in his _Manuel
pratique du magnetisme animal_.

On the 8th of May, Dr. Teste magnetizes Mme. Hortense ⸺ in the presence
of her husband. She is no sooner asleep than she announces that she has
been pregnant for a fortnight, that she will not go her full time, that
“she will take fright at something,” that she will have a fall and that
the result will be a miscarriage. She adds that, on the 12th of May,
after having had a fright, she will have a fainting-fit which will last
for eight minutes; and she then describes, hour by hour, the course of
her malady, which will end in three days’ loss of reason, from which she
will recover.

On awaking, she retains no recollection of anything that has passed; it
is kept from her; and Dr. Teste communicates his notes to Dr. Amédée
Latour. On the 12th of May, he calls on M. and Mme. ⸺, finds them at
table and puts Mme. ⸺ to sleep again, whereupon she repeats word for word
what she told him four days before. They wake her up. The dangerous hour
is drawing near. They take every imaginable precaution and even close the
shutters. Mme. ⸺, made uneasy by these extraordinary measures which she
is quite unable to understand, asks what they are going to do to her.
Half-past three o’clock strikes. Mme. ⸺ rises from the sofa on which they
have made her sit and wants to leave the room. The doctor and her husband
try to prevent her.

“But what is the matter with you?” she asks. “I simply must go out.”

“No, madame, you shall not: I speak in the interest of your health.”

“Well, then, doctor,” she replies, with a smile, “if it is in the
interest of my health, that is all the more reason why you should let me
go out.”

The excuse is a plausible one and even irresistible; but the husband,
wishing to carry the struggle against destiny to the last, declares that
he will accompany his wife. The doctor remains alone, feeling somewhat
anxious, in spite of the rather farcical turn which the incident has
taken. Suddenly, a piercing shriek is heard and the noise of a body
falling. He runs out and finds Mme. ⸺ wild with fright and apparently
dying in her husband’s arms. At the moment when, leaving him for an
instant, she opened the door of the place where she was going, a rat, the
first seen there for twenty years, rushed at her and gave her so great a
start that she fell flat on her back. And all the rest of the prediction
was fulfilled to the letter, hour by hour and detail by detail.


3

To make it quite clear in what spirit I am undertaking this study
and to remove at the beginning any suspicion of blind or systematic
credulity, I am anxious, before going any further, to say that I fully
realize that cases of this kind by no means carry conviction. It is
quite possible that everything happened in the subconscious imagination
of the subject and that she herself created, by self-suggestion her
illness, her fright, her fall and her miscarriage and adapted herself
to most of the circumstances which she had foretold in her secondary
state. The appearance of the rat at the fatal moment is the only thing
that would suggest a precise and disquieting vision of an inevitable
future event. Unfortunately, we are not told that the rat was perceived
by other witnesses than the patient, so that there is nothing to prove
that it also was not imaginary. I have therefore quoted this inadequate
instance only because it represents fairly well the general aspect and
the indecisive value of many similar cases, and enables us to note once
and for all the objections which can be raised and the precautions which
we should take before entering these suspicious and obscure regions.

We now come to an infinitely more significant and less questionable
case related by Dr. Joseph Maxwell, the learned and very scrupulous
author of _Les Phénomènes psychiques_, a work which has been translated
into English under the title of _Metapsychical Phenomena_. It concerns
a vision which was described to him eight days before the event and
which he told to many people before it was accomplished. A sensitive
perceived in a crystal the following scene: a large steamer, flying a
flag of three horizontal bars, black, white and red, and bearing the name
_Leutschland_, was sailing in mid-ocean; the boat was suddenly enveloped
in smoke; a great number of sailors, passengers and men in uniform rushed
to the upper deck; and the boat went down.

Eight days afterwards, the newspapers announced the accident to the
_Deutschland_, whose boiler had burst, obliging the steamboat to stand
to.

The evidence of a man like Dr. Maxwell, especially when we have to do
with a so-to-speak personal incident, possesses an importance on which it
is needless to insist. We have here, therefore, several days beforehand,
the very clear prevision of an event which, moreover, in no way concerns
the percipient: a curious detail, but one which is not uncommon in these
cases. The mistake in reading _Leutschland_ for _Deutschland_, which
would have been quite natural in real life, adds a note of probability
and authenticity to the phenomenon. As for the final act, the foundering
of the vessel in the place of a simple heaving to, we must see in this,
as Dr. J. W. Pickering and W. A. Sadgrove suggest, “the subconscious
dramatization of a subliminal inference of the percipient.” Such
dramatizations, moreover, are instinctive and almost general in this
class of visions.

If this were an isolated case, it would certainly not be right to attach
decisive importance to it; “but,” Dr. Maxwell observes, “the same
sensitive has given me other curious instances; and these cases, compared
with others which I myself have observed or with those of which I have
received first-hand accounts, render the hypothesis of coincidence very
improbable, though they do not absolutely exclude it.”[10]


4

Another and perhaps more convincing case, more strictly investigated
and established, a case which clearly does not admit of explanation by
the theory of coincidence, worthy of all respect though this theory
be, is that related by M. Théodore Flournoy, professor of science
at the university of Geneva, in his remarkable work, _Esprits et
médiums_. Professor Flournoy is known to be one of the most learned
and critical exponents of the new science of metapsychics. He even
carries his fondness for natural explanations and his repugnance to
admit the intervention of superhuman powers to a point whither it is
often difficult to follow him. I will give the narrative as briefly as
possible. It will be found in full on pp. 348 to 362 of his masterly book.

In August 1883, a certain Mme. Buscarlet, whom he knew personally,
returned to Geneva after spending three years with the Moratief family
at Kazan as governess to two girls. She continued to correspond with the
family and also with a Mme. Nitchinof, who kept a school at Kazan to
which Mlles. Moratief, Mme. Buscarlet’s former pupils, went after her
departure.

On the night of the 9th of December (O.S.) of the same year, Mme.
Buscarlet had a dream which she described the following morning in a
letter to Mme. Moratief, dated 10 December. She wrote, to quote her own
words:

“You and I were on a country-road when a carriage passed in front of us
and a voice from inside called to us. When we came up to the carriage, we
saw Mlle. Olga Popoi lying across it, clothed in white, wearing a bonnet
trimmed with yellow ribbons. She said to you:

“‘I called you to tell you that Mme. Nitchinof will leave the school on
the 17th.’

“The carriage then drove on.”

A week later and three days before the letter reached Kazan, the event
foreseen in the dream was fulfilled in a tragic fashion. Mme. Nitchinof
died on the 16th of an infectious disease; and on the 17th her body was
carried out of the school for fear of infection.

It is well to add that both Mme. Buscarlet’s letter and the replies which
came from Russia were communicated to Professor Flournoy and bear the
post-mark dates.

Such premonitory dreams are frequent; but it does not often happen that
circumstances and especially the existence of a document dated previous
to their fulfilment give them such incontestable authenticity.

We may remark in passing the odd character of this premonition. The date
is fixed precisely; but only a veiled and mysterious allusion (the woman
lying across the carriage and cloaked in white) is made to the essential
part of the prediction, the illness and death. Was there a coincidence, a
vision of the future pure and simple, or a vision of the future suggested
by telepathic influence? The theory of coincidence can be defended, if
need be, here as every elsewhere, but would be very extraordinary in this
case. As for telepathic influence, we should have to suppose that, on
the 9th of December, a week before her death, Mme. Nitchinof had in her
subconsciousness a presentiment of her end and that she transmitted this
presentiment across some thousands of miles, from Kazan to Geneva, to
a person with whom she had never been intimate. It is very complex but
possible, for telepathy often has these disconcerting ways. If this were
so, the case would be one of latent illness or even of self-suggestion;
and the preexistence of the future, without being entirely disproved,
would be less clearly established.


5

Let us pass to other examples. I quote from an excellent article on
the importance of precognitions, by Messrs. Pickering and Sadgrove,
which appeared in the _Annales des sciences psychiques_ for 1 February
1908, the summary of an experiment by Mrs. A. W. Verrall told in full
detail in Vol. XX. of the _Proceedings_. Mrs. Verrall is a celebrated
“automatist”; and her “cross-correspondences” occupy a whole volume of
the _Proceedings_. Her good faith, her sincerity, her fairness and her
scientific precision are above suspicion; and she is one of the most
active and respected members of the Society for Psychical Research.

On the 11th of May 1901, at 11.10 P.M., Mrs. Verrall wrote as follows:

“Do not hurry ____ date this ____ hoc est quod volui—tandem. δικαιοσύνη
καὶ χαρὰ συμφωνεῖ συνετοῖσιν. A. W. V. καὶ ἄλλῳ τινὶ ἴσως. calx pedibus
inhaerens difficultatem superavit. magnopere adiuvas persectando semper.
Nomen inscribere iam possum—sic, en tibi!”[11]

After the writing comes a humorous drawing representing a bird walking.

That same night, as there were said to be “uncanny happenings” in some
rooms near the London Law Courts, the watchers arranged to sit through
the night in the empty chambers. Precautions were taken to prevent
intrusion and powdered chalk was spread on the floor of the two smaller
rooms, “to trace anybody or anything that might come or go.” Mrs.
Verrall knew nothing of the matter. The phenomena began at 12.43 A.M.
and ended at 2.9 A.M. The watchers noticed marks on the powdered chalk.
On examination it was seen that the marks were “clearly defined bird’s
footprints in the middle of the floor, three in the left-hand room and
five in the right-hand room.” The marks were identical and exactly 2¾
inches in width; they might be compared to the footprints of a bird about
the size of a turkey. The footprints were observed at 2.30 A.M.; the
unexplained phenomena had begun at 12.43 that same morning. The words
about “chalk sticking to the feet” are a singularly appropriate comment
on the events; but the remarkable point is that Mrs. Verrall wrote what
we have said one hour and thirty-three minutes before the events took
place.

The persons who watched in the two rooms were questioned by Mr. J. G.
Piddington, a member of the council of the S. P. R., and declared that
they had not any expectation of what they discovered. I need hardly add
that Mrs. Verrall had never heard anything about the happenings in the
haunted house and that the watchers were completely ignorant of Mrs.
Verrall’s existence.

Here then is a very curious prediction of an event, insignificant in
itself, which is to happen, in a house unknown to the one who foretells
it, to people whom she does not know either. The spiritualists, who score
in this case, not without some reason, will have it that a spirit, in
order to prove its existence and its intelligence, organized this little
scene in which the future, the present and the past are all mixed up
together. Are they right? Or is Mrs. Verrall’s subconsciousness roaming
like this, at random, in the future? It is certain that the problem has
seldom appeared under a more baffling aspect.


6

We will now take another premonitory dream, strictly controlled by the
committee of the S. P. R.[12] Early in September 1893, Annette, wife
of Walter Jones, tobacconist, of Old Gravel Lane, East London, had her
little boy ill. One night she dreamt that she saw a cart drive up and
stop near where she was. It contained three coffins, “two white and one
blue. One white coffin was bigger than the other; and the blue was the
biggest of the three.” The driver took out the bigger white coffin and
left it at the mother’s feet, driving off with the others. Mrs. Jones
told her dream to her husband and to a neighbour, laying particular
stress on the curious circumstance that one of the coffins was blue.

On the 10th of September, a friend of Mr. and Mrs. Jones was confined of
a boy, who died on the 29th of the same month. Their own little boy died
on the following Monday, the 2nd of October, being then sixteen months
old. It was decided to bury the two children on the same day. On the
morning of the day chosen, the parish priest informed Mr. and Mrs. Jones
that another child had died in the neighbourhood and that its body would
be brought into church along with the two others. Mrs. Jones remarked to
her husband:

“If the coffin is blue, then my dream will come true. For the two other
coffins were white.”

The third coffin was brought; it was blue. It remains to be observed
that the dimensions of the coffins corresponded exactly with the dream
premonitions, the smallest being that of the child who died first, the
next that of the little Jones boy, who was sixteen months old, and the
largest, the blue one, that of a boy six years of age.

Let us take, more or less at random, another case from the inexhaustible
_Proceedings_.[13] The report is written by Mr. Alfred Cooper and
attested by the Duchess of Hamilton, the Duke of Manchester and another
gentleman to whom the duchess related the incident before the fulfilment
of the prophetic vision:

“A fortnight before the death of the late Earl of L⸺,” says Mr. Cooper,
“in 1882, I called upon the Duke of Hamilton, in Hill Street, to see
him professionally. After I had finished seeing him, we went into the
drawing-room, where the duchess was, and the duke said to me:

“‘Oh, Cooper, how is the earl?’

“The duchess said, ‘What earl?’ and, on my answering, ‘Lord L⸺,’ she
replied:

“‘That is very odd. I have had a most extraordinary vision. I went to
bed, but, after being in bed a short time, I was not exactly asleep, but
thought I saw a scene as if from a play before me. The actors in it were
Lord L⸺, in a chair, as if in a fit, with a man standing over him with a
red beard. He was by the side of a bath, over which bath a red lamp was
distinctly shown.’

“I then said:

“‘I am attending Lord L⸺ at present; there is very little the matter with
him; he is not going to die; he will be all right very soon.’

“Well, he got better for a week and was nearly well, but, at the end of
six or seven days after this, I was called to see him suddenly. He had
inflammation of both lungs.

“I called in Sir William Jenner, but in six days he was a dead man. There
were two male nurses attending on him; one had been taken ill. But, when
I saw the other, the dream of the duchess was exactly represented. He was
standing near a bath over the earl and, strange to say, his beard was
red. There was the bath with the red lamp over it; and this brought the
story to my mind.

“The vision seen by the duchess was told two weeks before the death of
Lord L⸺. It is a most remarkable thing.”


7

But it is impossible to find space for the many instances related. As
I have said, there are hundreds of them, making their tracks in every
direction across the plains of the future. Those which I have quoted
give a sufficient idea of the predominating tone and the general aspect
of this sort of story. It is nevertheless right to add that many of
them are not at all tragic and that premonition opens its mysterious
and capricious vistas of the future in connection with the most diverse
and insignificant events. It cares but little for the human value of
the occurrence and puts the vision of a number in a lottery on the same
plane as the most dramatic death. The roads by which it reaches us are
also unexpected and varied. Often, as in the examples quoted, it comes
to us in a dream. Sometimes, it is an auditory or visual hallucination
which seizes upon us while awake; sometimes, an indefinable but clear
and irresistible presentiment, a shapeless but powerful obsession, an
absurd but imperative certainty which rises from the depths of our inner
darkness, where perhaps lies hidden the final answer to every riddle.

One might illustrate each of these manifestations with numerous examples.
I will mention only a few, selected not among the most striking or the
most attractive, but among those which have been most strictly tested
and investigated.[14] A young peasant from the neighbourhood of Ghent,
two months before the drawing for the conscription, announces to all and
sundry that he will draw number 90 from the urn. On entering the presence
of the district-commissioner in charge, he asks if number 90 is still in.
The answer is yes.

“Well, then, I shall have it!”

And to the general amazement, he does draw number 90.

Questioned as to the manner in which he acquired this strange certainty,
he declares that, two months ago, just after he had gone to bed, he saw a
huge, indescribable form appear in a corner of his room with the number
90 standing out plainly in the middle, in figures the size of a man’s
hand. He sat up in bed and shut and opened his eyes to persuade himself
that he was not dreaming. The apparition remained in the same place,
distinctly and undeniably.

Professor Georges Hulin, of the university of Ghent, and M. Jules van
Dooren, the district-commissioner, who report the incident, mention
three other similar and equally striking cases witnessed by M. van
Dooren during his term of office. I am the less inclined to doubt their
declaration inasmuch as I am personally acquainted with them and know
that their statements, as regards the objective reality of the facts,
are so to speak equivalent to a legal deposition. M. Bozzano mentions
some previsions which are quite as remarkable in connection with the
gaming-tables at Monte Carlo.

I repeat, I am aware that, in the case of these occurrences and those
which resemble them, it is possible once again to invoke the theory of
coincidence. It will be contended that there are probably a thousand
predictions of this kind which are never talked about, because they were
not fulfilled, whereas, if one of them is accomplished, which is bound by
the law of probabilities to happen some day or other, the astonishment
is general and free rein is given to the imagination. This is true;
nevertheless, it is well to enquire whether these predictions are as
frequent as is loosely stated. In the matter of those which concern
the conscription-drawings, for instance, I have had the opportunity of
interrogating more than one constant witness of these little dramas of
fate; and all admitted that, on the whole, they are much rarer than one
would believe. Next, we must not forget that there can be no question
here of scientific proofs. We are in the midst of a slippery and nebulous
region, where we would not dare to risk a step if we were not allowing
ourselves to be guided by our feelings rather than by certainties which
we are not forbidden to hope for, but which are not yet in sight.


8

We will abridge our subject still further, referring readers who wish to
know the details to the originals, lest we should never have done; or
rather, instead of attempting an abridgment, which would still be too
long, so plentiful are the materials, we will content ourselves with
enumerating a few instances, all taken from Bozzano’s _Des Phénomènes
prémonitoires_. We read there of a funeral procession seen on a high-road
several days before it actually passed that way; or, again, of a young
mechanic who, in the beginning of November, dreamt that he came home at
half-past five in the afternoon and saw his sister’s little girl run
over by a tram-car while crossing the street in front of the house. He
told his dream, in great distress; and, on the 13th of the same month,
in spite of all the precautions that had been taken, the child was run
over by the tram-car and killed at the hour named. We find the ghost,
the phantom animal or the mysterious noise which, in certain families,
is the traditional herald of a death or of an imminent catastrophe. We
find the celebrated vision which the painter Segantini had thirteen days
before his decease, every detail of which remained in his mind and was
represented in his last picture, _Death_. We find the Messina disaster
clearly foreseen, twice over, by a little girl who perished under the
ruins of the ill-fated city; and we read of a dream which, three months
before the French invasion of Russia, foretold to Countess Toutschkoff
that her husband would fall at Borodino, a village so little known at the
time that those interested in the dream looked in vain for its name on
the maps.

Until now we have spoken only of the spontaneous manifestations of the
future. It would seem as though coming events, gathered in front of our
lives, bear with crushing weight upon the uncertain and deceptive dike of
the present, which is no longer able to contain them. They ooze through,
they seek a crevice by which to reach us. But side by side with these
passive, independent and intractable premonitions, which are but so many
vagrant and furtive emanations of the unknown, are others which do yield
to entreaty, allow themselves to be directed into channels, are more or
less obedient to our orders and will sometimes reply to the questions
which we put to them. They come from the same inaccessible reservoir, are
no less mysterious, but yet appear a little more human than the others;
and, without drugging ourselves with puerile or dangerous illusions,
we may be permitted to hope that, if we follow them and study them
attentively, they will one day open to us the hidden paths joining that
which is no more to that which is not yet.

It is true that here, where we must needs mix with the somewhat lawless
world of professional mystery-mongers, we have to increase our caution
and walk with measured steps on very suspicious ground. But even in
this region of pitfalls we glean a certain number of facts that cannot
reasonably be contested. It will be enough to recall, for instance,
the symbolic premonitions of the famous “seeress of Prevorst,” Frau
Hauffe, whose prophetic spirit was awakened by soap-bubbles, crystals
and mirrors;[15] the clairvoyant who, eighteen years before the event,
foretold the death of a girl by the hand of her rival in 1907, in a
written prophecy which was presented to the court by the mother of
the murdered girl;[16] the gipsy who, also in writing, foretold all
the events in Miss Isabel Arundel’s life, including the name of her
husband, Burton the famous explorer;[17] the sealed letter addressed
to M. Morin, vice-president of the Société du mesmerisme, describing
the most unexpected circumstances of a death that occurred a month
later;[18] the famous “Marmontel prediction,” obtained by Mrs. Verrall’s
cross-correspondences, which gives a vision, two months and a half
before their accomplishment, of the most insignificant actions of a
traveller in an hotel bedroom;[19] and many others.


9

I will not review the various and very often grotesque methods
of interrogating the future that are most frequently practised
to-day: cards, palmistry, crystal-gazing, fortune-telling by means
of coffee-grounds, tea-leaves, magnetic needles and white of egg,
graphology, astrology and the rest. These methods, as I have said before,
are worth exactly what the medium who employs them is worth. They have no
other object than to arouse the medium’s subconsciousness and to bring
it into relation with that of the person questioning him. As a matter of
fact, all these purely empirical processes are but so many, often puerile
forms of self-manifestation adopted by the undeniable gift which is known
as intuition, clairvoyance or, in certain cases, psychometry. I have
written at length, in my volume entitled _The Unknown Guest_, of this
last faculty and need not linger over it now. All that we have still to
do is to consider it for a moment in its relations with the foretelling
of the future.

A large number of investigations, notably those conducted by M. Duchatel
and Dr. Osty, show that, in psychometry, the notion of time, as Dr.
Joseph Maxwell observes, is very loose, that is to say, the past,
present and future nearly always overlap. Most of the clairvoyant or
psychometric subjects, when they are honest, do not know, “do not feel,”
as M. Duchatel very ably remarks, “what the future is. They do not
distinguish it from the other tenses; and consequently they succeed in
being prophets, but unconscious prophets.” In a word—and this is a very
important indication from the point of view of the probable coexistence
of the three tenses—it appears that they see that which is not yet with
the same clearness and on the same plane as that which is no more, but
are incapable of separating the two visions and picking out the future
which alone interests us. For a still stronger reason, it is impossible
for them to state dates with precision. Nevertheless, the fact remains
that, when we take the trouble to sift their evidence and have the
patience to await the realization of certain events which are sometimes
not due for a long time to come, the future is fairly often perceived by
some of these strange soothsayers.

There are psychometers, however, and notably Mme. M⸺, Dr. Osty’s
favourite medium, who never confuse the future and the past. Mme. M⸺
places her visions in time according to the position which they occupy
in space. Thus she sees the future in front of her, the past behind her
and the present beside her. But, notwithstanding these distinctly-graded
visions, she also is incapable of naming her dates exactly; in fact, her
mistakes in this respect are so general that Dr. Osty looks upon it as
a pure chronological coincidence when a prediction is realized at the
moment foretold.

We should also observe that, in psychometry, only those events can be
perceived which relate directly to the individual communicating with the
percipient, for it is not so much the percipient that sees into us as
we that read in our own subconsciousness, which is momentarily lighted
by his presence. We must not therefore ask him for predictions of a
general character, whether, for instance, there will be a war in the
spring, an epidemic in the summer or an earthquake in the autumn. The
moment the question concerns events, however important, with which we are
not intimately connected, he is bound to answer, as do all the genuine
mediums, that he sees nothing.

The area of his vision being thus limited, does he really discover the
future in it? After three years of numerous, cautious and systematic
experiments with some twenty mediums, Dr. Osty categorically declares
that he does:

“All the incidents,” he says, “which filled these three years of my
life, whether wished for by me or not, or even absolutely contrary to
the ordinary routine of my life, had always been foretold to me, not all
by each of the clairvoyant subjects, but all by one or other of them. As
I have been practising these tests continually, it seems to me that the
experience of three years wholly devoted to this object should give some
weight to my opinion on the subject of predictions.”

This is incontestable; and the sincerity, scientific conscientiousness
and high intellectual value of Dr. Osty’s fine work inspire one with the
utmost confidence. Unfortunately, he contents himself with quoting too
summarily a few facts and does not, as he ought, give us _in extenso_
the details of his experiments, controls and tests. I am well aware
that this would be a thankless and wearisome task, necessitating a large
volume which a mass of puerile incidents and inevitable repetitions would
make almost unreadable. Moreover, it could scarcely help taking the form
of an intimate and indiscreet autobiography; and it is not easy to bring
one’s self to make this sort of public confession. But it has to be done.
In a science which is only in its early stages, it is not enough to show
the object attained and to state one’s conviction; it is necessary above
all to describe every path that has been taken and, by an incessant and
infinite accumulation of investigated and attested facts, to enable every
one to draw his own conclusions. This has been the cumbrous and laborious
method of the _Proceedings_ for over thirty years; and it is the only
right one. Discussion is possible and fruitful only at that price. In
all these extra-conscious matters, we have not yet reached the stage of
definite deductions, we are still bringing up materials to the scene of
operations.

Once more, I know that, in these cases, as I have seen for myself, the
really convincing facts are necessarily very rare; indeed, no elsewhere
do we meet with the same difficulty. If the medium tells you, for
instance, as Mme. M⸺ seems easily to do, how you will employ your day
from the morning onwards, if she sees you in a certain house in a certain
street meeting this or that person, it is impossible to say that, on the
one hand, she is not already reading your as yet unconscious plans or
intentions, or that, on the other hand, by doing what she has foreseen,
you are not obeying a suggestion against which you could not fight
except by violently doing the opposite to what it demands of you, which
again would be a case of inverted suggestion. None therefore would have
any value save predictions of unlikely happenings, clearly defined and
outside the sphere of the person interested. As Dr. Osty says:

“The ideal prognostication would obviously be that of an event so rare,
so sudden and unexpected, implying such a change in one’s mode of life
that the theory of coincidence could not decently be put forward. But, as
everybody is not, in the peaceful course of his existence, threatened by
such an absolutely convincing event, the clairvoyant cannot always reveal
to the person experimenting—and reveal for a more or less approximate
date—one of those incidents whose accomplishment would carry irresistible
conviction.”

In any case, the question of psychometric prognostications calls for
further enquiry, though it is easy even at the present day to foresee the
results.


10

Let us now return to our spontaneous premonitions, in which the future
comes to seek us of its own accord and, so to speak, to challenge us at
home. I know from personal experience that when we embark upon these
disconcerting matters the first impression is scarcely favourable. We are
very much inclined to laugh, to treat as wearisome tales, as hysterical
hallucinations, as ingenious or interested fictions most of the incidents
that give too violent a shock to the narrow and limited idea which we
have of our human life. To smile, to reject everything beforehand and to
pass by with averted head, as was done, remember, in the time of Galvani
and in the early days of hypnotism, is much more easy and seems more
respectable and prudent than to stop, admit and examine. Nevertheless we
must not forget that it is to some who did not smile so lightly that we
owe the best part of the marvels from whose heights we are preparing to
smile in our turn. For the rest, I grant that, thus presented, hastily
and summarily, without the details that throw light upon them and the
proofs that support them, the incidents in question do not show to
advantage and, inasmuch as they are isolated and sparingly chosen, lose
all the weight and authority derived from the compact and imposing mass
whence they are arbitrarily detached. As I said above, nearly a thousand
cases have been collected, representing probably not the tenth part of
those which a more active and general search might bring together. The
number is evidently of importance and denotes the enormous pressure of
the mystery; but, if there were only half a dozen genuine cases—and Dr.
Maxwell’s, Professor Flournoy’s, Mrs. Verrall’s, the Marmontel, Jones
and Hamilton cases and some others are undoubtedly genuine—they would be
enough to show that, under the erroneous idea which we form of the past
and the present, a new verity is living and moving, eager to come to
light.

The efforts of that verity, I need hardly say, display a very different
sort of force after we have actually and attentively read those hundreds
of extraordinary stories which, without appearing to do so, strike to
the very roots of history. We soon lose all inclination to doubt. We
penetrate into another world and come to a stop all out of countenance.
We no longer know where we stand; before and after overlap and mingle.
We no longer distinguish the insidious and factitious but indispensable
line which separates the years that have gone by from the years that
are to come. We clutch at the hours and days of the past and present to
reassure ourselves, to fasten on to some certainty, to convince ourselves
that we are still in our right place in this life where that which is
not yet seems as substantial, as real, as positive, as powerful as that
which is no more. We discover with uneasiness that time, on which we
based our whole existence, itself no longer exists. It is no longer the
swiftest of our gods, known to us only by its flight across all things;
it alters its position no more than space, of which it is doubtless but
the incomprehensible reflex. It reigns in the centre of every event; and
every event is fixed in its centre; and all that comes and all that goes
passes from end to end of our little life without moving by a hair’s
breadth around its motionless pivot. It is entitled to but one of the
thousand names which we have been wont to lavish upon its power, a power
that seemed to us manifold and innumerable: “yesterday,” “recently,”
“formerly,” “erewhile,” “after,” “before,” “to-morrow,” “soon,” “never,”
“later” fall like childish masks, whereas “to-day” and “always”
completely cover with their united shadows the idea which we form in the
end of a duration which has no subdivisions, no breaks and no stages, but
is pulseless, motionless and boundless.


11

Many are the theories which men have imagined in their attempts to
explain the working of the strange phenomenon; and many others might be
imagined.

As we have seen, self-suggestion and telepathy explain certain cases
which concern events already in existence but still latent and perceived
before the knowledge of them can reach us by the normal process of the
senses or the intelligence. But, even by extending these two theories
to their uttermost point and positively abusing their accommodating
elasticity, we do not succeed in illumining by their aid more than
a rather restricted portion of the vast undiscovered land. We must
therefore look for something else.

The first theory which suggests itself and which on the surface seems
rather attractive is that of spiritualism, which may be extended until
it is scarcely distinguishable from the theosophical theory and other
religious suppositions. It assumes the survival of spirits, the existence
of discarnate or other superior and more mysterious entities which
surround us, interest themselves in our fate, guide our thoughts and
our actions and, above all, know the future. It is, as we recognize
when we speak of ghosts and haunted houses, a very acceptable theory;
and any one to whom it appeals can adopt it without doing violence to
his intelligence. But we must confess that it seems less necessary and
perhaps even less clearly proved in this region than in that. It starts
by begging the question: without the intervention of discarnate beings,
the spiritualists tell us, it is impossible to explain the majority of
the premonitory phenomena; therefore we must admit the existence of
these discarnate beings. Let us grant it for the moment, for to beg
the question, which is merely an indefensible trick of the superficial
logic of our brain, does not necessarily condemn a theory and neither
takes away from nor adds to the reality of things. Besides, as we shall
insist later, the intervention or non-intervention of the spirits is
not the point at issue; and the crux of the mystery does not lie there.
What must interest us is far less the paths or intermediaries by which
prophetic warnings reach us than the actual existence of the future in
the present. It is true—to do complete justice to neospiritualism—that
its position offers certain advantages from the point of view of the
almost inconceivable problem of the preexistence of the future. It can
evade or divert some of the consequences of that problem. The spirits, it
declares, do not necessarily see the future as a whole, as a total past
or present, motionless and immovable, but they know infinitely better
than we do the numberless causes that determine any agent, so that,
finding themselves at the luminous source of those causes, they have no
difficulty in foreseeing their effects. They are, with respect to the
incidents still in process of formation, in the position of an astronomer
who foretells, within a second, all the phases of an eclipse in which a
savage sees nothing but an unprecedented catastrophe which he attributes
to the anger of his idols of straw or clay. It is indeed possible that
this acquaintance with a greater number of causes explains certain
predictions; but there are plenty of others which presume a knowledge of
so many causes, causes so remote and so profound, that this knowledge
is hardly to be distinguished from a knowledge of the future pure and
simple. In any case, beyond certain limits, the preexistence of causes
seems no clearer than that of effects. Nevertheless it must be admitted
that the spiritualists gain a slight advantage here.

They believe that they gain another when they say or might say that it
is still possible that the spirits stimulate us to realize the events
which they foretell without themselves clearly perceiving them in the
future. After announcing, for instance, that on a certain day we shall
go to a certain place and do a certain thing, they urge us irresistibly
to proceed to the spot named and there to perform the act prophesied.
But this theory, like those of self-suggestion and telepathy, would
explain only a few phenomena and would leave in obscurity all those
cases, infinitely more numerous because they make up almost the whole of
our future, in which either chance intervenes or some event in no way
dependent upon our will or the spirit’s, unless indeed we suppose that
the latter possesses an omniscience and an omnipotence which takes us
back to the original mysteries of the problem.

Besides, in the gloomy regions of precognition, it is almost always a
matter of anticipating a misfortune and very rarely, if ever, of meeting
with a pleasure or a joy. We should therefore have to admit that the
spirits which drag me to the fatal place and compel me to do the act that
will have tragic consequences are deliberately hostile to me and find
diversion only in the spectacle of my suffering. What could those spirits
be, from what evil world would they arise and how should we explain why
our brothers and friends of yesterday, after passing through the august
and peace-bestowing gates of death, suddenly become transformed into
crafty and malevolent demons? Can the great spiritual kingdom, in which
all passions born of the flesh should be stilled, be but a dismal abode
of hatred, spite and envy? It will perhaps be said that they lead us
into misfortune in order to purify us; but this brings us to religious
theories which it is not our intention to examine.


12

The only attempt at an explanation that can hold its own with
spiritualism has recourse once again to the mysterious powers of our
subconsciousness. We must needs recognize that, if the future exists
to-day, already such as it will be when it becomes for us the present and
the past, the intervention of discarnate minds or of any other spiritual
entity adrift from another sphere is of little avail. We can picture
an infinite spirit indifferently contemplating the past and future in
their coexistence; we can imagine a whole hierarchy of intermediate
intelligences taking a more or less extensive part in the contemplation
and transmitting it to our subconsciousness. But all this is practically
nothing more than inconsistent speculation and ingenious dreaming in the
dark; in any case, it is adventitious, secondary and provisional. Let us
keep to the facts as we see them: an unknown faculty, buried deep in our
being and generally inactive, perceives, on rare occasions, events that
have not yet taken place. We possess but one certainty on this subject,
namely, that the phenomenon actually occurs within ourselves; it is
therefore within ourselves that we must first study it, without burdening
ourselves with suppositions which remove it from its centre and simply
shift the mystery. The incomprehensible mystery is the preexistence of
the future; once we admit this—and it seems very difficult to deny—there
is no reason to attribute to imaginary intermediaries rather than to
ourselves the faculty of descrying certain fragments of that future. We
see, in regard to most of the mediumistic manifestations, that we possess
within ourselves all the unusual forces with which the spiritualists
endow discarnate spirits; and why should it be otherwise as concerns the
powers of divination? The explanation taken from the subconsciousness
is the most direct, the simplest, the nearest, whereas the other is
endlessly circuitous, complicated and distant. Until the spirits testify
to their existence in an unanswerable fashion, there is no advantage in
seeking in the grave for the solution of a riddle that appears indeed to
lie at the roots of our own life.


13

It is true that this explanation does not explain much; but the
others are just as ineffectual and are open to the same objections.
These objections are many and various; and it is easier to raise them
than to reply to them. For instance, we can ask ourselves why the
subconsciousness or the spirits, seeing that they read the future and
are able to announce an impending calamity, hardly ever give us the one
useful and definite indication that would allow us to avoid it. What can
be the childish or mysterious reason of this strange reticence? In many
cases it is almost criminal; for instance, in a case related by Professor
Hyslop[20] we see the foreboding of the greatest misfortune than can
befall a mother germinating, growing, sending out shoots, developing,
like some gluttonous and deadly plant, to stop short on the verge of the
last warning, the one detail, insignificant in itself but indispensable,
which would have saved the child. It is the case of a woman who begins
by experiencing a vague but powerful impression that a grievous “burden”
is going to fall upon her family. Next month, this premonitory feeling
repeats itself very frequently, becomes more intense and ends by
concentrating itself upon the poor woman’s little daughter. Each time
that she is planning something for the child’s future, she hears a voice
saying:

“She’ll never need it.”

A week before the catastrophe, a violent smell of fire fills the house.
From that time the mother begins to be careful about matches, seeing
that they are in safe places and out of reach. She looks all over the
house for them and feels a strong impulse to burn all matches of the kind
easily lighted. About an hour before the fatal disaster, she reaches for
a box to destroy it; but she says to herself that her eldest boy is gone
out, thinks that she may need the matches to light the gas-stove and
decides to destroy them as soon as he comes back. She takes the child
up to its crib for its morning sleep and, as she is putting it into the
cradle, she hears the usual mysterious voice whisper in her ear:

“Turn the mattress.”

But, being in a great hurry, she simply says that she will turn the
mattress after the child has taken its nap. She then goes downstairs to
work. After a while, she hears the child cry and, hurrying up to the
room, finds the crib and its bedding on fire and the child so badly burnt
that it dies in three hours.


14

Before going further and theorizing about this case, let us once more
state the matter precisely. I know that the reader may straightway and
quite legitimately deny the value of anecdotes of this kind. He will say
that we have to do with a neurotic who has drawn upon her imagination for
all the elements that give a dramatic setting to the story and surround
with a halo of mystery a sad but commonplace domestic accident. This is
quite possible; and it is perfectly allowable to dismiss the case. But it
is none the less true that, by thus deliberately rejecting everything
that does not bear the stamp of mathematical or judicial certainty, we
risk losing, as we go along, most of the opportunities or clues which the
great riddle of this world offers us in its moments of inattention or
graciousness. At the beginning of an enquiry we must know how to content
ourselves with little. For the incident in question to be convincing,
previous evidence in writing, more or less official statements, would
be required, whereas we have only the declarations of the husband, a
neighbour and a sister. This is insufficient, I agree; but we must at
the same time confess that the circumstances are hardly favourable to
obtaining the proofs which we demand. Those who receive warnings of this
kind either believe in them or do not believe in them. If they believe
in them, it is quite natural that they should not think first of all of
the scientific interest of their trouble, or of putting down in writing
and thus authenticating its premonitory symptoms and gradual evolution.
If they do not believe in them, it is no less natural that they should
not proceed to speak or take notice of inanities of which they do not
recognize the value until after they have lost the opportunity of
supplying convincing proofs of them. Also, do not forget that the little
story in question is selected from among a hundred others, which in their
turn are equally indecisive, but which, repeating the same facts and the
same tendencies with a strange persistency, end by weakening the most
inveterate distrust.


15

Having said this much, in order to conciliate or part company with
those who have no intention of leaving the _terra firma_ of science,
let us return to the case before us, which is all the more disquieting
inasmuch as we may consider it a sort of prototype of the tragic and
almost diabolical reticence which we find in most premonitions. It is
probable that under the mattress there was a stray match which the child
discovered and struck; this is the only possible explanation of the
catastrophe, for there was no fire burning on that floor of the house.
If the mother had turned the mattress, she would have seen the match;
and, on the other hand, she would certainly have turned the mattress
if she had been told that there was a match underneath it. Why did the
voice that urged her to perform the necessary action not add the one
word that was capable of ensuring that action? The problem moreover is
equally perturbing and perhaps equally insoluble whether it concern our
own subconscious faculties, or spirits, or strange intelligences. Those
who give these warnings must know that they will be useless, because
they manifestly foresee the event as a whole; but they must also know
that one last word, which they do not pronounce, would be enough to
prevent the misfortune that is already consummated in their prevision.
They know it so well that they bring this word to the very edge of the
abyss, hold it suspended there, almost let it fall and recapture it
suddenly at the moment when its weight would have caused happiness and
life to rise once more to the surface of the mighty gulf. What then is
this mystery? Is it incapacity or hostility? If they are incapable, what
is the unexpected and sovran force that interposes between them and us?
And, if they are hostile, on what, on whom are they revenging themselves?
What can be the secret of those inhuman games, of those uncanny and cruel
diversions on the most slippery and dangerous peaks of fate? Why warn,
if they know that the warning will be in vain? Of whom are they making
sport? Is there really an inflexible fatality by virtue of which that
which has to be accomplished is accomplished from all eternity? But then
why not respect silence, since all speech is useless? Or do they, in
spite of all, perceive a gleam, a crevice in the inexorable wall? What
hope do they find in it? Have they not seen more clearly than ourselves
that no deliverance can come through that crevice? One could understand
this fluttering and wavering, all these efforts of theirs, if they did
not know; but here it is proved that they know everything, since they
foretell exactly that which they might prevent. If we press them with
questions, they answer that there is nothing to be done, that no human
power could avert or thwart the issue. Are they mad, bored, irritable
or accessory to a hideous pleasantry? Does our fate depend on the
happy solution of some petty enigma or childish conundrum, even as our
salvation, in most of the so-called revealed religions, is settled by a
blind and stupid cast of the die? Is all the liberty that we are granted
reduced to the reading of a more or less ingenious riddle? Can the great
soul of the universe be the soul of a great baby?


16

But, rather than pursue this subject, let us be just and admit that
there is perhaps no way out of the maze and that our reproaches are as
incomprehensible as the conduct of the spirits. Indeed, what would you
have them do in the circle in which our logic imprisons them? Either they
foretell us a calamity which their predictions cannot avert, in which
case there is no use in foretelling it, or, if they announce it to us and
at the same time give us the means to prevent it, they do not really see
the future and are foretelling nothing, since the calamity is not to take
place, with the result that their action seems equally absurd in both
cases.

It is obvious: to whichever side we turn, we find nothing but the
incomprehensible. On the one hand, the preestablished, unshakable,
unalterable future which we have called destiny, fatality or what you
will, which suppresses man’s entire independence and liberty of action
and which is the most inconceivable and the dreariest of mysteries; on
the other, intelligences apparently superior to our own, since they know
what we do not, which, while aware that their intervention is always
useless and very often cruel, nevertheless come harassing us with their
sinister and ridiculous predictions. Must we resign ourselves once more
to living with our eyes shut and our reason drowned in the boundless
ocean of darkness; and is there no outlet?


17

For the moment we will not linger in the dark regions of fatality,
which is the supreme mystery, the desolation of every effort and every
thought of man. What is clearest amid this incomprehensibility is that
the spiritualistic theory, at first sight the most seductive, declares
itself, on examination, the most difficult to justify. We will also
once more put aside the theosophical theory, or any other which assumes
a divine intention and which might, to a certain extent, explain the
hesitations and anguish of the prophetic warnings, at the cost, however,
of other puzzles, a thousand times as hard to solve, which nothing
authorizes us to substitute for the actual puzzle, formless and infinite,
presented to our uninitiated vision.

When all is said, it is perhaps only in the theory which attributes
those premonitions to our subconsciousness that we are able to find, if
not a justification, at least a sort of explanation of that formidable
reticence. They accord fairly well with the strange, inconsistent,
whimsical and disconcerting character of the unknown entity within us
that seems to live on nothing but nondescript fare borrowed from worlds
to which our intelligence as yet has no access. It lives under our
reason, in a sort of invisible and perhaps eternal palace, like a casual,
unknown guest, dropped from another planet, whose interests, ideas,
habits, passions have naught in common with ours. If it seems to have
notions on the hereafter that are infinitely wider and more precise than
those which we possess, it has only very vague notions on the practical
needs of our existence. It ignores us for years, absorbed no doubt with
the numberless relations which it maintains with all the mysteries of
the universe; and, when suddenly it remembers us, thinking apparently to
please us, it makes an enormous, miraculous, but at the same time clumsy
and superfluous movement, which upsets all that we believed we knew,
without teaching us anything. Is it making fun of us, is it jesting, is
it amusing itself, is it facetious, teasing, arch, or simply sleepy,
bewildered, inconsistent, absent-minded? In any case, it is rather
remarkable that it evidently dislikes to make itself useful. It readily
performs the most glamorous feats of sleight-of-hand, provided that we
can derive no profit from them. It lifts tables, moves the heaviest
articles, produces flowers and hair, sets strings vibrating, gives life
to inanimate objects and passes through solid matter, conjures up ghosts,
subjugates time and space, creates light; but all, it seems, on one
condition, that its performances should be without rhyme or reason and
keep to the province of supernaturally vain and puerile recreations. The
case of the divining-rod is almost the only one in which it lends us any
regular assistance, this being a sort of game, of no great importance,
in which it appears to take pleasure. Sometimes, to say all that can be
said, it consents to cure certain ailments, cleanses an ulcer, closes a
wound, heals a lung, strengthens or unstiffens an arm or leg, or even
sets bones, but always as it were by accident, without reason, method or
object, in a deceitful, illogical and preposterous fashion. One would
set it down as a spoilt child that has been allowed to lay hands on the
most tremendous secrets of heaven and earth; it has no suspicion of
their power, jumbles them all up together and turns them into paltry,
inoffensive toys. It knows everything, perhaps, but is ignorant of the
uses of its knowledge. It has its arms laden with treasures which it
scatters in the wrong manner and at the wrong time, giving bread to
the thirsty and water to the hungry, overloading those who refuse and
stripping the suppliant bare, pursuing those who flee from it and fleeing
from those who pursue it. Lastly, even at its best moments, it behaves
as though the fate of the being in whose depths it dwells interested
it hardly at all, as though it had but an insignificant share in his
misfortunes, feeling assured, one might almost think, of an independent
and endless existence.

It is not surprising therefore, when we know its habits, that its
communications on the subject of the future should be as fantastic as
the other manifestations of its knowledge or its power. Let us add,
to be quite fair, that, in those warnings which we would wish to see
efficacious, it stumbles against the same difficulties as the spirits
or other alien intelligences uselessly foretelling the event which they
cannot prevent, or annihilating the event by the very fact of foretelling
it.


18

And now, to end the question, is this unknown guest of ours alone
responsible? Does it explain itself badly or do we not understand it?
When we look into the matter closely, there is, under those anomalous and
confused manifestations, in spite of efforts which we feel to be enormous
and persevering, a sort of incapacity for self-expression and action
which is bound to attract our attention. Is our conscious and individual
life separated by impenetrable worlds from our subconscious and probably
universal life? Does our unknown guest speak an unknown language and do
the words which it speaks and which we think that we understand disclose
its thought? Is every direct road pitilessly barred and is there nothing
left to it but narrow, closed paths, in which the best of what it had
to reveal to us is lost? Is this the reason why it seeks those odd,
childish, roundabout ways of automatic writing, cross-correspondence,
symbolic premonition and all the rest? Yet, in the typical case which we
have quoted, it seems to speak quite easily and plainly when it says to
the mother:

“Turn the mattress.”

If it can utter this sentence, why should it find it difficult or
impossible to add:

“You will there find the matches that will set fire to the curtains.”

What forbids it to do so and closes its mouth at the decisive moment? We
relapse into the everlasting question: if it cannot complete the second
sentence because it would be destroying in the womb the very event which
it is foretelling, why does it utter the first?


19

But it is well, in spite of everything, to seek an explanation of the
inexplicable; it is by attacking it on every side, at all hazards,
that we cherish the hope of overcoming it; and we may therefore say to
ourselves that our subconsciousness, when it warns us of a calamity that
is about to befall us, knowing all the future as it does, necessarily
knows that the calamity is already accomplished. As our conscious and
unconscious lives blend in it, it distresses itself and flutters around
our overconfident ignorance. It tries to inform us, through nervousness,
through pity, so as to mitigate the lightning cruelty of the blow. It
speaks all the words that can prepare us for its coming, define it
and identify it; but it is unable to say those which would prevent it
from coming, seeing that it has come, that it is already present and
perhaps past, manifest, ineffaceable, on another plane than that on
which we live, the only plane which we are capable of perceiving. It
finds itself, in a word, in the position of the man who, in the midst of
peaceful, happy and unsuspecting folk, alone knows some bad news. He is
neither able nor willing to announce it nor yet to hide it completely.
He hesitates, delays, makes more or less transparent allusions, but
refrains from saying the last word that would, so to speak, let loose the
catastrophe in the hearts of the people around him, for to those who do
not know of it the catastrophe is still as though it were not there. Our
subconsciousness, in that instance, would act towards the future as we
act towards the past, the two conditions being identical, so much so that
it often confuses them, as we can see more particularly in the celebrated
Marmontel case, where it evidently blunders and reports as accomplished
an incident that will not take place until several months later. It is
of course impossible for us, at the stage which we have reached, to
understand this confusion or this coexistence of the past, the present
and the future; but that is no reason for denying it; on the contrary,
what man understands least is probably that which most nearly approaches
the truth.


20

Lastly, to complicate the question, it may be very justly objected that,
though premonitions in general are useless and appear systematically
to withhold the only indispensable and decisive words, there are,
nevertheless, some that often seem to save those who obey them. These,
it is true, are rarer than the first, but still they include a certain
number that are well-authenticated. It remains to be seen how far they
imply a knowledge of the future.

Here, for instance, is a traveller who, arriving at night in a small
unknown town and walking along the ill-lighted dock in the direction
of an hotel of which he roughly knows the position, at a given moment
feels an irresistible impulse to turn and go the other way. He instantly
obeys, though his reason protests and “berates him for a fool” in taking
a roundabout way to his destination. The next day he discovers that, if
he had gone a few feet farther, he would certainly have slipped into the
river; and, as he was but a feeble swimmer, he would just as certainly,
being alone and unaided in the extreme darkness, have been drowned.[21]

But is this a prevision of an event? No, for no event is to take place.
There is simply an abnormal perception of the proximity of some unknown
water and consequently of an imminent danger, an unexplained but fairly
frequent subliminal sensitiveness. In a word, the problem of the future
is not raised in this case, nor in any of the numerous cases that
resemble it.

Here is another which evidently belongs to the same class, though at
first sight it seems to postulate the preexistence of a fatal event and
a vision of the future corresponding exactly with a vision of the past.
A traveller in South America is descending a river in a canoe; the party
are just about to run close to a promontory when a sort of mysterious
voice, which he has already heard at different momentous times of his
life, imperiously orders him immediately to cross the river and gain the
other shore as quickly as possible. This appears so absurd that he is
obliged to threaten the Indians with death to force them to take this
course. They have scarcely crossed more than half the river when the
promontory falls at the very place where they meant to round it.[22]

The perception of imminent danger is here, I admit, even more abnormal
than in the previous example, but it comes under the same heading. It is
a phenomenon of subliminal hypersensitiveness observed more than once, a
sort of premonition induced by subconscious perceptions, which has been
christened by the barbarous name of “cryptaesthesia.” But the interval
between the moment when the peril is signalled and that at which it is
consummated is too short for those questions which relate to a knowledge
or a preexistence of the future to arise in this instance.

The case is almost the same with the adventure of an American dentist,
very carefully investigated by Dr. Hodgson. The dentist was bending over
a bench on which was a little copper in which he was vulcanizing some
rubber, when he heard a voice calling, in a quick and imperative manner,
these words:

“Run to the window, quick! Run to the window, quick!”

He at once ran to the window and looked out to the street below, when
suddenly he heard a tremendous report and, looking round, saw that the
copper had exploded, destroying a great part of the workroom.[23]

Here again, a subconscious cautiousness was probably aroused by certain
indications imperceptible to our ordinary senses. It is even possible
that there exists between things and ourselves a sort of sympathy or
subliminal communion which makes us experience the trials and emotions of
matter that has reached the limits of its existence, unless, as is more
likely, there is merely a simple coincidence between the chance idea of
a possible explosion and its realization.

A last and rather more complicated case is that of Jean Dupré, the
sculptor, who was driving alone with his wife along a mountain road,
skirting a perpendicular cliff. Suddenly they both heard a voice that
seemed to come from the mountain crying:

‘Stop!’

They turned round, and saw nobody and continued their road. But the cries
were repeated again and again, without anything to reveal the presence of
a human being amid the solitude. At last the sculptor alighted and saw
that the left wheel of the carriage, which was grazing the edge of the
precipice, had lost its linch-pin and was on the point of leaving the
axle-tree, which would almost inevitably have hurled the carriage into
the abyss.

Need we, even here, relinquish the theory of subconscious perceptions?
Do we know and can the author of the anecdote, whose good faith is not
in question, tell us that certain unperceived circumstances, such as
the grating of the wheel or the swaying of the carriage, did not give
him the first alarm? After all, we know how easily stories of this
kind involuntarily take a dramatic turn even at the actual moment and
especially afterwards.


21

These examples—and there are many more of a similar kind—are enough, I
think, to illustrate this class of premonitions. The problem in these
cases is simpler than when it relates to fruitless warnings; at least
it is simpler so long as we do not bring into discussion the question
of spirits, of unknown intelligences, or of an actual knowledge of the
future; otherwise the same difficulty reappears and the warning, which
this time seems efficacious, is in reality just as vain. In fact, the
mysterious entity which knows that the traveller will go to the water’s
edge, that the wheel will be on the point of leaving the axle, that
the copper will explode, or that the promontory will fall at a precise
moment, must at the same time know that the traveller will not take the
last fatal step, that the carriage will not be overturned, that the
copper will not hurt anybody and that the canoe will pull away from the
promontory. It is inadmissible that, seeing one thing, it will not see
the other, since everything happens at the same point, in the course of
the same second. Can we say that, if it had not given warning, the little
saving movement would not have been executed? How can we imagine a future
which, at one and the same time, has parts that are steadfast and others
that are not? If it is foreseen that the promontory will fall and that
the traveller will escape, thanks to the supernatural warning, it is
necessarily foreseen that the warning will be given; and, if so, what is
the point of this futile comedy? I see no reasonable explanation of it
in the spiritist or spiritualistic theory, which postulates a complete
knowledge of the future, at least at a settled point and moment. On the
other hand, if we adhere to the theory of a subliminal consciousness,
we find there an explanation which is quite worthy of acceptation. This
subliminal consciousness, though, in the majority of cases, it has no
clear and comprehensive vision of the immediate future, can nevertheless
possess an intuition of imminent danger, thanks to indications that
escape our ordinary perception. It can also have a partial, intermittent
and so to speak flickering vision of the future event and, if doubtful,
can risk giving an incoherent warning, which, for that matter, will
change nothing in that which already is.


22

In conclusion, let us state once more that fruitful premonitions
necessarily annihilate events in the bud and consequently work their own
destruction, so that any control becomes impossible. They would have an
existence only if they prophesied a general event which the subject would
not escape but for the warning. If they had said to any one intending to
go to Messina two or three months before the catastrophe, “Don’t go, for
the town will be destroyed before the month is out,” we should have an
excellent example. But it is a remarkable thing that genuine premonitions
of this kind are very rare and nearly always rather indefinite in regard
to events of a general order. In M. Bozzano’s excellent collection,
which is a sort of compendium of premonitory phenomena, the only pretty
clear cases are nos. clv. and clviii., both of which are taken from
the _Journal of the S.P.R._ In the first,[24] a mother sent a servant
to bring home her little daughter, who had already left the house
with the intention of going through the “railway garden,” a strip of
ground between the sea-wall and the railway-embankment, in order to sit
on the great stones by the seaside and see the trains pass by. A few
minutes after the little girl’s departure, the mother had distinctly and
repeatedly heard a voice within her say:

“Send for her back, or something dreadful will happen to her.”

Now, soon after, a train ran off the line and the engine and tender fell,
breaking through the protecting wall and crashing down on the very stones
where the child was accustomed to sit.

In the other case,[25] into which Professor W. F. Barrett made a special
enquiry, Captain MacGowan was in Brooklyn with his two boys, then on
their holidays. He promised the boys that he would take them to the
theatre and booked seats on the previous day; but on the day of the
proposed visit he heard a voice within him constantly saying:

“Do not go to the theatre; take the boys back to school.”

He hesitated, gave up his plan and resumed it again. But the words kept
repeating themselves and impressing themselves upon him; and, in the end,
he definitely decided not to go, much to the two boys’ disgust. That
night, the theatre was destroyed by fire, with a loss of three hundred
lives.

We may add to this the prevision of the Battle of Borodino, to which I
have already alluded. I will give the story in fuller detail, as told in
the journal of Stephen Grellet the Quaker.

About three months before the French army entered Russia, the wife of
General Toutschkoff dreamt that she was at an inn in a town unknown to
her and that her father came into her room, holding her only son by the
hand, and said to her, in a pitiful tone:

“Your happiness is at an end. He”—meaning Countess Toutschkoff’s
husband—“has fallen. He has fallen at Borodino.”

The dream was repeated a second and a third time. Her anguish of mind was
such that she woke her husband and asked him:

“Where is Borodino?”

They looked for the name on the map and did not find it.

Before the French armies reached Moscow, Count Toutschkoff was placed at
the head of the army of reserve; and one morning her father, holding her
son by the hand, entered her room at the inn where she was staying. In
great distress, as she had beheld him in her dream, he cried out:

“He has fallen. He has fallen at Borodino.”

Then she saw herself in the very same room and through the windows beheld
the very same objects that she had seen in her dreams. Her husband
was one of the many who perished in the battle fought near the River
Borodino, from which an obscure village takes its name.[26]


23

This is evidently a very rare and perhaps solitary example of a
long-dated prediction of a great historic event which nobody could
foresee. It stirs more deeply than any other the enormous problems of
fatality, free-will and responsibility. But has it been attested with
sufficient rigour for us to rely upon it? That I cannot say. In any case,
it has not been sifted by the S.P.R. Next, from the special point of view
that interests us for the moment, we are unable to declare that this
premonition had any chance of being of avail and preventing the general
from going to Borodino. It is highly probable that he did not know where
he was going or where he was; besides, the irresistible machinery of
war held him fast and it was not his part to disengage his destiny. The
premonition therefore could only have been given because it was certain
not to be obeyed.

As for the two previous cases, nos. clv. and clviii., we must here
again remark the usual strange reservations and observe how difficult
it is to explain these premonitions save by attributing them to our
subconsciousness. The main, unavoidable event is not precisely stated;
but a subordinate consequence seems to be averted, as though to make us
believe in some definite power of free-will. Nevertheless, the mysterious
entity that foresaw the catastrophe must also have foreseen that nothing
would happen to the person whom it was warning; and this brings us back
to the useless farce of which we spoke above. Whereas, with the theory of
a subconscious self, the latter may have—as in the case of the traveller,
the promontory, the copper or the carriage—not this time by inferences
or indications that escape our perception, but by other unknown means, a
vague presentiment of an impending peril, or, as I have already said, a
partial, intermittent and unsettled vision of the future event, and, in
its doubt, may utter its cry of alarm.

Whereupon let us recognize that it is almost forbidden to human reason to
stray in these regions; and that the part of a prophet is, next to that
of a commentator of prophecies, one of the most difficult and thankless
that a man can attempt to sustain on the world’s stage.


24

I am not sure if it is really necessary, before closing this chapter,
to follow in the wake of many others and broach the problem of the
preexistence of the future, which includes those of fatality, of
free-will, of time and of space, that is to say, all the points that
touch the essential sources of the great mystery of the universe. The
theologians and the metaphysicians have tackled these problems from every
side without giving us the least hope of solving them. Among those which
life sets us, there is none to which our brain seems more definitely
and strictly closed; and they remain, if not as unimaginable, at least
as incomprehensible as on the day when they were first perceived. What
corresponds, outside us, with what we call time and space? We know
nothing about it; and Kant, speaking in the name of the “apriorists,”
who hold that the idea of time is innate in us, does not teach us much
when he tells us that time, like space, is an _a priori_ form of our
sensibility, that is to say, an intuition preceding experience, even as
Guyau, among the “empiricists,” who consider that this idea is acquired
only by experience, does not enlighten us any more by declaring that
this same time is the abstract formula of the changes in the universe.
Whether space, as Leibnitz maintains, be an order of coexistence and
time an order of sequences, whether it be by space that we succeed
in representing time or whether time be an essential form of any
representation, whether time be the father of space or space the father
of time, one thing is certain, which is that the efforts of the Kantian
or neo-Kantian apriorists and of the pure empiricists and the idealistic
empiricists all end in the same darkness; that all the philosophers
who have grappled with the formidable dual problem, among whom one may
mention indiscriminately the names of the greatest thinkers of yesterday
and to-day—Herbert Spencer, Helmholtz, Renouvier, James Sully, Stumpf,
James Ward, William James, Stuart Mill, Ribot, Fouillée, Guyau, Bain,
Lechalas, Balmès, Dunan and endless others—have been unable to tame it;
and that, however much their theories may contradict one another, they
are all equally defensible and alike struggle vainly in the darkness
against shadows that are not of our world.


25

To catch a glimpse of this strange problem of the preexistence of the
future, as it shows itself to each of us, let us essay more humbly to
translate it into tangible images, to place it as it were upon the stage.
I am writing these lines sitting on a stone, in the shade of some tall
beeches that overlook a little Norman village. It is one of those lovely
summer days when the sweetness of life is almost visible in the azure
vase of earth and sky. In the distance stretches the immense, fertile
valley of the Seine, with its green meadows planted with restful trees,
between which the river flows like a long path of gladness leading to
the misty hills of the estuary. I am looking down on the village-square,
with its ring of young lime-trees. A procession leaves the church and,
amid prayers and chanting, they carry the statue of the Virgin around
the sacred pile. I am conscious of all the details of the ceremony: the
sly old curé perfunctorily bearing a small reliquary; four choirmen
opening their mouths to bawl forth vacantly the Latin words which convey
nothing to them; two mischievous serving-boys in frayed cassocks; a score
of little girls, young girls and old maids in white, all starched and
flounced, followed by six or seven village notables in baggy frockcoats.
The pageant disappears behind the trees, comes into sight again at the
bend of the road and hurries back into the church. The clock in the
steeple strikes five, as though to ring down the curtain and mark in
the infinite history of events which none will recollect the conclusion
of a spectacle which never again, until the end of the world and of the
universe of worlds, will be just what it was during those seconds when it
beguiled my wandering eyes.

For in vain will they repeat the procession next year and every year
after: never again will it be the same. Not only will several of the
actors probably have disappeared, but all those who resume their old
places in the ranks will have undergone the thousand little visible and
invisible changes wrought by the passing days and weeks. In a word, this
insignificant moment is unique, irrecoverable, inimitable, as are all
the moments in the existence of all things; and this little picture,
enduring for a few seconds suspended in boundless duration, has lapsed
into eternity, where henceforth it will remain in its entirety to the end
of time, so much so that, if a man could one day recapture in the past,
among what some one has called the “astral negatives,” the image of what
it was, he would find it intact, unchanged, ineffaceable and undeniable.


26

It is not difficult for us to conceive that one can thus go back and see
again the astral negative of an event that is no more; and retrospective
clairvoyance appears to us a wonderful but not an impossible thing.
It astonishes but does not stagger our reason. But, when it becomes a
question of discovering the same picture in the future, the boldest
imagination flounders at the first step. How are we to admit that there
exists somewhere a representation or reproduction of that which has not
yet existed? Nevertheless, some of the incidents which we have just been
considering seem to prove in an almost conclusive manner not only that
such representations are possible, but that we may arrive at them more
frequently, not to say more conveniently, than at those of the past. Now,
once this representation preexists, as we are obliged to admit in the
case of a certain number of premonitions, the riddle remains the same
whether the preexistence be one of a few hours, a few years or several
centuries. It is therefore possible—for, in these matters, we must go
straight to extremes or else leave them alone—it is therefore possible
that a seer mightier than any of to-day, some god, demigod or demon, some
unknown, universal or vagrant intelligence, saw that procession a million
years ago, at a time when nothing existed of that which composes and
surrounds it and when the very earth on which it moves had not yet risen
from the ocean depths. And other seers, as mighty as the first, who from
age to age contemplated the same spot and the same moment, would always
have perceived, through the vicissitudes and upheavals of seas, shores
and forests, the same procession going round the same little church that
still lay slumbering in the oceanic ooze and made up of the same persons
sprung from a race that was perhaps not yet represented on the earth.


27

It is obviously difficult for us to understand that the future can thus
precede chaos, that the present is at the same time the future and the
past, or that that which is not yet exists already at the same time
at which it is no more. But, on the other hand, it is just as hard to
conceive that the future does not preexist, that there is nothing before
the present and that everything is only present or past. It is very
probable that, to a more universal intelligence than ours, everything is
but an eternal present, an immense _punctum stans_, as the metaphysicians
say, in which all the events are on one plane; but it is no less probable
that we ourselves, so long as we are men, in order to understand anything
of this eternal present, will always be obliged to divide it into
three parts. Thus caught between two mysteries equally baffling to our
intelligence, whether we deny or admit the preexistence of the future, we
are really only wrangling over words: in the one case, we give the name
of “present,” from the point of view of a perfect intelligence, to that
which to us is the future; in the other, we give the name of “future”
to that which, from the point of view of a perfect intelligence, is the
present. But, after all, it is incontestable in both cases that, at least
from our point of view, the future preexists, since preexistence is the
only name by which we can describe and the only form under which we can
conceive that which we do not yet see in the present.


28

Attempts have been made to shed light on the riddle by transferring
it to space. It is true that it there loses the greater part of its
obscurity; but this apparently is because, in changing its environment,
it has completely changed its nature and no longer bears any relation to
what it was when it was placed in time. We are told, for instance, that
innumerable cities distributed over the surface of the earth are to us
as if they were not, so long as we have not seen them, and only begin to
exist on the day when we visit them. That is true; but space, outside
all metaphysical speculations, has realities for us which time does not
possess. Space, although very mysterious and incomprehensible once we
pass certain limits, is nevertheless not, like time, incomprehensible
and illusory in all its parts. We are certainly quite able to conceive
that those towns which we have never seen and doubtless never will see
indubitably exist, whereas we find it much more difficult to imagine that
the catastrophe which, fifty years hence, will annihilate one of them
already exists as really as the town itself. We are capable of picturing
a spot whence, with keener eyes than those which we boast to-day, we
should see in one glance all the cities of the earth and even those of
other worlds, but it is much less easy for us to imagine a point in the
ages whence we should simultaneously discover the past, the present and
the future, because the past, the present and the future are three orders
of duration which cannot find room at the same time in our intelligence
and which inevitably devour one another. How can we picture to ourselves,
for instance, a point in eternity at which our little procession already
exists, while it is not yet and although it is no more? Add to this the
thought that it is necessary and inevitable, from the millenaries which
had no beginning, that, at a given moment, at a given place, the little
procession should leave the little church in a given manner and that no
known or imaginable will can change anything in it, in the future any
more than in the past; and we begin to understand that there is no hope
of understanding.


29

We find among the cases collected by M. Bozzano a singular premonition
wherein the unknown factors of space and time are continued in a very
curious fashion. In August 1910, Cavaliere Giovanni de Figueroa, one of
the most famous fencing-masters at Palermo, dreamt that he was in the
country, going along a road white with dust, which brought him to a broad
ploughed field. In the middle of the field stood a rustic building, with
a ground-floor used for store-rooms and cow-sheds and on the right a
rough hut made of branches and a cart with some harness lying in it.

A peasant wearing dark trousers, with a black felt hat on his head, came
forward to meet him, asked him to follow him and took him round behind
the house. Through a low, narrow door they entered a little stable with a
short, winding stone staircase leading to a loft over the entrance to the
house. A mule fastened to a swinging manger was blocking the bottom step;
and the chevalier had to push it aside before climbing the staircase.
On reaching the loft, he noticed that from the ceiling were suspended
strings of melons, tomatoes, onions and Indian corn. In this room were
two women and a little girl; and through a door leading to another room
he caught sight of an extremely high bed, unlike any that he had ever
seen before.

Here the dream broke off. It seemed to him so strange that he spoke of it
to several of his friends, whom he mentions by name and who are ready to
confirm his statements.

On the 12th of October in the same year, in order to support a
fellow-townsman in a duel, he accompanied the seconds, by motor-car, from
Naples to Marano, a place which he had never visited nor even heard of.
As soon as they were some way in the country, he was curiously impressed
by the white and dusty road. The car pulled up at the side of a field
which he at once recognized. They alighted; and he remarked to one of the
seconds:

“This is not the first time that I have been here. There should be a
house at the end of this path and on the right a hut and a cart with some
harness in it.”

As a matter of fact, everything was as he described it. An instant later,
at the exact moment foreseen by the dream, the peasant in the dark
trousers and the black felt hat came up and asked him to follow him.
But, instead of walking behind him, the chevalier went in front, for
he already knew the way. He found the stable and, exactly at the place
which it occupied two months before, near its swinging manger, the mule
blocking the way to the staircase. The fencing-master went up the steps
and once more saw the loft, with the ceiling hung with melons, onions and
tomatoes, and, in a corner on the right, the two silent women and the
child, identical with the figures in his dream, while in the next room he
recognized the bed whose uncommon height had so much impressed him.

It really looks as if the facts themselves, the extramundane realities,
the eternal verities, or whatever we may be pleased to call them,
have tried to show us here that time and space are one and the same
illusion, one and the same convention and have no existence outside our
little day-spanned understanding; that “everywhere” and “always” are
exactly synonymous terms and reign alone as soon as we cross the narrow
boundaries of the obscure consciousness in which we live. We are quite
ready to admit that Cavaliere de Figueroa may have had by clairvoyance
an exact and detailed vision of places which he was not to visit until
later: this is a pretty frequent and almost classical phenomenon, which,
as it affects the realities of space, does not astonish us beyond
measure and, in any case, does not take us out of the world which our
senses perceive. The field, the house, the hut, the loft do not move;
and it is no miracle that they should be found in the same place. But,
suddenly, quitting this domain where all is stationary, the phenomenon
is transferred to time and, in those unknown places, at the foretold
second, brings together all the moving actors of that little drama in
two acts, of which the first was performed some two and a half months
before, in the depths of some mysterious other life where it seemed to be
motionlessly and irrevocably awaiting its terrestrial realization. Any
explanation would but condense this vapour of petty mysteries into a few
drops in the ocean of mysteries.

Let us note again, in passing, the strange freakishness of these
premonitions. They accumulate the most precise and circumstantial details
as long as the scene remains insignificant, but come to a sudden stop
before the one tragic and interesting scene of the drama: the duel and
its issue. We here once more recognize the inconsistent, impotent,
ironical or humorous habits of our unknown guest.


30

But we will not prolong these somewhat vain speculations concerning
space and time. We are merely playing with words that represent very
badly ideas which we do not put into form at all. To sum up, while it
is difficult for us to conceive that the future preexists, perhaps it
is even more difficult for us to understand that it does not exist;
moreover, a certain number of facts tend to prove that it is as real and
definite and has, both in time and in eternity, the same permanence and
the same vividness as the past. Now, from the moment that it preexists,
it is not surprising that we should be able to know it; it is even
astonishing, granted that it overhangs us on every side, that we should
not discover it oftener and more easily. It remains to be learnt what
would become of our life if everything were foreseen in it, if we saw
it unfolding beforehand, in its entirety, with its events which would
have to be inevitable, because, if it were possible for us to avoid
them, they would not exist and we could not perceive them. Suppose
that, instead of being abnormal, uncertain, obscure, debatable and very
unusual, prediction became, so to speak, scientific, habitual, clear and
infallible: in a short time, having nothing more to foretell, it would
die of inanition. If, for instance, it was prophesied to me that I must
die in the course of a journey in Italy, I should naturally abandon the
journey; therefore it could not have been predicted to me; and thus all
life would soon be nothing but inaction, pause and abstention, a sort of
vast desert where the embryos of still-born events would be gathered in
heaps and where nothing would grow save perhaps one or two more or less
fortunate enterprises and the little insignificant incidents which no one
would trouble to avoid. But these again are questions to which there is
no solution; and we will not pursue them further.




