II

ANNIHILATION


1

And now we stand before the abyss. It is void of all the dreams with
which our fathers peopled it. They thought that they knew what was there;
we know only what is not there. It is the vaster by all that we have
learned to know nothing of. While waiting for a scientific certainty to
break through its darkness—for man has the right to hope for that which
he does not yet conceive—the only point that interests us, because it is
situated in the little circle which our actual intelligence traces in the
thickest blackness of the night, is to know whether the unknown for which
we are bound will be dreadful or not.

Outside the religions, there are four imaginable solutions and no more:
total annihilation; survival with our consciousness of to-day; survival
without any sort of consciousness; lastly, survival in the universal
consciousness, or with a consciousness different from that which we
possess in this world.


2

Total annihilation is impossible. We are the prisoners of an infinity
without outlet, wherein nothing perishes, wherein everything is
dispersed but nothing lost. Neither a body nor a thought can drop out
of the universe, out of time and space. Not an atom of our flesh, not a
quiver of our nerves will go where they will cease to be, for there is no
place where anything ceases to be. The brightness of a star extinguished
millions of years ago still wanders in the ether where our eyes will
perhaps behold it this very night, pursuing its endless road. It is the
same with all that we see, as with all that we do not see. To be able
to do away with a thing, that is to say, to fling it into nothingness,
nothingness would have to exist; and, if it exists, under whatever form,
it is no longer nothingness. As soon as we try to analyse it, to define
it, or to understand it, thoughts and expressions fail us, or create that
which they are struggling to deny. It is as contrary to the nature of our
reason and probably of all imaginable reason to conceive nothingness as
to conceive limits to infinity. Nothingness, besides, is but a negative
infinity, a sort of infinity of darkness opposed to that which our
intelligence strives to illumine, or rather it is but a child-name or
nickname which our mind has bestowed upon that which it has not attempted
to embrace, for we call nothingness all that escapes our senses or our
reason and exists without our knowledge.


3

But, it will perhaps be said, though the annihilation of every world
and every thing be impossible, it is not so certain that their death is
impossible; and, to us, what is the difference between nothingness and
everlasting death? Here again we are led astray by our imagination and by
words. We can no more conceive death than we can conceive nothingness.
We use the word death to cover those fragments of nothingness which we
believe that we understand; but, on closer examination, we are bound to
recognize that our idea of death is much too puerile to contain the least
truth. It reaches no higher than our own bodies and cannot measure the
destinies of the universe. We give the name of death to anything that has
a life a little different from ours. Even so do we act towards a world
that appears to us motionless and frozen, the moon, for instance, because
we are persuaded that any form of existence, animal or vegetable, is
extinguished upon it for ever. But it is now some years since we learned
that the most inert matter, to outward seeming, is animated by movements
so powerful and furious that all animal or vegetable life is no more than
sleep and immobility by the side of the swirling eddies and immeasurable
energy locked up in a wayside stone.

“There is no room for death!” cried Emily Brontë.

But, even if, in the infinite series of the centuries, all matter should
really become inert and motionless, it would none the less persist under
one form or another; and persistence, though it were in total immobility,
would, after all, be but a form of life stable and silent at last. All
that dies falls into life; and all that is born is of the same age as
that which dies. If death carried us to nothingness, did birth then draw
us out of that same nothingness? Why should the second be more impossible
than the first? The higher human thought rises and the wider it expands,
the less comprehensible do nothingness and death become. In any case—and
this is what matters here—if nothingness were possible, since it could
not be anything whatever, it could not be dreadful.




III

COMMUNICATIONS WITH THE DEAD


1

The spiritualists communicate or think that they communicate with the
dead by means of what they call automatic speech and writing. These are
obtained by the agency of a medium[2] in a state of ecstasy, or rather
“trance,” to employ the vocabulary of the new science. This condition
is not one of hypnotic sleep, nor does it seem to be an hysterical
manifestation; it is often associated, as in the case of the medium
Mrs. Piper, with perfect health and complete intellectual and physical
balance. It is rather the more or less voluntary emergence of a second or
subliminal personality or consciousness of the medium; or, if we admit
the spiritualistic hypothesis, his occupation, his “psychic invasion,” as
Myers calls it, by forces from another world. In the “entranced” subject,
the normal consciousness and personality are entirely done away with;
and he replies “automatically,” sometimes by word of mouth, more often
in writing, to the questions put to him. It has happened that he speaks
and writes simultaneously, his voice being occupied by one spirit and
his hand by another, who thus carry on two independent conversations.
More rarely, the voice and the two hands are “possessed” at one and the
same time; and we receive three different communications. Obviously,
manifestations of this sort lend themselves, to frauds and impostures of
all kinds; and the distrust aroused is at first invincible. But there
are some that make their appearance encompassed with such guarantees of
good faith and sincerity, so often, so long and so rigorously checked by
scientific men of unimpeachable character and authority and of originally
inflexible scepticism, that it becomes difficult to maintain a suspicion
at the finish.[3] Unfortunately, I am not able to enter here into the
details of some of these purely scientific sittings, those for instance
of Mrs. Piper, the famous medium with whom F. W. H. Myers, Richard
Hodgson, Professor Newbold, of the University of Pennsylvania, Sir Oliver
Lodge and William James worked during a number of years. On the other
hand, it is precisely the accumulation and coincidences of these abnormal
details which gradually produce and confirm the conviction that we are in
the presence of an entirely new, improbable but genuine phenomenon, which
is sometimes difficult of classification among exclusively terrestrial
phenomena. I should have to devote to these “communications” a special
study which would exceed the limits of this essay; and I will therefore
content myself with referring those who care to know more of the subject
to Sir Oliver Lodge’s book, _The Survival of Man_; and, above all, to the
twenty-five bulky volumes of the _Proceedings_ of the S.P.R., notably to
the report and comments of William James on the Piper-Hodgson sittings
in Vol. XXIII. and to Vol. XIII., where Hodgson examines the facts and
arguments that may be adduced for or against the agency of the dead; and,
lastly, to Myers’ great work, _Human Personality and its Survival after
Bodily Death_.


2

The “entranced” mediums are invaded or possessed by different familiar
spirits to whom the new science gives the somewhat inappropriate and
ambiguous name of “controls.” Thus, Mrs. Piper is visited in succession
by Phinuit, George Pelham, or “G.P.,” Imperator, Doctor and Rector. Mrs.
Thompson, another very celebrated medium, has Nelly for her usual tenant,
while graver and more illustrious personages would take possession of
Stainton Moses, a clergyman. Each of these spirits retains a sharply
defined character, which is consistent throughout and which, moreover,
for the most part bears no relation to that of the medium. Amongst these,
Phinuit and Nelly are undoubtedly the most attractive, the most original,
the most living, the most active and, above all, the most talkative.
They centralize the communications after a fashion; they come and go
officiously; and, should any one of those present wish to be brought
into touch with the soul of a deceased relative or friend, they fly in
search of it, find it amid the invisible throng, usher it in, announce
its presence, speak in its name, transmit and, so to speak, translate
the questions and replies; for it seems that it is very difficult for the
dead to communicate with the living and that they need special aptitudes
and a concurrence of extraordinary circumstances. We will not yet examine
what they have to reveal to us; but to see them thus fluttering to and
fro amid the multitude of their discarnate brothers and sisters gives
us a first impression of the next world which is none too reassuring;
and we say to ourselves that the dead of to-day are strangely like those
whom Ulysses conjured up out of the Cimmerian darkness three thousand
years ago: pale and empty shades, bewildered, incoherent, puerile and
terror-stricken, like unto dreams, more numerous than the leaves that
fall in autumn and, like them, trembling in the unknown winds from the
vast plains of the other world. They no longer even have enough life to
be unhappy; and they seem to drag out, we know not where, a precarious
and idle existence, to wander aimlessly, to hover round us, slumbering,
or chattering among one another of the minor matters of this world; and,
when a gap is made in their darkness, to hasten from all sides, like
flocks of famished birds, hungering for light and the sound of a human
voice. And, in spite of ourselves, we think of the _Odyssey_ and the
sinister words of the shade of Achilles as it issued from Erebus:

“Do not, O illustrious Ulysses, speak to me of death; I would wish, being
on earth, to serve for hire with another man of no estate, who had not
much livelihood, rather than rule over all the departed dead.”


3

What have these latterday dead to tell us? To begin with, it is a
remarkable thing that they appear to be much more interested in events
here below than in those of the world wherein they move. They seem, above
all, jealous to establish their identity, to prove that they still exist,
that they recognize us, that they know everything; and, to convince us
of this, they enter into the most minute and forgotten details with
extraordinary precision, perspicacity and prolixity. They are also
extremely clever at unravelling the intricate family connections of the
person actually questioning them, of any of the sitters, or even of a
stranger entering the room. They recall this one’s little infirmities,
that one’s maladies, the eccentricities or personal tendencies of a
third. They have cognizance of events taking place at a distance:
they see, for instance, and describe to their hearers in London an
insignificant episode in Canada. In a word, they say and do almost all
the disconcerting and inexplicable things that are sometimes obtained
from a first-rate medium; perhaps they even go a little further; but
there comes from it all no breath, no glimmer of the hereafter, not even
the something vaguely promised and vaguely waited for.

We shall be told that the mediums are visited only by inferior spirits,
incapable of tearing themselves from earthly cares and soaring towards
greater and loftier ideas. It is possible; and no doubt we are wrong to
believe that a spirit stripped of its body can suddenly be transformed
and reach, in a moment, the level of our imaginings; but could they not
at least inform us where they are, what they feel and what they do?


4

And now it seems that death itself has elected to answer these
objections. Frederic Myers, Richard Hodgson and William James, who so
often, for long and ardent hours, questioned Mrs. Piper and Mrs. Thompson
and obliged the departed to speak by their mouths, are now themselves
among the shades, on the other side of the curtain of darkness. They
at least knew exactly what to do in order to reach us, what to reveal
in order to allay the uneasy curiosity of men. Myers in particular,
the most ardent, the most convinced, the most impatient of the veil
that parted him from the eternal realities, formally promised those who
were continuing his work that he would make every imaginable effort out
yonder, in the unknown, to come to their aid in a decisive fashion.
He kept his word. A month after his death, when Sir Oliver Lodge was
questioning Mrs. Thompson in her trance, Nelly, the medium’s familiar
spirit, suddenly declared that she had seen Myers, that he was not yet
fully awake, but that he hoped to come, at nine o’clock in the evening,
and “communicate” with his old friend of the Psychical Society.

The sitting was suspended and resumed at half past eight; and Myers’
“communication” was at last obtained. He was recognized by the first
few words he spoke; it was really he; he had not changed, Faithful to
his idiosyncracy when on earth, he at once insisted on the necessity
for taking notes. But he seemed dazed. They spoke to him of the Society
for Psychical Research, the sole interest of his life. He had lost all
recollection of it. Then memory gradually revived; and there followed
a quantity of post-mortem gossip on the subject of the society’s next
president, the obituary article in the _Times_, the letters that should
be published and so on. He complained that people would not let him rest,
that there was not a place in England where they did not ask for him:

“Call Myers! Bring Myers!”

He ought to be given time to collect himself, to reflect. He also
complained of the difficulty of conveying his ideas through the
mediums: “they were translating like a schoolboy does his first lines
of Virgil.”[4] As for his present condition, “he groped his way as if
through passages, before he knew he was dead. He thought he had lost his
way in a strange town ... and, even when he saw people that he knew were
dead, he thought they were only visions.”

This, together with more chatter of a no less trivial nature, is about
all that we obtained from Myers’ “control” or “impersonation,” of which
better things had been expected. The “communication” and many others
which, it appears, recall in a striking fashion Myers’ habits, character
and ways of thinking and speaking would possess some value if none of
those by whom or to whom they were made had been acquainted with him at
the time when he was still numbered among the living. As they stand, they
are most probably but reminiscences of a secondary personality of the
medium or unconscious suggestions of the questioner or the sitters.


5

A more important communication and a more perplexing, because of the
names connected with it, is that which is known as “Mrs. Piper’s
Hodgson-Control.” Professor William James devotes an account of over
a hundred and twenty pages to it in Vol. XXIII. of the _Proceedings_.
Dr. Hodgson, in his lifetime, was secretary of the American branch of
the S.P.R., of which William James was vice-president. For many years,
he devoted himself to Mrs. Piper the medium, working with her twice a
week and thus accumulating an enormous mass of documents on the subject
of posthumous manifestations, a mass whose wealth has not yet been
exhausted. Like Myers, he had promised to come back after his death;
and, in his jovial way, he had more than once declared to Mrs. Piper
that, when he came to visit her in his turn, as he had more experience
than the other spirits, the sittings would take a more decisive shape
and that “he would make it hot for them.” He did come back, a week after
his death, and manifested himself by automatic writing (which, with Mrs.
Piper as medium, was the most usual method of communication) during
several sittings at which William James was present. I should like to
give an idea of these manifestations. But, as the celebrated Harvard
professor very truly observes, the shorthand report of a sitting of this
kind at once alters its aspect from start to finish. We seek in vain
for the emotion experienced on thus finding yourself in the presence of
an invisible but living being, who not only answers your questions, but
anticipates your thoughts, understands before you have finished speaking,
grasps an allusion and caps it with another allusion, grave or smiling.
The life of the dead man, which, during a strange hour, had, so to speak,
surrounded and penetrated you, seems to be extinguished for the second
time. Stenography, which is devoid of all emotion, no doubt supplies the
best elements for arriving at a logical conclusion; but it is not certain
that here, as in many other cases where the unknown predominates, logic
is the only road that leads to the truth.

“When I first undertook,” says William James, “to collate this series of
sittings and make the present report, I supposed that my verdict would be
determined by pure logic. Certain minute incidents, I thought, ought to
make for spirit-return or against it in a ‘crucial’ way. But watching my
mind work as it goes over the data, convinces me that exact logic plays
only a preparatory part in shaping our conclusions here; and that the
decisive vote, if there be one, has to be cast by what I may call one’s
general sense of dramatic probability, which sense ebbs and flows from
one hypothesis to another—it does so in the present writer at least—in
a rather illogical manner. If one sticks to the detail, one may draw an
anti-spiritist conclusion; if one thinks more of what the whole mass may
signify, one may well incline to spiritist interpretations.”[5]

And, at the end of his article, he sums up in the following words:

“_I myself feel as if an external will to communicate were probably
there_, that is, I find myself doubting, in consequence of my whole
acquaintance with that sphere of phenomena, that Mrs. Piper’s dream-life,
even equipped with ‘telepathic’ powers, accounts for all the results
found. But if asked whether the will to communicate be Hodgson’s, or be
some mere spirit-counterfeit of Hodgson, I remain uncertain and await
more facts, facts which may not point clearly to a conclusion for fifty
or a hundred years.”[6]

As we see, William James is inclined to waver; and at certain points in
his account he appears to waver still more and indeed to say deliberately
that the spirits “have a finger in the pie.” These hesitations on the
part of a man who has revolutionized our psychological ideas and who
possessed a brain as wonderfully organized and well-balanced as that
of our own Taine, for instance, are very significant. As a doctor
of medicine and a professor of philosophy, sceptical by nature and
scrupulously faithful to experimental methods, he was thrice qualified to
conduct investigations of this kind to a successful conclusion. It is not
a question of allowing ourselves, in our turn, to be unduly influenced
by those hesitations; but, in any case, they show that the problem is
a serious one, the gravest, perhaps, if the facts were beyond dispute,
which we have had to solve since the coming of Christ; and that we must
not expect to dismiss it with a shrug or a laugh.


6

I am obliged, for lack of space, to refer those who wish to form an
opinion of their own on the “Piper-Hodgson” case to the text of the
_Proceedings_. The case, at the same time, is far from being one of
the most striking; it should rather be classed, were it not for the
importance of the sitters concerned, among the minor successes of
the Piper series. Hodgson, according to the invariable custom of the
spirits, is, first of all, bent on making himself recognized; and the
inevitable, tedious string of trifling reminiscences begins twenty
times over again and fills page after page. As usual in such instances,
the recollections common to both the questioner and the spirit who is
supposed to be replying are brought out in their most circumstantial,
their most insignificant and also their most private details with
astonishing eagerness, precision and vivacity. And observe that, for all
these details, which he discloses with such extraordinary facility, the
dead man answering seeks by preference, one would say, the most hidden
and forgotten treasures of the living listener’s memory. He spares
him nothing; he harps on everything with childish satisfaction and
apprehensive solicitude, not so much to persuade others as to prove to
himself that he still exists. And the obstinacy of this poor invisible
being, in striving to manifest himself through the hitherto uncrannied
doors that separate us from our eternal destinies, is at once ridiculous
and tragic:

“Do you remember, William, when we were in the country at So-and-so’s,
that game we played with the children; do you remember my saying
such-and-such a thing when I was in that room where there was
such-and-such a chair or table?”

“Why, yes, Hodgson, I do remember now.”

“A good test, that?”

“First-rate, Hodgson!”

And so on, indefinitely. Sometimes, there is a more significant incident
that seems to surpass the mere transmission of subliminal thought. They
are talking, for instance, of a frustrated marriage which was always
surrounded with great mystery, even to Hodgson’s most intimate friends:

“Do you remember a lady-doctor in New York, a member of our society?”

“No, but what about her?”

“Her husband’s name was Blair ... I think.”

“Do you mean Dr. Blair Thaw?”

“Oh, yes. Ask Mrs. Thaw if I did not at a dinner-party mention something
about the lady. I may have done so.”

James writes to Mrs. Thaw, who declares that, as a matter of fact,
fifteen years before, Hodgson had said to her that he had just proposed
to a girl and been refused. Mrs. Thaw and Dr. Newbold were the only
people in the world who knew the particulars.

But to come to the further sittings. Among other points discussed is
the financial position of the American branch of the S.P.R., a position
which, at the death of the secretary, or rather factotum, Hodgson, was
anything but brilliant. And behold the somewhat strange spectacle of
different members of the society debating its affairs with their defunct
secretary. Shall they dissolve? Shall they amalgamate? Shall they send
the materials collected, most of which are Hodgson’s, to England? They
consult the dead man; he replies, gives good advice, seems fully aware
of all the complications, all the difficulties. One day, in Hodgson’s
lifetime, when the society was found to be short of funds, an anonymous
donor had sent the sum necessary to relieve it from embarrassment.
Hodgson alive did not know who the donor was; Hodgson dead picks him out
among those present, addresses him by name and thanks him publicly. On
another occasion, Hodgson, like all the spirits, complains of the extreme
difficulty which he finds in conveying his thought through the alien
organism of the medium:

“I find now difficulties such as a blind man would experience in trying
to find his hat,” he says.

But, when, after so much idle chatter, William James at last puts the
essential questions that burn our lips—“Hodgson, what have you to tell us
about the other life?”—the dead man becomes shifty and does nothing but
seek evasions:

“It is not a vague fantasy but a reality,” he replies.

“But,” Mrs. William James insists, “do you live as we do, as men do?”

“What does she say?” asks the spirit, pretending not to understand.

“Do you live as men do?” repeats William James.

“Do you wear clothing and live in houses?” adds his wife.

“Oh yes, houses, but not clothing. No, that is absurd. Just wait a
moment, I am going to get out.”

“You will come back again?”

“Yes.”

“He has got to go out and get his breath,” remarks another spirit, named
Rector, suddenly intervening.

It has not been waste of time, perhaps, to reproduce the general features
of one of these sittings which may be regarded as typical. I will add,
in order to give an idea of the farthest point which it is possible to
attain, the following instance of an experiment made by Sir Oliver Lodge
and related by him. He handed Mrs. Piper, in her “trance,” a gold watch
which had just been sent him by one of his uncles and which belonged
to that uncle’s twin brother, who had died twenty years before. When
the watch was in her possession, Mrs. Piper, or rather Phinuit, one
of her familiar spirits, began to relate a host of details concerning
the childhood of this twin brother, facts dating back for more than
sixty-six years and of course unknown to Sir Oliver Lodge. Soon after,
the surviving uncle, who lived in another town, wrote and confirmed the
accuracy of most of these details, which he had quite forgotten and of
which he was only now reminded by the medium’s revelations; while those
which he could not recollect at all were subsequently declared to be in
accordance with fact by a third uncle, an old sea-captain, who lived in
Cornwall and who had not the least notion why such strange questions were
put to him.

I quote this instance not because it has any exceptional or decisive
value, but simply, I repeat, by way of an example; for, like the case
connected with Mrs. Thaw, mentioned above, it marks pretty accurately the
extreme points to which people have up to now, thanks to spirit agency,
penetrated the mysteries of the unknown. It is well to add that cases
in which the supposed limits of the most far-reaching telepathy are so
manifestly exceeded are fairly uncommon.


7

Now what are we to think of all this? Must we, with Myers, Newbold,
Hyslop, Hodgson and many others, who studied this problem at length,
conclude in favour of the incontestable agency of forces and
intelligences returning from the farther bank of the great river which
it was deemed that none might cross. Must we acknowledge with them that
there are cases ever more numerous which make it impossible for us to
hesitate any longer between the telepathic theory and the spiritualistic
theory? I do not think so. I have no prejudices—what were the use of
having any, in these mysteries?—no reluctance to admit the survival
and the intervention of the dead; but it is wise and necessary, before
leaving the terrestrial plane, to exhaust all the suppositions, all the
explanations there to be discovered. We have to make our choice between
two manifestations of the unknown, two miracles, if you prefer, whereof
one is situated in the world which we inhabit and the other in a region
which, rightly or wrongly, we believe to be separated from us by nameless
spaces which no human being, alive or dead, has crossed to this day. It
is natural, therefore, that we should stay in our own world, as long as
it gives us a foothold, as long as we are not pitilessly expelled from
it by a series of irresistible and irrefutable facts issuing from the
adjoining abyss. The survival of a spirit is no more improbable than the
prodigious faculties which we are obliged to attribute to the mediums
if we deny them to the dead; but the existence of the medium, contrary
to that of the spirit, is unquestionable; and therefore it is for the
spirit, or for those who make use of its name, first to prove that it
exists.

Do the extraordinary phenomena of which we know—transmission of
thought from one subconscious mind to another, perception of events
at a distance, subliminal clairvoyance—occur when the dead are not in
evidence, when the experiments are being made exclusively between living
persons? This cannot be honestly contested. Certainly no one has ever
obtained among living people any series of communications or revelations
similar to those of the great spiritualistic mediums, Mrs. Piper, Mrs.
Thompson and Stainton Moses, nor anything that can compare with them
for continuity or lucidity. But, though the quality of the phenomena
will not bear comparison, it cannot be denied that their inner nature is
identical. Our logical inference is that the real cause lies not in the
source of inspiration, but in the personal value, the sensitiveness, the
power of the medium. For the rest, Mr. J. G. Piddington, who devoted an
exceedingly detailed study to Mrs. Thompson, plainly perceived in her,
when she was not “entranced” and when there were no spirits whatever in
question, manifestations inferior, it is true, but absolutely analogous
to those involving the dead.[7] These mediums are pleased, in all good
faith and probably unconsciously, to give to their subliminal faculties,
to their secondary personalities, or to accept, on their behalf, names
which were borne by beings who have crossed to the farther side of the
mystery: this is a matter of vocabulary or nomenclature which neither
lessens nor increases the intrinsic significance of the facts. Well, in
examining these facts, however strange and really unparalleled some of
them may be, I never find one which proceeds frankly from this world
or which comes indisputably from the other. They are, if you wish,
phenomenal border incidents; but it cannot be said that the border has
been violated. In the story of Sir Oliver Lodge’s watch, for instance,
which is one of the most characteristic and one which carries us farther
than most, we must attribute to the medium faculties that have ceased to
be human. She must have put herself in touch, whether by perception of
events at a distance, or by transmission of thought from one subconscious
mind to another, or again by subliminal clairvoyance, with the two
surviving brothers of the deceased owner of the watch; and, in the
past subconsciousness of those two brothers, distant from each other,
she had to rediscover a host of circumstances which they themselves had
forgotten and which lay hidden beneath the heaped-up dust and darkness of
six-and-sixty years. It is certain that a phenomenon of this kind passes
the bounds of the imagination and that we should refuse to credit it if,
first of all, the experiment had not been controlled and certified by a
man of the standing of Sir Oliver Lodge, and if, moreover, it did not
form one of a group of equally significant facts which clearly show that
we are not here concerned with an absolutely unique miracle or with an
unhoped-for and unprecedented concourse of coincidences. It is simply
a matter of distant perception, subliminal clairvoyance and telepathy
raised to the highest power; and these three manifestations of the
unexplored depths of man are to-day recognized and classified by science,
which is not saying that they are explained: that is another question.
When, in connection with electricity, we use such terms as positive,
negative, induction, potential and resistance, we are also applying
conventional words to facts and phenomena of whose inward essence we are
utterly ignorant; and we must needs be content with these, pending any
better. There is, I insist, between these extraordinary manifestations
and those given to us by a medium who is not speaking in the name of the
dead, but a difference of the greater and the lesser, a difference of
extent or degree and in no wise a difference in kind.


8

For the proof to be more decisive, it would be necessary that no one,
neither the medium nor the witnesses, should ever have known of the
existence of him whose past is revealed by the dead man, in other words,
that every living link should be eliminated. I do not believe that this
has actually occurred up to the present, nor even that it is possible;
in any case, it would be very difficult to control such an experiment.
Be this as it may, Dr. Hodgson, who devoted part of his life to the
quest of specific phenomena wherein the boundaries of mediumistic power
should be plainly overstepped, believes that he found them in certain
cases, of which—as the others were of very much the same nature—I will
merely mention one of the most striking.[8] In a course of excellent
sittings with Mrs. Piper the medium, he communicated with various dead
friends who reminded him of a large number of common memories. The
medium, the spirits and he himself seemed in a wonderfully accommodating
mood; and the revelations were plentiful, exact and easy. In this
extremely favourable atmosphere, he was placed in communication with the
soul of one of his best friends, who had died a year before and whom
he simply calls “A.” This A, whom he had known more intimately than
most of the spirits with whom he had communicated previously, behaved
quite differently and, while establishing his identity beyond dispute,
vouchsafed only incoherent replies. Now A “had been troubled much, for
years before his death, by headaches and occasionally mental exhaustion,
though not amounting to positive mental disturbance.”

The same phenomenon appears to recur whenever similar troubles have come
before death, as in cases of suicide.

“If the telepathic explanation is held to be the only one,” says Dr.
Hodgson (I give the gist of his observations), “if it is claimed that all
the communications of these discarnate minds are only suggestions from
my subconscious self, it is unintelligible that, after having obtained
satisfactory results from others whom I had known far less intimately
than A and with whom I had consequently far fewer recollections in
common, I should get from him, in the same sittings, nothing but
incoherencies. I am thus driven to believe that my subliminal self is
not the only thing in evidence, that it is in the presence of a real,
living personality, whose mental state is the same as it was at the
hour of death, a personality which remains independent of my subliminal
consciousness and absolutely unaffected by it, which is deaf to its
suggestions and draws from its own resources the revelations which it
makes.”

The argument is not without value, but its full force would be obtained
only if it were certain that none of those present knew of A’s madness;
otherwise it can be contended that, the notion of madness having
penetrated the subconscious intelligence of one of them, it worked upon
it and gave to the replies induced a form in keeping with the state of
mind presupposed in the dead man.


9

Of a truth, by extending the possibilities of the medium to these
extremes, we furnish ourselves with explanations which forestall nearly
everything, bar every road and all but deny to the spirits any power
of manifesting themselves in the manner which they appear to have
chosen. But why do they choose that manner? Why do they thus restrict
themselves? Why do they jealously hug the narrow strip of territory which
memory occupies on the confines of both worlds and from which none but
indecisive or questionable evidence can reach us? Are there then no other
outlets, no other horizons? Why do they tarry around us, stagnant in
their little pasts, when, in their freedom from the flesh, they ought to
be able to wander at ease over the virgin stretches of space and time?
Do they not yet know that the sign which will prove to us that they
survive is to be found not with us, but with them, on the other side of
the grave? Why do they come back with empty hands and empty words? Is
that what one finds when one is steeped in infinity? Beyond our last hour
is it all bare and shapeless and dim? If it be so, let them tell us;
and the evidence of the darkness will at least possess a grandeur that
is all too absent from these cross-examining methods. Of what use is it
to die, if all life’s trivialities continue? Is it really worth while
to have passed through the terrifying gorges which open on the eternal
fields, in order to remember that we had a great-uncle called Peter and
that our Cousin Paul was afflicted with varicose veins and a gastric
complaint? At that rate, I should choose for those whom I love the august
and frozen solitudes of the everlasting nothing. Though it be difficult
for them, as they complain, to make themselves understood through a
strange and sleep-bound organism, they tell us enough categorical details
about the past to show that they could disclose similar details, if not
about the future, which they perhaps do not yet know, at least about
the lesser mysteries which surround us on every side and which our
body alone prevents us from approaching. There are a thousand things,
large or small, alike unknown to us, which we must perceive when feeble
eyes no longer arrest our vision. It is in those regions from which a
shadow separates us and not in foolish tittle-tattle of the past that
they would at last find the clear and genuine proof which they seem to
seek with such enthusiasm. Without demanding a great miracle, one would
nevertheless think that we had the right to expect from a mind which
nothing now enthrals some other discourse than that which it avoided when
it was still subject to matter.




