XII

IN MEMORIAM


Those who die for their country should not be numbered with the dead. We
must call them by another name. They have nothing in common with those
who end in their beds a life that is worn out, a life almost always too
long and often useless. Death, which every elsewhere is but the object of
fear and horror, bringing naught but nothingness and despair, this death,
on the field of battle, in the clash of glory, becomes more beautiful
than birth and exhales a grace greater than that of love. No life will
ever give what their youth is offering us, that youth which gives in one
moment the days and the years that lay before it. There is no sacrifice
to be compared with that which they have made; for which reason there is
no glory that can soar so high as theirs, no gratitude that can surpass
the gratitude which we owe them. They have not only a right to the
foremost place in our memories: they have a right to all our memories and
to everything that we are, since we exist only through them.

And now it is in us that their life, so suddenly cut short, must resume
its course. Whatever be our faith and whatever the God whom it adores,
one thing is almost certain and, in spite of all appearances, is daily
becoming more certain: it is that death and life are commingled; the dead
and the living alike are but moments, hardly dissimilar, of a single
and infinite existence and members of one immortal family. They are not
beneath the earth, in the depths of their tombs; they lie deep in our
hearts, where all that they once were will continue to live and to act;
and they live in us even as we die in them. They see us, they understand
us more nearly than when they were in our arms; let us then keep a watch
upon ourselves, so that they witness no actions and hear no words but
words and actions that shall be worthy of them.




XIII

THE LIFE OF THE DEAD


1

The other day I went to see a woman whom I knew before the war—she was
happy then—and who had lost her only son in one of the battles in the
Argonne. She was a widow, almost a poor woman; and, now that this son,
her pride and her joy, was no more, she no longer had any reason for
living. I hesitated to knock at her door. Was I not about to witness one
of those hopeless griefs at whose feet all words fall to the ground like
shameful and insulting lies? Which of us to-day is not familiar with
these mournful interviews, this dismal duty?

To my great astonishment, she offered me her hand with a kindly smile.
Her eyes, to which I hardly dared raise my own, were free of tears.

“You have come to speak of him,” she said, in a cheerful tone; and it was
as though her voice had grown younger.

“Alas, yes! I had heard of your sorrow; and I have come....”

“Yes, I too believed that my unhappiness was irreparable; but now I know
that he is not dead.”

“What! He is not dead? Do you mean that the news...? But I thought that
the body....”

“Yes, his body is over there; and I have even a photograph of his grave.
Let me show it to you. See, that cross on the left, the fourth cross:
that is where he is lying. One of his friends, who buried him, sent me
this card and gave me all the details. He suffered no pain. There was
not even a death-struggle. And he has told me so himself. He is quite
astonished that death should be so easy, so slight a thing.... You do not
understand? Yes, I see what it is: you are just as I used to be, as all
the others are. I do not explain the matter to the others; what would be
the use? They do not wish to understand. But you, you will understand. He
is more alive than he ever was; he is free and happy. He does just as he
likes. He tells me that one cannot imagine what a release death is, what
a weight it removes from you, nor the joy which it brings. He comes to
see me when I call him. He loves especially to come in the evening; and
we chat as we used to. He has not altered; he is just as he was on the
day when he went away, only younger, stronger, handsomer. We have never
been happier, more united, nearer to one another. He divines my thoughts
before I utter them. He knows everything; he sees everything; but he
cannot tell me everything he knows. He maintains that I must be wanting
to follow him and that I must wait for my hour. And, while I wait, we are
living in a happiness greater than that which was ours before the war, a
happiness which nothing can ever trouble again....”

Those about her pitied the poor woman; and, as she did not weep, as she
was gay and smiling, they believed her mad.


2

Was she as mad as they thought? At the present moment, the great
questions of the world beyond the grave are pressing upon us from every
side. It is probable that, since the world began, there have never
been so many dead as now. The empire of death was never so mighty, so
terrible; it is for us to defend and enlarge the empire of life. In the
presence of this mother, which are right and which are wrong, those who
are convinced that their dead are for ever swept out of existence, or
those who are persuaded that their dead do not cease to live, who believe
that they see them and hear them? Do we know what it is that dies in
our dead, or even if anything dies? Whatever our religious faith may
be, there is at any rate one place where they cannot die. That place is
within ourselves; and, if this unhappy mother went beyond the truth, she
was yet nearer to it than those despairing ones who nourish the mournful
certainty that nothing survives of those whom they loved. She felt too
keenly what we do not feel keenly enough. She remembered too much; and we
do not know how to remember. Between the two errors there is room for a
great truth; and, if we have to choose, hers is the error towards which
we should lean. Let us learn to acquire through reason that which a wise
madness bestowed on her. Let us learn from her to live with our dead and
to live with them without sadness and without terror. They do not ask for
tears, but for a happy and confident affection. Let us learn from her to
resuscitate those whom we regret. She called to hers, while we repulse
ours; we are afraid of them and are surprised that they lose heart and
pale and fade away and leave us for ever. They need love as much as do
the living. They die, not at the moment when they sink into the grave,
but gradually as they sink into oblivion; and it is oblivion alone that
makes the separation irrevocable. We should not allow it to heap itself
above them. It would be enough to vouchsafe them each day a single one of
those thoughts which we bestow uncounted upon so many useless objects:
they would no longer think of leaving us; they would remain around us and
we should no longer understand what a tombstone is, for there is no tomb,
however deep, whose stone may not be raised and whose dust dispersed by a
thought.

There would be no difference between the living and the dead if we but
knew how to remember. There would be no more dead. The best of what they
were dwells with us after fate has taken them from us; all their past is
ours; and it is wider than the present, more certain than the future.
Material presence is not everything in this world; and we can dispense
with it without despairing. We do not mourn those who live in lands which
we shall never visit, because we know that it depends on us whether we
go to find them. Let it be the same with our dead. Instead of believing
that they have disappeared never to return, tell yourselves that they are
in a country to which you yourself will assuredly go soon, a country not
so very far away. And while waiting for the time when you will go there
once and for all, you may visit them in thought as easily as if they were
still in a region inhabited by the living. The memory of the dead is even
more alive than that of the living; it is as though they were assisting
our memory, as though they, on their side, were making a mysterious
effort to join hands with us on ours. One feels that they are far more
powerful than the absent who continue to breathe as we do.


3

Try then to recall those whom you have lost, before it is too late,
before they have gone too far; and you will see that they will come much
closer to your heart, that they will belong to you more truly, that they
are as real as when they were in the flesh. In putting off this last,
they have but discarded the moments in which they loved us least or in
which we did not love at all. Now they are pure; they are clothed only in
the fairest hours of life; they no longer possess faults, littlenesses,
oddities; they can no longer fall away, or deceive themselves, or give
us pain. They care for nothing now but to smile upon us, to encompass us
with love, to bring us a happiness drawn without stint from a past which
they live again beside us.




