IV

OUR ULTIMATE CONSCIOUSNESS


1

Survival with our present consciousness is nearly as impossible and
incomprehensible as total annihilation. Moreover, even if it were
admissible, it could not be dreadful. This is certain that, when the body
disappears, all physical sufferings will disappear at the same time;
for we cannot imagine a spirit suffering in a body which it no longer
possesses. With them will vanish simultaneously all that we call mental
or moral sufferings, seeing that all of them, if we examine them well,
spring from the ties and habits of our senses. Our spirit feels the
reaction of the sufferings of our body or of the bodies that surround
it; it cannot suffer in itself or through itself. Slighted affection,
shattered love, disappointments, failures, despair, betrayal, personal
humiliations, as well as the sorrows and the loss of those whom it
loves, acquire their potent sting only by passing through the body which
it animates. Outside its own pain, which is the pain of not knowing,
the spirit, once delivered from its flesh, could suffer only in the
recollection of the flesh. It is possible that it still grieves over the
troubles of those whom it has left behind on earth. But to its eyes,
since it no longer reckons the days, these troubles will seem so brief
that it will not grasp their duration; and, knowing what they are and
knowing whither they lead, it will not behold their severity.

The spirit is insensible to all that is not happiness. It is made only
for infinite joy, which is the joy of knowing and understanding. It can
grieve only at perceiving its own limits; but to perceive those limits,
when there are no more bonds to space and time, is already to transcend
them.


2

It becomes a question of knowing whether that spirit, sheltered from all
sorrow, will remain itself, will perceive and recognize itself in the
bosom of infinity and up to what point it is important that it should
recognize itself. This brings us to the problems of survival without
consciousness, or survival with a consciousness different from that of
to-day.

Survival without consciousness seems at first sight the more probable.
From the point of view of the good or ill awaiting us on the other side
of the grave, it amounts to annihilation. It is lawful, therefore, for
those who prefer the easiest solution and that most consistent with the
present state of human thought to limit their anxiety to that. They have
nothing to dread; for, on close inspection, every fear, if any remained,
should deck itself with hopes. The body disintegrates and can no longer
suffer; the mind, separated from the source of pleasure and pain, is
extinguished, scattered and lost in a boundless darkness; and what comes
is the great peace so often prayed for, the sleep without measure,
without dreams and without awakening.

But this is only a solution that fosters indolence. If we press those who
speak of survival without consciousness, we perceive that they mean only
their present consciousness, for man conceives no other; and we have just
seen that it is almost impossible for that manner of consciousness to
persist in infinity.

Unless, indeed, they would deny every sort of consciousness, even that
cosmic consciousness into which their own will fall. But this were to
solve very quickly and very blindly, with a stroke of the sword in the
night, the greatest and most mysterious question that can arise in a
man’s brain.


3

It is evident that, in the depths of our thought limited on every
side, we shall never be able to form the least idea of an infinite
consciousness. There is even an essential antinomy between the words
consciousness and infinity. To speak of consciousness is to mean the
most definite thing conceivable in the finite; consciousness, properly
speaking, is the finite self-concentrated in order to discover and feel
its closest limits, to the end that it may enjoy them as closely as
possible. On the other hand, it is impossible for us to separate the idea
of intelligence from the idea of consciousness. Any intelligence that
does not seem capable of transforming itself into consciousness becomes
for us a mysterious phenomenon to which we give names more mysterious
still, lest we should have to admit that we understand nothing of it at
all. Now, on this little earth of ours, which is but a dot in space, we
see expended in every scale of life, as for instance, in the wonderful
combinations and organisms of the insect world, a mass of intelligence
so vast that our human intelligence cannot even dream of assessing it.
Everything that exists—and man first of all—is incessantly drawing upon
that inexhaustible reserve. We are therefore irresistibly driven to
ask ourselves if that cosmic intelligence is not the emanation of an
infinite consciousness, or if it must not, sooner or later, elaborate
one. And this sets us tossing between two irreducible impossibilities.
What is most probable is that here again we are judging everything from
the lowlands of our anthropomorphism. At the summit of our infinitesimal
life, we see only intelligence and consciousness, the extreme point of
thought; and from this we infer that, at the summits of all lives, there
could be naught but intelligence and consciousness, whereas these perhaps
occupy only an inferior place in the hierarchy of spiritual or other
possibilities.


4

Survival absolutely denuded of consciousness would, therefore, be
possible only if we deny the existence of a cosmic consciousness.
When once we admit this consciousness, under whatsoever form, we are
bound to share in it; and, up to a certain point, the question is
indistinguishable from that of the continuance of a more or less modified
consciousness. There is, for the moment, no hope of solving it; but we
are free to grope in its darkness, which is not perhaps equally dense at
all points.

Here begins the open sea. Here begins the splendid adventure, the only
one abreast with human curiosity, the only one that soars as high as its
highest longing. Let us accustom ourselves to regard death as a form of
life which we do not yet understand; let us learn to look upon it with
the same eye that looks upon birth; and soon our mind will be accompanied
to the steps of the tomb with the same glad expectation that greets a
birth.

Suppose that a child in its mother’s womb were endowed with a certain
consciousness; that unborn twins, for instance, could, in some obscure
fashion, exchange their impressions and communicate their hopes and
fears to each other. Having known naught but the warm maternal shades,
they would not feel straitened nor unhappy there. They would probably
have no other idea than to prolong as long as possible that life of
abundance free from cares and of sleep free from alarms. But, if, even
as we are aware that we must die, they too knew that they must be born,
that is to say, that they must suddenly leave the shelter of that gentle
darkness and abandon for ever that captive but peaceful existence, to be
precipitated into an absolutely different, unimaginable and boundless
world, how great would be their anxieties and their fears! And yet there
is no reason why our own anxieties and fears should be more justified
or less ridiculous. The character, the spirit, the intentions, the
benevolence or the indifference of the unknown to which we are subject do
not alter between our birth and our death. We remain always in the same
infinity, in the same universe. It is perfectly reasonable and legitimate
to persuade ourselves that the tomb is no more dreadful than the cradle.
It would even be legitimate and reasonable to accept the cradle only on
account of the tomb. If, before being born, we were permitted to choose
between the great peace of non-existence and a life that should not be
completed by the glorious hour of death, which of us, knowing what he
ought to know, would accept the disquieting problem of an existence
that would not lead to the reassuring mystery of its end? Which of us
would wish to come into a world where we can learn so little, if he did
not know that he must enter it if he would leave it and learn more?
The best thing about life is that it prepares this hour for us, that
it is the one and only road leading to the magic gateway and into that
incomparable mystery where misfortunes and sufferings will no longer be
possible, because we shall have lost the body that produced them; where
the worst that can befall us is the dreamless sleep which we number among
the greatest boons on earth; where, lastly, it is almost unimaginable
that a thought should not survive to mingle with the substance of the
universe, that is to say, with infinity, which, if it be not a waste of
indifference can be nothing but a sea of joy.


5

Before fathoming that sea, let us remark to those who aspire to maintain
their ego that they are calling for the sufferings which they dread.
The ego implies limits. The ego cannot subsist except in so far as it
is separated from that which surrounds it. The stronger the ego, the
narrower its limits and the clearer the separation. The more painful too;
for the mind, if it remain as we know it—and we are not able to imagine
it different—will no sooner have seen its limits than it will wish to
overstep them; and, the more separated it feels, the greater will be its
longing to unite with that which lies outside. There will therefore be
an eternal struggle between its being and its aspirations. And really it
would have served no object to be born and die only to arrive at these
interminable contests. Have we not here yet one more proof that our ego,
as we conceive it, could never subsist in the infinity where it must
needs go, since it cannot go elsewhere? It behoves us therefore to clear
away conceptions that emanate only from our body, even as the mists that
veil the daylight from our sight emanate only from the lowlands. Pascal
has said, once and for all:

“The narrow limits of our being conceal infinity from our view.”


6

On the other hand—for we must keep nothing back, nor turn from the
adverse darkness should it seem nearest to the truth, nor show any
bias—on the other hand, we can grant to those who yearn to remain as they
are that the survival of an atom of themselves would suffice for a new
entrance into an infinity from which their body no longer separates them.

If it seems impossible that anything—a movement, a vibration, a
radiation—should stop or disappear, why then should thought be lost?
There will, no doubt, subsist more than one idea powerful enough to
allure the new ego, which will nourish itself and thrive on all that
it will find in that boundless environment, just as the other ego, on
this earth, nourished itself and throve on all that it met there. Since
we have been able to acquire our present consciousness, why should it
be impossible for us to acquire another? For that ego which is so dear
to us and which we believe ourselves to possess was not made in a day;
it is not at present what it was at the hour of our birth. Much more
chance than purpose has entered into it; and much more alien substance
than any inborn substance which it contained. It is but a long series
of acquisitions and transformations, of which we do not become aware
until the awakening of our memory; and its kernel, of which we do not
know the nature, is perhaps more immaterial and less concrete than a
thought. If the new environment which we enter on leaving our mother’s
womb transforms us to such a point that there is, so to speak, no
connection between the embryo that we were and the man that we have
become, is it not right to think that the far newer, stranger, wider and
richer environment which we enter on quitting life will transform us even
more? We can see in what happens to us here a figure of what awaits us
elsewhere and can readily admit that our spiritual being, liberated from
its body, if it does not mingle at the first onset with the infinite,
will develop itself there gradually, will choose itself a substance and,
no longer trammelled by space and time, will go on for ever growing.
It is very possible that our loftiest wishes of to-day will become
the law of our future development. It is very possible that our best
thoughts will welcome us on the farther shore and that the quality of our
intellect will determine that of the infinite which crystallizes around
it. Every hypothesis is permissible and every question, provided it be
addressed to happiness; for unhappiness is no longer able to answer us.
It finds no place in the human imagination that methodically explores
the future. And, whatever be the force that survives us and presides
over our existence in the other world, this existence, to presume the
worst, could be no less great, no less happy than that of to-day. It
will have no other career than infinity; and infinity is nothing if it
be not felicity. In any case, it seems fairly certain that we spend in
this world the only narrow, grudging, obscure and sorrowful moment of our
destiny.


7

We have said that the peculiar sorrow of the mind is the sorrow of
not knowing or not understanding, which includes the sorrow of being
powerless; for he who knows the supreme causes, being no longer paralysed
by matter, becomes one with them and acts with them; and he who
understands ends by approving, or else the universe would be a mistake,
which is not possible, an infinite mistake being inconceivable. I do not
believe that another sorrow of the sheer mind can be imagined. The only
one sorrow which, at first thought, might seem admissible—and which, in
any case, could be but ephemeral—would arise from the sight of the pain
and misery remaining on the earth which we have left. But this sorrow,
after all, would be but one aspect and an insignificant phase of the
sorrow of being powerless and of not understanding. As for the latter,
though it is not only beyond the domain of our intelligence, but even at
an insuperable distance from our imagination, we may say that it would
be intolerable only if it were without hope. But, for that, the universe
would have to abandon any attempt to understand itself, or else admit
within itself an object that remained for ever foreign to it. Either the
mind will not perceive its limits and, consequently, will not suffer from
them, or else it will overstep them as it perceives them; for how could
the universe have parts eternally condemned to form no part of itself
and of its knowledge? Hence we cannot understand that the torture of not
understanding, supposing it to exist for a moment, should not end by
absorption in the state of infinity, which, if it be not happiness as we
comprehend it, could be naught but an indifference higher and purer than
joy.




