XI

THE DEAD DO NOT DIE


1

When we behold the terrible loss of so many young lives, when we see
so many incarnations of physical and moral vigour, of intellect and of
glorious promise pitilessly cut off in their first flower, we are on the
verge of despair. Never before have the fairest energies and aspirations
of men been flung recklessly and incessantly into an abyss whence comes
no sound or answer. Never since it came into existence has humanity
squandered its treasure, its substance and its prospects so lavishly.
For more than twelve months, on every battlefield, where the bravest,
the truest, the most ardent and self-sacrificing are necessarily the
first to die and where the less courageous, the less generous, the weak,
the ailing, in a word the less desirable, alone possess some chance of
escaping the carnage, for over twelve months a sort of monstrous inverse
selection has been in operation, one which seems to be deliberately
seeking the downfall of the human race. And we wonder uneasily what the
state of the world will be after the great trial and what will be left of
it and what will be the future of this stunted race, shorn of all the
best and noblest part of it.

The problem is certainly one of the darkest that has ever vexed the minds
of men. It contains a material truth before which we remain defenceless;
and, if we accept it as it stands, we can discover no remedy for the
evil that threatens us. But material and tangible truths are never
anything but a more or less salient angle of greater and deeper-lying
truths. And on the other hand mankind appears to be such a necessary and
indestructible force of nature that it has always, hitherto, not only
survived the most desperate ordeals, but succeeded in benefiting by them
and emerging greater and stronger than before.


2

We know that peace is better than war; it were madness to compare the
two. We know that, if this cataclysm let loose by an act of unutterable
folly had not come upon the world, mankind would doubtless have reached
ere long a zenith of wonderful achievement whose manifestations it is
impossible to foreshadow. We know that, if a third or a fourth part of
the fabulous sums expended on extermination and destruction had been
devoted to works of peace, all the iniquities that poison the air we
breathe would have been triumphantly redressed and that the social
question, the one great question, that matter of life and death which
justice demands that posterity should face, would have found its definite
solution, once and for all, in a happiness which now perhaps even our
sons and grandsons will not realize. We know that the disappearance
of two or three million young existences, cut down when they were on
the point of bearing fruit, will leave in history a void that will not
be easily filled, even as we know that among those dead were mighty
intellects, treasures of genius which will not come back again and which
contained inventions and discoveries that will now perhaps be lost to us
for centuries. We know that we shall never grasp the consequences of this
thrusting back of progress and of this unprecedented devastation. But,
granting all this, it is a good thing to recover our balance and stand
upon our feet. There is no irreparable loss. Everything is transformed,
nothing perishes and that which seems to be hurled into destruction is
not destroyed at all. Our moral world, even as our physical world, is
a vast but hermetically-sealed sphere, whence naught can issue, whence
naught can fall to be dissolved in space. All that exists, all that comes
into being upon this earth remains there and bears fruit; and the most
appalling wastage is but material or spiritual riches flung away for an
instant, to fall to the ground again in a new form. There is no escape or
leakage, no filtering through cracks, no missing the mark, not even waste
or neglect. All this heroism poured out on every side does not leave our
planet; and the reason why the courage of our fighters seems so general
and yet so extraordinary is that all the might of the dead has passed
into those who survive. All those forces of wisdom, patience, honour and
self-sacrifice which increase day by day and which we ourselves, who
are far from the field of danger, feel rising within us without knowing
whence they come are nothing but the souls of the heroes gathered and
absorbed by our own souls.


3

It is well at times to contemplate invisible things as though we saw them
with our eyes. This was the aim of all the great religions, when they
but represented under forms appropriate to the manners of their day the
latent deep, instinctive truths, the general and essential truths which
are the guiding principles of mankind. All have felt and recognized that
loftiest of all truths, the communion of the living and the dead, and
have given it various names designating the same mysterious verity: the
Christians know it as revival of merit, the Buddhists as reincarnation,
or transmigration of souls, and the Japanese as Shintoism, or
ancestor-worship. The last are more fully convinced than any other nation
that the dead do not cease to live and that they direct our actions, are
exalted by our virtues and become gods.

Lafcadio Hearn, the writer who has most closely studied and understood
that wonderful ancestor-worship, says:

“One of the surprises of our future will certainly be a return to beliefs
and ideas long ago abandoned upon the mere assumption that they contained
no truth—beliefs still called barbarous, pagan, mediæval, by those who
condemn them out of traditional habit. Year after year the researches of
science afford us new proof that the savage, the barbarian, the idolater,
the monk, each and all have arrived, by different paths, as near to some
one point of eternal truth as any thinker of the nineteenth century. We
are now learning, also, that the theories of the astrologers and of the
alchemists were but partially, not totally, wrong. We have reason even to
suppose that no dream of the invisible world has ever been dreamed,—that
no hypothesis of the unseen has ever been imagined,—which future science
will not prove to have contained some germ of reality.”[28]

There are many things which might be added to these lines, notably
all that the most recent of our sciences, metaphysics, is engaged
in discovering with regard to the miraculous faculties of our
subconsciousness.


4

But, to return more directly to what we were saying, was it not observed
that, after the great battles of the Napoleonic era, the birth-rate
increased in an extraordinary manner, as though the lives suddenly cut
short in their prime were not really dead and were eager to be back again
in our midst and complete their career? If we could follow with our eyes
all that is happening in the spiritual world that rises above us on every
side, we should no doubt see that it is the same with the moral force
that seems to be lost on the field of slaughter. It knows where to go,
it knows its goal, it does not hesitate. All that our wonderful dead
relinquish they bequeath to us; and, when they die for us, they leave us
their lives not in any strained, metaphorical sense, but in a very real
and direct way. Virtue goes out of every man who falls while performing
a deed of glory; and that virtue drops down upon us; and nothing of him
is lost and nothing evaporates in the shock of a premature end. He gives
us in one solitary and mighty stroke what he would have given us in a
long life of duty and love. Death does not injure life; it is powerless
against it. Life’s aggregate never changes. What death takes from those
who fall enters into those who are left standing. The number of lamps
grows less, but the flame rises higher. Death is in no wise the gainer
so long as there are living men. The more it exercises its ravages, the
more it increases the intensity of that which it cannot touch; the more
it pursues its phantom victories, the better does it prove to us that man
will end by conquering death.




