XIV

THE WAR AND THE PROPHETS


1

At the end of an essay occurring in _The Unknown Guest_ and entitled,
_The Knowledge of the Future_, in which I examined a certain number
of phenomena relating to the anticipatory perception of events, such
as presentiments, premonitions, precognitions, predictions, etc., I
concluded in nearly the following terms:

    “To sum up, if it is difficult for us to conceive that the
    future preexists, perhaps it is just as difficult for us to
    understand that it does not exist; moreover, many facts tend
    to prove that it is as real and definite and has, both in
    time and eternity, the same permanence and the same vividness
    as the past. Now, from the moment that it preexists, it is
    not surprising that we should be able to know it; it is even
    astonishing, granted that it overhangs us from every side, that
    we should not discover it oftener and more easily.”

Above all is it astonishing and almost inconceivable that this universal
war, the most stupendous catastrophe that has overwhelmed humanity since
the origin of things, should not, while it was approaching, bearing in
its womb innumerable woes which were about to affect almost every one of
us, have thrown upon us more plainly, from the recesses of those days
in which it was making ready, its menacing shadow. One would think that
it ought to have overcast the whole horizon of the future, even as it
will overcast the whole horizon of the past. A secret of such weight,
suspended in time, ought surely to have weighed upon all our lives; and
presentiments or revelations should have arisen on every hand. There was
none of these. We lived and moved without uneasiness beneath the disaster
which, from year to year, from day to day, from hour to hour, was
descending upon the world; and we perceived it only when it touched our
heads. True, it was more or less foreseen by our reason; but our reason
hardly believed in it; and besides I am not for the moment speaking of
the inductions of the understanding, which are always uncertain and which
are resigned beforehand to the capricious contradictions which they are
daily accustomed to receive from facts.


2

But I repeat, beside or above these inductions of our everyday logic,
in the less familiar domain of supernatural intuitions, of divination,
prediction or prophecy properly so-called, we find that there was
practically nothing to warn us of the vast peril. This does not mean that
there was any lack of predictions or prophecies collected after the
event; these number, it appears, no fewer than eighty-three; but none of
them, excepting those of Léon Sonrel and the Rector of Ars, which we will
examine in a moment, is worthy of serious discussion. I shall therefore
mention, by way of a reminder, only the most widely known; and, first of
all, the famous prophecy of Mayence or Strasburg, which is supposed to
have been discovered by a certain Jecker in an ancient convent founded
near Mayence by St. Hildegarde, of which the original text could not
be found and of which no one until lately had ever heard. Then there
is another prophecy of Mayence or Fiensberg, published in the _Neue
Metaphysische Rundschau_ of Berlin in February 1912, in which the end of
the German Empire is announced for the year 1913. Next, we have various
predictions uttered by Mme. de Thèbes, by Dom Bosco, by Blessed Andrew
Bobola, by Korzenicki the Polish monk, by Tolstoy, by Brother Hermann
and so on, which are even less interesting; and, lastly, the prophecy of
“Brother Johannes,” published by M. Joséphin Peladan in the _Figaro_ of
16 September 1914, which contains no evidence of genuineness and must
therefore meanwhile be regarded merely as an ingenious literary conceit.


3

All these, on examination, leave but a worthless residuum; but the
prophecies of the Rector of Ars and Léon Sonrel are more curious and
worthy of a moment’s attention.

Father Jean-Baptiste Vianney, Rector of Ars, was, as everybody knows, a
very saintly priest, who appears to have been endowed with extraordinary
mediumistic faculties. The prophecy in question was made public in 1862,
three years after the miracle-worker’s death, and was confirmed by a
letter which Mgr. Perriet addressed to the Very Rev. Dom Gréa on the
24th of February 1908. Moreover it was printed, as far back as 1872, in
a collection entitled, _Voix prophétiques, ou signes, apparitions et
prédictions modernes_. It therefore has an incontestable date. I pass
over the part relating to the war of 1870, which does not offer the same
safeguards; but I give that which concerns the present war, quoting from
the 1872 text:

“The enemies will not go altogether; they will return again and destroy
everything upon their passage; we shall not resist them, but will allow
them to advance; and, after that, we shall cut off their provisions and
make them suffer great losses. They will retreat towards their country;
we shall follow them and there will be hardly any who return home. Then
we shall take back all that they took from us and much more.”

As for the date of the event, it is stated definitely and rather
strikingly in these words:

“They will want to canonize me, but there will not be time.”

Now the preliminaries to the canonization of the Rector of Ars were begun
in July 1914, but abandoned because of the war.


4

I now come to the Sonrel prediction. I will summarize it as briefly as
possible from the admirable article which M. de Vesme devoted to it in
the _Annales des Sciences Psychiques_.[29]

On the 3rd of June 1914—observe the date—Professor Charles Richet handed
M. de Vesme, from Dr. Amédée Tardieu, a manuscript of which the following
is the substance: on the 23rd or 24th of July 1869, Dr. Tardieu was
strolling in the gardens of the Luxembourg with his friend Léon Sonrel,
a former pupil of the Higher Normal School and teacher of natural
philosophy at the Paris Observatory, when the latter had a kind of vision
in the course of which he predicted various precise and actual episodes
of the war of 1870, such as the collection on behalf of the wounded
at the moment of departure and the amount of the sum collected in the
soldiers’ képis; incidents of the journey to the frontier; the battle of
Sedan, the rout of the French, the civil war, the siege of Paris, his own
death, the birth of a posthumous child, the doctor’s political career and
so on: predictions all of which were verified, as is attested by numerous
witnesses who are worthy of the fullest credence. But I will pass over
this part of the story and consider only that portion which refers to the
present war:

“I have been waiting for two years,” to quote the text of Dr. Tardieu’s
manuscript of the 3rd of June, “I have been waiting for two years for the
sequel of the prediction which you are about to read. I omit everything
that concerns my friend Léon’s family and my own private affairs. Yet
there is in my life at this moment a personal matter, which, as always
happens, agrees too closely with general occurrences for me to be able to
doubt what follows:

“‘O my God! My country is lost: France is dead!... What a disaster!...
Ah, see, she is saved! She extends to the Rhine! O France, O my beloved
country, you are triumphant; you are the queen of nations!... Your genius
shines forth over the world.... All the earth wonders at you....”

These are the words contained in the document written at the Mont-Dore on
the 3rd and handed to M. de Vesme on the 13th of June 1914, at a moment
when no one was thinking of the terrible war which to-day is ravaging
half the world.

When questioned, after the declaration of war, by M. de Vesme on the
subject of the prophetic phrase, “I have been waiting for two years for
the sequel of the prediction which you are about to read,” Dr. Tardieu
replied, on the 12th of August:

“I had been waiting for two years; and I will tell you why. My friend
Léon did not name the year, but the more general events are described
simultaneously with the events of my own life. Now the events which
concern me privately and which were doubtful two years ago became
certain in April or May last. My friends know that since May last I have
been announcing war as due before September, basing my prediction on
coincidences with events in my private life of which I do not speak.”


5

These, up to the present, are the only prophecies known to us that
deserve any particular attention. The prediction in both is timid and
laconic; but, in those regions where the least gleam of light assumes
extraordinary importance, it is not to be neglected. I admit, for the
rest, that there has so far been no time to carry out a serious enquiry
on this point, but I should be greatly surprised if any such enquiry
gave positive results and if it did not allow us to state that the
gigantic event, as a whole, as a general event, was neither foreseen
nor divined. On the other hand, we shall probably learn, when the
enquiry is completed, that hundreds of deaths, accidents, wounds and
cases of individual ruin and misfortune included in the great disaster
were predicted by clairvoyants, by mediums, by dreams and by every
other manner of premonition with a definiteness sufficient to eliminate
any kind of doubt. I have said elsewhere what I think of individual
predictions of this kind, which seem to be no more than the reading
of the presentiments which we carry within us, presentiments which
themselves, in the majority of cases, are but the perception, by the as
yet imperfectly known senses of our subconsciousness, of events in course
of formation or in process of realization which escape the attention
of our understanding. However, it would still remain to be explained
how a wholly accidental death or wound could be perceived by these
subliminal senses as an event in course of formation. In any case, it
would once more be confirmed, after this great test, that the knowledge
of the future, so soon as it ceases to refer to a strictly personal fact
and one, moreover, not at all remote, is always illusory, or rather
impossible.

Apart then from these strictly personal cases, which for the moment we
will agree to set aside, it appears more than ever certain that there is
no communication between ourselves and the vast store of events which
have not yet occurred and which nevertheless seem already to exist at
some place, where they await the hour to advance upon us, or rather
the moment when we shall pass before them. As for the exceptional and
precarious infiltrations which belong not merely to the present that is
still unknown, veiled or disguised, but really to the future, apart from
the two which we have just examined, which are inconclusive, I, for my
part, know of but four or five that appear to be rigorously verified;
and these I have discussed in the essay which I have already mentioned.
For that matter, they have no bearing upon the present war. They are,
when all is said, so exceptional that they do not prove much; at the
most, they seem to confirm the idea that a store exists filled with
future events as real, as distinct and as immutable as those of the past;
and they allow us to hope that there are paths leading thither which
as yet we do not know, but which it will not be for ever impossible to
discover.




