XV

THE WILL OF EARTH


1

To-day’s conflict is but a revival of that which has not ceased to
drench the west of Europe in blood since the historical birth of the
continent. The two chief episodes in this conflict, as we all know,
are the invasion of Roman Gaul, including the north of Italy, by the
Franks and the successive conquests of England by the Anglo-Saxons and
the Normans. Without delaying to consider questions of race, which are
complex, uncertain and always open to discussion, we may, regarding
the matter from another aspect, perceive in the persistency and the
bitterness of this conflict the clash of two wills, of which one or the
other succumbs for a moment, only to rise up again with increased energy
and obstinacy. On the one hand is the will of earth or nature, which,
in the human species as in all others, openly favours brute or physical
force; and on the other hand is the will of humanity, or at least of a
portion of humanity, which seeks to establish the empire of other more
subtle and less animal forces. It is incontestable that hitherto the
former has always won the day. But it is equally incontestable that
its victory has always been only apparent and of brief duration. It
has regularly suffered defeat in its very triumph. Gaul, invaded and
overrun, presently absorbs her victor, even as England little by little
transforms her conquerors. On the morrow of victory, the instruments
of the will of earth turn upon her and arm the hand of the vanquished.
It is probable that the same phenomenon would recur once more to-day,
were events to follow the course prescribed by destiny. Germany, after
crushing and enslaving the greater part of Europe, after driving her back
and burdening her with innumerable woes, would end by turning against the
will which she represents; and that will, which until to-day had always
found in this race a docile tool and its favourite accomplices, would be
forced to seek these elsewhere, a task less easy than of old.


2

But now, to the amazement of all those who will one day consider them in
cold blood, events are suddenly ascending the irresistible current and,
for the first time since we have been in a position to observe it, the
adverse will is encountering an unexpected and insurmountable resistance.
If this resistance, as we can now no longer doubt, maintains itself
victoriously to the end, there will never perhaps have been such a sudden
change in the history of mankind; for man will have gained, over the will
of earth or nature or fatality, a triumph infinitely more significant,
more heavily fraught with consequences and perhaps more decisive than
all those which, in other provinces, appear to have crowned his efforts
more brilliantly.

Let us not then be surprised that this resistance should be stupendous,
or that it should be prolonged beyond anything that our experience of
wars has taught us to expect. It was our prompt and easy defeat that
was written in the annals of destiny. We had against us all the forces
accumulated since the birth of Europe. We have to set history revolving
in the reverse direction. We are on the point of succeeding; and, if it
be true that intelligent beings watch us from the vantage-point of other
worlds, they will assuredly witness the most curious spectacle that our
planet has offered them since they discovered it amid the dust of stars
that glitters in space around it. They must be telling themselves in
amazement that the ancient and fundamental laws of earth are suddenly
being transgressed.


3

Suddenly? That is going too far. This transgression of a lower law,
which was no longer of the stature of mankind, had been preparing for a
very long time; but it was within an ace of being hideously punished.
It succeeded only by the aid of a part of those who formerly swelled
the great wave which they are to-day resisting by our side, as though
something in the history of the world or the plans of destiny had
altered; or rather as though we ourselves had at last succeeded in
altering that something and in modifying laws to which until this day we
were wholly subject.

But it must not be thought that the conflict will end with the victory.
The deep-seated forces of earth will not be at once disarmed; for a
long time to come the invisible war will be waged under the reign of
peace. If we are not careful, victory may even be more disastrous to
us than defeat. For defeat, indeed, like previous defeats, would have
been merely a victory postponed. It would have absorbed, exhausted,
dispersed the enemy, by scattering him about the world, whereas our
victory will bring upon us a twofold peril. It will leave the enemy
in a state of savage isolation in which, thrown back upon himself,
cramped, purified by misfortune and poverty, he will secretly reinforce
his formidable virtues, while we, for our part, no longer held in check
by his unbearable but salutary menace, will give rein to failings and
vices which sooner or later will place us at his mercy. Before thinking
of peace, then, we must make sure of the future and render it powerless
to injure us. We cannot take too many precautions, for we are setting
ourselves against the manifest desire of the power that bears us.

This is why our efforts are difficult and worthy of praise. We are
setting ourselves—we cannot too often repeat it—against the will of
earth. Our enemies are urged forward by a force that drives us back.
They are marching with nature, whereas we are striving against the great
current that sweeps the globe. The earth has an idea, which is no longer
ours. She remains convinced that man is an animal in all things like
other animals. She has not yet observed that he is withdrawing himself
from the herd. She does not yet know that he has climbed her highest
mountain-peaks. She has not yet heard tell of justice, pity, loyalty
and honour; she does not realize what they are, or confounds them with
weakness, clumsiness, fear and stupidity. She has stopped short at
the original certitudes which were indispensable to the beginnings of
life. She is lagging behind us; and the interval that divides us is
rapidly increasing. She thinks less quickly; she has not yet had time
to understand us. Moreover, she does not reckon as we do; and for her
the centuries are less than our years. She is slow because she is almost
eternal, while we are prompt because we have not many hours before us.
It may be that one day her thought will overtake ours; in the meantime,
we have to vindicate our advance and to prove to ourselves, as we are
beginning to do, that it is lawful to be in the right as against her,
that our advance is not fatal and that it is possible to maintain it.


4

For it is becoming difficult to argue that earth or nature is always
right and that those who do not blindly follow earth’s impulses are
necessarily doomed to perish. We have learned to observe her more
attentively and we have won the right to judge her. We have discovered
that, far from being infallible, she is continually making mistakes.
She gropes and hesitates. She does not know precisely what she wants.
She begins by making stupendous blunders. She first peoples the world
with uncouth and incoherent monsters, not one of which is capable of
living; these all disappear. Gradually she acquires, at the cost of
the life which she creates, an experience that is the cruel fruit of
the immeasurable suffering which she unfeelingly inflicts. At last she
grows wiser, curbs and amends herself, corrects herself, returns upon
her footsteps, repairs her errors, expending her best energies and her
highest intelligence upon the correction. It is incontestable that she is
improving her methods, that she is more skilful, more prudent and less
extravagant than at the outset. And yet the fact remains that, in every
department of life, in every organism, down to our own bodies, there is a
survival of bad workmanship, of twofold functions, of oversights, changes
of intention, absurdities, useless complications and meaningless waste.
We therefore have no reason to believe that our enemies are in the right
because earth is with them. Earth does not possess the truth any more
than we do. She seeks it, as do we, and discovers it no more readily.
She seems to know no more than we whither she is going or whither she is
being led by that which leads all things.

We must not listen to her without enquiry; and we need not distress
ourselves or despair because we are not of her opinion. We are not
dealing with an infallible and unchangeable wisdom, to oppose which in
our thoughts would be madness. We are actually proving to her that it is
she who is in fault; that man’s reason for existence is loftier than that
which she provisionally assigned to him; that he is already outstripping
all that she foresaw; and that she does wrong to delay his advance.
She is, indeed, full of goodwill, is able on occasion to recognize
her mistakes and to obviate their disastrous results and by no means
takes refuge in majestic and inflexible self-conceit. If we are able to
persevere, we shall be able to convince her. Much time will be needed,
for, I repeat, she is slow, though in no wise obstinate. Much time will
be needed because a very long future is in question, a very great change
and the most important victory that man has ever hoped to win.




