X

ON RE-READING THUCYDIDES


1

At moments above all when history is in the making, in these times when
great and as yet incomplete pages are being traced, pages by the side
of which all that had already been written will pale, it is a good and
salutary thing to turn to the past in search of instruction, warning
and encouragement. In this respect, the unwearying and implacable war
which Athens kept up against Sparta for twenty-seven years, with the
hegemony of Greece for a stake, presents more than one analogy with that
which we ourselves are waging and teaches lessons that should make us
reflect. The counsels which it gives us are all the more precious, all
the more striking or profound inasmuch as the war is narrated to us by
a man who remains, with Tacitus, despite the striving of the centuries,
the progress of life and all the opportunities of doing better, the
greatest historian that the earth has ever known. Thucydides is in fact
the supreme historian, at the same time swift and detailed, scrupulously
sifting his evidence but giving free play to intuition, setting forth
none but incontestable facts, yet divining the most secret intentions and
embracing at a glance all the present and future political consequences
of the events which he relates. He is withal one of the most perfect
writers, one of the most admirable artists in the literature of mankind;
and from this point of view, in an entirely different and almost
antagonistic world, he has not an equal save Tacitus.

But Tacitus is before everything a wonderful tragic poet, a painter of
foul abysses, of fire and blood, who can lay bare the souls of monsters
and their crimes, whereas Thucydides is above all a great political
moralist, a statesman endowed with extraordinary perspicacity, a painter
of the open air and of a free state, who portrays the minds of those
sane, ingenious, subtle, generous and marvellously intelligent men
who peopled ancient Greece. The one piles on the gloom with a lavish
hand, gathers dark shadows which he pierces at each sentence with
lightning-flashes, but remains sombre and oppressed on the very summits,
whereas the other condenses nothing but light, groups together judgments
that are so many radiant sheaves and remains luminous and breathes freely
in the very depths. The first is passionate, violent, fierce, indignant,
bitter, sincerely but pitilessly unjust and all made up of magnificent
animosities; the second is always even, always at the same high level,
which is that which the noblest endeavour of human reason can attain. He
has no passion but a passion for the public weal, for justice, glory and
intelligence. It is as though all his work were spread out in the blue
sky; and even his famous picture of the plague of Athens seems covered
with sunshine.


2

But there is no need to follow up this parallel, which is not my object.
I will not dwell any longer—though perhaps I may return to them one
day—upon the lessons which we might derive from that Peloponnesian War,
in which the position of Athens towards Lacedæmon provides more than one
point of comparison with that of France towards Germany. True, we do
not there see, as in our own case, civilized nations fighting a morally
barbarian people: it was a contest between Greeks and Greeks, displaying,
however, in the same physical race two different and incompatible
spirits. Athens stood for human life in its happiest development,
gracious, cheerful and peaceful. She took no serious interest except in
the happiness, the imponderous riches, the innocent and perfect beauties,
the sweet leisures, the glories and the arts of peace. When she went to
war, it was as though in play, with the smile still on her face, looking
upon it as a more violent pleasure than the rest, or as a duty joyfully
accepted. She bound herself down to no discipline, she was never ready,
she improvised everything at the last moment, having, “with habits not
of labour but of ease and courage not of art but of nature,” as Pericles
said, “the double advantage of escaping the experience of hardships in
anticipation and of facing them in the hour of need as fearlessly as
those who are never free from them.”[27]

For Sparta, on the other hand, life was nothing but endless work, an
incessant strain, having no other objective than war. She was gloomy,
austere, strict, morose, almost ascetic, an enemy to everything that
excuses man’s presence on this earth, a nation of spoilers, looters,
incendiaries and devastators, a nest of wasps beside a swarm of bees,
a perpetual menace and danger to everything around her, as hard upon
herself as upon others and boasting an ideal which may appear lofty if
it be man’s ideal to be unhappy and the contented slave of unrelenting
discipline. On the other hand, she differed entirely from those whom we
are now fighting in that she was generally honest, loyal and upright and
showed a certain respect for the gods and their temples, for treaties and
for international law. It is none the less true that, if she had from the
beginning reigned alone or without encountering a long resistance, Hellas
would never have been the Hellas that we know. She would have left in
history but a precarious trace of useless warlike virtues and of minor
combats without glory; and mankind would not have possessed that centre
of light towards which it turns to this day.


3

What was to be the issue of this war? Here begins the lesson which it
were well to study thoroughly. It would seem indeed as if, with the
first encounters in that conflict, as in our own, the inexplicable will
that governs nations was favourable to the less civilized; and in fact
Lacedæmon gained the upper hand, at least temporarily and sufficiently
to abuse her victory to such a degree that she soon lost its fruits.
But Athens held the evil will in check for seven-and-twenty years;
for twenty-seven summers and twenty-seven winters, to use Thucydides’
reckoning, she proved to us that it is possible, in defiance of
probability, to fight against what seems written in the book of heaven
and hell. Nay more, at a time when Sparta, whose sole industry, whose
sole training, whose only reason for existence and whose only ideal was
war, was hugging the thought of crushing in a few weeks, under the weight
of her formidable hoplites, a frivolous, careless and ill-organized city,
Athens, notwithstanding the treacherous blow which fate dealt her by
sending a plague that carried off a third of her civil population and a
quarter of her army, Athens for seventeen years definitely held victory
in her grasp. During this period, she more than once had Lacedæmon at
her mercy and did not begin to descend the stony path of ruin and defeat
until after the disastrous expedition to Sicily, in which, carried away
by her rhetoricians and bitten with inconceivable folly, she hurled
all her fleet, all her soldiers and all her wealth into a remote,
unprofitable, unknown and desperate adventure. She resisted the decline
of her fortunes for yet another ten years, heaping up her sins against
wisdom and simple common sense and with her own hands drawing tighter
the knot that was to strangle her, as though to show us that destiny is
for the most part but our own madness and that what we call unavoidable
fatality has its root only in mistakes that might easily be avoided.


4

To point this moral was again not my real object. In these days when we
have so many sorrows to assuage and so many deaths to honour, I wished
merely to recall a page written over two thousand years ago, to the glory
of the Athenian heroes who fell for their country in the first battles of
that war. According to the custom of the Greeks, the bones of the dead
that had been burnt on the battlefield were solemnly brought back to
Athens at the end of the year; and the people chose the greatest speaker
in the city to deliver the funeral oration. This honour fell to Pericles
son of Xanthippus, the Pericles of the golden age of human beauty. After
pronouncing a well-merited and magnificent eulogium on the Athenian
nation and institutions, he concluded with the following words:

    “Indeed, if I have dwelt at some length upon the character
    of our country, it has been to show that our stake in the
    struggle is not the same as theirs who have no such blessing
    to lose and also that the panegyric of the men over whom I am
    now speaking might be by definite proofs established. That
    panegyric is now in a great measure complete; for the Athens
    that I have celebrated is only what the heroism of these and
    their like have made her, men whose fame, unlike that of most
    Hellenes, will be found to be only commensurate with their
    deserts. And, if a test of worth be wanted, it is to be found
    in their closing scene; and this not only in the cases in which
    it set the final seal upon their merit, but also in those
    in which it gave the first intimation of their having any.
    For there is justice in the claim that steadfastness in his
    country’s battles should be as a cloak to cover a man’s other
    imperfections, since the good action has blotted out the bad
    and his merit as a citizen more than outweighed his demerits as
    an individual. But none of these allowed either wealth with its
    prospect of future enjoyment to unnerve his spirit, or poverty
    with its hope of a day of freedom and riches to tempt him to
    shrink from danger. No, holding that vengeance upon their
    enemies was more to be desired than any personal blessings
    and reckoning this to be the most glorious of hazards, they
    joyfully determined to accept the risk, to make sure of their
    vengeance and to let their wishes wait; and, while committing
    to hope the uncertainty of final success, in the business
    before them they thought fit to act boldly and trust in
    themselves. Thus choosing to die resisting rather than to live
    submitting, they fled only from dishonour, but met danger face
    to face and, after one brief moment, while at the summit of
    their fortune, escaped not from their fear but from their glory.

    “So died these men as became Athenians. You, their survivors,
    must determine to have as unfaltering a resolution in the
    field, though you may pray that it may have a happier issue.
    And, not contented with ideas derived only from words of
    the advantages which are bound up with the defence of your
    country, though these would furnish a valuable text to a
    speaker even before an audience so alive to them as the
    present, you must yourselves realize the power of Athens and
    feed your eyes upon her from day to day, till love of her fills
    your hearts; and then, when all her greatness shall break upon
    you, you must reflect that it was by courage, sense of duty and
    a keen feeling of honour in action that men were enabled to win
    all this and that no personal failure in an enterprise could
    make them consent to deprive their country of their valour,
    but they laid it at her feet as the most glorious contribution
    that they could offer. For by this offering of their lives made
    in common by them all they each of them individually received
    that renown which never grows old and, for a sepulchre, not
    so much that in which their bones have been deposited, but
    that noblest of shrines wherein their glory is laid up to be
    eternally remembered upon every occasion on which deed or story
    shall call for its commemoration. For heroes have the whole
    earth for their tomb; and in lands far from their own, where
    the column with its epitaph declares it, there is enshrined in
    every breast a record unwritten with no tablet to preserve it,
    except that of the heart. These take as your model and, judging
    happiness to be the fruit of freedom and freedom of valour,
    never decline the dangers of war. For it is not the miserable
    that would most justly be unsparing of their lives: these
    have nothing to hope for; it is rather they to whom continued
    life may bring reverses as yet unknown and to whom a fall, if
    it came, would be most tremendous in its consequences. And
    surely, to a man of spirit, the degradation of cowardice must
    be immeasurably more grievous than the unfelt death which
    strikes him in the midst of his strength and patriotism!

    “Comfort, therefore, not condolence, is what I have to offer
    to the parents of the dead who may be here. Numberless are the
    chances to which, as they know, the life of man is subject;
    but fortunate indeed are they who draw for their lot a death
    so glorious as that which has caused your mourning and to
    whom life has been so exactly measured as to terminate in the
    happiness in which it has been passed. Still I know that this
    is a hard saying, especially when those are in question of
    whom you will be constantly reminded by seeing in the homes of
    others blessings of which once you also boasted; for grief is
    felt not so much for the want of what we have never known as
    for the loss of that to which we have been long accustomed. Yet
    you who are still of an age to beget children must bear up in
    the hope of having others in their stead: not only will they
    help you to forget those whom you have lost, but they will be
    to the state at once a reinforcement and a security; for never
    can a fair or just policy be expected of the citizen who does
    not, like his fellows, bring to the decision the interests and
    apprehensions of a father. While those of you who have passed
    your prime must congratulate yourselves with the thought that
    the best part of your life was fortunate and that the brief
    span that remains will be cheered by the fame of the departed.
    For it is only the love of honour that never grows old; and
    honour it is, not gain, as some would have felt it, that
    rejoices the heart of age and helplessness....

    “And, now that you have brought to a close your lamentations
    for your relatives, you may depart.”

These words spoken twenty-three centuries ago ring in our hearts as
though they were uttered yesterday. They celebrate our dead better than
could any eloquence of ours, however poignant it might be. Let us bow
before their paramount beauty and before the great people that could
applaud and understand.




