XVIII

MORALITY

 Dualistic ethics--The categorical imperative--Monistic ethics--Morals
 and adaptation--Variation and adaptation--Habit--Chemistry of
 habit--Trophic stimuli--Habit in inorganic bodies--Instincts--Social
 instincts--Instinct and morality--Right and duty--Morals and
 morality--The good and the bad--Morals and fashions--Sexual
 selection--Fashion and the feeling of shame--Fashion and
 reason--Ceremonies and cults--Mysteries and sacraments--Baptism--The
 Lord's Supper--Transubstantiation--The miracle of redemption--Papal
 sacraments--Marriage--Modern fashions--Honor--Phylogeny of morals.


The practical life of man is, like that of all the social higher
animals, ruled by impulses and customs which we describe as "moral."
The science of morality, ethics, is regarded by the dualists as a
mental science, and closely connected with religion on the one hand and
psychology on the other. During the nineteenth century this dualistic
view retained its popularity especially because the great authority
of Kant, with his dogma of the categorical imperative, seemed to have
given it a solid foundation, and because it agreed admirably with the
teaching of the Church. Monism, on the other hand, regards ethics as
a natural science, and starts from the principle that morality is not
supernatural in origin, but has been built up by adaptation of the
social mammals to the conditions of existence, and thus may be traced
eventually to physical laws. Hence modern biology sees no metaphysical
miracle in morality, but the action of physiological functions.

Our whole modern civilization clings to the erroneous ideas which
traditional morality, founded on revelation, and closely connected
with ecclesiastical teaching, has imposed upon it. Christianity has
taken over the ten commandments from Judaism, and blended them with a
mystical Platonism into a towering structure of ethics. Kant especially
lent support to it in recent years with his _Critique of Practical
Reason_, and his three central dogmas. The close connection of these
three dogmas with each other, and their positive influence on ethics,
were particularly important through Kant formulating the further dogma
of the categorical imperative.

The great authority which Kant's dualist philosophy obtained is largely
owing to the fact that he subordinated pure reason to practical reason.
The vague moral law for which Kant claimed absolute universality is
expressed in his categorical imperative as follows: "So act that the
maxim (or the subjective principle of your will) may at the same time
serve as a general law." I have shown in the nineteenth chapter of the
_Riddle_ that this categorical imperative is, like the thing in itself,
an outcome of dogmatic, not critical, principles. As Schopenhauer says:

 Kant's categorical imperative is generally quoted in our day under
 the more modest and convenient title of "the moral law." The daily
 writers of compendiums think they have founded the science of ethics
 when they appeal to this apparently innate "moral law," and then
 build on it that wordy and confused tissue of phrases with which
 they manage to make the simplest and clearest features of life
 unintelligible, without having ever seriously asked themselves
 whether there really is any such convenient code of morality written
 in our head, breast, or heart. This broad cushion is snatched from
 under morality when we prove that Kant's categorical imperative
 of the practical reason is _a wholly unjustified, baseless, and
 imaginative assumption_.

Kant's categorical imperative is a mere dogma, and, like his whole
theory of practical reason, rests on dogmatic and not critical grounds.
It is a fiction of faith, and directly opposed to the empirical
principles of pure reason.

The notion of duty, which the categorical imperative represents as
a vague _a priori_ law implanted in the human mind--a kind of moral
instinct--can, as a matter of fact, be traced to a long series of
phyletic modifications of the phronema of the cortex. Duty is a
social sense that has been evolved _a posteriori_ as a result of the
complicated relations of the egoism of individuals and the altruism of
the community. The sense of duty, or conscience, is the amenability of
the will to the feeling of obligation, which varies very considerably
in individuals.

A scientific study of the moral law, on the basis of physiology,
evolution, ethnography, and history, teaches us that its precepts
rest on biological grounds, and have been developed in a natural way.
The whole of our modern morality and social and juridical order have
evolved in the course of the nineteenth century out of the earlier
and lower conditions which we now generally regard as things of the
past. The social morality of the eighteenth century proceeded, in its
turn, from that of the seventeenth and sixteenth centuries, and still
further from that of the Middle Ages, with its despotism, fanaticism,
Inquisition, and witch trials. It is equally clear from modern
ethnography and the comparative psychology of races that the morality
of barbarous races has been evolved gradually from the lower social
rules of savage tribes, and that these differ only in degree, not in
kind, from the instincts of the apes and other social vertebrates. The
comparative psychology of the vertebrates shows, further, that the
social instincts of the mammals and birds have arisen from the lower
stages of the reptiles and amphibia, and these in turn from those
of the fishes and the lowest vertebrates. Finally, the phylogeny of
the vertebrates proves that this highly developed stem has advanced
through a long series of invertebrate ancestors (chordonia, vermalia,
gastræada) from the protists by a process of gradual modification.
We find, even among these unicellulars (first protophyta, then
protozoa), the important principle which lies at the base of morality,
association, or the formation of communities. The adaptation of the
united cell-individuals to each other and to the common environment is
the physiological foundation of the first traces of morality among the
protists. All the unicellulars that abandon their isolated eremitic
lives, and unite to form communities, are compelled to restrict
their natural egoism, and make concessions to altruism in the common
interest. Even in the globular cœnobia of volvox and magosphæra the
special form and movement and mode of reproduction are determined by
the compromise between the egoistic instincts of the individual cells
and the altruistic need of the community.

Morality, whether we take it in the narrower or broader sense, can
always be traced to the physiological function of adaptation, which
is closely connected through nutrition with the self-maintenance of
the organism. The change in the plasm which adaptation brings about is
always based on the chemical energy of metabolism (chapter ix.). Hence
it will be as well to have a clear idea of the nature of adaptation. I
defined it as follows in my _General Morphology_:

 Adaptation or variation is a general physiological function of
 organisms, closely connected with their radical function of
 nutrition. It expresses itself in the fact that every organism may
 be modified by the influence of the environment, and may acquire
 characters which were wanting in its ancestors. The causes of
 this variability are chiefly found in a material correlation
 between parts of the organism and the outer world. Variability or
 adaptability is not, therefore, a special organic function, but
 depends on the material, physico-chemical process of nutrition.

I have developed this conception of adaptation in the tenth chapter of
the _History of Creation_.

The nature of the adaptation and its relation to variation are often
conceived in different ways from that I have defined. Quite recently
Ludwig Plate has restricted the idea, and understood by adaptation only
variations that are _useful_ to the organism. He severely criticises
my broader definition, and calls it "a palpable error," suggesting
that I only retain it because I am not open to conviction. If I wanted
to return this grave charge, I might point to Plate's one-sided and
perverse treatment of my biogenetic law. Instead of doing this I will
only observe that I think the restriction of adaptation to useful
variations is untenable and misleading. There are in the life of man
and of other organisms thousands of habits and instincts that are
not useful, but either indifferent or injurious to the organism,
yet certainly come under the head of adaptation, are maintained by
heredity, and modify the form. We find adaptations of all sorts--partly
useful, partly indifferent, partly injurious (the result of education,
training, distortion, etc.)--in the life of man, and the domestic
animals and plants. I need only refer to the influence of fashion
and the school. Even the origin of the useless (and often injurious)
rudimentary organs depends on adaptation.

Habit is a second nature, says an old proverb. This is a profound
truth, the full appreciation of which came to us through Lamarck's
theory of descent. The formation of a habit consists in the frequent
repetition of one physiological act, and so is in principle reducible
to cumulative or functional adaptation. Through this frequent
repetition of one and the same act, which is closely connected with the
memory of the plasm, a permanent modification is caused, either in a
positive or a negative sense; _positively_ the organ is developed and
strengthened by exercise, _negatively_ it is atrophied or enfeebled
by disuse. When this accumulation of slight changes continues, the
effect of adaptation goes so far in time as to produce new organs
by progressive modification, or to cause actual organs to become
useless and rudimentary, and finally disappear, owing to regressive
metamorphosis.

When we make a careful study of the simpler processes of habit in the
lower organisms, we see that they depend, like all other adaptations,
on chemical changes in the plasm, and that these are provoked by
trophic stimuli--that is to say, by external action on the metabolism.
As Ostwald rightly says: "The most important function of organisms
is the conversion of the various chemical energies into each other.
The chemical energy that is taken into the organism as food is not
generally capable of being applied directly to its purposes, but needs
some further preparation. Every cell is a chemical laboratory, in
which the most varied reactions take place without fires and retorts.
The most frequently employed means in this is probably the catalytic
acceleration of the usable and the catalytic retardation of the useless
reactions. As a proof of this we have the regular presence of these
enzyma in all organisms." In this the greatest importance attaches to
memory, which I regard with Hering as a general property of living
substance, "in virtue of which certain processes in the living being
leave effects behind them that facilitate the repetition of the
processes." I agree with Ostwald that "the importance of this property
cannot be exaggerated. In its more general forms it effects adaptation
and heredity, in its highest development the conscious memory." While
the latter, and consciousness in general, reach the highest stage in
the mental life of civilized man, the adaptation of the monera remains
at the lowest stage. Among the latter the bacteria especially, which
have assumed the most varied and important relations to other organisms
in spite of the simplicity of their structure, show that this manifold
adaptation depends on the formation of habits in the plasm, and is
solely based on their chemical energy, or their invisible molecular
structure. Once more the monera form a connecting link between the
organic and inorganic; they fill up the deep gulf, from the point of
view of energy, that seems to yawn between "animated" organisms and
"lifeless" bodies.

According to the prevailing view, habit is a purely biological process,
but there are processes even in inorganic nature which come under this
head in the broader sense. Ostwald gives the following illustration:

 If we take two equal tubes of thin nitric acid and dissolve a little
 metallic copper in one of them, the liquid will acquire the power to
 dissolve a second piece of the same metal more quickly than the one
 that remains unchanged. The cause of this phenomenon--which may be
 observed in the same way with mercury or silver and nitric acid--is
 that the lower oxydes of nitrogen that are formed in dissolving the
 metal accelerate the action of the nitric acid catalytically on the
 fresh metal. The same effect is produced if you put part of these
 oxydes in the acid; it then acts much more rapidly than pure acid.
 The formation of a habit consists, therefore, in the production of a
 catalytic acceleration during the reaction.

We may not only compare inorganic habit with organic adaptation, which
we call habit or practice, but also with "imitation," which implies a
catalytic transfer of habits to socially united living beings.

By instincts were formerly understood, as a rule, the unconscious
impulses of animals which led to purposive actions, and it was
believed that every species of animal had special instincts implanted
in it by the Creator. Animals were thought, according to Descartes's
view, to be unconscious machines whose actions proceed with unvarying
constancy in the particular form that God had ordained. Although
this antiquated theory of instinct is still taught by many dualistic
metaphysicians and theologians, it has long since been demolished
by the monistic theory of evolution. Lamarck had observed that most
instincts are formed by habit and adaptation, and then transmitted by
heredity. Darwin and Romanes especially showed afterwards that these
inherited habits are subject to the same laws of variation as other
physiological functions. However, Weismann has recently taken great
pains in his _Lectures on the Theory of Descent_ (xxiii.) to refute
this idea, and in general the hypothesis of an inheritance of acquired
characters, because it will not harmonize with his theory of the
germ-plasm. Ernst Heinrich Ziegler, who has recently (1904) published
a subtle analysis of former and present ideas of instinct, agrees with
Weismann that "all instincts are due to selection, and that they have
their roots not in the practice of the individual life, but in the
variations of the germ." But where else can we find the cause of these
"germ-variations" except in the laws of direct and indirect adaptation?
In my opinion, it is just the reverse; the remarkable phenomena of
instinct yield a mass of evidence of progressive heredity, completely
in the sense of Lamarck and Darwin.

The great majority of organisms live social lives, and so are united by
the link of common interests. Of all the relations which determine the
existence of the species, the chief are those which bind the individual
to other individuals of the species. This is at once clear from the
laws of sexual propagation. Moreover, the association of individuals is
a great advantage in the struggle for existence. In the case of the
higher animals this association becomes particularly important, because
it is accompanied by an extensive division of labor. Then arises the
antithesis of the personal egoism and the communal altruism; and in
human societies the opposition of the two instincts is all the greater
when reason recognizes that each has a right to satisfaction. Social
habits become moral habits, and their laws are afterwards taught as
sacred duties, and form the basis of the juridical order.

The morals of nations, so rich in psychological and sociological
interest, are nothing more than social instincts, acquired by
adaptation, and passed on from generation to generation by heredity.
An attempt has been made to distinguish between the two kinds of habit
by describing the instincts of animals as constant vital functions
based on their physical organization, and the habits or morals of human
beings as mental powers maintained by a spiritual tradition. This
distinction has, however, been excluded by the modern physiological
teaching that men's morals are, like all their other psychic functions,
based physiologically on the organization of their brain. The habits
of the individual man, which have been formed by adaptation to his
personal conditions, become hereditary in his family; and these family
usages can no more be sharply distinguished from the general morals of
the community than these can be from the precepts of the Church and the
laws of the state.

When a certain habit is regarded by all the members of a community
as important, its cultivation favored and its breach punished, it is
raised to the position of a duty. This is true even in the case of the
herds of mammals (apes, gregarious carnivora, and ungulates) and the
flocks of social birds (hens, geese, ducks). The laws which have been
formed in these cases by the higher development of social instincts
are particularly striking and equivalent to those of savage tribes
when conspicuous individuals (old or strong males) have acquired a
leadership of the troop, and successfully insure the observance of
the proper habits or duties. Many of these organized bands are in
some respects higher than the savages at the lowest stages who live
in isolated families, or only form loose temporary associations of a
few families. The great progress made by comparative psychology and
ethnology, and historical and prehistorical research, in the second
half of the nineteenth century, confirms us in the conviction that a
long scale of intermediate stages joins the rudiments of law in the
social primates and other mammals to the sense of law in the lower
savage, and this again to that of the barbarian and the civilized human
being--right up to the science of law in modern Europe.

Like civil laws, the commands of religion come originally from the
morals of the savage, and eventually from the social instincts of
the primates. The important province of mental life to which we give
the vague name of religion was developed at an early stage among the
prehistoric races from whom we all descend. When we study its origin
from the point of view of empirical psychology and monistic evolution,
we find that religion has arisen polyphyletically from different
sources--ancestor worship, the desire of personal immortality, the
craving for a causal explanation of phenomena, superstition of various
kinds, the strengthening of the moral law by the authority of a divine
law-giver, etc. According as the imagination of the savage or the
barbarian followed one or other of these lines it raised up hundreds
of religious forms. Only a few of them survived in the struggle for
existence, and acquired (at least outwardly) dominion over the modern
mind. But as independent and impartial science advances in our time,
religion is purified of superstition and turns more and more to
morality.

The obedience to the "divine commands" which religion demands of
its followers is often transferred by human society to rules that
have arisen from social customs of subordinate kinds. Thus we get
the familiar confusion of manners and morals, of conventional outer
deportment and real inner morality. The ideas of good and bad, morality
and immorality, are subjected to arbitrary definitions. In this a
great part is played by the moral pressure which is exercised by
conventional ideas in the social body on the conduct and minds of its
members. However clearly and rationally the individual thinks about the
important questions of practical life, he has to yield to the tyranny
of traditional and often quite irrational customs. As a matter of fact,
both in life and in the nature of the case practical reason does take
that precedence of pure reason which Kant claimed.

The tyranny of custom in practical life does not depend merely on the
authority of social usage, but also on the power of selection. Just as
natural selection insures the relative constancy of the specific form
in the origin of the animal and plant species, so it has a powerful
effect on the origin of morals and customs. An important factor in this
is mimetic adaptation, or mimicry, the aping or imitating of certain
forms or fashions by various classes of animals. This is unconscious in
the case of many orders of insects, butterflies, beetles, hymenoptera,
etc. When insects of a certain family come to resemble in their outer
form and color and design those of another family, they obtain the
protection or other advantages which these particular characters give
in the struggle for life. Darwin, Wallace, Weismann, Fritz Müller,
Bates, and others, have shown in numbers of instances how the origin
of these deceptive resemblances can be traced to natural selection,
and how important they are in the formation of the species. But many
customs and usages in human life arise in just the same way, partly by
conscious and partly by unconscious imitation. Of these the varying
external forms which we call "fashions" have a most important influence
in practical life. The phrase "fashion-ape," when used in a scientific
sense, is not merely an expression of contempt, but has also a profound
meaning; it correctly indicates the origin of fashions by imitation,
and also the peculiar resemblance we find in this respect between man
and his cousins, the apes. Sexual selection among the primates has a
good deal to do with this.

The great importance which Darwin ascribes in his _Descent of Man_
to the æsthetic selection of the respective sexes is equally true of
man and of all the higher vertebrates that have a feeling of beauty,
especially the amniotes (mammals, birds, and reptiles). The beautiful
coloring and marking and ornamentation which distinguish the males from
the females are due entirely to the careful individual selection of the
former by the latter. Thus the various kinds of ornamental hair (beard,
hair of head, etc.), the tint of the face, the peculiar form of the
lips, nose, ears, etc., are to be explained, as we find them in man and
the male ape; also the brilliant plumage of the humming-bird, the bird
of paradise, pheasant, etc. I have dealt fully with these interesting
facts in the eleventh chapter of the _History of Creation_, and must
refer the reader thereto. I will only point out here how valuable the
whole of this chapter of Darwinism is for the understanding of the
foundation of species on the one hand and men's fashions and customs on
the other. It is most closely connected with ethical problems.

The growth of fashion in civilized life is very important, not only for
the development of the sense of beauty and for the sexual selection
of the sexes, but also in connection with the origin of the feeling of
shame and the finer psychological traits that relate to it. The lower
savages have no more sense of shame than animals or children. They are
quite naked, and accomplish the sexual act without the slightest trace
of shame. The beginning of clothing which we find among the middle
savages is not due to a sense of shame, but partly to low temperature
(in the polar regions), partly to vanity and love of decoration (such
as ornamenting the ears, lips, nose, and sex-organs by the insertion
of shells, pieces of wood, flowers, stones, etc.). Afterwards the
sense of shame sets in, and we have the covering of certain parts of
the body with leaves, girdles, shirts, etc. In most nations the sexual
parts are the first to be covered; though some attach importance to the
veiling of the face. In many Oriental tribes (especially Mohammedan)
it is still the first precept of female chastity to veil the face (the
most characteristic part of the individual), while the rest of the body
may remain naked. Generally speaking, the æsthetic and psychological
relations of the sexes play the chief part in the higher development of
morals. Morality is often taken to be synonymous with the law of sexual
intercourse.

As the features of civilized life advance, the influence of reason
increases, and so does the power of hereditary tradition and the moral
ideas associated with it. The result is a severe conflict between the
two. Reason seeks to judge everything by its own standard, to learn
the causes of phenomena and direct practical life accordingly. On
the other hand tradition, or "good morals," looks at everything from
the point of view of our forefathers and other venerable laws and
religious precepts. It is indifferent to the independent discoveries
of reason and the real causes of things. It demands that the practical
life of every individual be framed in accordance with the hereditary
morality of the race or state. Thus we get the inevitable conflict
between reason and tradition, or science and religion, which continues
in our own day. Sometimes in the course of it a "new fashion" is
substituted for some sacred tradition, a transitory custom that
succeeds in imposing itself by its novelty or curiosity; and when this
has contrived to win general acceptance, or has gained the support of
Church or state to some extent, it is regarded in much the same light
as the older morality.

The lowest races of the present time (for instance, the pithecoid
pygmies, the Veddahs of Ceylon, the Akkas of Central Africa) are very
little higher than their primate ancestors in mental development. This
is also true of their habits of life and morals. As their ideas are for
the most part concrete and sensual, their power of forming abstract
concepts is very little developed; they have hardly any religious ideas
to speak of. But with the middle savages we begin to find the craving
to know the causes of things and the idea of spirits that are concealed
behind the phenomena of sense. Dread of these leads to worship,
fetichism, and animism, the beginning of religion. Even at this early
stage of worship we find certain customs associated with the cult to
which a symbolical or mysterious meaning is given. These ceremonies
lead on in the higher races to the great religious festivities,
which the Greeks called "mysteries." Sensual images of various kinds
are mixed up in them with supersensual ideas and superstitions. The
festivals, processions, dances, hymns, and sacrifices of all sorts that
form part of the cult are more or less concerned with the mysterious,
and are therefore considered "holy." They are often made the pretext of
sensual gratifications, which end in gross immorality and orgies.

From the older pagan and Jewish religious usages were afterwards
developed in the Christian Church those parts of the cult which are
known as sacraments. These miraculous sacraments, by the mysterious
action of which man is supposed to be born again or regenerated, very
quickly became powerful instruments in the hand of the Church and
thorny problems for theologians, especially after Gregory the Great
introduced the dogmas of Purgatory and the relieving power of the Mass.
According to St. Thomas of Aquin, the sacraments are channels that
convey the grace of God to sinful man. The papal authorities fixed
their number at seven (baptism, eucharist, penance, confirmation,
matrimony, orders, and extreme unction) in the twelfth century. The
superstitious content of these sacraments was generally lost sight
of in the glamour of their ceremonious side, but their authority was
unshaken. Since the Reformation the Protestants have retained only the
two chief sacraments which were founded by Christ himself--Baptism and
the Lord's Supper.

 Christian baptism is a continuation of the older ceremonies of
 washing and purification that were in use thousands of years before
 Christ among nations of the East and among the Greeks. They combined
 the hygienic value of the bath with the idea of a regeneration of the
 soul and spiritual purification. Augustine, who founded the dogma of
 original sin, held that the baptism of children was necessary for the
 salvation of their souls, and it then became general. It has since
 given rise to a number of superstitious ideas and unfortunate family
 troubles, but it is still regarded as a sacred ceremony. Millions of
 Christians still believe that the child's soul is saved (though it
 has no consciousness whatever when baptized) and delivered from the
 power of the devil and the curse of sin by baptism.

 The second sacrament that Luther retained is the Lord's Supper, or
 the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. It was instituted by
 Christ on the night before his death, and is a continuation of the
 paschal supper of the Jews, in which the head of the house shared
 bread and wine with his family with certain ritual ceremonies. In
 this paschal supper the people of Israel celebrated their release
 from the bondage of Egypt and their distinction as the "chosen
 people." By connecting his "last supper" with the traditional
 rite of the Jews, Christ sought on the one hand to found the new
 dispensation on the old, and on the other hand to institute a
 love-feast (communion or agape) among his followers. Like baptism,
 the Lord's Supper led afterwards to the bitterest controversy among
 theologians.

 The differences of opinion as to the Eucharist in the Middle Ages
 culminated at last in the opposition of the two reformers, Luther and
 Zwingli. The latter, the founder of the Free Reformed Church, saw
 in the Supper only a symbolical act and a commemoration of Christ.
 Luther, however, adhered to the mysterious miracle that had been
 defined in 1215 by the dogma of transubstantiation. Bread and wine
 are believed on this view to be converted physically into the body
 and blood of Christ! I was taught this in 1848 by the minister who
 prepared me for confirmation, and to whom I was greatly attached. We
 were actually to perceive this change when we assisted at the Supper
 for the first time, if we did so with real faith. As I was quite
 conscious of having this quality, I had great expectations of the
 miracle. But I was very painfully disillusioned when I found only the
 familiar taste of bread and wine, not the flesh and blood that faith
 had desired. I had to regard myself (then a boy of fourteen years) as
 an utterly abandoned sinner, and it was with the greatest difficulty
 that my parents succeeded in pacifying me over my want of faith.

 I have spoken somewhat fully in the seventeenth chapter of the
 _Riddle_ of the view of the papacy and ultramontanism which modern
 historical and anthropological science leads us to form. No one
 who has any idea of history and of the metamorphoses of religion
 can question that Romanism is a miserable caricature of primitive
 Christianity; it retains the name, but has completely reversed the
 principles. In the course of its domination, from the fourth to the
 sixteenth century, the papacy has raised up the marvellous structure
 of the Catholic hierarchy, but has departed farther and farther
 from the stand-point of pure Christianity. The aim of Romanism is
 to-day, as it was a thousand years ago, to dominate and exploit a
 blindly believing humanity. It finds admirable instruments for this
 in its mystic sacraments, to which it has ascribed an "indelible
 character." From the cradle to the grave, from baptism to the last
 anointing, in confirmation and penance, the believer must be reminded
 that he must live as an obedient and self-sacrificing child; and the
 sacrament of ordination must teach him that the priest, with his
 higher inspiration, is the only intermediary between man and God. The
 symbolical rites that are associated with these sacraments serve
 to surround them with the magic of the mysterious and exclude the
 penetration of reason. This is particularly true of the sacrament
 that has had the greatest practical influence--matrimony.

In view of the extreme importance of the life of the family as a
foundation of social and civic life, it is advisable to consider
marriage from the biological point of view, as an orderly method of
reproduction. Here, as in all other sociological and psychological
questions, we must be careful not to accept the present features of
civilized life as a general standard of judgment. We have to take
a comparative view of its various stages, as we find them among
barbarians and savages. When we do this impartially, we see at once
that reproduction, as a purely physiological process having for its
end the maintenance of the species, takes place in just the same way
among uncultivated races as among the anthropoid apes. We may even say
that many of the higher animals, especially monogamous mammals and
birds, have reached a higher stage than the lower savages; the tender
relations of the two sexes towards each other, their common care of
their young, and their family life, have led to the development of
higher sexual and domestic instincts, to which we may fitly ascribe a
moral character. Wilhelm Bölsche has shown, in his _Life of Love in
Nature_, how a long series of remarkable customs has been developed
in the animal world by adaptation to various forms of reproduction.
Westermarck has pointed out, in his _History of Marriage_, how the
crude animal forms of marriage current among savages have been
gradually elevated as we rise to higher races. As the sensual pleasure
of generation is combined with the finer psychological feeling of
sympathy and psychic attachment, the latter gains constantly on the
former, and this refined love becomes one of the richest sources of the
higher spiritual functions, especially in art and poetry. Marriage
itself, of course, remains a physiological act, a wonder of life, with
the organic sex impulse as its chief foundation. As the conclusion
of marriage represents one of the most important moments in human
life, we find it accompanied by symbolic ceremonies and festive rites
even among lower tribes. The immense variety of marriage festivals
shows how this important act has appealed to the imagination. Priests
quickly recognized this, and decked out marriage with all kinds of
ceremonies and turned it to the advantage of their Church. While the
Catholic Church raised it to the status of a sacrament and ascribed to
it an "indelible" character, it declared that it was indissoluble when
performed according to ecclesiastical rite. This unwholesome influence
of Romanism, this dependence of matrimony on religious mysteries and
ceremonies, and difficulty of obtaining divorce, etc., still continue
in our day. It is only a short time since the German Reichstag, under
the influence of the Centre [Catholic] party, added laws to its civic
code which increase instead of lessening the difficulty of obtaining
divorce. Reason demands the liberation of marriage from ecclesiastical
pressure. It demands that matrimony be grounded on mutual love,
esteem, and devotion, and that it at the same time be counted a social
contract, and be protected, as civil marriage, by proper legislation.
But when the contracting parties find (as so often happens) that they
have mistaken each other's character, and that they do not suit each
other, they should be free to dissolve the bond. The pressure which
comes of marriage being regarded as a sacrament, and which prevents the
dissolution of unhappy marriages, is merely a source of vice and crime.

We find in many other features of our social life, besides marriage,
a contradiction between the demands of reason and the traditional
usages which modern civilization has taken over as a heritage from
earlier and lower nations, and partly from barbarians and savages. In
the public life of states this contradiction is much more striking
than in the private life of the family or the individual. Whereas the
milder teaching of the Christian religion--sympathy, love of one's
fellows, patience, and devotion--has had a good influence in many
ways, there can be no question of this in the international relations
of the nations; here we find pure egoism. Every nation seeks to take
advantage of others by cunning or force, and, wherever possible, to
subjugate them: if they will not consent, the brute force of war is
employed. Social misery of all kinds spreads wider and wider, almost in
proportion as civilization develops. Alexander Sutherland is right when
he characterizes "the leading nations of Europe and their offshoots"
(in the United States) as _lower_ civilized races. In some respects we
are still barbarians.

How far the bulk of modern nations still are from the ideal and
the reign of pure reason can be seen by a glance at the social,
juridical, and ecclesiastical condition of "these leading nations
of Europe," either Teutonic or Latin. We need only consider with an
unprejudiced mind the accounts in our journals of parliamentary and
legal proceedings, government measures and social relations, in order
to realize that the force of tradition and fashion is immense, and
resists the claims of reason on every side. This is most clearly seen
externally in the power of fashion, especially as regards clothing.
There is a good ground for the complaint about "the tyranny of
fashion." However unpractical, ridiculous, ugly, and costly a new
garment may be, it becomes popular if it is patronized by authority,
or some clever manufacturer succeeds in imposing it by specious
advertisements. We need only recall the crinoline of fifty years ago,
the bustle of twenty years ago, and the exposure of the breast and
back by low dresses (with the object of sexual excitement) which was
the fashion of forty years ago.[11] For centuries we have had the
pernicious fashion of the corset, an article that is as offensive from
the æsthetic as from the hygienic point of view. Thousands of women are
sacrificed every year to this pitiful fashion, through disease of the
liver or lungs; nevertheless, the craze for the hour-glass shape of the
female form continues, and the reform of clothing makes little headway.
It is just the same with numbers of fashions in the home and in
society, of devices in commerce and laws in the state. Everywhere the
demands of reason advance little in their struggle with the venerable
usages of tradition.

A false sense of honor dominates our social life, just as a false
sense of modesty controls our clothing. The true honor of man or woman
consists in their inner moral dignity, in the determination to do only
what they conceive to be good and right, not in the outer esteem of
their fellows or in the worthless praise of a conventional society.
Unfortunately, we have to admit that in this respect we are still
largely ruled by the foolish views of a lower civilization, if not of
crude barbarians.

In many other features of our life besides this false modesty and
false honor we perceive the force of social usage. Many of what are
thought to be honorable customs are relics of barbarism; much of our
morality is, in the light of pure reason, downright immorality. As
even the latter is due to adaptation, and as the same custom may be
at one time thought useful and fitting, at another time injurious
and bad, we see again that it is impossible to restrict the idea of
adaptation to useful variations. We may say the same of the changing
rules of education, commerce, legislation, and so on. The ideal in all
departments of life is pure reason; but it has to struggle long against
the current prejudices and customs, which find their chief support in
the superstitions of the Church and the conservative tendencies of the
state. In this state of Byzantine immorality, decorating itself so
often with the mantle of piety, practical materialism flourishes, while
monism, or theoretical materialism, is thrust aside.

If we sum up all that monistic science has taught us as to the origin
and development of morality, we may put it in the following series
of propositions: 1. By adaptation to different conditions of life
the simple plasm of the earliest organisms, the archigonous monera,
undergoes certain modifications. 2. As the living plasm reacts on
these influences, and the reaction is often repeated, a habit is
formed (as in the catalysis of certain inorganic chemical processes).
3. This habit is hereditary, the repeated impressions being fixed
in the nucleus (or caryoplasm) in the case of the unicellulars. 4.
When hereditary transmission lasts through many generations, and is
strengthened by cumulative adaptation, it becomes an instinct. 5. Even
in the protist cœnobia (the cell-communities of the protophyta and
protozoa) social instincts are formed by association of cells. 6.
The antithesis of the individual and social instinct, or of egoism
and altruism, increases in the animal kingdom in proportion to the
development of psychic activity and social life. 7. In the higher
social animals definite customs arise in this way, and these become
rights and duties when obedience to them is demanded by the society
(herd, flock, people) and the breach of them punished. 8. Savage races
at the lowest stage, without religion, are not differently related to
their customs than the higher social animals. 9. The higher savages
develop religious ideas, combine their superstitious practices
(fetichism and animism) with ethical principles, and transform their
empirical moral laws into religious commands. 10. Among barbaric, and
more particularly among civilized, races definite moral laws are formed
by the association of these hereditary religious, moral, and legal
ideas. 11. In the civilized races the Church formulates the religious
commands, and jurisprudence the legal commands, in more definitely
binding forms; the advancing mind remains, however, subject in many
respects to Church and state. 12. In the higher civilized nations pure
reason gains more and more influence on practical life, and thrusts
back the authority of tradition; on the basis of biological knowledge a
rational or monistic ethic is developed.




