XVII

THE VALUE OF LIFE

 Changes of life--Aim of life--Progress of life--Historic
 aims--Historic waves--Value of life in classes and races of
 men--Psychology of uncivilized races--Savages--Barbarians--Civilized
 nations--Educated nations--Three stages of development (lower,
 middle, and higher) in each of the four classes--Individual and
 social value of civilized life in the five sections of nutrition,
 reproduction, movement, sensation, and mental life--Estimate of human
 life.


The value of human life is seen by us to-day, now that evolution is
established, in quite a different light from fifty years ago. We are
now accustomed to regard man as a natural being, the most highly
developed natural being that we know. The same "eternal iron laws"
that rule the evolution of the whole cosmos control our own life.
Monism teaches that the universe really deserves its name, and is an
all-embracing unified whole--whether we call it God or Nature. Monistic
anthropology has now established the fact that man is but a tiny part
of this vast whole, a placental mammal, developed from a branch of
the order of primates in the later Tertiary Period. Hence, before we
seek to estimate the value of man's life, we will cast a glance at the
significance of organic life generally.

An impartial survey of the history of organic life on our planet
teaches, first of all, that it is a process of constant change.
Millions of animals and plants die every second, while other millions
replace them; every individual has his definite period of life,
whether it lives only a few hours, like the one-day fly or the
infusorium, or, like the Wellingtonia, the dragon-tree of Orotava, and
many other giant trees, lives for thousands of years. Even the species,
the collection of like individuals, is just as transitory, and so are
the orders and classes that embrace numbers of species of animals and
plants. Most species are confined to a single period of the organic
history of the earth; few species or genera pass unchanged through
several periods, and not a single one has lived in all the periods.
Phylogeny, taking its stand on the facts of paleontology, teaches
unequivocally that every specific living form has only existed a longer
or shorter period in the course of the many (more than a hundred)
million years which make up the history of organic life.

Every living being is an end to itself. On this point all unprejudiced
thinkers are agreed, whether, like the teleologist, they believe in an
entelechy or dominant as regulator of the vital mechanism, or whether
they explain the origin of each special living form mechanically by
selection and epigenesis. The older anthropistic idea, that animals
and plants were created for man's use, and that the relations of
organisms to each other were generally regulated by creative design,
is no longer accepted in scientific circles. But it is just as true of
the species as of the individual that it lives for itself, and looks
above all to self-maintenance. Its existence and "end" are transitory.
The progressive development of classes and stems leads slowly but
surely to the formation of new species. Every special form of life--the
individual as well as the species--is therefore merely a biological
episode, a passing phenomenal form in the constant change of life. Man
is no exception. "Nothing is constant but change," said the old maxim.

The historical succession of species and classes is, both in the
animal and the plant kingdom, accompanied by a slow and steady
progress in organization. This is directly and positively taught by
paleontology; its creation-medals, the fossils, are unequivocal and
irrefutable witnesses to this phylogenetic advance. I have dealt with
the subject in my _History of Creation_, and at the same time shown
that both the progressive improvement and the increasing variety of
the species can be explained mechanically as necessary consequences of
selection. There was no need of a conscious Creator or a transcendental
purposiveness to effect this. Scientific and thorough proof of this
will be found in the three volumes of my _Systematic Phylogeny_ (1894).
I need only refer briefly to the two conspicuous examples we have in
the stem-history of the tissue-plants and that of the vertebrates. Of
the metaphyta the ferns are the chief groups in the Paleozoic, the
gymnosperms in the Mesozoic, and the angiosperms in the Cenozoic age.
Of the vertebrates only fishes are found in the Silurian age, dipneusta
only begin in the Devonian, and the first mammals are in the Triassic.

A number of false teleological conclusions have been drawn from these
facts of progressive modification of forms, as they are given in
paleontology. The latest and most developed form of each stem was
taken to be the preconceived aim of the series, and its imperfect
predecessors were conceived as preparatory stages to the attainment
of this aim. It was like the conduct of many historians, who, when
a particular race or state has reached a high rank in civilization
as a result of its natural endowments and favorable conditions of
development, hail it as a "chosen people," and regard its imperfect
earlier condition as a deliberately conceived preparatory stage.
In point of fact, these evolutionary stages were bound to proceed
according as the internal structure (given by heredity) and the outer
conditions (provoking adaptation) determined. We cannot admit any
conscious direction to a certain end, either in the form of theistic
predestination or pantheistic finality. For this we must substitute a
simple mechanical causality in the sense of psycho-mechanical monism or
hylozoism.

Although the stem-history of plants and animals, like the history of
humanity, shows a progressive advance taken as a whole, we find a
good deal of vacillation in detail. These historical waves are wholly
irregular; in periods of decay the hollows of the waves often persist
for a long time, and are then succeeded by a fresh rise to the crest
of another wave. New and rapidly advancing groups come to take the
place of the old decaying groups, bringing with them a higher stage
of organization. Thus, for instance, the ferns of to-day are only a
feeble survival of the huge and varied pteridophyta that formed the
most conspicuous part of the paleozoic forests in the Devonian and
Carboniferous periods; they were ousted in the Secondary Period by
their gymnosperm descendants (cycadea and conifers), and these, again,
in the Tertiary Period by the angiosperm flowering plants. So among the
terrestrial reptiles the modern tortoises, serpents, crocodiles, and
lizards are only a feeble remnant of the enormous reptile-fauna that
dominated the Secondary Period, the colossal dinosauri, pterosauri,
ichtyosauri, and plesiosauri. They were replaced in the Tertiary
Period by the smaller but more powerful mammals. In the history of
civilization the Middle Ages form a deep valley between the crests of
the waves of classical antiquity and modern culture.

These few examples suffice to show that the various classes and orders
of living things have a very different value when compared with each
other. In regard to their intrinsic aim, self-maintenance, it is true
that all organisms are on a level, but in their relations to other
living things and to nature as a whole they are of very unequal
value. Not only may larger animals and plants retain domination for a
long time in virtue of their special use or superior force and mass,
but small ones may prevail owing to their power of inflicting injury
(bacteria, fungi, parasites, etc.). In the same way the value of the
various races and nations is very unequal in human history. A small
country like Greece has almost dominated the mental life of Europe
for more than two thousand years in virtue of its superior culture.
On the other hand, the various tribes of American Indians have, it is
true, developed a partial civilization in some parts (Peru and Central
America); but, on the whole, they have proved incapable of advancing.

Though the great differences in the mental life and the civilization
of the higher and lower races are generally known, they are, as a
rule, undervalued, and so the value of life at the different levels is
falsely estimated. It is civilization and the fuller development of the
mind that makes civilization possible, that raise man so much above
the other animals, even his nearest animal relatives, the mammals. But
this is, as a rule, peculiar to the higher races, and is found only
in a very imperfect form or not at all among the lower. These lower
races (such as the Veddahs or Australian negroes) are psychologically
nearer to the mammals (apes or dogs) than to civilized Europeans; we
must, therefore, assign a totally different value to their lives. The
views on the subject of European nations which have large colonies in
the tropics, and have been in touch with the natives for centuries,
are very realistic, and quite different from the ideas that prevail in
Germany. Our idealistic notions, strictly regulated by our academic
wisdom and forced by our metaphysicians into the system of their
abstract ideal-man, do not at all tally with the facts. Hence we can
explain many of the errors of the idealistic philosophy and many of
the practical mistakes that have been made in the recently acquired
German colonies; these would have been avoided if we had had a better
knowledge of the low psychic life of the natives (_cf._ the writings of
Gobineau and Lubbock).

The grave errors that have been maintained in psychology for centuries
are mostly due to a neglect of the comparative and genetic methods and
the narrow employment of self-observation, or the introspective method;
they are also partly due to the fact that metaphysicians generally make
their own highly developed mind--a scientifically trained reason--the
starting-point of their inquiry, and regard this as representative of
the human mind in general, and thus build up their ideal scheme. The
gulf between this thoughtful mind of civilized man and the thoughtless
animal soul of the savage is enormous--greater than the gulf that
separates the latter from the soul of the dog. Kant would have avoided
many of the defects of his critical philosophy, and would not have
formulated some of his powerful dogmas (such as the immortality of the
soul, or the categorical imperative) if he had made a thorough and
comparative study of the lower soul of the savage, and phylogenetically
deduced the soul of civilized man therefrom.

The extreme importance of this comparison has only been fully
appreciated of late years (by Lubbock, Romanes, etc.). Fritz Schultze
(of Dresden) made the first valuable attempt in his interesting
_Psychology of the Savage_ (1900) to give us an "evolutionary
psychological description of the savage in respect of intelligence,
æsthetics, ethics, and religion." At the same time, he gives us "a
history of the natural creation of the human imagination, will, and
faith." The first book of this important work deals with thought, the
second with will, and the third with the religious ideas of the savage,
or "the story of the natural evolution of religion" (fetichism,
animism, worship of the heavenly bodies). In an appendix to the second
book the author deals with the difficult problems of evolutionary
ethics, supporting himself by the authority of the great work of
Alexander Sutherland, _The Origin and Growth of the Moral Instinct_
(1898). Sutherland divides humanity, in regard to the various stages of
civilization and mental development (not according to racial affinity),
into four great classes: 1, Savages; 2, barbarians; 3, civilized
races; 4, educated races. As this classification of Sutherland's not
only enables us to take a good survey of the various forms of mental
development, but is also very useful in connection with the question of
the value of life at the different stages, I will briefly reproduce the
chief points of his characterization of the four classes.

I. SAVAGES.--Their food consists of wild natural products (the fruits
and roots of plants, and wild animals of all kinds). Most of them are,
therefore, fishers or hunters. They are ignorant of agriculture and the
breeding of cattle. They live isolated lives in families or scattered
in small groups, and have no fixed home. The lowest and oldest savages
come very close to the anthropoid apes from which they have descended,
in bodily structure and habits. We may distinguish three orders in this
class--the lower, middle, and higher savages.

_A._ Lower savages, approaching nearest to the ape, pygmies of
small stature, four to four and a half feet high (rarely four and
three-quarters); the women sometimes only three to three and a half
feet. They are woolly haired and flat-nosed, of a black or dark brown
color, with pointed belly, thin and short legs. They have no homes, and
live in forests and caverns, and partly on trees; wander about in small
families of ten to forty persons; quite naked, or with just a trace of
some primitive garment. Of the lower races now living we must put in
this class the Veddahs of Ceylon, the Semangs of the Malay Peninsula,
the Negritos of the Philippines, the Andaman Islanders, the Kimos of
Madagascar, the Akkas of Guinea, and the Bushmen of South Africa. Other
scattered remnants of these ancient negroid dwarfs, which approach
closely to the anthropoid apes, still live in various parts of the
primitive forests of the Sunda Islands (Borneo, Sumatra, Celebes).

The value of the life of these lower savages is like that of the
anthropoid apes, or very little higher. All recent travellers who have
carefully observed them in their native lands, and studied their bodily
structure and psychic life, agree in this opinion. Compare the thorough
treatment of the Veddahs of Ceylon in the work of the brothers Sarasin
(of which I have given a summary in my _Travels in Ceylon_). Their only
interests are food and reproduction, in the same simple form in which
we find these among the anthropoid apes (_cf._ chapters xv. and xxiii.
of my _Anthropogeny_). Our own ancestors were probably much the same
ten thousand or more years ago. On the strength of fossil remains of
Pleistocene men Julius Kollmann has shown it to be very probable that
similar dwarf races (with an average height of four and a half feet)
inhabited Europe at that time.

_B._ Middle savages, somewhat larger and less apelike than the
preceding, averaging five to five and a half feet in height. Their
homes are rock caverns and shelters from the wind and rain. Though
they have shirts and other rudiments of clothing, both sexes generally
go naked; they have primitive weapons of wood and stone and rudely
fashioned boats, wander in troops of fifty to two hundred, and have
no social organization; certain races, however, have laws. To this
group belong the Australian negroes and Tasmanians, the Ainos of
Japan, the Hottentots, Fuegians, Macas, and some of the forest races of
Brazil. The value of their life is very little superior to that of the
preceding order.

_C._ Higher savages, mostly of average human height (smaller in colder
regions), having always simple dwellings (generally of skins or the
bark of trees). They have always primitive clothing, and good weapons
of stone, bronze, or copper. They wander in troops of one hundred to
five hundred, led by prominent but not ruling princes, and exhibiting
rudimentary differences of rank. The method of life is determined
by hereditary customs. To this group belong many of the primitive
inhabitants of India (Todas, Nagas, Curumbas, etc.), the Nicobar
Islanders, the Samoyeds, and Kamtschadals; in Africa, the negroes of
Damara; and most of the Indian tribes of North and South America. Their
life is higher than that of the pithecoid lower and middle savages, but
less than that of the barbarians.

II. BARBARIANS OR SEMI-SAVAGES.--The greater part of their food
consists of natural products, which they secure with some foresight;
hence they have developed agriculture and pasture to a greater or less
extent. The division of labor is slight, each family supplying its
own wants. As a rule, a stock of food is provided for the whole year.
As a result of this, art begins to develop. They have generally fixed
dwellings.

_A._ Lower Barbarians. Dwellings: Simple huts, generally grouped into
villages and surrounded with plantations. Clothing worn regularly, but
very simple: the men often naked in hot climates or with shirt. Pottery
and cooking utensils, tools of stone, wood, or bone. Rudiments of
commerce by exchange. Groups of one thousand to five thousand persons
able to form larger communities; distinctions of rank and warfare.
Princes rule according to traditional laws. Of this group we have
in Asia many of the aboriginal inhabitants of India (Mundas, Khonds,
Paharias, Bheels, etc.), the Dyaks of Borneo, the Battaks of Sumatra,
Tunguses, Kirgises, etc.; in Africa the Kaffirs, Bechuanas, and
Basutos; in Australasia the aborigines of New Guinea, New Caledonia,
New Hebrides, New Zealand, etc.; and in America the Iroquois and
Thlinkets, and the inhabitants of Nicaragua and Guatemala.

_B._ Middle barbarians. Dwellings good and durable, generally of wood,
roofed with cane or straw, forming fine towns. Clothing general, though
nudity is not considered immoral. Pottery, weaving, and metal-work
pretty well developed. Commerce in regular markets, with the use of
money. States ruled by kings in accordance with traditional laws,
fixed distinctions of rank, communities up to one hundred thousand
persons. To these belong in Asia the Calmucks; in Africa many negro
races (Ashantis, Fantis, Fellahs, Shilluks, Mombuttus, Owampos, etc.);
in Polynesia the inhabitants of the Fiji, Tonga, Samoa, and Markesas
islands. In Europe the Lapps belonged to this class two hundred years
ago, the ancient Germans two thousand years ago, the Romans before
Numa, and the Greeks of the Homeric period.

_C._ Higher barbarians. Dwellings, usually solid stone buildings.
Clothing obligatory, weaving habitual occupation of the women,
metal-work far advanced, tools generally of iron. Restricted commerce,
with minted money, no rudder-ships. Crude judicature in fixed courts;
rudimentary writing. Masses of people, with progressive division of
labor and hereditary distinctions of rank, sometimes reaching half a
million souls, under an autonomous ruler. To this class belong in Asia
most of the Malays (in the large Sunda Islands and the peninsula of
Malacca), and the nomadic races of Tartars, Arabs, etc.; in Polynesia
the islanders of Tahiti and Hawaii; in Africa the Somalis and
Abyssinians, and the inhabitants of Zanzibar and Madagascar. Of the
historic peoples of antiquity we have the Greeks of the time of Solon,
the Romans at the beginning of the republic, the Jews under the Judges,
the Anglo-Saxons of the Heptarchy, and the Mexicans and Peruvians at
the time of the Spanish invasion.

III. CIVILIZED RACES.--Food and complex vital needs are easily
satisfied on account of the advanced division of labor and improvement
of instruments. Art and science are consequently developed more and
more. The increasing specialization brings about a great elaboration
of individual functions, and at the same time a great strengthening of
the whole body politic, as there is complete mutual dependence. The
citizens see that they must submit to the laws of the state.

_A._ Lower civilized races. Towns with stone walls; vast architectural
works in stone; use of the plough in agriculture. War is intrusted to
a particular class. Writing firmly established, primitive law-books,
fixed courts. Literature begins to develop. To this group belong
in Asia the inhabitants of Thibet, Bhutan, Nepaul, Laos, Annam,
Korea, Manchuria, and the settled Arabs and Turcomans; in Africa the
Algerians, Tunisians, Moors, Kabyles, Tuaregs, etc. Of historical races
we have the ancient Egyptians, Phœnicians, Assyrians, Babylonians,
Carthaginians, the Greeks after Marathon, the Romans of the time of
Hannibal, and the English under the Norman kings.

_B._ Middle civilized races. Beautiful temples and palaces, built
of stone and brick. Windows come into use, and sailing-ships.
Commerce expands. Writing and written books are general; the literary
instruction of the young is attended to. Militarism is further
developed; so are legislation and advocacy. Of these we have in Asia
the Persians, Afghans, Birmans, and Siamese; in Europe the Finns and
Magyars of the eighteenth century. Of historical peoples we must count
among them the Greeks of the age of Pericles, the Romans of the later
republic, the Jews under the Macedonian rule, France under the first
Capets, and England under the Plantagenets.

_C._ Higher civilized races. Stone houses general; streets paved;
chimneys, canals, water and wind mills. Beginnings of scientific
navigation and warfare. Writing general, written books widely
distributed, literature esteemed. The highly centralized state embraces
communities of ten millions or more. Fixed and written codes of law
are officially promulgated and applied by courts to particular cases.
Numbers of government officials have settled rank. To this group belong
in Asia the Chinese, Japanese, and Hindoos; also the Turks and the
various republics of South America, etc. In history we have the Romans
of the empire, and the Italians, French, English, and Germans of the
fifteenth century.

IV. CULTIVATED RACES.--Food and other needs are artificially supplied
with the greatest ease and in abundance, human labor being replaced
by natural forces. The social organization grows and facilitates the
play of all the social forces, and man obtains a great freedom to
cultivate his mental and æsthetic qualities. Printing is in general
use, the education of the young one of the first duties. War becomes
less important; rank and fame depend less on military bravery than on
mental superiority. Legislation is influenced by representatives of the
people. Art and science are increasingly promoted by state aid.

Alexander Sutherland distinguishes three stages of development--the
lower, middle, and higher--in the fourth as well as in the preceding
classes. To the first stage he assigns "the leading nations of Europe
and their offshoots, such as the United States of North America."
For the second stage--middle cultured races--he gives a programme
that may be carried out in three or four hundred years' time, with
this definition: "All men are well fed and housed; war is universally
condemned, but breaks out now and again. Small armies and fleets of all
the nations co-operate as a sort of international police; commercial
and industrial life are directed according to the moral precepts of
sympathy; culture is general; crime and punishment rare." Of the third
and highest stage Sutherland merely says, "Too bold a subject for
prophecy, that may not come for one thousand to two thousand years
yet." This division seems to me too vague and unsatisfactory, in the
sense that it does not properly emphasize the civilization of the
nineteenth century in contrast with all preceding stages. It would
be better to distinguish _provisionally_ the following stages in
modern civilization: first, sixteenth to eighteenth century; second,
nineteenth century; and third, twentieth century and the future.

_A._ Lower cultured races (Europe, sixteenth to eighteenth century).
At the commencement of this period, the first half of the sixteenth
century, we notice the preparatory movements to the full growth of
mental life which was to achieve such great results in the following
periods: 1. The cosmic system of Copernicus (1543) maintained by
Galileo (1592). 2. The discovery of America by Columbus (1492) and of
the East Indies by Vasco da Gama (1498), the first circumnavigation
of the earth by Magellan (1520) and the evidence it afforded of the
rotundity of the earth. 3. The liberation of the mind of Europe
from the papal yoke by Martin Luther (1517) and the repulse of the
prevailing superstition by the spread of the Reformation. 4. The new
impulse to scientific investigation independently of scholasticism
and the Church and of the philosophy of Aristotle; the founding of
empirical science by Francis Bacon (1620). 5. The spread of scientific
knowledge by the press (Gutenberg, 1450) and wood-engraving. The way
was prepared for modern civilization by these and other advances in the
sixteenth century, and it quickly arose above the barbaric level of the
Middle Ages. However, it was confined at first within narrow limits, as
the reactionary civilization of the Middle Ages was still powerful in
political and social life, and the struggle against superstition and
unreason made slow progress. The French Revolution (1792) at last gave
a great impetus in practical directions.

_B._ Middle cultured races. This name may be given to the leading
nations of Europe and North America in the nineteenth century. We may
illustrate in the following achievements the great advance which this
"century of science" made as compared with all preceding ages: 1.
Deepening, experimental grounding, and general spread of a knowledge
of nature; independent establishment of many new branches of science;
founding of the cell-theory (1838), the law of energy (1845), and the
theory of evolution (1859). 2. Practical and comprehensive application
of this theoretical science to all branches of art and industry.
Especially 3. The overcoming of time and space by the extraordinary
speed of transit (steamboats, railways, telegraphs, electrotechnics).
4. Construction of the monistic and realistic philosophy, in opposition
to the prevailing dualistic and mystical views. 5. Increasing influence
of rational scientific instruction and abandonment of the religious
fiction of the Churches. 6. Increasing self-consciousness of the
nations on account of having a share in government and legislation;
extinction of the belief in the divine right of rulers. New distinction
of classes. However, these great advances, to which we children of the
nineteenth century may point with pride, are far from being universal;
they are struggling daily with reactionary views and powers in Church
and state, with militarism, and with ancient and venerable immorality
of every kind.

_C._ The higher culture which we are just beginning to glimpse will set
itself the task of creating as happy and contented a life as possible
for all men. A perfect ethic, free from all religious dogma and based
on a clear knowledge of natural law, will be found in the golden rule,
"Love thy neighbor as thyself." Reason tells us that a perfect state
must provide the greatest possible happiness for every individual that
belongs to it. The adjustment of a rational balance between egoism and
altruism is the aim of our monistic ethics. Many barbaric customs that
are still regarded as necessary--war, duelling, ecclesiastical power,
etc.--will be abolished. Legal decisions will suffice to settle the
quarrels of nations, as they now do of individuals. The chief interest
of the state will be, not the formation of as strong a military force
as possible, but the best possible instruction of its young, with
special attention to art and science. The improvement of technical
methods, owing to new discoveries in physics and chemistry, will bring
greater satisfaction of our needs of life. The artificial production of
albumin will provide plenty of food for all. A rational reform of the
marriage relations will increase the happiness of family life.

The darker sides of modern life, of which we are all more or less
sensitive, have been laid bare by Max Nordau in his _Conventional Lies
of Civilization_. They will be greatly altered if reason is permitted
to have its way in practical life, and the present evil customs, based
on antiquated dogmas, are suppressed. But, in spite of all these
shades, the luminous features of modern civilization are so great that
we look to the future with hope and confidence. We need only glance
back half a century, and compare life to-day with what it was then,
in order to realize the progress made. If we regard the modern state
as an elaborate organism (a "social individual of the first order"),
and compare its citizens to the cells of a higher tissue-animal, the
difference between the state of to-day and the crudest family groups
of savages is not less than that between a higher metazoon (such as a
vertebrate) and a cœnobium of protozoa. The progressive division
of labor, on the one hand, and the centralization of society, on the
other, prepare the social body for higher functions than in isolation,
and proportionately increase the worth of its life. To see this more
clearly, let us compare the personal and the social value of life in
the five chief fields of vital activity--nutrition, reproduction,
movement, sensation, and mental life.

The first need of the individual organism, self-maintenance, is met in
a much more perfect manner in the modern state than it was formerly.
The savage is satisfied with the raw products of nature--with hunting,
fishing, and the gathering of roots and fruits. Agriculture and
pasturage come later. Many stages of barbarism and lower civilization
must be passed before the conditions of feeding, housing, and clothing
provide a secure and comfortable existence for man, and permit the
addition of æsthetic and intellectual interests to the indispensable
search for food.

The feeding and condition of the social body as a whole have been
improved by modern civilization, just as in the case of the individual.
The progress of chemistry and agriculture has enabled us to produce
food in larger quantities. The ease and rapidity of transfer allow it
to be distributed over the whole earth. Scientific medicine and hygiene
have discovered many means of diminishing the dangers of disease and
preventing its occurrence. By means of public baths, gymnasiums,
popular restaurants, public gardens, etc., greater care is taken of
the health of the community. The arrangement of modern houses and
their heating and lighting have been immensely improved. Modern social
politics strives more and more to extend these benefits of civilization
to the lower classes. Philanthropic societies are busy supplying the
material and spiritual wants of various classes of sufferers. It is
true there is still a broad margin for the improvement of the national
well-being. But, on the whole, it cannot be denied that the provision
of food in the modern state is an immense advance upon that of the
Middle Ages and of the barbaric period.

The great value of modern civilization and its vast progress beyond
the condition of the savage is seen in no branch of physiology so
conspicuously as in the wonderful process of reproduction and the
maintenance of the species. In most savages and barbarians the
satisfaction of their powerful sexual impulse is at the same low stage
as in the ape and other mammals. The woman is merely an object of
lust to the man, or even a slave without rights, bought and exchanged
like all other property. Improvement is slow and gradual in the value
of this property, until it reaches a high guarantee of permanency in
the formal marriage. The family life proves a source of higher and
finer enjoyment for both parties. The position of woman advances with
civilization; her rights obtain further recognition, and in addition to
sensual love the psychic relation of man and wife begins to develop.
The common concern for the proper care and education of the children,
which we find to an extent even in the case of many animals, leads
to the further development of family life and the founding of the
school. With the advent of a higher stage of civilization begins the
refinement of sexual love, which finds its highest satisfaction, not in
the momentary gratification of the sex-impulse, but in the spiritual
relation of the sexes and their constant and intimate intercourse. The
beautiful then unites with the good and the true to form a harmonious
trinity. Hence love has been for thousands of years the chief source
of the æsthetic uplifting of man in every respect; the arts--poetry,
music, painting, and sculpture--have drawn inexhaustively from this
source. However, for the individual civilized human being this
higher love is of value, not only because it satisfies the natural
and irresistible sex-impulse in its noblest form, but also because
the mutual influence of the sexes, their complementary qualities and
their common enjoyment of the highest ideal good, has a great effect
upon individual character. A good and happy marriage--which is not
very common to-day--ought to be regarded, both psychologically and
physiologically, as one of the most important ends of life by every
individual of the higher nations.

As a pure marriage is the best form of family life and the most solid
foundation of the state, its high social value is at once evident. The
attraction and mutual devotion of the sexes fulfils in the highest
degree the ethical golden rule--the balance of egoism and altruism. As
Fritz Schultze very truly says in his _Comparative Psychology_

 We must not seek the causes of this altruism in the transcendental
 region of the supernatural, or in any metaphysical abstraction,
 but must go back to the very real and natural qualities of the
 organic being--and then there can be no question that the organic
 sex-impulse, at once physical and psychical is the first and enduring
 source of all love, however spiritual, and of all real ethical and
 sympathetic feelings and the morality founded thereon. There are
 two primitive instincts in all organisms: that of self-maintenance
 and that of the maintenance of the species. The one is the strong
 impulse of egoism, the other the spring of altruism: from the one
 come all unfriendly and from the other all friendly feelings. Every
 being seeks first to nourish and protect itself in virtue of its
 instinct of self-maintenance. But soon the magic of the instinct for
 the maintenance of the species works in it; it feels the sex-impulse,
 and thinks it is only satisfying its egoistic lust in yielding to
 it. In this it is wrong; it is not really serving itself, but the
 whole, the species, the genus. The ardor of love burns in it; and
 however sensual this love is at first, the new feeling is undeniably
 a feeling of belonging to another and of mutual consideration,
 looking not only to itself, but to another; not only to its own good,
 but to that of another, and finding its own good only in that of the
 other. And though this feeling at first only unites the two parents,
 it enlarges when children enter into life, and is extended to them
 in the form of parental love. Thus, out of the sex-impulse of the
 maintenance of the species, with its strong physical and psychic
 roots, is developed the love of spouses, of parents, of children,
 and of neighbor. Disinterested egoism goes even to the extent of
 sacrificing its own life for its young; in this organic and natural
 family love, and in the sense of the family that comes of it, we find
 the roots of all sympathetic and really ethical altruistic feelings;
 from this it widens out to larger spheres. Hence, the family is
 rightly held to be the chief source of all real moral feeling and
 life, not only in the human, but also in the animal world.

The further ennoblement of family life in the advance of civilization
will give fresh proofs of the truth of this appreciation.

We now turn to consider the advantages that modern civilization offers
in the way of movement in contrast to the simple methods of locomotion
of the savage. We may point out first that the earliest men, like their
ancestors, the anthropoid apes, lived in trees, and only gradually
began to run on the ground. Some of the higher savages began to use
the horse for riding and to tame it. Many inhabitants of the coast or
islands began at an early period to make boats. Later the barbaric
tribes invented the wagon, and much later again streets were paved
and vehicles improved by civilized races. But the nineteenth century
brought the invaluable means of rapid and convenient travelling by
means of steamboats and railways. The whole problem of transit was
revolutionized, and in the last few decades further vast changes have
been made owing to the advance of electricity. Modern ideas of time
and space are quite different from those of our parents sixty years
ago, or our grandparents ninety years ago. In our expresses we cover
in an hour a stretch of country that the mail-coach took five times
and the foot-passenger ten times as long to cover. As the experiments
with the Berlin electric railway have lately shown, we can now travel
two hundred kilometres in an hour. The journey from Europe to India
now takes three weeks, whereas the earlier sailing-vessel took as
many months. The immense saving of time that we make is equivalent to
a lengthening of our own life. This applies also to the more rapid
transit provided by balloons, automobiles, bicycles, etc. It is easy
to estimate the value of these improvements; but it is only fully
appreciated by those who have lived long in an uncivilized country
without roads or among savages whose legs are their only means of
locomotion.

This progress in the means of transit is not less valuable socially
than personally. If we conceive the state as a unified organism of the
higher order, the development of its means of transit corresponds in
many ways to that of the circulation of the blood in the vertebrate
frame. The easy, rapid, and convenient transport of the means of
life from the centre to the most distant parts of the land, and the
corresponding development of the net-work of railways and steamboat
routes, are to a certain extent direct tests of the degree of
civilization. To this we must add the creation of a large number of
offices which provide steady employment and means of subsistence for
many thousands.

To compare the complex sensations of civilized man with the much
simpler ones of the savage we must consider first the functions of
the outer organs of sense and then the internal sense-processes in the
cortex of the brain. Fritz Schultze has pointed out in his _Psychology
of the Savage_, in regard to both sets of organs, that the savage is
a man of sense-life, the civilized human being a man of mind-life.
When we remember that our higher psychic functions (sensation, will,
presentation, and thought) are anatomically connected with the phronema
(the thought-organ in the cortex), and the inner sense-perception
with the central sensorium (in the sense-centres of the cortex), we
shall expect to find the latter more developed in the savage and the
former in civilized man. The external sense-action is more intense in
quantity, but weaker in quality, in the savage than in civilized man;
this is especially true of the finer and more complex sense-functions
which we call æsthetic sensations and regard as the source of art and
poetry. Most strongly developed of all in the savage is the power of
perceiving distant objects (sight, hearing, smell), as they warn him of
the dangers about him. It is just the reverse with the subjective and
proximate feelings that are excited by the immediate touch of objects
and are the special instruments of sensual enjoyment--taste, sex-sense,
touch, and feeling of temperature. But in both kinds of sense-action
the civilized man is far ahead of the savage in respect of the finer
shades of feeling and æsthetic education. Moreover, modern civilization
has provided man with various means of vastly increasing and improving
the natural power of his senses. We need only mention the fields of
knowledge that have been opened to us by the microscope and telescope,
the refined chemical methods of modern cooking, etc. The finer æsthetic
enjoyment which our advanced art affords--plastic art for the eye,
music for the ear, perfumery for the nose, cuisine for the tongue--is
generally unintelligible to the savage, although he can see much
farther, and hear and smell much more acutely, than civilized man. And
in the senses of near objects (taste, touch, temperature) the senses of
the savages are more coarse, and incapable of the fine gradations of
civilized man.

This more refined sense-life and the accompanying æsthetic enjoyment
have no less social than personal value. We have, in the first place,
the incalculable treasure of modern art and science, their promotion
by the state, and their embodiment in the training of the young. In
the future the higher races are likely to give more attention to this,
training the senses of children as well as their intelligence from the
earliest years, leading them to a closer observation of nature and
reproduction of its forms by drawing and painting. The art-sense must
also be fostered by the exhibition of models and by æsthetic exercises,
a larger place must be given to artistic education along with the
acquisition of real knowledge, and an appreciation of the beauties of
nature must be created by means of walks and travels. Then the children
of civilized races will have the inexhaustible sources of the finest
and noblest pleasures in life opened to them in good time.

The higher psychic activity that civilized man calls his "mental life,"
and that is so often regarded as a kind of miracle, is merely a higher
development of the psychic function we find at a lower level in the
savage, and is shared by him with the higher vertebrates. Comparative
psychology shows us, as I have explained in the seventh chapter of the
_Riddle_, the long scale of development, which leads from the simple
cell-soul of the protist up to the intelligence of man. I have already
dealt in various chapters with this point, and need not enlarge on
it any further to estimate the high personal value of mental life in
every civilized human being. It is enough to remind the reader of
the vast treasures of knowledge that lie open to every one of us at
the commencement of the twentieth century--treasures of which our
grandparents at the beginning of the last century had not the slightest
presentiment.

Just as the individual has experienced a great advance in the value
of his personal life by the higher culture of the nineteenth century,
so the modern state itself has benefited by it in many ways. The many
discoveries made in every branch of science and technical industry, the
great advance in commerce and industrial life, in art and science, were
bound to bring about a higher development of the whole mind of a modern
community. Never, in the whole of history, has true science risen to
such an astounding height as it has at the beginning of the twentieth
century. Never before did the human mind penetrate so deeply into the
darkest mysteries of nature, never did it rise so high to a sense of
the unity of nature and make such practical use of its knowledge. These
brilliant triumphs of modern civilization have, however, only been
made possible by the various forces co-operating in a vast division of
labor, and by the great nations utilizing their resources zealously for
the attainment of the common end.

But we are still far from the attainment of the ideal. The social
organization of our states is advanced only on one side; it is very
reactionary on other sides. Unfortunately, the words of Wallace which
I quoted in the _Riddle_ remain as true as ever. Our modern states
will only pass beyond this condition in the course of the twentieth
century if they adopt pure reason as their guide instead of faith and
traditional authority, and if they come at length to understand aright
"man's place in nature."

If we take a summary view of all that I have said on the increase in
the value of human life by the progress of civilization, there can be
no doubt that both the personal and the social value of life are now
far higher than they were in the days of our savage ancestors. Modern
life is infinitely rich in the high spiritual interests that attach
to the possession of advanced art and science. We live in peace and
comfort in orderly social and civic communities, which have every
care of person and property. Our personal life is a hundred times
finer, longer, and more valuable than that of the savage, because it
is a hundred times richer in interests, experiences, and pleasures.
It is true that within the limits of civilization the differences in
the value of life are enormous. The greater the differentiation of
conditions and classes in consequence of division of labor, the greater
become the differences between the educated and uneducated sections of
the community, and between their interests and needs, and, therefore,
the value of their lives. This difference is naturally most conspicuous
if we consider the leading minds and the greatest heights of the
culture of the century, and compare these with the average man and the
masses, which wander far below in the valley, treading their monotonous
and weary way in a more or less stupid condition.

The state thinks quite otherwise than the individual man does of the
personal worth of his life and that of his fellows. The modern state
often demands for its protection the military service of all its
citizens. In the eyes of our ministers of justice the value of life
is the same whether there be question of an embryo of seven months
or a new-born child (still without consciousness), an idiot or a
genius. This difference between the personal and the social estimate
of life runs through the whole of our moral principles. War is still
believed by highly civilized nations to be an unavoidable evil, just as
barbarians think of individual murder or blood-revenge; yet the murder
of masses for which the modern state uses its greatest resources is in
flagrant contradiction to the gentle doctrine of Christian charity
which it employs its priests to preach every Sunday with all solemnity.

The chief task of the modern state is to bring about a natural
harmony between the social and the personal estimate of human life.
For this purpose we need, above all, a thorough reform of education,
the administration of justice, and the social organization. Only
then can we get rid of that mediæval barbarism of which Wallace
speaks; to-day it finds expression triumphantly in our penal laws,
our caste-privileges, the scholastic nature of our education, and the
despotism of the Church.

For each individual organism the life of the individual is the first
aim and the standard of value. On this rests the universal struggle
for self-maintenance, which can be reduced in the inorganic world to
the physical law of inertia. To this subjective estimate of life is
opposed the objective, which proceeds on the value of the individual
to the outer world. This objective value increases as the organism
develops and presses into the general stream of life. The chief of
these relations are those that come of the division of labor among
individuals and their association in higher groups. This is equally
true of the cell-states which we call tissues and persons, of the
higher stocks of plants and animals, and of the herds and communities
of the higher animals and men. The more these develop by progressive
division of labor and the greater the mutual need of the differentiated
individuals, so much the higher rises the objective value of the life
of the latter for the whole, and so much the lower sinks the subjective
value of the individual. Hence arises a constant struggle between the
interests of individuals who follow their special life-aim and those of
the state, for which they have no value except as parts of the whole.




