XIV

MENTAL LIFE

 Mind and soul--Intelligence and reason--Pure reason--Kant's
 dualism--Anthropology--Anthropogeny--Embryology of the mind--Mind of
 the embryo--The canonical mind--Legal rights of the embryo--Phylogeny
 of the mind--Paleontology of the mind--Psyche and phronema--Mental
 energy--Diseases of the mind--Mental powers--Conscious and
 unconscious mental life--Monistic and dualistic theory--Mental life
 of the mammals, of savages, and of civilized and educated people.


The greatest and most commanding of all the wonders of life is
unquestionably the mind of man. That function of the human organism,
to which we give the name of "mind," is not only the chief source of
all the higher enjoyment of life for ourselves, but it is also the
power that most effectually separates man from the brute according
to conventional beliefs. Hence it is supremely important for our
biological philosophy to devote a few careful pages to the study of its
nature, its origin and development, and its relation to the body.

At the very outset of our psychological inquiry we are met by the
difficulty of giving a clear definition of "mind," and distinguishing
it from "soul." Both ideas are extremely ambiguous: their content
and connotation are described in the most various ways by the
representatives of science. Generally speaking, we mean by mind that
part of the life of the soul which is connected with consciousness and
thought, and is, therefore, only found in the higher animals which have
intelligence and reason. In a narrower sense reason is regarded as the
proper function of mind, and as the essential prerogative of man in the
animal world. In this sense Kant especially has done much to strengthen
the prevailing conception of mental action, and has, by his _Critique
of Pure Reason_, converted philosophy into a mere "science of reason."
In consequence of this conception, which still prevails widely in
scientific circles, we will first study the mental life in the action
of reason, and try to form a clear idea of this great wonder of life.

Psychologists and metaphysicians are of very varied opinions as to
the difference between intelligence and reason. Schopenhauer, for
instance, considers causality to be the sole function of intelligence,
and the formation of concepts to be the province of reason; in his
opinion the latter power alone marks off man from the brute. However,
the power of abstraction, which collects the common features in a
number of different presentations, is also found in the higher animals.
Intelligent dogs not only discriminate between individual men, cats,
etc., according as they are sympathetic or the reverse, but they have
a general idea of man or cat, and behave very differently towards the
two. On the other hand, the power of forming concepts is still so
slight in uncivilized races that it rises but little above the mind of
dogs, horses, etc.; the mental interval between them and civilized man
is extremely wide. However, a long scale of reason unites the various
stages of association of presentations which lead up to the formation
of concepts; it is quite impossible to lay down a strict line of
demarcation between the lower and higher mental functions of animals,
or between the latter and reason. Hence the distinction between the
two cerebral functions is only relative; the intelligence comprises
the narrower circle of concrete and more proximate associations, while
reason deals with the wider sphere of abstract and more comprehensive
groups of association. In the scientific life of the mind, therefore,
the intelligence is always occupied with empirical investigation, and
reason with speculative knowledge. But the two faculties are equally
functions of the phronema, and depend on the normal anatomic and
chemical condition of this organ of thought.

Since Kant won so great a prominence in modern philosophy for the
idea of pure reason by his famous _Critique_ (1781), it has been much
discussed, especially in the modern metaphysical theory of knowledge.
It has, however, like all other ideas, undergone considerable changes
of meaning in the course of time. Kant himself at first understood
by pure reason "reason independent of all experience." But impartial
modern psychology based on the physiology of the brain and the
phylogeny of its functions, has shown that there is no such thing as
this pure _a priori_ knowledge, independent of all experience. Those
principles of reason which at present seem to be a priori in this sense
have been attained in virtue of thousands of experiences. In so far as
this is a question of real knowledge of the truth, Kant himself has
frequently recognized the point. He says expressly in his _Prolegomena
to any future metaphysic that can be regarded as Science_ (1783, p.
204): "A knowledge of things by pure reason or pure intelligence is
nothing but an empty appearance; only in experience is there truth."
In subscribing to this empirical theory of knowledge of Kant I. and
rejecting the transcendental theory of Kant II., we may on our side
understand by pure reason "knowledge without prejudices," free from all
dogma--all fictions of faith.

The familiar cry of modern metaphysicians, "Return to Kant," has become
so general in Germany that not only nearly all metaphysicians--the
official representatives of "philosophy" at our universities--but
also many distinguished scientists, regard Kant's dualistic theory of
knowledge as a necessary condition for the attainment of truth. Kant
dominated philosophy in the nineteenth century much as Aristotle did
in the Middle Ages. His authority became especially powerful when the
prevailing Christian faith believed that his "practical reason" fully
supported its own three fundamental dogmas--the personality of God, the
immortality of the soul, and the freedom of the will. It overlooked
the fact that Kant had utterly failed to find proofs of these dogmas
in his _Critique of Pure Reason_. Even conservative governments found
favorable features in this dualistic philosophy. We are, therefore,
forced to return once more to this mischievous system; though Kant's
antinomy of the two reasons has now been refuted so often and so
thoroughly that we need not dwell any further on this point.

Although the great Königsberg philosopher brought every side of
human life within his comprehensive sphere of study, man remained to
him--as he had been to Plato and Aristotle, Christ and Descartes--a
dual being, made up of a physical body and a transcendental mind or
spirit. Comparative anatomy and evolution, which have provided the
solid morphological basis of monistic anthropology, did not come
into existence until the beginning of the nineteenth century; they
were quite unknown to Kant. He had, however, a presentiment of their
importance, as Fritz Schultze has shown in his interesting work on
_Kant and Darwin_ (1875). We find in various places expressions which
may be described as anticipations of Darwinism. Kant also gave lectures
on "Pragmatic Anthropology," and studied the psychology of races and
peoples. It is remarkable that he did not arrive at a phylogenetic
conception of the human mind, and a recognition of the possibility of
its evolution from the mind of other vertebrates. It is clear that he
was held back from this by the profound mystic tendency of his theory
of reason, and the dogma of the immortality of the soul, the freedom
of the will, and the categorical imperative. Reason remained in Kant's
view a transcendental phenomenon, and this dualistic error had a
great influence on the whole structure of his philosophy. It must be
remembered, of course, that our knowledge of the psychology of peoples
was then very imperfect; but a critical study of the facts then known
should have sufficed to convince him of the lower and animal condition
of their minds. If Kant had had children, and followed patiently the
development of the child's soul (as Preyer did a century later), he
would hardly have persisted in his erroneous idea that reason, with
its power of attaining _a priori_ knowledge, is a transcendental and
supernatural wonder of life, or a unique gift to man from Heaven.

The root of the error is that Kant had no idea of the natural
evolution of the mind. He did not employ the comparative and genetic
methods to which we owe the chief scientific achievements of the last
half-century. Kant and his followers, who confined themselves almost
exclusively to the introspective method or the self-observation of
their own mind, regarded as the model of the human soul the highly
developed and versatile mind of the philosopher, and disregarded
altogether the lower stages of mental life which we find in the child
and the savage.

The immense advance made by the science of man in the second half
of the nineteenth century cut the ground from under the older
anthropology and the dualistic system of Kant. A number of newly
founded branches of science co-operated in the work. Comparative
anatomy showed that our whole complicated frame resembles that of
the other mammals, and in particular differs only by slight stages
of growth, and therefore in the details of the organs, from that
of the anthropoid apes. The comparative histology of the brain
especially showed that this is also true of the brain, the real organ
of mind. From comparative embryology we learned that man develops
from a simple ovum just like the anthropoid ape; in fact, that it is
almost impossible to distinguish between the ape and the human embryo
even at a late stage of development. Comparative animal chemistry
explained that the chemical compounds which build up our organs, and
the conversions of energy which accompany its metabolism, resemble
those in the other vertebrates. Comparative physiology taught us that
all man's vital functions--nutrition and reproduction, movement and
sensation--can be traced to the same physical laws in man as in all
the other vertebrates. Above all, the comparative and experimental
study of the sense-organs and the various parts of the brain showed
that these organs of the mind work in the same way in man as in the
other primates. Modern paleontology taught that man is, it is true,
more than a hundred thousand years old, but only appeared on earth
towards the close of the Tertiary Period. Prehistoric research and
comparative ethnology have shown that civilized nations were preceded
by older and lower races, and these by savages, which have a close
bodily and mental affinity to the apes. Finally, the reformed theory
of descent (1859) enabled us to unite the chief results of the various
branches of anthropological study, and explain them phylogenetically
by the development of man from other primates (anthropoid apes,
cynocephali, lemures, etc.). By this means a new and monistic basis
was provided for modern anthropology; the position assigned to man in
nature by dualistic metaphysics was shown to be utterly untenable. I
have attempted in the last edition of my _Anthropogeny_ (of which an
English edition is in preparation) to combine all these results of
empirical investigation in a sketch of the natural evolution of man,
paying special regard to embryology. I pointed out in chapters ii.-vi.
of the _Riddle_ how important a part of our monistic philosophy this
phylogenetic anthropology is.

The monistic conception of the human body and mind, which the theory
of descent has put on a zoological basis, was bound to meet with the
sternest resistance in dualistic and metaphysical circles. It was,
however, also regarded with great disapproval by many modern empirical
anthropologists, especially those who take it to be their chief
task to make as "exact" a study as possible of the human frame, and
measure and describe its various parts. We might have expected these
descriptive anthropologists and ethnologists to extend a friendly
hand to the new anthropogeny, and avail themselves of its leading
ideas, in order to bring unity and causal connection into the enormous
mass of empirical material accumulated. However, this took place
only to a limited extent, The majority of anthropologists regarded
evolution, and especially the evolution of man, as an undemonstrated
hypothesis. They confined themselves to accumulating huge masses of
raw empirical material, without having any clear aim or any definite
questions in view. This was chiefly the case in Germany, where the
Society of Anthropology and Prehistoric Research was for thirty years
under the lead of Rudolph Virchow. This famous scientist had won
great honor in connection with the reform of medicine by his cellular
pathology and a number of distinguished works on pathological anatomy
and histology since the middle of the nineteenth century. But when
he afterwards (subsequently to his removal to Berlin, 1856) devoted
himself chiefly to political and social questions, he lost sight of the
great advance made in other branches of biology. He completely failed
to appreciate its greatest achievement--the establishment of the
science of evolution by Darwin. To this we must add the psychological
metamorphosis (similar to that of Wundt, Baer, Dubois-Reymond, and
others), of which I have spoken in the sixth chapter of the _Riddle_.
The extraordinary authority of Virchow, and the indefatigable zeal
with which he struggled every year until his death (1903) against the
descent of man from other vertebrates, caused a wide-spread opposition
to the doctrine of evolution. This was supported especially by Johannes
Ranke, of Munich, the secretary of the Anthropological Society.
Happily, a change has recently set in. However, my _Anthropogeny_
has remained for thirty years the only work of its kind--namely, a
comprehensive treatment of man's ancestral history, especially in the
light of embryology.

As I pointed out in the eighth and ninth chapters of the _Riddle_, the
most solid foundation of our monistic psychology is the fact that the
human mind grows. Like every other function of our organism, our mental
activity exhibits the phenomenon of development in two directions,
individually in each human being and phyletically in the whole race.
The ontogeny of the mind--or the embryology of the human soul--brings
before us in direct observation the various stages of development
through which the mind of every man passes from the beginning to the
close of life. The phylogeny of the mind--or the ancestral history of
the human soul--does not afford us this direct observation; it can only
be deduced by a comparison and synthesis of the historical indications
which are supplied by history and prehistoric research on the one hand,
and the critical study of the various stages of mental life in savages
and the higher vertebrates on the other. In this the biogenetic law is
used with great success (chapter xvi.).

As everybody knows, the new-born child shows as yet no trace of mind
or reason or consciousness; these functions are wanting in it as
completely as in the embryo from which it has been developed during
the nine months in the mother's womb. Even in the ninth month, when
most of the organs of the human embryo are formed and arranged as they
appear later, there is no more trace of mind in its psychic life than
in the ovum and spermatozoon from which it was evolved. The moment in
which these sexual cells unite marks precisely the real commencement of
individual existence, and therefore of the soul also (as a potential
function of the plasm). But the mind proper--or reason, the higher
conscious function of the soul--only develops, slowly and gradually,
long after birth. As Flechsig has shown anatomically, the cortex in the
new-born child is not yet organized or capable of functioning. Rational
consciousness is even impossible for the child when it begins to speak;
it reveals itself for the first time (after the first year) at the
moment when the child speaks of itself, not in the-third person, but
as "I." With this self-consciousness comes also the antithesis of the
individual to the outer world, or world-consciousness. This is the real
beginning of mental life.

In defining the appearance of the individual mind by the awakening
of self-consciousness, we make it possible to distinguish, from the
monistic physiological point of view, between "soul" (_psyche_) and
"spirit" (_pneuma_). There is a soul even in the maternal ovum and
the paternal spermatozoon (_cf._ chapter xi.); there is an individual
soul in the stem-cell (_cytula_) which arises at conception by the
blending of the parent cells. But the mind proper, the thinking reason,
develops out of the animal intelligence (or earlier instincts) of the
child only with the consciousness of its personality as opposed to the
outer world. At the same time the child reaches the higher stage of
personality, which law has for a long time taken under its protection
and made morally responsible to society by education. This shows how
erroneous and untenable, from the physiological point of view, are the
ideas still embodied in our code as to the psychic life and the mind of
the embryo and the new-born infant. They came mostly from the canon law
of the Catholic Church.

The dualistic ideas of the soul of the human embryo which were taught
by the Church in the Middle Ages are particularly interesting from
the psychological point of view; and at the same time they are of
great practical importance even in our own day, since many of their
moral consequences form an important element in canon law, and have
passed from this into civil law. This influential canon law was formed
under ecclesiastical authority from the decisions of Church councils
and the decretals of the popes. It is, like most of the dogmas and
decrees which civilization owes to this powerful hierarchy, a curious
tissue of old traditions and new fictions, political dogmas, and
crass superstition. It is directed to the despotic ruling of the
uneducated masses and the exclusive dominion of the Church--a Church
that calls itself Christian while thus acting as the very reverse of
pure Christianity. The canon law takes its name from the dogmatic rules
(or canons) of the Church. They involuntarily suggest the metal tubes
which are so often the _ultima ratio regis_ in the wars of Christian
nations. The canonical regulations of the Church, as implements of a
crude spiritual despotism, have no more to do with the ethical laws
of pure reason than the cannons of secular authorities have as naked
organs of physical force. We might write the motto, _Ultima ratio
ecclesiæ_ (the last argument of the Church), over the sacred _Corpus
Juris Canonici_. A collection of later papal decretals which forms an
appendix to the books of canon law was very happily given the official
title of _Extravagantes_. Among the "extravagant" nonsense which the
papacy included in canon law as a moral code for believers is its view
of the psychic life of the embryo. The "immortal soul" is supposed
to enter the soulless embryo only several weeks after conception. As
theologians and metaphysicians are very much divided as to the period
of this entrance of the soul, and know nothing about the structure of
the embryo and its development, we will only recall the fact that the
human fœtus cannot be distinguished from that of the anthropoid
ape and other mammals even in the sixth week of its development. The
outline of the five cerebral vesicles and the three higher sense-organs
(nose, eye, and ear vesicle) is discernible in the head; the two
pairs of limbs can be traced in the shape of four simple roundish
unjointed plates; and the pointed tail sticks out at the lower part,
the rudimentary legacy from our long-tailed ape-ancestors. Although the
cortex is not yet developed at this stage, the embryo may be considered
to have a "soul" (_cf._ chapters xiv. and xv. of my _Anthropogeny_, and
plates 8-14).

It is said to be a great merit of canon law that it was the first to
extend legal protection to the human embryo, and punished abortion
with death as a mortal sin. But as this mystical theory of the
entrance of the soul is now scientifically untenable, we should expect
them consistently to extend this protection to the fœtus in its
earlier stages, if not to the ovum itself. The ovary of a mature maid
contains about 70,000 ova; each of these might be developed into a
human being under favorable circumstances if it united with a male
spermium after its release from the ovary. If the state is so eager
for the multiplication of its citizens in the general interest, and
regards prolific reproduction as a "duty" of its members, this is
certainly a "sin of omission." It punishes abortion with several
years' imprisonment. But while civil law thus takes its inspiration
from canon law, it overlooks the physiological fact that the ovum is
a part of the mother's body over which she has full right of control;
and that the embryo that develops from it, as well as the new-born
child, is quite unconscious, or is a purely "reflex machine," like
any other vertebrate. There is no mind in it as yet; it only appears
after the first year, when its organ, the phronema in the cortex, is
differentiated. This interesting fact is explained by the biogenetic
law, which shows that the ontogeny of the brain is a condensed
recapitulation of its phylogeny in virtue of the laws of heredity.

The biogenetic law applies just as much to the brain, the organ of
mind, as to any other organ of the human body. On the strength of the
ontogenetic facts, which fall under direct observation, we infer that
there was a corresponding development in the phylogenetic series of
our animal ancestors. A significant confirmation of this inference is
found in comparative anatomy. It shows that in all the skull-animals
(_craniota_)--from the fishes and amphibia up to the apes and man--the
brain is developed in the same way, as a vesicular distension of
the ectodermal medullary tube. This simple oval cerebral vesicle
first divides into three and afterwards five successive vesicles by
transverse constriction (_Anthropogeny_, chapter xxiv., plate 24). It
is the first of these vesicles, the cerebrum, that afterwards becomes
the chemical laboratory of the mind. In the lower craniota (fishes and
amphibia) the cerebrum remains very small and simple. It only reaches
a notably higher stage in the three chief classes of the vertebrates,
the amniotes. As these land-dwelling and air-breathing craniota have
more difficult work to do in the struggle for life than their lower
aquatic ancestors, we find much more varied and complex habits among
them. These hereditary habits are gradually converted into instincts by
functional adaptation and progressive heredity; and with the further
development of consciousness in the higher mammals we have at last
the appearance of reason. The gradual unfolding of the mental life is
accompanied step by step with the advance of its anatomic organ, the
phronema in the cortex. Recent careful investigations of the ontogeny
and histology of the origin of mind (by Flechsig, Hitzig, Edinger,
Ziehen, Oscar Vogt, etc.) have given us an interesting insight into the
mysterious processes of its phylogeny.

While the comparative anatomy of the cortex gives us a good idea
of the gradual historical development of the mind in the higher
classes of vertebrates, we get at the same time from their fossilized
remains positive indications as to the period of time in which this
phylogenesis has slowly taken place. The historical series in which the
classes of vertebrates have succeeded each other in the great periods
of the organic history of the earth is directly demonstrated by their
fossil remains--the real commemorative medals of natural creation--and
gives us a most valuable record of the ancestral history of our race
and of the mind. The oldest strata that contain vertebrate remains
form the huge Silurian System, which were, on the latest calculations,
formed more than a hundred million years ago. They contain a few fossil
fishes. In the succeeding Devonian System these are followed by the
dipneusta, transitional forms between the fishes and the amphibia. The
latter, the oldest four-footed and five-toed vertebrates, appear in
the Carboniferous Period. They are succeeded in the Permian, the next
system, by the oldest amniotes, the primitive reptiles (tocosauria).
It is not until the next period (the Triassic) that the oldest mammals
are found, small primitive monotremes (_pantotheria_), then marsupials
in the Jurassic, and the first placentals in the Cretaceans. The great
wealth of varied and highly organized forms which are contained in this
third and last sub-class of the mammals appear only in the succeeding
Tertiary Period. The numbers of well-preserved skulls which these
placentals have left behind in fossil form are particularly important,
because they give us an idea of the quantitative and qualitative
formation of the brain within the various orders; thus, for instance,
in the modern carnivora the brain is from two to four times, and in the
modern ungulates from six to eight times, as large (in proportion to
the size of the body) as in their earliest Tertiary ancestors. It is
also found that the cortex (the real organ of mind) has developed in
the Tertiary Period at the expense of the other parts of the brain. The
duration of this Cænozoic Period has lately been calculated at three
million years (according to other geologists twelve to fourteen or more
million years). It was, at all events, sufficient to make possible the
gradual development of the human mind from the lower intelligence of
our ape-ancestors and the instincts of the older placentalia.

We have given the physiological name of the "phronema," as the real
organ of mind or the instrument of reason, to that part of the cortex
on the normal anatomic condition of which the action of the human mind
depends. The remarkable investigations during the last few decades of
the finer texture of the grey cortex (or cortical substance of the
cerebrum) have shown that its structure--a real anatomic "wonder of
life"--represents the most perfect morphological product of plasm;
and its physiological function--mind--is the most perfect action of
a "dynamo-machine," the highest achievement that we know anywhere
in nature. Millions of psychic cells or neurona--each of them of an
extremely elaborate fibril molecular structure--are associated as
special thought-organs (phroneta) at certain parts of the cortex, and
these again are built up into a large harmonious system of wonderful
regularity and capacity. Each phronetal cell is a small chemical
laboratory, contributing its share to the unified central function of
the mind, the conscious action of reason. Scientists are still very far
from agreement as to the extent of the phronema in the cortex and its
delimitation from the neighboring sense-centres (sensoria). But they
are all agreed that there is such a central organ of mind, and that its
normal anatomic and chemical condition is the first requisite for the
life of the human mind. This belief--one of the foundations of monistic
psychology--is confirmed by the study of psychiatry.

The study of the diseased organism has greatly furthered our knowledge
of the normal frame. Diseases are so many physiological experiments
made by nature herself under special conditions, which experimental
physiology would often be unable to arrange artificially. The
thoughtful physician or pathologist can often obtain most important
knowledge of the function of organs by carefully observing them during
disease. This is especially true of diseases of the mind, which
always have their immediate foundation in an anatomical or chemical
modification of certain parts of the brain. Our advancing knowledge
of the localization of mental functions, or of their connection with
special phroneta or organs of thought, is for the most part based on
the experience that the destruction of the one is followed by the
extinction of the other. Modern psychiatry, the empirical science of
mental disease, has thus become an important element of our monistic
psychology. If Immanuel Kant had studied it and had visited the
asylum wards for a few months, he would certainly have escaped the
dualist errors of his philosophy. We may say the same of the modern
metaphysical psychologists who built up a mystic theory of an immortal
soul without knowing the anatomy, physiology, and pathology of the
brain.

The comparative anatomy, physiology, and pathology of the brain, in
concurrence with the results of ontogeny and phylogeny, have led
us to form the sound monistic principle that the human mind is a
function of the phronema, and that the neurona of the latter, or the
phronetal cells, are the real elementary organs of mental life. Hence
modern energism is perfectly justified in regarding mental energy
(in all its forms) from the same point of view as all other forms of
nervous energy, and in fact all manifestations of energy in organic
or inorganic nature. Fechner's psychophysics had already shown that a
part of this nervous energy is measurable and mathematically reducible
to the mechanical laws of physics (_Riddle_, chapter vi.) Ostwald
has, in his _Natural Philosophy_, lately emphasized the fact that all
the manifestations of mental life, not only sensation and will, but
even thought and consciousness, can be reduced to nervous energy.
Hence we may distinguish what are called mental forces from the other
expressions of nervous energy as _phronetic energy_. The monistic
research of Ostwald on the energy-processes in mental life (chapter
xviii.), consciousness (chapter xix.), and will (chapter xx.) is very
notable, and confirms the views I advanced in the second part of the
_Riddle_ (chapters vi., x., and xi.). Ostwald has, however, caused
some misunderstanding by insisting on substituting his idea of energy
for the pure notion of substance (as Spinoza had formulated it), and
by rejecting the other attribute of substance, matter. His supposed
"Refutation of Materialism" is a mere attack on windmills; his energism
(the consistent dynamism of Leibnitz, etc.) is just as one-sided as its
apparent opposite, the consistent materialism of Democritus, Holbach,
etc. The latter makes matter precede force; the former regards matter
as the product of force. Monism escapes the one-sidedness of both
systems, and, as hylozoism, refuses to separate the two attributes of
substance, space-filling matter and active energy. This applies to
mental life just as to any other natural process; our mental forces or
phronetic energies are just as much bound up with the neuroplasm, the
living plasm of the neurona in the cortex, as the mechanical energy
of our muscles is with the contractile myoplasm, the living muscular
substance.

In the exhaustive study of consciousness which I gave in the tenth
chapter of the _Riddle_ I sought to show that this enigmatic
function--the central mystery of psychology--is not a transcendental
problem, but a natural phenomenon, subject to the law of substance,
as much as any other psychic power. The child's consciousness only
develops long after its first year, and grows as gradually as any other
psychic function; like these, it is bound up with the normal anatomic
and chemical condition of its organs, the phroneta in the cortex.
Consciousness develops originally out of unconscious functions (as an
"inner view," or mirroring, of the action of the phronema); and at any
time an unconscious process in the cortex may come within the sphere
of consciousness by having the attention directed to it. On the other
hand, conscious actions, which need a good deal of attention when they
are first learned (such as playing the piano), may become unconscious
through frequent repetition and practice. The fact that chemical energy
is converted in the phronetal cells during any of these actions is
proved by the fatigue and exhaustion which prolonged mental work causes
in the brain, just as mechanical work does in the muscles. Fresh matter
has to be supplied by the food before the mental work can be continued.
Moreover, it is well known that various drinks have a considerable
influence on consciousness (coffee and tea, beer and wine); and the
temporary extinction of it under chloroform or ether is an analogous
fact. Again, the familiar phenomena of the dream, the deviations from
normal consciousness, hallucinations, delusions, etc., must convince
every impartial thinker that these mental functions are not of a
metaphysical character, but physical processes in the neuroplasm of the
brain, and thoroughly dependent on the law of substance.

In complete contrast to this natural monistic conception of the
human mind, which is, in my opinion, definitely established by
nineteenth-century science, we have the older dualistic estimate of
it which is still widely accepted both by unlearned and learned,
especially metaphysicians and theologians. I have already dealt in
the _Riddle_ (chapter xi.) with the grounds for this belief in an
immaterial soul, and expressed my conviction that "the belief in the
immortality of the human soul is in flagrant contradiction to the
soundest empirical principles of modern science." I must refer the
reader to what I said there about thanatism and athanatism, only
reminding him once more of the immense influence of the Kantist
philosophy in maintaining this belief in the spirituality of the
soul. Kant derived from the introspective study of his own gifted
mind an extremely high estimate of human reason, and he fallaciously
transferred this estimate to the human mind generally. He did not
perceive that it is either wholly wanting in the savage, or does not
rise much above the stage which has been reached by the intelligence of
the dog, horse, elephant, and other advanced animals.

Modern anthropogeny has raised the theory of evolution to the rank of
an historical fact. All the various organs of our body resemble those
of our nearest relatives, the anthropoid apes, in their structure and
composition. They only differ from them in details of form and size,
which are determined by inherited variations of growth. But the
functions as well as the organs have been inherited by man from his
primate ancestors. This applies to the mind also, which is merely the
collective function of the phronema, the central organ of thought.
An impartial comparison of mental life in the anthropoid ape and
the savage shows that the differences between the two are not more
considerable than the differences in the structure of their brains.
Hence, if one accepts the dualistic theory of the soul formulated by
Plato and Kant and accepted by so many modern psychologists, it is
necessary to attribute an immortal soul to the anthropoid apes and the
higher mammals (especially to domestic dogs) just as well as to savage
or civilized man (_cf._ chapter xi. of the _Riddle_).

The thorough and careful study of the mental life of the savage,
supported by the results of anthropogeny and ethnography, has in the
course of the last forty years decided the issue of this struggle
between the conflicting theories of the origin of civilization. The
older theory of degeneration, based on religious beliefs, and so
preferred by theologians and theosophists, declared that man--the
"image of God"--was created originally with perfect bodily and mental
powers, and only fell away from his high estate after the original
sin. On this view the present savages are degenerate descendants of
the first godlike men. (In tropical lands the anthropoid apes are in
similar fashion regarded by the natives as degenerate branches of
their own stem!) Although this Biblical degeneration theory is still
taught in most of our schools, and even supported by a few mystic
philosophers, it had lost all scientific countenance before the end
of the nineteenth century. It is now replaced by the modern theory
of evolution, which was represented by Lamarck, Goethe, and Herder
a century ago, and raised to a predominant position in ethnography
by Darwin and Lubbock. It has taught us that human civilization is
the outcome of a long and gradual process of evolution, covering
thousands of years. The civilized races of our time have arisen from
less civilized races, and these in turn from lower, until we reach the
savage races which show no trace of civilization.

Ethnologists distinguish as a separate class the races which are found
midway between the civilized peoples and the savages. We shall deal
with their classification and characteristics later on (chapter xvii.).
These races show some advance on the artistic instinct which we find in
a slight degree even among the savages at times; moreover, their animal
curiosity develops into human curiosity, and raises the question of the
causes of phenomena, the germ of all science.

Civilized races, which occupy the next stage to these, are raised above
them by the formation of larger states and a greater division of labor.
The specialization of the various groups of workers and the greater
ease of maintenance permit a further development of art and science. To
these groups belong, of living races, the majority of the Mongolians,
and the greater part of the inhabitants of Europe and Asia in ancient
and mediæval times. The great ancient civilizations of China, Southern
India, Asia Minor, Egypt, and afterwards of Greece and Italy, show not
only a great development of art and science, but also a concern for
legislation, religious worship, education of the young, and the spread
of knowledge by written books.

Civilization in the narrower sense, characterized by a high development
of art and science and the manifold application of them to practical
life in legislation, education, etc., was greatly advanced even in
antiquity among several nations--in Asia by the Chinese, Southern
Indians, Babylonians, and Egyptians; in Europe by the Greeks and Romans
of the classic age. However, their results were at first restricted
to narrow fields, and were mostly lost during the Middle Ages. Modern
civilization rose to importance about the end of the fifteenth century,
when the invention of printing had made possible the spread of
knowledge far and wide, the discovery of America and circumnavigation
of the globe had widened the horizon, and the Copernican system had
demolished the error of geocentricism. Then began the many-sided
growth of civilization which has reached so marvellous a height in the
nineteenth century through the extraordinary development of science.
Then at last free reason could triumph over the prevailing mediæval
superstition.




