VII

UNITIES OF LIFE

 Units of life--Simple and complex organisms--Morphological and
 physiological individuals--Morphonta and bionta--Stages of
 individuality: cell, person, stem--Actual and virtual bionta--Partial
 and genealogical bionta--Metaphysical individuals--Cells (elementary
 organisms)--Cell membranes--Unnucleated cells--Plastids (cytodes
 and cells)--Primitive cells and nucleated cells--Organella (cell
 organs)--Cell communities (cœnobia)--Tissues of histona--Systems
 of organs--Organic apparatus--Histonal individuals (sprouts and
 persons)--Articulation of the histona (metamerism)--Stems of the
 histona--Animal states.


The dissection of the body of the higher animal and plant into
its various organs soon prompted comparative anatomists to draw a
distinction between simple and complex organisms. Then, when the
cell-theory developed in the course of the last half-century, the
common anatomic groundwork of all living forms was recognized in
the cell; and the conception of the cell as the elementary organism
led to the further belief that our own frame, like that of all the
higher animals and plants, is a cell-state, composed of millions of
microscopic citizens, the individual cells, which work more or less
independently therein, and co-operate for the common purposes of the
entire community. This fundamental principle of the modern cell-theory
was applied with great success by Rudolph Virchow to the diseased
organism, and led to most important reforms in medicine. The cells are,
in his view, independent "life-unities or individual life-centres,"
and the unified life of the whole man is the combined result of the
work of his component cells. In this way the cells are the real
life-unities of the organism. Their individual independence is at once
seen in the permanently unicellular protists, of which several thousand
species are already known to us.

On the other hand, we find among the lower animals and the higher
plants a composition of homogeneous parts, which represents a higher
stage of life-unity. The tree is an individual, but it is made up of
a number of branches or individual sprouts, each of which consists
in like manner of an axial stem with leaves attached. If we detach
such a branch and plant it in the ground, it takes root and grows
into an independent plant. So the coral-stem is made up of a number
of individual animals or persons, each of which has its own stomach
and mouth with a crown of tentacles. Each several coral-individual is
equivalent to a single living polyp (actinia). Thus the stem (_cormus_)
is a higher unity, both in the animal and the plant world. Even the
herds of gregarious animals, the swarms of bees and ants, and the
communities of human beings, are similar unities; with the difference
that the individual persons or citizens are not physically connected,
but held together by common interests. We can, therefore, distinguish
three stages of organic individuality, one building upon the other--the
cell, the person (or sprout), and the stem or state (cormus). Each
higher unity represents an intimate union of lower individuals.
Morphologically, in relation to their anatomic structure, the latter
are independent; but physiologically, in respect of the life-unity of
the whole, they are subordinated to the former.

This relation is quite clear in the familiar examples I have quoted.
But there are other organisms in which this is not so, and where the
question of the real individuality is very difficult to answer.
Thus, fifty years ago, we came to recognize floating animal-stems in
the remarkable siphonophora, or social medusæ, which had hitherto
been regarded as individual animals, or medusæ with a multiplicity
of organs; further study proved that each of these apparent organs
is really a modified medusa, and the whole united structure a stem.
This example throws a good deal of light on the important question of
association and division of labor. The whole floating siphonophoron
is, physiologically considered (in respect of its vital activity), a
harmoniously organized animal with a number of different organs; but
from the morphological point of view (in respect of form and structure)
each dependent organ is really an independent medusa.

It is clear, from these few illustrations, that the question of
organic individuality is by no means so simple as it seems at first
sight, and that it receives different answers according as we look
at the form and structure (morphologically) or the vital and psychic
activity (physiologically). We must, therefore, distinguish at once
between morphological (_morphonta_) and physiological (_bionta_)
individuals. The tree and the siphonophoron are bionta, or individuals
of the highest order, made up of a number of similar branches or
persons, the social morphonta. But, when we further dissect the latter
anatomically into their various organs, and these again into their
microscopic elements, the cells, each branch or person seems to be a
bion, and their cells to be morphonta. Each multicellular organism is,
however, developed in the beginning from a single cell, the stem-cell
(cytula) or fertilized ovum; this is at once a morphon and a bion, a
simple individual both morphologically and physiologically. The whole
process of its development into a multicellular organism consists in a
repeated cleavage of the stem-cell, the resultant cells being joined
in a higher unity, and assuming different forms in consequence of the
division of work.

The complicated modern state, with its remarkable achievements, may be
regarded as the highest stage of individual perfection which is known
to us in organic nature. But we can only understand the structure of
this extremely complex "organism of the highest order," and its social
forms and functions, when we have a sociological knowledge of the
various classes that compose it, and the laws of their association and
division of labor; and when we have made an anthropological study of
the nature of the persons who have united, under the same laws, for the
formation of a community and are distributed in its various classes.
The familiar arrangement of these classes, and the settling of the rank
in the mass and the governing body, show us how this complex social
organism is built up step by step.

But we have to look in the same way on the cell-state, which is made
up from the separate individualities in human society or in the
kingdom of the tissue-animals, or the branches in the kingdom of the
tissue-plants. Their complex organism, composed of various organs and
tissues, can only be understood when we are acquainted with their
constituent elements, the cells, and the laws according to which these
elementary organisms unite to form cell-communities and tissues, and
are in turn modified in the divers organs in the division of labor. We
must, therefore, first establish the scale of the morphonta, and the
laws of their association and ergonomy, according to which the several
stages or conditions of morphological individuality build on each
other. Three such stages may be at once distinguished: (1) the cell
(or, more correctly, the plastid), (2) the person (animal) or branch
(vegetal), and (3) the stem or cormus. But we shall find that there
are further subordinate stages under each of these three. It is only
in the case of the protists that the morphological unity is bound up
with the physiological. In the case of the histona, the multicellular,
tissue-forming organisms, this is only so at the beginning of
individual existence (at the stage of the stem-cell). As soon as the
multicellular body arises from this cytula by repeated segmentation, it
is raised to the stage of a higher individuality, the cell-state.

Our own human frame is, in its mature condition, like that of all the
higher animals, a very complete cell-state, but a single cell at the
beginning of its existence. We speak of the life-unity of the former
as an actual bion, and that of the latter as a virtual bion; in other
words, the physiological individual or the life-unity has in the first
case reached the highest stage of individual development that pertains
to its species, while in the second case it remains at the lowest
stage of virtual formation, and has only the capacity of rising to
the higher stage. In the higher plants and animals only one cell of
the organism, or the two combined sexual cells (ovum and spermium),
are the potential bion which may develop into an actual one. There
are, however, exceptions. In the fresh-water polyp (hydra) and cognate
cnidaria each piece of the body-wall, in the bath-sponge (euspongia)
and similar sponges each piece of tissue, and in many plants (for
instance, marchantia among the crytogams and bryophyllum among the
phanerogams) each portion of a branch or leaf, has the power to develop
into a mature organism, and is, therefore, a virtual bion.

From these virtual bionta (parts of the body that may grow into whole
organisms) we must distinguish the partial bionta which have not this
property. These are separated parts of the body that live for a time
after being cut off from the whole organism, but then die off. Thus,
for instance, the heart of a tortoise beats for a long time after being
cut out. A flower that has been plucked may, if put in water, keep
fresh and alive for many days. In some highly organized cephalopods one
of the eight arms of the male develops into an independent body, swims
about, and accomplishes the fertilization of the female (_hectocotylus_
among the _argonauta_, _philonexis_, etc.). It was at first thought
to be an independent animal parasite. The same thing happens with
the remarkable foldlike dorsal appendages of a large naked snail
(_thetys_), which get detached and creep about. The body of many of
the lower animals may be cut in pieces and yet may live for weeks. The
life-properties of these partial bionta are important in view of the
general question of the nature of life and its apparent unity in most
of the higher organisms. As a fact, even here the cells and organs lead
their separate individual life, though they are subordinate to and
dependent on the whole.

It has been attempted to answer this question of organic individuality
in the sense of counting all organisms individuals which develop from
a single fertilized ovum. Thus, the Italian botanist Gallesio, in
1816, regarded all plants that arise by asexual generation (budding
or segmentation)--sprouts, branches, slips, bulbs, etc.--as merely
portions of a single individual that came from an egg (the seed).
So also Huxley, in 1855, considered the sum of all the animals that
have been produced by asexual propagation, but from a single sexually
generated animal, to be parts of one individual. In practice, however,
this principle is useless. We should have to say that the millions
of plant-lice which arise parthenogenetically from unfertilized
germ-cells, but are originally descended from one impregnated ovum,
are one single individual; so also all the weeping-willows in Europe,
because they all came from shoots of one single sexually-produced tree.

Many attempts have been made in the course of the nineteenth century
to give a generally satisfactory answer to this difficult question of
the content and connotation of the idea of the organic individual.
None of these has found general favor. I have compared and criticised
them in the third book of my _General Morphology_. I there paid
special attention to the views of Goethe, Alexander Braun, and Nägeli
among the botanists, and Johannes Müller, Leuckart, and Victor Carus
among the zoologists. When we consider the striking divergence of the
views of such distinguished scientists and thinkers on so important a
biological question, we can understand that opinions are still very
divided to-day. Hence we must not be too hard on the metaphysical
philosophers when--in complete ignorance of the real facts--they rear
the most extraordinary theories in their airy speculations on "the
principle of individuation". Compare, for instance, the opinions of the
school-men and those of recent thinkers such as Arthur Schopenhauer and
Edward Hartmann. As a rule, the psychological side of the problem--the
question of the individual soul--is very prominent, without much
attention being paid to its material substratum--the anatomic basis of
the organism. Many metaphysicians, who, in their one-sided anthropism,
make man here also the measure of all things, would assign personal
consciousness as the basis of the idea of individuality. It is obvious
that this is not a practicable test even for the higher animals, to
say nothing of the lower animals and plants. In these we have a far
greater variety of individuality on the one hand, and a far greater
simplicity of construction on the other. I have tried to show, in my
essay on "The Individuality of the Animal Body" (1878), the easiest way
to answer these complicated tectological questions, and to support it
by the science of structure. It suffices to distinguish the three chief
stages I have mentioned, and to explain clearly their physiological
significance on the one hand and morphological on the other. We will
therefore consider the cell first, then the person (or sprout), and,
finally, the stock (or cormus).

Ever since the middle of the nineteenth century the cell theory has
been generally and rightly considered one of the most important
theories in biology. Every anatomical, histological, physiological, and
ontogenetic work must build on the idea of the cell as the elementary
organism. Nevertheless, we are still very far from having a general
and clear agreement as to this universal and fundamental idea. On
the contrary, the ablest biologists still differ considerably as to
the nature of the cell or the elementary individual, its relation to
the whole of the multicellular organism, and so on. This divergence
of views is partly due to the intricacy of the phenomena we find in
the life of the cell, and partly to the many and extensive changes
that have been made in the meaning of the term in the course of its
employment. Let us first cast a glance at the various stages of its
history.

When in the last third of the seventeenth century a number of
scientists, especially Malpighi in Italy and Crew in England, used the
microscope for the first time in the anatomic study of plant structure,
they noticed a certain build of the tissue that closely resembled the
honeycomb. The closely packed wax cells, filled with honey, of the
hive, which show a hexagonal appearance in section, are like the wood
cells that contain the sap in the plant. It was the great merit of
Schleiden, the real founder of the cell theory, to prove that _all_
the different tissues of plants are originally composed of such cells
(1838). Theodor Schwann soon afterwards proved the same for the animal
tissues; in 1839 he extended the theory to the whole organic world.
Both these scientists regarded the cell as essentially a vesicle, the
firm membrane of which enclosed a fluid content, and a solid smaller
body inside this, which R. Brown had recognized as the nucleus in 1833.
They compared the cell, as a microscopic individual, to an organic
crystal, and thought it arose by a sort of crystallization in an
organic medium (cytoblastema); in this the central nucleus would serve
as starting-point like the nucleus of the crystal.

In the first twenty years (1839-59) of the cell theory it was a fixed
principle that there were three essential parts of the cell. Firstly,
there was the strong outer membrane, which was not only regarded as a
protective covering, but also credited with a great deal of importance
as an element in the building of the organism. In the second place,
there was the fluid or semi-fluid content (the sap); and, thirdly,
the firm nucleus enclosed in the sap. In order to give a clearer idea
of the relative thickness and disposition of these parts, the cell
was compared to a cherry or a plum. The soft flesh of this fruit
(corresponding to the cell sap) can, with difficulty, be separated from
the external firm skin or from the hard stone within. A great step in
advance was made in 1860, when Max Schultze showed that the external
membrane was an unessential and secondarily formed part of the cell.
It is, as a fact, altogether wanting in many, especially young, cells
of the animal body. They are naked cells without any membrane. The
distinguished anatomist also proved that the so-called "cell sap"--the
real body of the cell--is not a simple fluid, but a viscous, albuminous
substance, the independent movements of which had long been known
in the rhizopods, and which the first to study it carefully, Felix
Dujardin, had described as _sarcode_ in 1835. Max Schultze further
showed that this "sarcode" was identical with the "cell mucus" of
the plant cells which Hugo Mohl had designated "protoplasm" in 1846,
and that this living matter must be regarded as the real vehicle
of the phenomena of life. As the membrane was now recognized to be
non-essential, of secondary growth, and completely wanting in some
cases, there remained only two essential parts of the cell--the outer
soft cell body, consisting of protoplasm, and the inner firm nucleus,
consisting of a similar substance called nuclein. The original naked
cell was now like a cherry or plum without the skin. This new idea of
the cell, formulated forty years ago, which I endeavored to confirm
in my monograph on the radiolaria (1862), is now generally accepted,
and the cell is defined as a granule or particle of protoplasm (=
cytoplasm) enclosing a firm and definite nucleus (or caryon, consisting
of caryoplasm).

This would be a good occasion to glance at the errors to which
microscopic investigation and the conclusions based on it are liable.
Although Kölliker in 1845, and Remak in 1851, had drawn attention to
the existence of naked cells, and had compared their movements (for
instance, in lymph-cells) to those of the protoplasm in plant-cells,
the majority of the leading microscopists clung for twenty years to
the dogma that every cell must have a membrane; the definite outline
which even a naked cell must show in a different refracting medium was
taken to be the sign of a special and anatomically separable membrane.
It would be just as correct to talk of a protective membrane on a
homogeneous glass ball; its outline is sharply defined. In the long
controversy that "exact" observers sustained as to the presence or
absence of a membrane, this optical error--the false interpretation
of a sharp contour--counted for a good deal. It is much the same
with other conflicts of "exact" observers who give their "certain
observations" as facts, whereas they are really inferences from
imperfect observations on which different interpretations may be put.

Forty years ago (1864) I tried in vain to detect a nucleus in the
naked, living, mobile protoplasm of a few small rhizopod-like protists
(protamœba and protogenes). Other observers, who afterwards studied
similar unnucleated cells (Gruber, Cienkowski, and others), were no
more successful. On the ground of these observations, which were often
repeated afterwards, I formed the class of the _monera_--the simplest
unnucleated organisms--in my _General Morphology_ in 1866, and pointed
out their great importance in solving some of the chief problems of
biology. This importance has been much enhanced of late, since the
chromacea and bacteria have also been recognized as unnucleated cells.
Bütschli has, it is true, raised the objection that their homogeneous
plasma-body behaves, not as cytoplasm, but as caryoplasm (or nuclein),
and so that these simplest plastids correspond, not to the cell-body,
but to the nucleus of other cells. On this view the bacteria and
chromacea are not cells without nuclei, but nuclei without cell-bodies.
This idea agrees with my own in conceiving the plasma-body of the
monera (apart from its molecular structure) as homogeneous and not yet
advanced as far as the characteristic differentiation of inner nucleus
and outer cell-body. Bearing in mind that these essential parts of
the cell (in the view of most cytologists) are chemically related yet
different from each other, we have three possible cases of the original
formation of the nucleated cell from the unnucleated cytode: (i) The
nucleus and cell-body have arisen by differentiation of a homogeneous
plasm (monera); (2) the cell-body is a secondary growth from the
primary nucleus; (3) the nucleus is a secondary development from the
cell-body.

On the first view, which I hold, the plasm, or living matter, of
the earliest organisms on the earth (which can only be conceived as
archigonous monera) was a homogeneous _plasson_ or archiplasm--that
is to say, a plasma-compound that was not yet differentiated into
outer cytoplasm and inner caryoplasm. The rise of this chemical
distinction--and the accompanying morphological division of cell-body
and nucleus--was due to a phyletic differentiation; it was the outcome
of a very early and most important division of labor. The hereditary
matter gathered in the nucleus, the outer cell-matter controlling the
intercourse with the external world. Thus, by this first ergonomy, the
nucleus became the vehicle of heredity and the cell-body the organ of
adaptation. Opposed to this view is the second, the hypothesis which
the founder of the cell-theory, Schleiden, had put forward--that the
nucleus is the original base of the cell, and the cell-body a secondary
development from it. This opinion (which, in the main, corresponds
to that of Bütschli) raises a number of difficulties; as does also
the third hypothesis, that the unnucleated "protoplasm-body" (the
outer cytoplasm-body) is the original formation, and that the nucleus
arose secondarily by condensation and chemical modification of it. At
the bottom, however, the difference between the three hypotheses on
the primary cytogenesis is not as great as it seems at first sight.
However, I am more inclined to adhere to the first; it supposes
that the physiological and chemical differences between nucleus and
cell-body, which afterwards became so important, were not originally
present. The phenomena of caryolysis in indirect cell-division show us
still how close are the relations of the two substances.

If the organic population of our planet has arisen naturally, and not
by a miracle, as Reinke and other vitalists suppose, the earliest
elementary organisms, produced by the chemical process of archigony
(spontaneous generation), could not be real nucleated cells, but
unnucleated cytodes of the type of the chromacea (_cf._ chapter ii.).
The nucleated real cell, as Oscar Hertwig and others define it to-day,
can only have arisen by phylogenetic differentiation of nucleus and
cell-body from the simple cytode of the monera. In that case it is a
matter of simple logic to distinguish the older cytode from the later
cell. The two may then best be comprised (as I proposed in vain in
1866) under the name of "plastids" (formative principles)--that is,
the elementary organism in the broader sense. But if it is preferred
to call the latter _cells_ (in the broader sense), the wrong modern
idea of the cell must be altered, and the nucleus-feature omitted from
it. The cell is then simply the living particle of plasm, and its two
stages of development must be described by other names. The unnucleated
plastid might be called _primitive cell_ (protocytos), and the ordinary
nucleated one the nuclear cell (caryocytos).

A long gradation of cellular organization leads from the simplest
primitive cells (monera) to the highest developed protists. While no
morphological organization whatever is discoverable in the homogeneous
plasma-body of the chromacea and bacteria, we find a composition from
different parts in the highly differentiated body of the advanced
protophyta (diatomes, siphonea) and protozoa (radiolaria, infusoria).
The manifold parts of the unicellular organism, developed by division
of work in the plasm, discharge various functions, and behave
physiologically like the organs of the multicellular histona. But
as the idea of "organ" in the latter is morphologically fixed as a
multicellular part of the body, made up of numerous tissues, we cannot
call these similarly functioning parts "organs of the cell," and had
better describe them as organella (or organoids).

The great majority of the protists are, in the developed condition,
as actual individuals, equivalent morphologically to real nucleated
cells. By means of adaptation to the most varied conditions and
the inheritance of the properties thus acquired such a variety of
unicellular forms has been evolved in the course of millions of
years that we can distinguish thousands of living species, both of
plasmodomous protophyta and plasmophagous protozoa. The number of
known and named species is already as high as this in several distinct
classes, as, for instance, in the diatomes of the primitive plants
and the radiolaria of the primitive animals. These solitary living
unicellulars, or "hermit-cells," may be called _monobia_.

Many other protists have abandoned this original solitary life; they
follow their social instincts and form communities or colonies of cells
(_cœnobia_). These are usually formed by the daughter-cells which
arise from the cleavage of a mother-cell remaining united after the
division, and so on with the succeeding generations which come from
their repeated segmentation. The following are the chief forms of these
cœnobia:

1. GELATINOUS CŒNOBIA.--The social cells secrete a structureless
mass of jelly, and remain associated in the common gelatinous mass,
without actual contact. Sometimes they are regularly, at other times
irregularly, distributed in it. We find cœnobia of this kind even
among the monera, such as the _zooglœa_ of many bacteria and
chromacea. They are common among the protophyta and protozoa.

2. SPHERICAL CŒNOBIA.--The cell-community forms a sort of ball,
the cells lying close together at its surface, touching each other or
even forming a continuous layer; such are _holosphæra_ and _volvox_
among the protophyta, _magosphæra_ and _synura_ among the protozoa.
The latter are particularly interesting because they resemble the
_blastula_, an important embryological stage of the metazoa, of which
the simple, epithelial cell-layer at the surface of the hollow sphere
is called the _blastoderm_ (or germinal membrane).

3. ARBOREAL CŒNOBIA.--The cell-community takes the form of a small
tree or shrub, the fixed cells secreting jelly-like stalks at their
base and these forming branches. At the top of each stalk or branch
is an independent cell; so in the case of the _gomphonema_ and many
other diatomes, the _codonocladium_ among the flagellata, and the
_carchesium_ among the ciliata.

4. CATENAL CŒNOBIA.--The cell-community forms a chain, the links of
which (the individual cells) are joined in a row. We find chainlike
cell-communities of this sort, or "articulated threads," even among the
monera (_oscillaria_ and _nostic_ among the chromacea, _leptothrix_
among the bacteria). Among the diatomes we have the _bacillaria_, among
the thalamophora _nodosaria_, as examples. Many of the lower protophyta
(algaria and algetta) form the direct transition to the true algæ among
the metaphyta, as the threadlike layer of the latter (for instance,
_cladophora_) is only a higher development of the catenal cœnobium,
with polymorphism of the co-ordinated cells. We may also regard these
articulated multicellular threads as the first sketch for the formation
of tissues in the metaphyta.

The stable communities of cells which make up the body of the histona,
or multicellular plants and animals, are called tissues (_tela_ or
_hista_). They differ from the cœnobia of the protists in that
the social cells give up their independence, assume different forms
in the division of labor, and subordinate themselves to the higher
unity of the organ. However, it would be just as difficult to lay
down a sharp limit between the cœnobia and the tissues as between
the protists and the histona which possess them; the latter have been
developed phylogenetically from the former. The original physiological
independence of the cells which have combined to form tissues is more
completely lost in proportion to the closeness of their combination,
the complexity of their division of labor, and the differentiation
and centralization of the tissue-organism. Hence the various kinds of
tissue in the body of the histona behave like the various classes and
professions in a state. The higher the civilization and the more varied
the classes of workers, the more they are dependent on each other, and
the state is centralized.

In the lower tissue-forming plants, the algæ and fungi, the plant-body
has the appearance of a layer of cells, the tissues of which show
little or no division of labor. In these _thallophyta_ there are
none of the conducting or vascular fibres, the formation of which
is of great importance in the higher plants in connection with
their physiological function of circulation of the sap. These more
advanced vascular plants comprehend the two great groups of ferns
(_pteridophyta_) and flowering plants (_anthophyta_, or phanerogams).
Their body is always composed of two chief organs, the axial stem
and the lateral leaves. This is also the case with the mosses
(_bryophyta_), which have no vascular fibres; they lie between the
two chief groups of the non-vascular thallophyta and the vascular
cormophyta. However, this histological and organological division of
the two great groups of tissue-plants must not be pressed; there are
many exceptions and intermediate forms. In general their manifold
tissue-forms may be brought under two chief groups, which we may call
primary and secondary. The primary tissues are the phylogenetically
older and histologically simple "cell-tissues," such as we have in the
thallophyta (algæ, fungi, and mosses); in these there are no conducting
fibres, or, at least, only rudimentary ones. The secondary tissues
are a later development from these; they form conducting and vascular
fibres and other highly differentiated forms of tissue (cambium, wood,
etc.). They make up the bodies of the more complex vascular plants, the
ferns and flowering plants.

In the bodies of the tissue-animals we may similarly distinguish two
chief groups of tissues, the primary and secondary. The former are
phylogenetically and ontogenetically older than the latter. The primary
tissues of the metazoa are the _epitelia_, simple layers of cells or
forms of tissue directly derived from such (glands, etc.). Secondary
tissues, evolved from the former by physiological change of work and
morphological differentiation, are the _apotelia_; of these "derivative
tissues" we may distinguish the three leading groups of connective
tissue, muscular tissue, and nerve tissue. These three great groups of
tissue in the animal world may be subdivided, like the plant groups,
into lower and higher sub-sections. The cœlenteria (gastræads,
sponges, cnidaria) are predominantly built up of epitelia, as are also
the phyletically older group of the cœlomaria; in the vast majority
of the latter, however, the great mass of the body is formed of
apotelia, and they are subject to the most extensive differentiation.
The embryo of all the metazoa consists solely of epitelia (the
germ-layers) at first; apotelia are developed from these afterwards by
differentiation of the tissues.

Comparative anatomy distinguishes in the multicellular body of the
tissue-forming organisms a great number of different parts, which are
regularly adapted to discharge definite vital functions, and have been
most intricately developed in virtue of the division of labor. They are
called "organs" in the stricter sense in opposition to the organella
(or organoids) of the protists; the latter have, it is true, a similar
physiological purport, but are not (being parts of a cell) equal to the
former morphologically. The remarkable efficiency that we find in the
structure of the various organs in view of the functions they have to
discharge, and the regularity of their construction in the unity of
the histon--in other words, their adaptive organization--is explained
mechanically by the theory of selection, while the teleological
hypotheses of dualistic biology (for instance, the "intelligent
dominants" of Reinke) completely fail to account for their origin. The
gradual advance of the organs and their physiological division of labor
have many analogies in the two kingdoms of the histona. While at the
lowest stages the simple organ represents only a separate individual
piece of primitive tissue, we find special systems of organs and
organic apparatus in the higher stages.

The idea of a particular system of organs is determined by the unity
of one tissue which forms the characteristic element in the totality
of the organs that belong to it. Of such systems in the kingdom of the
metaphyta we have: the skin-system (with the tissue of the epidermis),
the vascular system (with its conducting and vascular fibres), and the
complementary tissue system (with the basic tissue). In the kingdom of
the metazoa we may similarly distinguish: the skin-system (integument
of the epidermis), the vascular system (with the mesenchyma-tissue
of the blood and blood-vessels), the muscular system (with the
muscle-tissue), and the nervous system (with the neurona of the
nerve-tissue).

In contrast with the histological idea of a system of organs, we have
the physiological conception of an apparatus of organs. This is not
determined by the unity of the constituent tissue, but by the unity of
the lifework that is accomplished by the particular group of organs in
the histona. Such an apparatus of organs is, for instance, the flowers
and the fruit developing therefrom in the phanerogams, or the eye or
the gut of an animal. In these apparatus the most diverse organs and
systems of organs may be associated for the fulfilment of a definite
physiological task.

In the higher animals and plants we usually regard as the "real
individual" (in the wider sense of the word) the tissue-forming
organism made up of various organs; and we may here briefly and
instructively call this the histonal individual (or, more briefly,
the "histonal"). Botanists call this individual phenomenon among
the metaphyta a sprout (_blastus_). Zoologists give the title of
"person" (_prosopon_) to the corresponding unity among the animals.
The two forms agree very much in their general features, and may be
called "individuals of the second order," if we take the cells to be
the first and the stock the third stage in the hierarchy of organic
individuality. In comprising them here under the general head of
histonals, or histonal individuals, I mean by this to designate the
definite physiological unity of the multicellular and tissue-forming
organism, as contrasted with the unicellular protist on the one hand,
and the higher stem, made up of several histonals, on the other.

The plant-histonal, which Alexander Braun especially clearly marked
out and described as the sprout, is found in two principal forms in
the kingdom of the metaphyta--the lower form of the layer-sprout
(_thallus_) and the higher form of the stalk-sprout (_culmus_).
The thallus predominates in the lower and older sub-kingdom of the
layer-plants (_thallophyta_), in the classes of the algæ and fungi;
the culmus in the higher and younger sub-kingdom of the stalk-plants
(_cormophyta_), in the classes of the mosses, ferns, and flowering
plants. The culmus presents in general the characteristic form of
an axial central organ, the stalk, with lateral organs, the leaves,
attached to this at the sides, the former having an unlimited vertical
growth and the latter an unlimited basal growth. The thallus does not
yet show this important morphological division. There are, however,
exceptions in both groups of the metaphyta. The large and highly
developed _fucoidea_ among the algæ exhibit similar differentiations
of organs to those we distinguish as stalk and leaves in the higher
cormophyta. On the other hand, they are wanting in the lower
liverworts, which form a thallus like many of the algæ; thus, for
instance, the liverwort _riccia fluitans_ is just like the brown
alga _dictyota dichotoma_. Other primitive liverworts (such as the
_anthoceros_) have also a very simple thallus; but most of them have
a separation of the thallus into an axial organ (stalk) and several
lateral organs (leaves). In the distribution of labor among the
leaves there then emerge the differences between the lower leaves,
foliage leaves, higher leaves, and flower leaves. A simple poppy-plant
(_papaver_) or a single-flowered _gentiana ciliata_, which has only one
bloom at the top of its branchless stalk, is a good example of a highly
developed culmus.

To the plant-sprout corresponds in the animal world the _person_. All
the tissue-animals pass in the course of their embryonic development
through the important stage of the _gastrula_, or "cup-shaped embryo."
The whole body of the tissue-animal at this stage forms at first a
simple gut-sac or gastric sac (the primitive gut), the cavity of
which opens outward by a primitive mouth. The thin wall of the sac is
formed by two superimposed layers of cells, the two primary germinal
layers. This gastrula is the simplest form of the "person," and the two
germinal layers are its sole organs.

The diverse animal forms which develop along different lines
from this common embryonic form of the gastrula may be grouped
into two sub-kingdoms, the lower (_cœlenteria_) and the upper
(_cœlomaria_) animals. The former correspond in the simplicity of
their structure in many respects to the thallophyta, and the latter
to the cormophyta. Of the four stems of the cœlenteria (which
have only a ventral opening and no gut-cavity) the gastræads remain
at the gastrula stage, and the sponges are formed by multiplication
of the same stems of gastræads. On the other hand, the cnidaria
develop into higher radial (star-shaped) persons, and the platodes
into lower bilateral persons. From the latter are derived the worms
(_vermalia_), the common stem-groups of the five higher animal stems,
the unarticulated mollusks, echinoderms, and tunicates, and the
limb-forming articulates and vertebrates.

A large part of the physiological advantages and morphological
perfection which the higher histona have, as contrasted with the lower,
may be traced to the circumstance that the tissue-forming organism
articulates--that is to say, divides on its long axis into several
sections. With this multiplication of groups of organs there goes, as a
rule, a more or less extensive division of work among them, a leading
factor of higher development. In this point also we see the biogenetic
parallelism between the two great groups of the tissue-plants and
tissue-animals.

In the kingdom of the tissue-plants the articulated cormophyta rise
high above the unarticulated thallophyta. While the articulation of
the stem of the former proceeds and leaves are developed at the knots
(_nodi_) between each two sections of the stalk, far greater play is
offered to polymorphic differentiation than in the thallophyta, which
are generally without this metamerism. The formation of the bloom in
the flowering plants or phanerogams consists in a sexual division of
labor among the thickly gathered leaves in a short section of a stem.

To the two groups of unarticulated and articulated sprouts in the
kingdom of the tissue-plants correspond, in many respects, the two
sections of the tissue-animals, the unarticulated and the articulated.
The two stems of the articulates and vertebrates rise above all the
other metazoa by the perfection of their organism and the variety
of their functions. In the articulates the metamerism is chiefly
external--an articulation of the body wall. In the vertebrates it
mainly affects the internal organs, the skeleton, and the muscular
system. The vertebration (articulation) of the vertebrates is not
outwardly visible like that of the articulates. In both stems the
articulation is similar in the lower and upper forms, as we find in
the annelids and myriapods, the acrania and cyclostoma. On the other
hand, the higher the organization the greater is the unlikeness of
the members or articulated parts, as in the arachnida and insects,
the amphibia and amniotes. The same antithesis is found in the lower
and higher crustacea. This metamerism of the higher metazoa is of a
motor character, having been acquired through the manner of movement
of the lengthened body; but we find in some groups of the lower, and
usually unarticulated, metazoa a propagative metamerism, determined
by budding at the end; such is the strobilation of the chain-worms
and the scyphostoma polyps. The individual metamera (parts) that are
released from the end of the chain in these cases immediately show
their individuality. This is also the case with many of the annelids,
in which every member that is separated has the power to reproduce the
whole chain of metamera.

The third and highest stage of individuality to which the multicellular
organism attains is the stock or colony (_cormus_). It is usually
formed by a permanent association of histonals that are produced
by cleavage (imperfect segmentation or budding) from one histonal
individual. The great majority of the metaphyta form complex plants in
this sense. But among the metazoa we find this form of individuality
only in the lower (and generally stationary) stages of development.
Here also there is a striking parallelism of development between the
two chief groups of the histona. At the lower stages of stock-formation
there is equality of the social histonals. But in the higher grades
they become unequally developed in the division of labor; and the
greater the differences between them become, the greater is the
centralization of the whole stock (as in the case of the siphonophora).
We may therefore distinguish two principal forms of stocks--the
homonomous and heteronomous, the one without, and the other with,
division of labor among the histonals.

The history of civilization teaches us that its gradual evolution is
bound up with three different processes: (1) Association of individuals
in a community; (2) division of labor (ergonomy) among the social
elements, and a consequent differentiation of structure (polymorphism);
(3) centralization or integration of the unified whole, or rigid
organization of the community. The same fundamental laws of sociology
hold good for association throughout the entire organic world; and also
for the gradual evolution of the several organs out of the tissues
and cell-communities. The formation of human societies is directly
connected with the gregariousness of the nearest related mammals. The
herds of apes and ungulates, the packs of wolves, the flocks of birds,
often controlled by a single leader, exhibit various stages of social
formation; as also the swarms of the higher articulates (insects,
crustacea), especially communities of ants and termites, swarms
of bees, etc. These organized communities of free individuals are
distinguished from the stationary colonies of the lower animals chiefly
by the circumstance that the social elements are not bodily connected,
but held together by the ideal link of common interest.




