X

NUTRITION

 Functions of nutrition--Assimilation and disassimilation--Plasmodoma
 and plasmophaga--Phytoplasm and zooplasm--Plasmodomism of
 plants--Chlorophyll granules and nitro-bacteria--Plasmophagism of
 fungi and animals--Metasitism (conversion of metabolism)--Nutrition
 of the monera (chromacea, bacteria, rhizomonera)--Nutrition of the
 protophyta and metaphyta (cell-plants and tissue-plants)--Nutrition
 of the metazoa--- Gastræa theory--Gastro-canal system of the
 cœlenteria (gastræads, sponges, cnidaria, platodes)--Nutrition
 of the cœlomaria (digestion, circulation, respiration,
 evacuation)--Saprositism--Parasitism--Symbiosis.


The wonder of life which we call, in the widest sense of the word,
"nutrition" is the chief factor in the self-maintenance of the organic
individual. It is always bound up with a chemical modification of the
living matter, an organic metabolism (circulation of matter), and a
corresponding circulation of force. In this chemical process plasm is
used up, built up afresh, and once more disintegrated. The metabolism
which lies at the root of this chemistry of food is the essential
feature in the manifold processes of nutrition. A large part of the
several nutritive processes are explained without further trouble
by the known physical and chemical properties of inorganic bodies;
for another part of them we have not yet succeeded in doing this.
Nevertheless, all impartial physiologists now agree that it is possible
in principle, and that we have no reason to introduce a special vital
principle. All the trophic (nutritive) processes, without exception,
are subject to the law of substance.

In all the higher plants and animals the chemical process of
metabolism, with the stream of energy that accompanies it, is a very
complex vital activity, in which many different functions and organs
co-operate with the common aim of self-maintenance. As a rule, they are
distributed in four groups--namely: (1) Intussusception of food and
digestion: (2) distribution of the food in the body, or circulation;
(3) respiration, or exchange of gases; and (4) excretion of unusable
matter. In most of the histona, either tissue-plants or tissue-animals,
a number of organs are differentiated for the accomplishment of these
tasks. At the lower stages of life this division of labor is not found,
the entire process of nutrition being accomplished by a single layer of
cells (lower algæ, gastræads, sponges, lower polyps). In the protists,
again, it is the single cell that does all these things itself; in the
simplest cases, the monera, a homogeneous plasma-globule. As a long
gradation uninterruptedly unites these lowest forms of nutrition with
the more complicated forms, we must regard the latter no less than the
former as physico-chemical processes.

When we take the whole of the metabolic functions in organisms
together, we may look upon them as the outcome of two opposite chemical
processes--on the one hand the building-up of living matter by taking
in food (assimilation), and on the other the breaking-down of it in
consequence of its vital activity (disassimilation). As in every case
the plasm is the active living matter, we may say: _Assimilation_ (or
plasma-production) consists in the conversion within the organism into
the special plasm of the particular species of food that has been
received from without; _disassimilation_ (or plasma-destruction)
is the result of the work done by the plasm, which is the cause of
its partial decomposition or breakdown. In both respects there is a
striking difference between the two great kingdoms of organic nature.
The plant kingdom is, on the whole, the agent of assimilation, forming
new plasm by synthesis and reduction from inorganic matter. In the
animal world, on the contrary, disassimilation preponderates, the plasm
received being resolved by oxydation, and the actual energy taken out
of it by analysis being converted into heat and motion. Plants are
plasmodomous; animals, plasmophagous.

Of all the chemical processes the most important, because the most
indispensable, for the origin and maintenance of organic life is the
constant reconstruction of plasm. We give it the name of plasmodomism
(_domeo_=to build up), or carbon-assimilation. Botanists have the
habit of late of calling it briefly assimilation, and have thus
caused a good deal of misunderstanding. The more common and older
meaning of assimilation in animal physiology is, in the widest sense,
the intussusception and preparation of the food received. But the
carbon-assimilation in plants--what I call plasmodomism--is only the
first and original form of plasma-production. It means that the plant
is able, under the influence of sunlight, to form carbohydrates,
and from these new plasm, out of simple inorganic compounds (water,
carbonic acid, nitric acid, and ammonia) by synthesis and reduction.
The animal is unable to do this. It has to take its plasm in its
food from other organisms--plant-eaters directly, and animal-eaters
indirectly. We therefore give the title of _plasmophagous_ to these
animal "plasma-eaters." In working up the foreign plasm it has eaten,
and converting it into its own specific form of plasm, the animal
also accomplishes assimilation; but this animal albumin-assimilation
is totally different from the vegetal carbon-assimilation. The
fresh-formed animal plasm is then broken up by oxydation, and by this
analysis the energy needed for the vital movements is obtained.

The physiological contrast which we thus find between the two principal
forms of living matter, the synthetic plasm of the plant and the
analytic plasm of the animal, is of great importance for the lasting
maintenance of the whole organic world. It depends on a reversal of
the molecular movement in the plasm, the intimate nature of which is
just as little known to us as the chemical constitution of the albumins
in general, and that of living albumin, the plasm, in particular. As
I mentioned in chapter v., modern physiological chemistry has good
reason to believe that the invisible albumin-molecule is, comparatively
speaking, gigantic, and is composed of more than a thousand atoms.
These are in such an unstable equilibrium, so complicated and
impermanent an arrangement, that the slightest push or stimulus
suffices to alter them and form a new kind of plasm. As a fact, the
number and variety of kinds of plasm are immense. This is seen at
once from the ontogenetic fact that the ovum and sperm-cell of each
species (and each variety) have a specific chemical constitution.
In reproduction this is transmitted to the offspring. But, setting
aside these countless finer modifications, we may distinguish two
chief groups of kinds of plasm: the phytoplasm of the plant, with the
synthetic property of plasmodomism, and the zooplasm of the animal,
which is destitute of this property, and so confined to plasmophagy.

The remarkable synthetic process of building up the plasm, to which
we give the name of plasmodomism, or carbon-assimilation, usually
needs as its first condition the radiant energy of sunlight. Every
green plant-cell contains in its chlorophyll-granules so many tiny
laboratories, their green plasm being able to form new plasm out of
inorganic compounds under the influence of light. The water that is
needed for this, besides nitrogenous compounds (nitric acid, ammonia),
is drawn from the earth by the roots; the carbonic acid is taken from
the atmosphere by the green leaves. The immediate products of the
synthesis, due to the separation of the carbonic acid, is, as a rule, a
non-nitrogenous starch-flour (_amylum_). This is further used for the
composition of the nitrogenous albumin by an as yet unknown synthetic
process, with the aid of nitrogenous mineral compounds. In this process
of reduction the separated free oxygen is returned to the atmosphere.
The carbohydrates that chiefly co-operate in this are glucoses and
maltoses: the mineral substances, especially salts of potassium and
magnesium, and compounds of these elements with nitric acid, sulphuric
acid, and phosphoric acid. Iron is also found to be an important
element in the process, though in a very small quantity. As a rule,
the ferruginous chlorophyll can only form new plasm with the help of
light-waves. The most important part of the spectrum for this purpose
is that containing the red, orange, and yellow waves.

The chief factor in plasma-formation in the organic world is the
photosynthesis, or ordinary carbon-assimilation by chlorophyll, the
wonderful green matter that amounts to only a very small percentage
(about one-tenth) of the weight of the chlorophyll-granules, and can
be separated from their plasmatic substance by certain methods. Even
when the plant has some other color than green the chlorophyll is still
the real plasmodomous substance. Its green color is then masked by
some other color--diatomin in the yellow diatomes, phycorhodin in the
red rhodophyceæ, phycophæin in the brown phæophyceæ, and phyocyan in
the blue-green chromacea or cyanophyceæ. The latter have an especial
interest for us, because in the simplest specimens the entire organism
is merely a globular bluish-green granule of plasm. Moreover, in the
simplest forms of nucleated primitive plants (_algariæ_)--many of the
so-called unicellular algæ--the metabolism is effected by a single
grain of chlorophyll. There is usually a large number of them in the
plasm of the plant-cells.

Another kind of plasm-synthesis, quite different from the ordinary
plasmodomism by chlorophyll and sunlight has lately been discovered in
some of the lowest organisms (by Heraeus, Winogradsky, and others). The
nitro-bacteria (or nitromonades) are tiny monera (unnucleated cells)
that live in complete darkness underground. Their globular colorless
plasma-bodies contain neither chlorophyll nor nucleus. They have the
remarkable capacity of forming carbohydrates, and from these plasm,
by a peculiar synthesis out of purely inorganic compounds--water,
carbonic acid, ammonia, and nitric acid. Pfeffer has called this
carbon-assimilation, on account of its purely chemical nature,
"chemosynthesis," in opposition to the ordinary photosynthesis by
means of sunlight. There are also other bacteria (sulphur-bacteria,
purple-bacteria, etc.) that show various peculiarities of metabolism.
The nitro-bacteria must belong to the oldest monera, and represent a
transition from the vegetal chromacea to the animal bacteria.

The extensive class of the fungi (or _mycetes_) resembles a part of
the bacteria in regard to metabolism. These organisms are, it is true,
generally regarded as plants, but they have not the capacity of the
green, chlorophyll-bearing plants to supply themselves with carbon
from the carbonic acid in the atmosphere. They have to take it from
organic substances, such as albumin, carbohydrates, etc., like the
animals. But while the animals have to derive their nitrogen from the
latter, the fungi can obtain it from inorganic matter in the earth.
Fungi cannot support life without the addition of organic compounds;
but we can make them grow in a food solution consisting of sugar and
purely inorganic nitrogenous salts. Thus they are on the border that
separates the plasmodomous plants from the plasmophagous animals. Like
the latter, the fungi have evolved from the plants through changed food
conditions. We find this process even among the unicellular protists in
the phycomycetes, which descend from the siphonea. In the same way the
real multicellular fungi (ascomycetes and basimycetes) may be traced to
the tissue-forming algæ.

All true animals have to derive their food from the plant kingdom, the
vegetal feeders directly, and the flesh feeders indirectly, when they
consume vegetal feeders. Hence the animals are, in a certain sense, as
the older natural philosophy put it four hundred years ago, "parasites
of the plant world." From the point of view of phylogeny, the animal
kingdom is, therefore, clearly much younger than the plant kingdom. The
development of the animals from the plants was determined originally by
a change in the method of nutrition which we call metasitism.

The chemical modification of the living matter which is connected
with the loss of plasmodomism--in other words, the conversion of the
reducing phytoplasm into oxidizing zooplasm--must be regarded as
one of the most important changes in the history of organic life.
This "reversal of metabolism" is polyphyletic; it has been repeated
many times in the course of biological history, and has taken place
independently in very different groups of the organic world--whenever
a plasmodomous cell or group of cells (=tissue) had occasion to feed
directly on ready-made plasm, instead of giving itself the trouble of
building it up out of inorganic compounds. We see this particularly
among the unicellular protists in the independent ciliated cells.
The longer plasmophagous flagellata, which are colorless, and have
no chlorophyll (monodina, conoflagellata), closely resemble in
form and movement the older plasmadomous and chlorophyll-bearing
mastigota, from which they are descended (volvocina, peridinia); they
only differ in the manner of nutrition. The colorless flagellata
feed on ready-formed plasm, which they obtain either by means of
their lashes or by a special cell mouth in their cell body. On the
other hand, their ancestors, the green or yellow mastigota, form
new plasm by photosynthesis like true cells. But there are also
complete intermediate forms between the two groups--for instance, the
chrysomonades and the gymnodinia; these may behave alternately as
protozoa or protophyta. In the same way we can derive the phycomycetes
by metasitism from the siphonea, the fungi from the algæ; and, finally,
the process is also found in many of the higher parasitic plants
(orchids, orobanches, etc.). (See under "Parasitism.")

As is the case with every other vital function, so for the function
of metabolism we find a starting-point in the lowest and simplest
group of the protophyta, the chromacea. In their oldest forms, the
chroococcacea, the whole body is merely a blue-green, structureless,
globular plasma particle, growing by means of its plasmodomous power,
and splitting up as soon as it reaches a certain stage of growth.
There the miracle of life consists merely of the chemical process of
plasmodomism by photosynthesis. The sunlight enables the blue-green
phytoplasm to form new plasm of the same kind out of inorganic
compounds (water, carbonic acid, ammonia, and nitric acid). We may look
upon this process as a special kind of catalysis. In this case there
is absolutely nothing to be done by Reinke's "dominants," or conscious
and purposive vital forces. There are, as yet, no differentiated
physiological functions in these organisms without organs, and no
anatomically distinct members; and so their one vital activity, growth,
may very well be compared to the simple growth of inorganic crystals.

It has been pointed out repeatedly that the remarkable monera which
now play so important a part in biology as bacteria stand, in many
respects, quite apart from the ordinary vital phenomena of the
higher organisms. This is especially true of their metabolism, which
has the most striking peculiarities. Morphologically, many of the
bacteria cannot be distinguished from their nearest relatives and
direct ancestors, the chromacea, differing from them only in the
absence of coloring matter in the plasm. Many of them are simple,
globular, ellipsoid, or rod-shaped plasma particles, without any
visible organization or movement. Others move about by means of one or
more very fine lashes (like the flagellata). No real nucleus can be
discovered in the structureless plasma body. The very fine granules
which are found in some species, and the vacuole-formation that we see
in others, may be regarded as products of metabolism; and the same
may be said of the thin membrane or the thicker gelatinous envelope
which many of the bacteria secrete. This makes all the more remarkable
the peculiarity of their chemical constitution and the metabolism
determined thereby. The nitro-bacteria we have mentioned previously are
plasmodomous; the anaërobe bacteria (of butyric acid and tetanus) only
flourish where oxygen is excluded; the sulphur bacteria (_beggiatoa_)
secrete--by the oxydation of sulphuretted hydrogen--pure regulation
sulphur in the form of round granules. The ferruginous bacteria
(_leptothrix ochrocea_) store up oxyhydrate of iron (by the oxydation
of carbonic protoxide of iron). The saprogenetic bacteria cause
putrefaction, and the zymogenetic fermentation. Finally, we have the
very interesting pathogenetic bacteria which cause the most dangerous
diseases by the secretion of special poisons--toxins--festering,
small-pox, tetanus, diphtheria, typhus, tuberculosis, cholera, etc.
On account of their great practical importance, these bacteria have
of late been taken over by a special branch of biology, bacteriology.
But only a few of the many experts in this department have pointed out
the extreme theoretical significance which these zoomonera have for
the important questions of general biology. These structureless plasma
bodies show unmistakably that their vital activity is a purely chemical
phenomenon. Their great variety proves how manifold and complicated
must be the molecular composition of the plasm, even in these simplest
organisms.

The unicellular protophyta exhibit the same form of metabolism and
plasmodomism as the familiar green cells of the tissue-plants; but
in most of the protozoa we find special features of nutrition and
plasmophagy. The great class of the rhizopods is distinguished by the
fact that their naked plasma body can take in ready-formed solid food
at any point of its surface. On the other hand, most of the infusoria
have a definite mouth-opening in the outer wall of their unicellular
body, and sometimes a gullet-tube as well. Besides this cell-mouth
(_cytostoma_) we usually find also a second opening for the discharge
of indigestible matter, a cell-anus (_cytopyge_).

Metabolism in the tissue plants (metaphyta) forms a long gradation from
very simple to very complicated arrangements. The lowest and oldest
thallophyta, especially the simplest algæ, are not far removed from
the communities of protophyta, and, like these, are merely definitely
grouped colonies of cells. The social cells which form their most
rudimentary tissue are quite homogeneous, with no differentiation
beyond that of sex. The thallus or bed-formation consists in the
simplest specimens of plain or branched fine threads, consisting of
rows or chains of homogeneous cells (so _conferva_ among the green,
_ectocarpus_ among the brown, and _callithamnion_ among the red
algæ). Other algæ (such as the ulva) form thin leaf-shaped forms of
the thallus, a number of homogeneous cells lying side by side along a
level. In the larger algæ compact tissue-bodies are formed, in which
frequently firmer rows of cells exhibit the rudiments of fibres; and
the thallus divides, as in the cormophyta, into root, stalk, and
leaves. There is also a trophic differentiation, the fibres undertaking
special functions of nutrition (the conduction of the sap). The
same must be said of the mosses (_bryophyta_). Their lowest forms
(_ricciadinæ_) are close akin to the algæ; the highest mosses (the
_mnium_ and _polytrichum_, for instance) approach the cormophyta. Many
botanists comprise these lower plants--algæ, fungi, and mosses--under
the title of "cell-plants" (_cytophyta_), and oppose the higher
plants--ferns and flowering-plants--to them as "vascular plants"
(_angiophyta_), because they have complex fibres or sap vessels. This
distinction has a phylogenetic significance similar to the division
between cœlenteria and cœlomaria in the animal kingdom.

While most of the cell-plants either live in the water (algæ) or are
very simply organized on account of their saprophytic or parasitic
habits (fungi), the vascular plants mostly live on land, and have to
adapt themselves to much more complicated conditions. Their nutrition
is accordingly distributed among different functions, and special
organs have been evolved to discharge them. This is equally true of
the crytogam ferns (_pteridophyta_) and the phanerogam flowering
plants (_anthophyta_). The most important later acquisition which
distinguishes both groups from the lower cell-plants is the possession
of vascular or conducting fibres. These organs for conducting water
pass through the entire body of the vascular plant in the shape of
long tubes, formed by the combination of rows of cells; the cells
themselves die off, and their plasma content disappears. The stream of
water that rises constantly in these tubes is taken up by the roots,
conducted by the fibres to all parts, and given off (transpiration) by
the pores of the leaves. But these pores also serve for the breathing
of plants, being connected with the air-containing intercellular
passages; through these air-spaces, which serve for the aëration of
the higher plant-body, air and moisture can enter, and oxygen be given
off in respiration. Finally, many of the vascular plants have special
glands that serve for secretion (of oil, resin, etc.). In the higher
flowering plants this division of work among the various digestive
organs gives rise to a very complicated apparatus for nutrition. Among
the many remarkable structures that have been developed in this way by
adaptation to special conditions we may particularly note the organs
for catching and digesting insects in the insect-eating plants, the
European _drosera_ and _utricalaria_, and the tropical _nepenthas_ and
_dionæa_.

The long scale of evolutionary forms which we find in the tissue
animals (metazoa) leads up uninterruptedly from the simplest to
the most elaborate physiological functions and a corresponding
morphological complexity of organs. The two principal divisions of
the metazoa are chiefly distinguished by the circumstance that in the
cœlenteria one single system of organs, the gastro-canal system,
discharges the whole (or most part) of the partial functions of
nutrition; while in the cœlomaria they are usually distributed among
four different systems of organs, each of which is made up of a number
of organs. To an extent, we find once more in each great division
characteristic types of organization. However, comparative ontogeny
teaches us that all these various structures have been developed
from one simple fundamental form, as I have shown in my theory of the
gastræa (1872).

The older research into the origin of the nutritive apparatus in
the metazoa--especially its chief part, the alimentary or gastric
canal--had led to the erroneous belief that in several groups of the
metazoa it owed its origin to very different growth-processes, and
that particularly in the higher vertebrates (the amniotes) it was
a comparatively late product of evolution. On the other hand, the
comparative study of the embryology of the lower and higher animals
led me thirty-four years ago to the opposite conclusion, that a simple
gastric sac was the first and oldest organ of all the metazoa, and that
all the different forms of it had been developed from this primitive
type. I gave this view in my _Biology of the Sponges_ in 1872; and I
developed and established it in my _Studies of the Gastræa Theory_ in
1873. In the latter book I also worked out the important conclusions
that follow from this monistic reform of the theory of germinal layers
for the phylogenetic natural classification of the animal kingdom.
I began with the consideration of the simplest sponges (_olynthus_)
and cnidaria (_hydra_). The whole body of these lowest and oldest
of the cœlenteria is in essence nothing but a round, oval, or
cylindrical gastric vesicle, a digestive sac, the thin wall of which
consists of two simple layers of cells. The outer layer (the ectoderm
or skin-layer) is the covering layer of the external skin (epidermis);
it is the instrument of sensation and movement. The inner layer of
cells (entoderm or gastric layer) serves for nutrition; it clothes
the simple cavity of the sac, which admits the food by its opening
and digests it. This opening is the primitive mouth (_prostoma_ or
_blastoporus_), the inner cavity itself the primitive gut (_progaster_
or _archenteron_). I proved that there was the same composition in
the young embryos or larvæ of many of the lower animals, and showed
that the manifold and apparently very different embryonic form of all
the higher animals may be reduced to the same common type. To this I
gave the name of the "cup-embryo" or gastric larvæ (_gastrula_), and
concluded, in virtue of the biogenetic law, that it is the palingenetic
reproduction of a corresponding ancestral form (the _gastræa_)
maintained until the present by heredity. It was not until much later
(1895) that Monticelli discovered a modern gastræad (_pemmatodiscus_)
which corresponds completely to this hypothetical ancestor (see the
last edition of my _Anthropogeny_, fig. 287). The simplest living forms
of the sponges (_olynthus_) and the cnidaria (_hydra_) only differ from
this hypothetical primitive form of the gastræa by a few secondary and
subsequently acquired features.

The classes of the lower animals which we comprise under the name
cœlenteria (or cœlenterata in the widest sense) generally agree
in having all the functions of nutrition accomplished exclusively (or
for the most part) by a single system of organs, the gastro-canal or
gastro-vascular system. From their common stem-group, the gastræads,
three different stems have been evolved--the sponges, cnidaria, and
platodes. All these cœlenteria have three features in common: (1)
The gastric canal or tube has only one opening--the primitive mouth,
which serves at once for admitting food and ejecting indigestible
matter; there is no anus; (2) there is no special body-cavity
(_cœloma_) distinct from the gastric tube; (3) there is also no
trace of a vascular system. All cavities that are found in these lower
animals besides the digestive gut-cavity are direct processes from it
(with the exception of the nephridia in the platodes).

While the simple digestive gut is the sole organ of nutrition in the
stem-group of the gastræads, we find other structures co-operating in
the rest of the cœlenteria. The characteristic stem of the sponges
is distinguished by the piercing of the wall of the gastric vesicle
with several holes. Through these water pours into the body, bringing
with it the small particles of food which are received and digested
by the ciliated cells of the entoderm; the water emerges again by the
mouth-opening (_osculum_). The best-known of the sponges is the common
bath-sponge (_euspongia officinalis_), the horny skeleton of which
we use daily in washing. In these and most other sponges the large,
unshapely body is traversed by a number of branching canals, on which
there are thousands of tiny vesicles, produced by the multiplication
of a simple gastric vesicle of the primitive sponge (_olynthus_). Each
of these ciliated chambers is really a tiny gastræa, a "person" of the
simplest character (_cf._ chapter vii.). Hence we may regard the whole
sponge-body as a gastræad-stock (_cormus_).

The large group of the cnidaria offers a long series of evolutionary
stages, from very small and simple to very large and elaborate forms.
Some of them remain at a very low stage, as does our common green
fresh-water polyp (_hydra viridis_), which only differs from the
gastræa by a few variations in tissue and the formation of a crown of
feelers about the mouth. Most of the polyps form stocks (_cormi_),
the individuals shooting out buds which remain joined to the mother
animal. In these and all the other stock-forming animals the nutrition
is communistic; all the food that the individuals get and digest is
conducted by tubes to the common fund and equally distributed. In all
the larger cnidaria the body-wall becomes thicker, and is traversed by
branching gastro-canals; these convey the nutritive fluid to all parts
of the body.

While the fundamental type in the cnidaria is radial (determined
by the crown of radiating feelers or tentacles that surrounds the
mouth), it is bilateral-symmetrical in the platodes or "flat-worms"
(_plathelminthes_). In this animal-stem, moreover, the lowest forms,
the platodaria (also called _cryptocœla_ and _acæla_) come very
close to the gastræa. But most of the platodes are distinguished from
the rest of the cœlenteria by the formation of a pair of nephridia
(renal canals or water-vessels), thin tubes which, as excretory organs,
remove from the body the unusable products of metabolism, the urine.
Here we have a second organ of nutrition, the gut tube, added to the
first. In the lower platodes this remains very simple. As a rule, a
gullet tube (pharynx) is formed by the hollowing out of the mouth, as
in the corals; and as in the case of the latter branched canals, which
conduct the nutritive sap from the stomach to distant parts of the
body, grow out of the stomach, in the larger coil-worms (_turbellaria_)
and suction-worms (_trematodes_). On the other hand, the gut atrophies
in the tape-worms (_cestodes_); as these parasites live in the
intestines or other organs of animals, they can obtain their nutritive
sap directly from them through the surface of the skin.

The more highly organized cœlomaria differ from the simpler
cœlenteria chiefly by the greater complexity in the structure
and functions of their apparatus of nutrition. As a rule, these
functions are divided between four groups of organs, which are not yet
differentiated in the cœlenteria--namely: 1, organs of digestion
(gastric system); 2, organs of circulation (vascular system); 3, organs
of breathing (respiratory system); and 4, organs of excretion (renal
system). Moreover, in the cœlomaria the gastric canal has usually
two openings, the mouth and the anus. Finally, they all have a special
body-cavity (_cœloma_); this is quite separate from the gastric
canal, which is suspended in it, and serves for the formation of the
sexual cells. It is formed in the embryo by the hollowing out and
cutting off of a pair of sacs (cœlom-pouches) from the gut near the
mouth; the pouches touch, and then coalesce, as their division-walls
break down. If a part of the dividing wall remains, it serves as
mesentery to fasten the gut to the body-wall. The action of the four
groups of alimentary organs remains very simple in the lowest and
oldest cœlomaria, the worms (_vermalia_); but in the other higher
animals, which have been evolved from these, they have very varied and
often complicated features.

In the great majority of the cœlomaria the gastric system forms a
highly differentiated apparatus, composed, as in man, of a number of
different organs. The food is usually taken in by the mouth, ground
up by the jaws or the teeth, and softened with saliva, which the
salivary glands pour into the cavity of the mouth. From the mouth
the pulpy food passes in swallowing into the gullet, which often has
glandular appendages, and from this through the narrow esophagus into
the stomach. This most important part of the alimentary apparatus is
often divided into several sections, one of which (the masticating
stomach) is armed with teeth and prepared for a further triturition
of solid pieces, while the other (the glandular stomach) produces the
dissolving gastric juice. The liquefied food (_chylus_) then passes
into the small intestine (_ileum_), which has to absorb it, and is as a
rule the longest section of the alimentary canal. A number of different
digestive glands open into this intestine, the most important of them
being the liver. The small intestine is often sharply distinguished
from the large intestine (_colon_), the last large section of the
alimentary canal; into this also a number of glands and blind
intestines open. The last portion of it is called the _rectum_, and
this removes the indigestible remnants of the food (_fæces_) through
the anus.

This general plan of the alimentary system, which is common to most
of the cœlomaria in its chief features, is very much modified in
the various groups of these animals and adapted to their several
conditions of nutrition. The simplest structures are found in many of
the vermalia; the lowest forms of these, the rotifers, and especially
the gastrotricha, still closely resemble their platode ancestors, the
turbellaria. The higher type of animal-stems which have been evolved
from them are partly distinguished by special structures. Thus the
mollusks have a characteristic masticating apparatus; on their tongue
there is a hard plate (_radula_) armed with a number of teeth, which
grinds against a hard upper jaw, and so breaks up the food. In most of
the articulates this work is done by side-jaws, which consist of hard
rods and represent modified bones. The vertebrates and the closely
related tunicates are distinguished by the conversion of the first
sections of the alimentary canal into a characteristic respiratory
apparatus (gills). But the construction of the various sections of
the gastro-canal also varies a good deal in the small groups of
the cœlomaria, as it depends to a great extent on the nature of
the food and the conditions in which it is got and prepared. The
largest expenditure of mechanical and chemical energy is needed for
a voluminous solid vegetal diet. Hence the alimentary canal and its
many appendages are longest and most complicated in the plant-eating
snails, leaf-eating insects, and grass-eating ruminants. On the other
hand, they are shortest and simplest in parasitic cœlomaria, which
derive their fluid food already prepared from the contents of another
animal's intestines. In these cases the gut may altogether atrophy; as
in the _acanthocephala_ among the vermalia, the _entoconcha_ among the
mollusks, and the _sacculina_ among the crustacea.

The greater the extent of the body, and the more complex the
organization of the higher animals, the more necessary it is to have
an orderly and regular distribution of the nutritive fluid to all
parts. In the cœlenteria this work is accomplished by the gastric
canals (side branches from the gut, opening into its cavity) but in
the cœlomaria it is done much better by means of blood-vessels
(_vasa sanguifera_). These canals do not communicate directly with the
gastro-canal, but are formed independently of it in the surrounding
parenchyma of the mesoderm. They take up the filtered and chemically
improved food-fluid, which transudes through the intestinal walls, and
conduct it in the form of blood to all parts of the body. This blood
generally contains millions of cells, which are of great importance
in metabolism. The blood-cells of the lower cœlomaria are usually
colorless (leucocytes), while those of the vertebrates are mostly red
(rhodocytes).

The circulation of the blood in most of the cœlomaria is effected
by a heart, a contractile tube, formed by the local thickening of
a skin-vessel, which contracts and beats regularly by means of its
muscular bands. Originally two of these skin-vessels were developed in
the abdominal wall--a dorsal vessel in the upper and ventral vessel
in the lower wall (as in many of the vermalia). The heart is formed
from the dorsal vessel in the mollusks and articulates, but from the
ventral in the tunicates and vertebrates. The arteries are the vessels
which conduct the blood from the heart; those which conduct it from the
body to the heart are the veins. The finest branchlets of both kinds
of vessels, which form the connecting link between them, are called
capillaries; these immediately effect the interchange of matter in the
tissues by osmosis. The blood-vessels co-operate very closely with the
respiratory organs.

The interchange of gases in the organism, which we call breathing or
respiration--the taking in of oxygen and giving out of carbonic-acid
gas--does not require special organs in the lower animals. In these
it is accomplished by epithelial cells, which clothe the surface of
the body--the ectoderm of the outer skin layer and the entoderm of
the inner gut-covering. As nearly all these cœlenteria live in the
water, or (as parasites) in some fluid that contains air, and as these
fluids are constantly pouring in and out of the body, the exchange of
gases is accomplished at the same time. But in the higher animals this
is rarely found, only in the small animals of simple construction (such
as the rotifers and other vermalia, and the smallest specimens of the
mollusca and articulata). The majority of these cœlomaria attain a
considerable size, and so require special organs; these afford a larger
surface for the exchange of gases in the limited space, and accomplish
a very peculiar chemical work as the localized organs of respiration.
They fall into two groups according to the nature of the environment;
gills for breathing in water and lungs for breathing on land. The
latter take the oxygen directly from the atmosphere, and the former
from the water, in which atmosphere air is contained in solution.

The instruments of water-respiration which we call gills (_branchiæ_)
are generally attenuated parts or processes of the outer skin or the
inner gastric skin; hence we distinguish the two chief forms, external
and internal gills. Both are richly provided with blood-vessels which
bring the blood from the body for the purpose of aëration. Cutaneous
or external gills are especially found in the vertebrates, in the form
of threads, combs, leaves, pencils, tufts of feathers, etc., which are
drawn out from the entoderm as local processes of the outer skin, and
afford a wide surface for the interchange of gases between the body
and the water. In the mollusca there are usually a pair of comb-shaped
gills near the heart; in the articulates there are several pairs,
repeated in the different segments of the body. Gastric or internal
gills are peculiar to the vertebrates and the next-related tunicates,
with a small group of the vermalia, the enteropneusta. In these the
fore-gut or head-gut is converted into a gill-organ, the wall of which
is pierced with gill-fissures; the water that has been taken in by the
mouth passes away through the outer openings of these fissures. In the
lower aquatic vertebrates (acrania, cyclostoma, and fishes) the gills
are the sole organs of breathing; in the higher animals, that live in
the air, they fall into disuse, and their place is taken by lungs.
Nevertheless, heredity is so tenacious that we find from three to five
pairs of rudimentary gill-clefts in the embryo right up to man, though
they have long since ceased to have any function. This is one of the
most interesting of the palingenetic facts that prove the descent of
the amniotes (including man) from the fishes.

The group of the aquatic echinoderms has some very peculiar features of
respiration. Their body possesses an extensive water-duct, which takes
in the sea-water and returns it by special openings (skin-pores or
madreporites). The many branches of these water-vessels or ambulacral
vessels fill with water, especially the tiny feelers or feet, which
extend from the skin in thousands; they serve at once for movement,
feeling, and breathing. But many of the echinoderms have also special
gills--the star-fish have small finger-shaped cutaneous gills on
the back, the sea-urchins special leaf-shaped ambulacral gills, the
sea-cucumbers internal gastric gills (tree-shaped branching internal
folds of the rectum).

The organs of air-breathing are called, in general, lungs (_pulmones_).
Like the organs of water-breathing, they are formed sometimes from
the external and sometimes from the internal covering of the body.
Cutaneous or external lungs are found in several groups of the
vertebrates. Among the mollusks the land-dwelling lung-snails have
acquired a lung-sac by change in the work of the gill cavity: among
the articulata the lung-spiders and scorpions have two or more
trachea-lungs; that is to say, cutaneous sacs, in which are enclosed
fanwise a number of trachea-leaves. In the other air-breathing
articulates (tracheata) we find, instead of these simple or branched,
and often bushlike, air-tubes (_tracheæ_), which spread through the
whole body and conduct the air direct to the tissues. They take the
air from without by special air-holes in the skin (_stigmata_ and
_spiracula_). The myriapods and insects generally have numbers of
air-holes; the spiders only one or two, more rarely four, pairs. When
these air-tube animals return to an aquatic life (as happens with the
larvæ of various groups of insects), the outer air-holes close up, and
new thread-shaped or leaf-shaped trachea-gills are formed, which take
the air from the surrounding water by osmosis. The oldest and lowest
tracheata are the primitive air-tube animals, or protracheata, and form
the link between the older annelids and the myriapods. They have a
number of clusters of short air-tubes distributed over the whole skin,
and it is clear that these have been evolved from simple skin-glands by
change of function.

Gastric or internal lungs are only found in the higher animals, to
which we give the name of quadrupeds (or _tetrapoda_), the amphibia and
amniotes, and their fishlike ancestors, the dipneusta. These internal
lungs are sac-shaped folds of the fore-gut, formed originally from the
swimming-bladder (_nectocystis_) of the fishes by change of function.
This air-filled bladder, a sac-shaped appendage of the gullet, merely
serves the purpose of a hydrostatic organ, by varying the specific
weight, in the fishes. When the fish wishes to descend it contracts
the bladder and becomes heavier; it rises to the top by inflating it
again. The lungs were formed by the adaptation of the blood-vessels
in the wall of the swimming-bladder to the interchange of gases. In
the oldest living lung-fishes (_ceratodus_) it is still a simple sac
(_monopneumones_=one-lunged); in the others the simple gullet-cavity
divides early into a pair of sacs (_dipneumones_, two-lunged). The
wind-pipe (_trachea_--not to be confused with the organ of the same
name in the tracheata) is formed by the lengthening of their stalk
and strengthening of it with cartilaginous rings. At the anterior end
of the trachea we find already formed in the amphibia the larynx, the
important organ of voice and speech.

The function of removing unusable matter is not less important to the
organism than breathing. Just as breathing gets rid of the poisonous
carbonic acid, so the kidneys remove fluid and solid excreta in the
shape of urine; these are partly acid (uric acid, hippuric acid, etc.),
partly alkaline (urea, guanine, etc.). In most of the cœlomaria
special organs for removing these would be superfluous, as this is
accomplished (like breathing) by the stream of water that is constantly
passing through the whole body. But with the platodes we begin to
find important excretory organs in the nephridia, a pair of simple
and ramified canals which lie on either side of the gut, and open
outward. These primitive renal canals are transmitted by the platodes
to the vermalia, and by these to the higher stems of the cœlomaria.
In the latter they generally open by special funnels into the inner
body-cavity, which serves as first receptacle for the urine. Their
outer opening sometimes (primarily) goes through the outer skin at the
back (excretory pores), sometimes (secondarily) to the rectum, and
so out through the anus. The oldest articulates, the annelids, have
a pair of nephridia in each segment of the body; each renal canal,
or segmental canal, consists of three sections, an inner funnel
which opens into the body-cavity, a middle glandular section, and an
external bladder that ejects the urine by contraction. The disposition
of the renal system in the internally articulated vertebrates is very
similar to this; but now complicated structures begin to appear, a
pair of compact kidneys (_renes_), which are made up of a number of
branching nephridia. Three generations of kidneys succeed each other,
as phylogenetic stages of evolution--first the primary fore-kidneys
(_protonephros_), in the middle the secondary primitive kidneys
(_mesonephros_), and last the tertiary after-kidneys (_metanephros_).
The latter are only reached in the three highest classes of
vertebrates, reptiles, birds, and mammals. Mollusks also have a couple
of compact kidneys. They are developed from a pair of nephridia, the
funnels of which open internally into the heart-pouch (the remainder of
the reduced body-cavity); at the back they open outward. The crustacea
also have generally a pair of renal canals. On the other hand, the
protracheata (the stem-forms of the air-tube animals) have segmental
nephridia, a pair to each joint inherited from their annelid ancestors.
The rest of the tracheata, the myriapods, spiders, and insects, have,
instead of these, Malpighi tubes, funnel-shaped glands that arise from
the entodermal rectum, sometimes one pair or less, sometimes a number
in a cluster.

While most plants are purely plasmodomous, and most animals
plasmophagous, there are nevertheless in both organic kingdoms a
number of species (especially the lower) whose metabolism has assumed
peculiar forms by their relations to other organisms. To this class
belong especially the saprosites and parasites. By saprosites are
understood those plants and animals which feed entirely or mostly
on the corpses of other animals, or the decomposed matter which is
unfit for the food of higher animals. Among the unicellular protists
many of the bacteria, especially, belong to this class, and also many
fungilla (_phycomycetes_); among the metaphyta the fungi (mycetes),
and among the metazoa the sponges. I have already spoken of the many
peculiarities of metabolism in the ubiquitous bacteria; while many of
them cause putrefaction, they at the same time feed on the parts of
other organisms which have died. The fungi feed for the most part on
the decayed remains of plants and the products of putrefaction which
accumulate on the ground. In this character of scavengers they play the
same important part on land as the sponges do at the bottom of the sea.
But a number of small groups of the higher plants and animals have, as
a secondary habit, turned to saprositism. Among the metaphyta we have
especially the monotropea (to which our native asparagus, _monotropa
hypopitys_, belongs) and many orchids (_neottia_, _corallorhiza_). As
they find their plasm directly in the decayed matter in the woods,
they have lost their chlorophyll and green leaves. Among the metazoa
many of the vermalia, and some of the higher animals, such as the
rain-worm and many tube-dwelling annelids (the mud-eaters, _limicolæ_),
etc., live on putrid matter. The organs which their nearest relatives
use for obtaining, breaking up, and digesting food (eyes, jaws,
teeth, digestive glands) have been entirely or mostly lost by these
saprosites. Many of them form a transitional type to the parasites.

By parasites, in the narrower sense, we understand, in modern biology,
only those organisms which live on others and derive their nourishment
from them. They are numerous in all the chief divisions of the plant
and animal kingdoms, and their modifications are of great interest
in connection with evolution. No other circumstance has so profound
an influence on the organism as adaptation to a parasitic existence.
Moreover, there is no other section in which we can follow, step
by step, the course of the degeneration which is caused, and show
clearly the mechanical nature of the process. Hence the science of
parasites--parasitology--is one of the soundest supports of the theory
of descent, and provides an abundance of the most striking proofs of
the much-contested inheritance of acquired characteristics.

Among the unicellular organisms, the bacteria are the most conspicuous
instances of manifold adaptation to parasitic habits. As we count
these unnucleated protozoa among the oldest and simplest organisms,
and trace them directly by metasitism to the plasmodomous chromacea,
it is very probable that they turned to parasitism very early in the
history of life. Even a part of the monera (in which group we must
place the bacteria on account of their lack of a nucleus) found it
convenient and advantageous to prey on other protists and assimilate
their plasm directly, instead of going through the laborious process
of carbon assimilation themselves in the hereditary fashion. This is
also true of the large class of the sporozoa or fungilla (_gregarinæ_,
_coccidia_, etc.), real nucleated cells, which have adapted themselves
in various ways to parasitic habits. Many of them live in the
rectum, the cœlum, or other organs of the higher animals (the
gregarinæ, especially in the articulates); others in the tissues (for
instance, the sarcosporidia in the muscles of mammals, the coccidia
and myxosporidia in the liver of vertebrates). A good many of them
are "cell-parasites," and live inside the cells of other animals,
which they destroy; such are the hœmosporidia, which destroy the
blood-cells in man, and so cause intermittent fever.

Among the multicellular metaphyta it is particularly the fungi that
have taken to parasitism in various ways. Many of them are, as is
known, the most dangerous enemies of the higher animals and plants. The
various species of fungi cause certain diseases by their poisonous
(chemical) action on the tissues of their host. It is well known how
our most important cultivated plants, the vine, potato, corn, coffee,
etc., are threatened by fungoid diseases; and this is also true of many
of the lower and higher animals. It is probable that the fungi have
been evolved polyphyletically by metasitism from the algæ.

Among the higher metaphyta we find parasitism in many different
families, especially orchids, rhinanthacea (_orobranche_,
_lathraca_), convolvulacea (_cuscuta_), aristolochiacea, loranthacea
(_viscum_, _loranthus_), rafflesiacea, etc. These various kinds of
flowering-plants often grow to resemble each other by convergence
(that is to say, by their common adaptation to parasitic life); they
lose their green leaves, the plasmodomous chlorophyll of which is of
no further use to them. Frequently rudimentary leaves are left on them
in the form of colorless scales. For the purpose of clinging to the
plants they live on, and penetrating into their tissues, they evolve
special clinging apparatus (haustoria, suctorial cups, creepers). Their
stalks and roots are also modified in a characteristic way. The whole
productive force of these parasites is expended on their sexual organs;
_rafflesia_ has the largest flowers there are, more than a yard in
diameter.

Parasitism in the metazoa (in all groups) is even more frequent and
interesting than in the metaphyta. The mollusks and echinoderms
show the least disposition for it, and the platodes, vermalia, and
articulates the most. Even among the gastræada, the common ancestral
group of the metaphyta, we find parasites (kyemaria and gastremaria).
The protection they find inside their hosts is probably the reason
why these oldest of the metazoa have remained unchanged to the
present day. Real parasites are not numerous among the sponges and
cnidaria. But they are very numerous among the platodes. The suctorial
worms (_trematodes_) live partly externally (as ectoparasites)
on other animals and partly inside them (as endoparasites), and
produce serious diseases in them. They have lost the vibratory
coat of their free-living ancestors, the turbellaria, and acquired
clinging apparatus instead. The tape-worms (_cestodes_), which live
entirely in the interior of other animals, and are descended from the
suctorial worms, have lost their gastro-canal; they are nourished by
imbibition through the skin. The same degeneration is found in the
itchworms (_acanthocephala_) among the vermalia, the parasitic snails
(_entoconcha_) among the mollusks, and the root-crabs (_rhizocephala_)
among the crustacea.

The class of crustacea affords the most numerous and most instructive
examples of degeneration through parasitism, because in this class it
is found polyphyletically in very different orders and families, and
because their highly organized body shows every stage of degeneration
together in the different organs. The free-living crustacea generally
move about very rapidly and ingeniously; their numerous bones are
well jointed and excellently adapted for the most varied methods of
locomotion (running, swimming, climbing, digging, etc.); their organs
of sense are highly developed. As these are no longer used when
they take to parasitism, they atrophy and gradually disappear. The
younger crustacea all proceed from the same characteristic form of
the _nauplius_, and swim freely about; later, when they settle down
to parasitic habits, their organs of sense and locomotion atrophy. As
Fritz Müller-Desterro showed in his famous little work, _For Darwin_
(1864), forty years ago, the crustacea afford most luminous proofs of
the theory of descent and selection, and of progressive heredity and
the biogenetic law. These facts are the more important as the crab
undergoes the same degeneration by parasitic habits in a number of
different orders and families.

From parasitism we must entirely distinguish that intimate life-union
of two different organisms which we called symbiosis or mutualism.
Here we have an association of two living things for their mutual
benefit, while the parasite lives entirely at the expense of his
host. Symbiosis is found among the protista, being very wide-spread
among the radiolaria. In the gelatinous envelope (_calymma_) which
encloses the central capsule of their unicellular bodies we find a
number of motionless yellow cells (_zooxanthella_) scattered. These
are protophyta or (as it is said) "unicellular algæ" of the class of
paulotomea (_palmellacea_). They receive protection and a home from the
radiolaria, grow plasmodomously, and multiply by rapid segmentation.
A large part of the starch-flour and the plasm which they form by
carbon-assimilation goes as food directly to the radiolarium-host; the
other part of the xanthella goes on growing and multiplying. Similar
yellow zooxanthella or green zoochlorella are found as symbionta in the
tissues of many animals. Our common fresh-water polyp (_hydra viridis_)
owes its green color to the zoochlorella which live in great numbers
on the ciliated cells of its entoderm (the digestive gut-epithelium).
In general, however symbiosis is rarer in the metazoa than in the
metaphyta. In the latter case it is the fundamental feature of a whole
class of plants, the lichens. Each lichen consists of a plasmodomous
plant (sometimes a protophyte, sometimes an alga) and a plasmophagous
fungus. The latter affords a home, protection, and water to the green
alga, which repays the service by providing food.




