XV

THE ORIGIN OF LIFE


 The miracle of the origin of life--Creation of species: Moses and
 Agassiz--Creation of the first cells: Wigand and Reinke--Agnostic
 position: resignation--Eternity hypothesis (dualistic, Helmholtz;
 monistic, Preyer)--Archigony hypothesis (autogony hypothesis,
 Haeckel, Nägeli; cyanic hypothesis, Pflüger, Verworn)--Spontaneous
 generation--Saprobiosis or necrobiosis--Experiments in spontaneous
 generation--Pasteur--Stages of archigony--Observation of
 archigony--Synthesis of plasma--Value of the unsuccessful experiments
 to produce plasm artificially--The logic of modern experimental
 biology.


The question of the origin of life is one of the most important and
interesting, but one of the most difficult and complicated, problems
with which the mind of man has been occupied for thousands of years.
There are few other questions (such as the freedom of the will or
personal immortality) on which such different and contradictory views
have been expressed, and few that remain so far from being closed
at the present day. There are, moreover, few problems on which the
opinions of even distinguished thinkers diverge so much, and have
degenerated so much into fantastic hypotheses. This is partly due to
the extreme difficulty of giving a strictly scientific solution of
the problem and partly to the confusion of ideas which is so great in
this controversy, the lack of clear rational insight, and the powerful
authority of the prevailing religious faith and other venerable dogmas.

The easiest and quickest thing to do is to cut the Gordian knot of
the question with the sword of faith, or answer it with a belief in
a supernatural creation. The first article of the creed was given
to us in childhood as the foundation of all cosmic philosophy. It
is based on the Mosaic account of creation in the first chapter of
Genesis. As I have fully examined its scientific value in the second
chapter of my _History of Creation_, I may refer the reader thereto.
It is unquestionable that this myth still has a very great practical
influence; the great majority of the clergy cling to it because it is
found in the infallible "word of God." Most governments, which hold
blind faith to be an important element of education, include it in the
code for the elementary school. On the other hand, it is difficult
to find a man of science who will uphold it to-day. The gifted Louis
Agassiz made one of the most remarkable attempts to do this in
his _Essay on Classification_ (1858), a book that appeared almost
contemporaneously with Darwin's epoch-making _Origin of Species_, and
dealt with the general problems of biology from the directly opposite,
the mystic, point of view. According to Agassiz, each species of animal
or plant is an "incarnate thought of the Creator."

Differing from this Biblical fancy of the supernatural creation of
each species, two botanists, Wigand of Marburg and Reinke of Kiel,
have lately restricted the action of the celestial architect very
considerably; they have ascribed to him only the creation of the
primitive cells, which he is supposed to have endowed with the power
to develop into the higher organisms. Wigand assumed for the origin
of each species a special primitive cell and a long phylogenetic
development of this; Reinke prefers a stem, composed of a number of
species. These modern creative theories have no more scientific value
than that of Agassiz; they are equally based on pure superstition
(_cf._ chapters i.-iii.).

A different attitude from this irrational positive superstition is
the sceptical view of those scientists who regard the question of the
origin of life as insoluble or transcendental. Darwin and Virchow are
representatives of this agnostic position; they held that we know
nothing, and can know nothing, about the origin of the first organisms.
Darwin, for instance, explains in his chief work that he "has nothing
to do with the origin of the fundamental spiritual forces, or with
that of life itself." This is a complete abandonment of the task of
solving a scientific problem which must present as definite a subject
of inquiry to modern research as any other evolutionary problem. The
origin of life on our planet represents a fixed point in its history.
However, there is nothing to be said if a scientist chooses to make no
inquiry into it. A number of distinguished modern scientists maintain
this agnostic attitude; they are more or less convinced that the origin
of life is a natural process, but believe we have not as yet the means
to explain it.

Different, again, is a third attitude which regards the problem of
the origin of life as extremely difficult, yet capable of solution.
This is the position of Dubois-Reymond, for instance, who counts the
origin of life as the third great cosmic problem. Most of the modern
scientists who have worked on the problem are of this opinion, although
their views as to the way of solving it differ very much. We are
confronted, in the first place, with two essentially different views
which we may call the eternity-hypothesis and the theory of archigony
(or spontaneous generation). According to the first view, organic life
is eternal; according to the second, it began at a definite point of
time. The eternity-hypothesis has assumed two very different forms, one
of which has a dualistic and the other a monistic base. Helmholtz is a
representative of the former theory, and Preyer of the latter.

Hermann Eberhard Richter put forward, in 1865, the hypothesis that
infinite space is full throughout of the germs of living things,
just as it is of inorganic bodies; both of them are in a condition
of eternal development. When the ubiquitous germs reach a mature and
habitable cosmic body, which possesses heat and moisture in the proper
degrees for their development, they break into life, and may lead to
the formation of a whole world of living things. Richter conceives
these ubiquitous germs as living cells, and formulates the principle:
_Omne vivum ab æternitate e cellula_ (Every living thing is eternal and
from a cell). In much the same way the botanist Anton Kerner postulates
the eternity of organic life and its complete independence of the
inorganic world. But the difficulties encountered by this hypothesis,
in the indefinite form that Kerner gives it, are so great and so
obvious that his theory has won no recognition.

However, the "cosmozoic hypothesis" attained a great popularity when it
was afterwards taken up by two of the most distinguished physicists,
Hermann Helmholtz and Sir W. Thomson (Lord Kelvin). Helmholtz
formulated the alternative thus (in 1884): "Organic life either came
into existence at a certain period, or it is eternal." He declared for
the latter view, on the ground that we have not succeeded in producing
living organisms by artificial means. He supposes that the meteors
that roam about the universe might contain the germs of organisms,
and, under favorable conditions, these might reach the earth or other
planets and develop thereon. This cosmozoic hypothesis of Helmholtz
is untenable, because the physical features of space (the extreme
temperatures, the absolute dryness, the absence of atmosphere, etc.)
exclude the lasting existence of plasm on meteorites in the form of
organic germs with a capacity to live. The hypothesis is, moreover,
logically useless, since it does not solve, but postpones, the
question of the origin of organic life. If it is consistently worked
out, it leads to pure cosmological dualism.

Another and very different theory of the eternity of life has been
elaborated by Theodor Fechner (1873) and Wilhelm Preyer (1880). Both
these scientists extend the idea of life to the whole cosmos, and
reject the distinction that is usually drawn between the organic and
the inorganic. Fechner goes so far as to ascribe consciousness to the
whole universe and every single body in it, and regards individual
organisms merely as parts of one vast universal organism. His system
is, therefore, panpsychistic, and, at the same time, pantheistic, as he
somewhat mystically connects the idea of a conscious God with that of
a living universe. Preyer generally agrees with him in extending the
idea of life to the whole universe, and conceiving it as an organism.
He applies his theory in the symbolic sense which I alluded to on page
38, and described as impracticable. The fiery mass of the forming
earth is the gigantic organism, and Preyer gives the name of "life" to
its rotatory movement (or gravitational energy). As it cooled down,
the heavier metals (the dead inorganic masses) separated from it;
from the rest of it were formed first simple and afterwards complex
carbon-combinations, and finally albumin and plasm. This extension
of the word "organism" has very properly met with little approval in
biology. It only increases the confusion, and the difficulty of marking
off biological from abiological science, which is both practically
necessary and theoretically justified.

If, then, in our opinion, the eternity-hypotheses are of no more
value than the creation-hypotheses, we have left, for the purpose of
answering the great question of the origin of life, only the third
group of scientific theories which I have combined under the general
head or archigony. They start from the following points: 1. Organic
life is everywhere bound up with the plasm (or protoplasm), a chemical
substance of a viscous character, having albuminous matter and water as
its chief constituents. 2. The characteristic movements of this living
substance, to which we give the name of organic life, are physical and
chemical processes, that can only take place within certain limits of
temperature (between the freezing-point and boiling-point of water).
3. Beyond these limits organic life may in certain circumstances be
maintained for a time in a latent condition (apparent death, potential
life); but this latent condition is restricted to a certain (and
generally short) period. 4. As the earth, like all the other planets,
was for a long time in a state of incandescence, at a temperature
of several thousand degrees, living organisms (viscous albuminoids)
cannot possibly have existed on it, and so cannot be eternal. 5.
Fluid water, the first condition for the appearance of organic life,
cannot have formed on it until the crust at the surface had fallen
below boiling-point. 6. The chemical processes which first set in
at this stage of development must have been catalyses, which led to
the formation of albuminous combinations, and eventually of plasm.
7. The earliest organisms to be thus formed can only have been
plasmodomous monera, structureless organisms without organs; the
first forms in which the living matter individualized were probably
homogeneous globules of plasm, like certain of the actual chromacea
(_chroococcus_). 8. The first cells were developed secondarily from
these primitive monera, by separation of the central caryoplasm
(nucleus) and peripheral cytoplasm (cell-body).

The monistic hypothesis of abiogenesis, or autogony (=
self-development) in the strictly scientific sense of the word, was
first formulated by me in 1866 in the second book of the _General
Morphology_. The solid foundation for it was found in the monera I had
described, the very simple organisms without organs that had up to that
time been overlooked or thrust aside. It is of radical importance, in
giving a naturalistic solution of the problem of the origin of life, to
start from these structureless granules of living matter, and not--as
still generally happens--from the cell; these nucleated elementary
organisms could not be the earliest archigonous living things, but
must have been evolved secondarily from the unnucleated monera. Hence,
I made a very thorough study of these rudimentary organisms in my
_Monograph on the Monera_ (1870), and endeavored to formulate it more
clearly later on (in the first volume of the _Systematic Phylogeny_).
In regard to the chemical question of the first formation of plasm
and its inorganic preparation, Edward Pflüger conducted some valuable
investigations, and recognized that the radical of cyanogen was the
chief element of the living plasm. I may therefore distinguish two
different stages of the theory--my own older autogony-hypothesis and
the later cyanogen-hypothesis.

The theory of abiogenesis, or archigony, which I advanced in 1866, and
have developed in later writings, appeals directly to the biochemical
facts that modern vegetal physiology has firmly established. The
chief of these facts is that even the living green plant-cell has the
synthetic faculty of plasmodomism or carbon-assimilation; that is to
say, it is able to build up, by a chemical synthesis and reduction,
from simple inorganic compounds (water, carbonic acid, nitric acid,
and ammonia), the complex albuminous compounds which we call plasm
or protoplasm, and which we regard as the active living substance
and the true material basis of all vital function (_cf._ chapter
vi.). All botanists are now agreed that this most important process
of vegetal life, the fundamental process of all organic life and all
organization, is a purely chemical (or, in the wider sense, physical)
process, and that there is no question of a specific vital force or a
mystic constructor (like the famous "mechanical engineer of life"),
or any other transcendental agency, in connection with it. The tiny
chemical laboratory in which this remarkable organoplastic process
takes place under the influence of sunlight is, in the simplest
plants, the chromacea, either the whole homogeneous globule of plasm
(_chroococcus_) or its bluish-green surface-layer, which is active
as a chromatic principle (chromatophore). But in most plants these
reduction-laboratories are the chromatella or chromatophora, which
have been differentiated from the rest of the plasm of the cell, and
are colorless globular leucoplasts within its dark interior, or green
chromoplasts (or granules of chlorophyll) at its illumined surface.
My theory of archigony only assumes that this chemical process of
plasmodomism which we find repeated every second in every plant-cell
exposed to the sunlight, and which has become an "inherited habit" of
the green plant-cell, developed of itself at the beginning of organic
life; in other words, it is a catalytic process (or one analogous to
catalysis), the physical and chemical conditions of which were present
in the condition of organic nature at that time.

My hypothesis was very strongly confirmed twenty years ago by the
adhesion of the able botanist, Carl Nägeli. In his instructive work,
_A Mechanical-physiological Theory of Evolution_ (1884), he supported
all the principal ideas as to the natural origin of life which I
had advanced in 1866. He formulates the chief part of them in this
admirable principle:

 The origin of the organic from the inorganic is, in the first place,
 not a question of experience and experiment, but a fact deduced from
 the law of the constancy of matter and force. If all things in the
 material world are causally related, if all phenomena proceed on
 natural principles, organisms, which are formed of and decay into
 the same matter, must have been derived originally from inorganic
 compounds.

This excellent and clear declaration of a distinguished scientist and
profound thinker might be taken to heart by the "exact" scientists who
are always attacking the monistic theory of archigony as an unproved
hypothesis, or regard the whole problem as insoluble. Nägeli has,
moreover, proceeded to make a thorough study of the molecular processes
involved, and embodied the results in his idioplasm theory. He
believes that at the beginning of organization the definite autonomous
arrangement of the smallest homogeneous parts of the plasm was a
matter of the greatest importance. In his opinion these "micella" are
crystalline groups of molecules, arranged multifariously in strings and
parallel rows.

A similar and more elaborate attempt to give a physical explanation
of the processes of archigony and trace them to mechanical molecular
structures was made by Ludwig Zehnder in 1899 in his work on _The
Origin of Life_. He believes that the smallest and lowest life-unities
(the micellar strings of Nägeli and the biophora of Weismann,
corresponding to my plastidules) have a tubular shape, and so he calls
them "fistella." He supposes that these invisible molecular structures
are regularly arranged in millions in the plasma of the cell, and
differentiated in such a way that some will effect endosmosis, others
contraction, others the conduction of stimuli, and so on. As in
the similar work of Nägeli and others, the value of this molecular
hypothesis is that it stimulates us to attempt to conceive the mode of
the arrangement and movement of the molecules of plasm in the process
of archigony on physical principles.

A more interesting and notable attempt to penetrate into the mysterious
obscurity of the chemical processes in archigony was made in 1875
by the distinguished physiologist, Edward Pflüger, in his essay on
_Physiological Combustion in the Living Organism_. He starts from
the fact that the plasm (or protoplasm) is the material basis of all
vital phenomena, and that this living matter owes its properties to
the chemical properties of the albumin (whether we regard this as a
chemical unity, protein or protalbumin, or as a mixture of different
compounds). However, Pflüger sharply distinguishes between the living
albumin of the plasm out of which all organisms are built, and the dead
albumin, such as we find it, for instance, in the glairy albumin of the
hen's egg. Only the living albumin (plasm) decomposes of itself in a
slight degree, and to a greater extent under the influence of external
excitation; the dead albumin will remain intact for a long time under
favorable conditions. The cause of the extraordinary instability of the
living albumin is its intramolecular oxygen--that is to say, the oxygen
that is taken into the interior of the plasma-molecules in breathing,
and effects there a disassociation, surrounding the atoms and breaking
up the new-formed groups.

The real cause of this rapid decomposability of the plasm, and of the
accompanying formation of carbonic acid, is found in the cyanogen,
a remarkable body composed of an atom of carbon and an atom of
nitrogen, which, in conjunction with potassium, forms the well-known
and very virulent poison, cyanide of potassium. The non-nitrogenous
decomposition-products of the dead and the living albumin agree in the
main, but their nitrogenous products are totally different. Uric acid,
creotin, guanine, and the other decomposition products of plasm contain
the cyanogen-radical, and the most important of all, urea, can be
artificially produced from cyanic compounds, as Wöhler showed in 1828.
From this we may infer that the living albumin always contains the
cyanogen-radical, and that dead nutritive albumin does not. The belief
that it is cyanogen which gives its characteristic vital properties
to the plasm is supported by a number of analogies that we find to
exist between cyanide compounds, especially cyanic acid (C N O H.) and
the living albumin. Both bodies are fluid and transparent at a low
temperature, while they set at a higher; both of them break up in the
presence of water into carbonic acid and ammonia; both produce urea by
disassociation (by the intramolecular surrounding of the atoms, not by
direct oxydation). "The similarity of the two substances is so great,"
says Pflüger, "that I might describe cyanic acid as a semi-living
molecule." Both substances grow in the same way by concatenation of the
atoms, homogeneous groups of atoms joining together chainwise in large
masses.

There is an especial interest in connection with the theory of
archigony and its physical basis in the chemical fact that cyanogen and
its compounds--cyanide of potassium, cyanic acid, cyanide of hydrogen,
etc.--are only formed at incandescent heat; that is to say, when the
requisite inorganic nitrogenous compounds are put with glowing coals,
or the mixture is heated to incandescence. Other essential constituents
of albumin, such as carburetted hydrogen or alcohol-radical, can be
formed synthetically in heat. "Thus," says Pflüger, "nothing is clearer
than the possibility of the formation of cyanic compounds when the
earth was entirely or partially in a state of incandescence or great
heat. We see how extraordinarily all the facts of chemistry point to
fire as the force that has produced the constituents of albumin by
synthesis. Hence life was born from fire, and the chief conditions of
its appearance are associated with a time when the earth was a glowing
ball of fire. When we remember the incalculably long period in which
the surface of the earth was slowly cooling, we see that cyanogen, and
the compounds that contained cyanogen, and carburetted hydrogen, had
plenty of time and opportunity to follow out to any extent their great
tendency to the transposition and formation of polymeria (chains of
atoms), and, with the co-operation of oxygen and afterwards of water
and salts, to evolve into the self-decomposable albumin which is living
matter." In regard to the latter feature, it is well to emphasize the
fact that, as will be understood, there must have been a long series
of chemical intermediary stages between the incandescent formation of
cyanogen and the appearance of the aqueous living plasm.

Pflüger's cyanogen theory does not conflict with my monera theory, but
rather supplements it, by its careful and thoroughly scientific study
of a much earlier stage of primitive biogenesis--in a sense, the first
period of preparation for the formation of albumin. This must be well
borne in mind in view of the attacks which have lately been made on
it by Neumeister and other vitalists; it is supposed to be untenable,
because "there is an impassable gulf between cyanic compounds and
proteids." This criticism is answered by the living albumin itself,
which always contains in its nitrogenous decomposition products the
radical of cyanide or other substances (urea) that can be artificially
produced from cyanic compounds. Another objection is that "the cyanic
compounds which were formed in the heat must have very quickly perished
on the subsequent appearance of water." The objection has no weight,
since we can form no definite idea as to the special conditions of
chemical activity in those times. We can only say that the conditions
during this long period (embracing millions of years) were totally
different from those of chemical action at the surface of the earth
to-day. The real ground of the opposition of Neumeister and other
vitalists is their dualistic conception of nature, which will maintain
at all costs the deep gulf between the organic and inorganic worlds.

Max Verworn, in his _General Physiology_, has fully described and
criticised the various theories of the appearance of life on the earth.
He rightly attributes a great value to Pflüger's cyanogen theory,
because "it makes a strictly scientific study of the problem in close
relation to the facts of physiological chemistry, and goes thoroughly
into detail." He agrees with Pflüger when he expresses himself as
follows: "I would say, therefore, that the first albumin to be formed
was in point of fact living matter, endued with the property in all its
radicals of attracting especially homogeneous parts with great force
and preference, in order to build them chemically into the molecule,
and so grow indefinitely. On this view the living albumin need not
have a constant molecular weight, because it is a huge molecule in an
unceasing process of formation and decomposition, probably acting on
the ordinary chemical molecules as a sun does on a small meteor." This
theory, which I believe to be correct, is also maintained by many other
modern scientists who have made a particular study of the difficult
question of the nature and origin of the albuminoids.

Now that we have described the various modern theories of archigony
that are worth considering, and recognized with Nägeli that the
original development of the organic from the inorganic is a fact, we
may glance at the older theories which, under the name of "spontaneous
generation," afforded matter for a good deal of controversy. It is true
that they are now almost entirely abandoned, but the experiments in
connection with them excited a good deal of interest and led to many
misunderstandings.

The older hypotheses of "spontaneous generation" do not bear on our
problem of archigony (or the first development of living matter from
lifeless inorganic carbon compounds) but relate to the formation of
lower organisms out of the putrid and decomposing organic elements of
higher organisms. In order to distinguish these hypotheses from the
totally different theory of archigony, it is better to give them the
name of saprobiosis (an earlier name was necrobiosis), which means
the birth of living from dead (_nekron_) or putrid (_sapron_) organic
matter. Saprobiosis is preferable, because necrobiosis is better used
in a different sense, for the dead organic parts which gradually bring
about the death of the living body (see p. 106). It was believed in
ancient times that lower organisms could arise from the dead remains of
higher organisms, such as fleas from manure, lice from morbid pustules
in the skin, moths from old furs, and mussels from slime in the water.
As these stories were supported by the authority of Aristotle, and
on that account believed by St. Augustine and other fathers, and
reconciled with the faith, they were held until the beginning of the
eighteenth century. Even in the year 1713 the botanist Heucherus stated
that the green duck-weed (_lemna_) is only condensed grease from the
surface of foul standing water, and that water-cress was formed from it
in fresh running water.

The first scientific refutation of these old stories was made by the
Italian physician, Francisco Redi, in 1674, on the basis of very
careful experiment: he was persecuted for "unbelief" on that account.
He showed that all these animals arose from eggs that had been
deposited by female animals in dung, skin, fur, slime, etc. But at that
time the proof could not be extended to the tape-worms, maw-worms,
and other intestinal animals (_entozoa_), which live inside other
animals (in the bowels, blood, brain, or liver). It was still believed
that these arise from diseased parts of the host-animals in which
they live, until about the middle of the nineteenth century. It was
not until 1840-1860 that it was shown by the experiments of Siebold,
Leuckart, Van Beneden, Virchow, and other famous biologists, that all
these intestinal animals have come from without into the animals they
live in, and propagate there by eggs. Of late years the proof has been
applied all round.

On the other hand, the hypothesis of saprobiosis retained its position
until quite recently for one section of the smallest and lowest
organisms, the microscopic forms of life, invisible to the naked eye,
which were formerly called infusoria, and which we now call by the
wider name of protists or unicellulars. When Leeuwenhoek discovered the
infusoria in 1675 with the newly invented microscope, and showed that
they arise in great quantities in infusions of hay, moss, flesh, and
other putrid organic substances, it was generally believed that they
were spontaneously generated there. The Abbé Spallanzani showed in 1687
that no infusoria appear in these infusions if they are well boiled and
the vessel is carefully closed; the boiling kills the germs in them,
and the exclusion of air prevents the entrance of fresh germs. In spite
of this, many microscopists still believed that certain infusoria,
particularly the very small and simple bacteria, could be born directly
from putrid or diseased tissues of organisms, or from decomposing
organic fluids; the opinion was maintained by Pouchet at Paris in 1858,
and afterwards by Charlton Bastian. The controversy about the subject
moved the Paris Academy in 1858 to offer a prize for "careful research
that would throw new light on the question of spontaneous generation."
It fell to the famous Louis Pasteur, who proved, by a series of
ingenious experiments, that there are everywhere in the atmosphere
numbers of germs of microbes or microscopic organisms floating among
the dust particles, and that these grow and reproduce when they reach
water. Not only infusoria, but also small highly organized plants and
animals--such as lichens, mosses, rotifers, and tardigrades--can live
for months in a desiccated condition, be carried in all directions
by the wind, and reawaken into life when they reach water. On the
other hand, Pasteur showed convincingly that organisms never appear
in infusions of organic substances when they are sufficiently boiled
and the atmosphere that reaches them has been chemically purified. He
summed up the results of his rigorous experiments, which were confirmed
by Robert Koch and other bacteriologists, and gave rise to the modern
precautions as to disinfection, in the maxim: "Spontaneous or equivocal
generation is a myth."

The famous experiments of Pasteur and his successors had destroyed the
myth of saprobiosis, but not the theory of archigony. These entirely
different hypotheses are still very frequently confused, because the
old title of "spontaneous generation" is used for both. We still read
sometimes that the "unscientific" belief in abiogenesis has been
definitely refuted by these experiments, and that the question of
the origin of life has thus become an insoluble enigma. There is an
astonishing superficiality and lack of discernment in such remarks;
they would hardly be possible in any other branch of science. But in
biology--many of its distinguished representatives continue to say--we
have only to observe and correctly describe facts; the formation
of clear ideas and the indulgence in reflection on the facts are
unnecessary and dangerous, and, therefore, to be avoided! It is due
to this pitiable condition of biological methods of research that
our hypothesis of archigony is still attacked, or else ignored. Why?
Because the false hypothesis of saprobiosis, which has absolutely
nothing in common with it but the name "spontaneous generation," has
been refuted by the experiments of Pasteur and his colleagues![9]
These experiments prove nothing whatever beyond the fact that new
organisms are not formed in certain infusions of organic matter--under
definite, artificial conditions. They do not even touch the important
and pressing question, which alone interests us: "How did the earliest
organic inhabitants of our earth, the primitive organisms, arise from
inorganic compounds?"

The great popularity of the famous experiments of Pasteur on
spontaneous generation, and the unfortunate confusion of ideas which
was caused by the false interpretation of his results, make it
necessary for me to say a word on the general value of scientific
experiments in many questions. Since Bacon introduced experiment into
science three hundred years ago, and gave it a logical basis, both
our speculative knowledge of nature and the practical application
of our knowledge made remarkable progress. New methods of research
made it possible for modern workers to penetrate far more deeply into
the nature of phenomena than the older thinkers had done, who had no
knowledge of experiment. Especially in the nineteenth century the
development of the experimental method, or the putting of a question to
nature, led to enormous advances in the various sciences.

In the subject we are considering the question to be put to nature
is: "Under what conditions and in what manner is living matter (or
plasm) formed from lifeless inorganic compounds?" We may confidently
assume that in the period when archigony took place--the time when
organic life first appeared on the cooled surface of the earth, at
the beginning of the Laurentian Age--the conditions of existence were
totally different from what they are now; but we are very far from
having a clear idea of what they were, or from being able to reproduce
them artificially. We are just as far from having a thorough chemical
acquaintance with the albuminous compounds to which plasm belongs.
We can only assume that the plasma-molecule is extremely large, and
made up of more than a thousand atoms, and that the arrangement and
connection of the atoms in the molecule are very complicated and
unstable. But of the real features of this intricate structure we
have as yet no conception. As long as we are ignorant of this complex
molecular structure of albumin, it is useless to attempt to produce
it artificially. Yet in this position of the matter we would seek
to produce that great wonder of life, the plasm, artificially, and
when the experiment miscarries (as we should expect) we cry out:
"Spontaneous generation is impossible."

When we carefully consider the intelligent experiments that have been
made in regard to archigony in the light of these facts, it is clear
that their negative result does not in the slightest degree affect our
question. The much-admired experiments of Pasteur and his colleagues
prove merely that in certain artificial conditions infusoria are not
formed in decomposing organic compounds (or the dead tissues of highly
organized histona); they cannot possibly prove that saprobioses of this
kind do not take place under other conditions. They tell us nothing
whatever about the possibility or reality of archigony; in the form
in which I put the scientific hypothesis in 1866 it is completely
untouched by all these experiments. It remains intact as the first
attempt to give a provisional reply--if only in the form of a temporary
hypothesis--on the basis of modern science to one of the chief
questions of natural philosophy.

In my _General Morphology_ (1866), and afterwards in my _Biological
Studies on the Monera and other Protists_, and the first volume of
my _Systematic Phylogeny_ (1894), I attempted to sketch in detail
the stages of the process to which I give the name of archigony. I
distinguished two principal stages--_autogony_ (the formation of the
first living matter from inorganic nitrogenous carbon-compounds) and
_plasmogony_ (the formation of the first individualized plasm; the
earliest organic individuals in the form of monera). In more recent
efforts I have made use of the important results reached by Nägeli
(1884) in his investigations of the same subject. In regard to some
important points relating to the chemico-physical part of the question,
Nägeli has, in his _Mechanico-physiological Theory of Evolution_
(chapter ii.), gone more into the details of the process of archigony.
To the earliest living things, which were formed by "unicellular
organization" of the plasm out of simple inorganic compounds, he
gives the name of _probia_ or _probionta_, and thinks that these had
an even simpler structure than my monera. This view seems to rest on
a misunderstanding. Nägeli does not strictly follow my definition,
"organisms without organs" (that is to say, structureless living
particles of plasm without morphological differentiation), but he has
in mind the individual rhizopod-like organisms which I had at first
described as monera--_protamœba_, _protogenes_, _protomyxa_, etc. In
my present view the chromacea, or plasmodomous phytomonera, are much
more important than these plasmophagous zoomonera. It is curious that
Nägeli does not make thorough use of their primitive organization for
the establishment of his theory, although he has had the great merit of
describing these most primitive of all living organisms as unicellular
algæ (1842). As a matter of fact, the simplest chromacea (chroococcus
and related forms) approach so closely to his hypothetical probia
or probionta that the only things we can regard as the rudiments of
organization in the chroococcacea are the secretion of a protective
membrane about the homogeneous plasma-globule and the separation of
the blueish-green cortical zone from the colorless central granule.
The more important of the further conclusions of Nägeli are those
which relate to the mode of the primitive abiogenesis and the frequent
repetition of this physical process.

Recently Max Kassowitz, in the second volume of his _General Biology_
(1899), has gone fully into the various stages of the process of
archigony, as a sequel to his metabolic theory of the building up and
decay of plasm, from the point of view of physiological chemistry. He
says very truly that the development of living from lifeless matter
must not be conceived as a sudden leap; the very complicated chemical
unities which now form the basis of life have been slowly and gradually
evolved during an incalculably long period by the way of substitution
for simpler compounds. We may join these views--which generally accord
with my earlier deductions--with Pflüger's cyanogen theory, and so draw
up the following theses:

1. A preliminary stage to archigony is the formation of certain
nitrogenous carbon-compounds which may be classed in the cyanic
group (cyanic acid, etc.). 2. When the crust of the earth stiffened,
water was formed in the fluid condition; under its influence, and in
consequence of the great changes in the carbonic-acid laden atmosphere,
a series of complicated nitrogenous carbon-compounds were formed from
these simple cyanic compounds, and these first produced albumin (or
protein). 3. The molecules of albumin arranged themselves in a certain
way, according to their unstable chemical attractions, in larger groups
of molecules (pleona or micella). 4. The albumin-micella combined to
form larger aggregations, and produced homogeneous plasma-granules
(plassonella). 5. As they grew the plassonella divided, and
formed larger plasma-granules of a homogeneous character: monera
(= probionta). 6. In consequence of surface-strain or of chemical
differentiation, there took place a separation of the firmer cortical
layer (membrane) from the softer marrow layer (central granule), as in
many of the chromacea. 7. Afterwards the simplest (nucleated) cells
were formed from these unnucleated cytodes, the hereditary mass of the
plasm gathering within the monera and condensing into a firm nucleus.

It is an interesting, but at present unanswered, question whether the
process of archigony only occurred once in the course of time or was
frequently repeated. Reasons can be given for both views. Pflüger
says: "In the plant the living albumin only continues to do what it
has done ever since its origin--constantly to regenerate itself or to
grow; hence I believe that all the albumin in the world comes from that
source. On that account I doubt if spontaneous generation takes place
in our time. Moreover, comparative biology directly shows that all life
has come from one single root." However, this view does not exclude the
possibility of the chemical process of spontaneous plasmodomism having
been frequently repeated--under like conditions--in the same form in
primordial times.

On the other side, Nägeli especially has pointed out that there is
no reason to prevent us from thinking that archigony was repeated
several times, even down to our own day. Whenever the physical
conditions for the chemical process of plasmodomism were given, it
might be repeated anywhere at any time. As to locality, the sea-shore
probably affords the most favorable conditions; as, for instance, on
the surface of fine moist sand the molecular forces of matter in all
its conditions--gaseous, fluid, viscous, and solid--find the best
conditions for acting on each other. It is a fact that to-day all the
various evolutionary forms of living matter--from the simplest moneron
(chroococcus) to the plain nucleated cell, from this to the highly
organized cell of the radiolaria and infusoria, from the simple ovum to
the most elaborate tissue-structure in the higher plants and animals,
from the amphioxus to man--come in an order of succession. There are
only two ways of explaining this fact: either the simplest living
organisms, the chromacea and bacteria, the palmella and amœbæ, have
remained unchanged or made very little advance in organization since
the beginning of life--more than a hundred million years; or else
the phylogenetic process of their transformation has been frequently
repeated in the course of this period, and is being repeated to-day.
Even if the latter were the case, we should hardly be in a position to
learn it by direct observation.

Assuming that the simplest organisms are still formed by abiogenesis,
the direct observation of the process would probably be impossible,
or at least extremely difficult, for the following reasons: 1. The
earliest and simplest organisms are most probably globular particles
of plasm, without any visible structure, like the simplest living
chromacea (_chroococcus_). 2. These plasmodomous monera cannot be
distinguished from the chromoplasts (chlorophyll-granules), which live
inside plant-cells, and may continue after the death of the cells
to multiply independently by cleavage. 3. We must admit with Nägeli
that the original size of these probionta (in spite of the relatively
colossal size of their molecules) is very small--much too small to
come within the range of the best microscope. 4. In the same way the
primitive metabolism and the slow, simple growth of these monera would
not come within direct observation. 5. As a matter of fact, we do often
find in stagnant water, and in the sea, tiny granules which consist, or
seem to consist, of plasm. We usually regard them as detached portions
of dead animals or plants; little isolated chlorophyll-granules that
may be found everywhere are looked upon as rejected products of vegetal
cells. But who could refute the assumption that they are really
plassonella or young monera, which grow slowly and unite with similar
particles to form larger plasmic bodies?

It is often objected to our naturalistic and monistic conception of
archigony that we have not yet succeeded in forming albuminous bodies,
and especially plasm, in our chemical laboratories by artificial
synthesis; from this the perverse dualistic conclusion is drawn that
it is only supernatural vital forces that can do this. It is forgotten
that we do not yet know the complicated structure of albuminous
bodies, and that we do not yet know what really happens inside the
green chlorophyll-granules which in every plant-cell convert the
radiant energy of sunlight into the virtual energy of the new-formed
plasm. How can we be expected to reproduce synthetically, with the
imperfect and crude methods of present chemistry, an elaborate chemical
process the nature of which is not analytically known to us? However,
the worthlessness of this sceptical objection is obvious: we can
never claim that a natural process is supernatural because we cannot
artificially reproduce it.




