IX

MONERA

 The simplest forms of life--Cell theory and cell dogma--Precellular
 organisms: monera, cytodes, and cells--Actual monera--Chromacea
 (cyanophyceæ)--Chromatophora--Cœnobia of chromacea: vital
 phenomena--Bacteria--Relations of the bacteria to the chromacea,
 the fungi, and the protozoa--Rhizomonera (protamœba, protogenes,
 protomyxa, bathybius)--Problematic monera--Phytomonera (plasmodoma)
 and zoomonera (plasmophaga)--Transition between the two classes.


In the study and explanation of all complex phenomena the first
thing to do is to understand the simple parts, the manner of their
combination, and the development of the compound from the simple. This
principle applies generally to inorganic objects, such as minerals,
artificially constructed machines, etc. It is also of general
application in biological work. The efforts of comparative anatomy are
directed to the comprehension of the intricate structure of the higher
organisms from the rising scale of organization and life in the lower,
and the origin of the former by historical development from the latter.
The modern science of the cell (cytology), which has in a short time
attained a considerable rank, pursues a method in opposition to this
principle. The intricate composition of the unicellular organism, in
many of the higher protists (such as the ciliata and infusoria) and
many of the higher tissue-cells (such as the neurona) has led to the
erroneous ascription of a highly complex organization to the cell in
general. One would be justified in saying that of late the cell-theory
has established itself in the dangerous and misleading position of a
cell-dogma.

The modern treatment of the science, as we find it in numbers of recent
works, even in some of the most distinguished manuals, and which we
must resent on account of its dogmatism, culminates in something like
the following theses:

1. The nucleated cell is the general elementary organism; all living
things are either unicellular, or made up of a number of cells and
tissues.

2. This elementary organism consists of at least two different organs
(or, more correctly, organella), the internal nucleus and the outer
cell-body (or cytoplasm).

3. The matter in each of these cell-organs--the caryoplasm of the
nucleus and the cytoplasm of the body--is never homogeneous (or
consisting of a chemical substratum), but always "organized," or
made up of several chemically and anatomically different elementary
constituents.

4. The plasm (or protoplasm) is, therefore, a morphological, not a
chemical, unity.

5. Every cell comes (and has come) only from a mother-cell, and every
nucleus from a mother-nucleus (_omnis cellula e cellula--omnis nucleus
e nucleo_).

These five theses of the modern cell-dogma are by no means sound; they
are incompatible with the theory of evolution. I have, therefore,
consistently resisted them for thirty-eight years, and consider them
to be so dangerous that I will briefly give my reasons. First, let
us clearly understand the modern definition of the cell. It is now
generally defined (in accordance with the second thesis) as being
composed of two essentially different parts, the nucleus and the
cell-body, and it is added that these organella differ constantly
both in respect of chemistry, morphology, and physiology. If that
is really so, the cell cannot possibly be the primitive organism; if
it were, we should have a miracle at the beginning of organic life
on the earth. The theory of natural evolution clearly and distinctly
demands that the cell (in this sense) is a secondary development from
a simpler, primary, elementary organism, a homogeneous cytode. There
are still living to-day very simple protists which do not tally with
this definition, and which I designated _monera_ in 1866. As they must
necessarily have preceded the real cells, they may also be called
"precellular organisms."

The earliest organisms to live on the earth, with which the wonderful
drama of life began, can, in the present condition of biological
science, only be conceived as homogeneous particles of plasm--biogens
or groups of biogens, in which there was not yet the division of
nucleus and cell-body which characterizes the real cell. I gave the
name "cytodes" to these unnucleated cells in 1866, and joined them
with the real nucleated cells under the general head of "plastids."
I also endeavored to prove that such cytodes still exist in the form
of independent monera, and in 1870 I described in my _Monograph on
the Monera_ a number of protists which do not tally with the above
definition.

Fifty years ago I made the first careful observations of living monera
(_protamœba_ and _protogenes_), and described them in my _General
Morphology_ (vol. i., pp. 133-5; vol. ii., p. xxii.) as structureless
organisms without organs and the real beginnings of organic life.
Soon afterwards, during a stay in the Canary Islands, I succeeded
in following the continuous life-history of a related organism of
the rhizopod type, which behaved like a very simple mycetozoon, but
differed in having no nucleus; I have reproduced the picture of it in
the first plate of my _History of Creation_. The description of this
orange-red globule of plasm (_protomyxa aurantiaca_) appeared first in
my _Monograph on the Monera_. Most of the organisms which I comprised
under this name exhibited the same movements as true rhizopods (or
sarcodina). It was afterwards proved of some of them that there was
a nucleus hidden within the homogeneous particle of plasm, and that,
therefore, they must be regarded as real cells. But this discovery
was wrongly extended to the whole of the monera, and the existence of
unnucleated organisms was denied altogether. Nevertheless, there are
living to-day several kinds of these organisms without organs, some
of them being very widely distributed. The chief examples are the
chromacea and the bacteria, the former with vegetal and the latter with
animal metabolism (or the former plasmodomous = plasma-forming, and the
latter plasmophagous = plasma-feeding). On the ground of this important
chemical difference, I distinguished two principal groups of the monera
in my _Systematic Phylogeny_ twenty years ago--the phytomonera and
the zoomonera, the former being unnucleated protophyta and the latter
unnucleated protozoa.

Among living organisms the chromacea are certainly the most primitive
and the nearest to the oldest inhabitants of the earth. Their simplest
forms, the chroococcacea, are nothing but small structureless particles
of plasm, growing by plasmodomism (formation of plasm) and multiplying
by simple cleavage as soon as their growth passes a certain limit
of individual size. Many of them are surrounded by a thin membrane
or somewhat thicker gelatinous covering, and this circumstance had
prevented me for some time from counting the chromacea as monera.
However, I became convinced afterwards that the formation of a
protective cover of this kind around the homogeneous particle of
plasm may indeed be regarded from the physiological stand-point as a
"purposive" structure, but at the same time may be looked upon, from
the purely physical stand-point, as a result of superficial strain.
On the other hand, the physiological character of these plasmodomous
monera is especially important, as it gives us the simple key to the
solution of the great question of spontaneous generation (or archigony,
_cf._ chapter xv.).

The chromacea are to-day found in every part of the earth, living
sometimes in fresh water and sometimes in the sea. Many species form
blue-green, violet, or reddish deposits on rocks, stones, wood, and
other objects. In these thin gelatinous plates millions of small
homogeneous cytodes are packed close together. Their tint is due to a
peculiar coloring matter (phycocyan), which is chemically connected
with the substance of the plasma-particle. The shade of this color
differs a good deal in the various species of chromacea (of which more
than eight hundred have been distinguished); in the native species it
is generally blue-green or sage-green, sometimes blue, cyanine blue,
or violet. Hence the common name cyanophyceæ (_i.e._, blue algæ).
It is incorrect, for two reasons; firstly, because only a part of
these protophyta are blue, and, secondly, because they (as simple,
primitive plants without tissue) must be distinguished from the real
algæ (phyceæ), which are multicellular, tissue-forming plants. Other
chromacea are red, orange, or yellow in color, as the interesting
_trichodesmium erythræum_, for instance, the flaky masses of which,
gathering in enormous quantities, cause at certain times the yellow
or red coloring of the sea-water in the tropics; it is these that are
responsible for the name "Red Sea" on the Arabian and "Yellow Sea" on
the Chinese coast. When I passed the equator in the Sunda Straits on
March 10, 1901, the boat sailed through colossal accumulations, several
miles in width, of this trichodesmium. The yellow or reddish surface of
the water looked as if it were strewn with sawdust. In the same way,
the surface of the Arctic Ocean is often colored brown or reddish-brown
by masses of the brown _procytella primordialis_ (formerly described as
_protococcus marinus_).

It is clearly quite illogical to regard the chromacea as a class
or family of the algæ, as is still done in most manuals of botany.
The real algæ--excluding the unicellular diatomes and paulotomes,
which belong to the protophyta--are multicellular plants that form
a _thallus_ or bed of a certain form and characteristic tissue. The
chromacea, which have not advanced as far as the real nucleated cell,
are unnucleated cytodes of a lower and earlier stage of plant-life.
If one would compare the chromacea with algæ or other plants at all,
the comparison cannot be with their constituent cells, but merely
with the chromatophora or chromatella, which are found in all green
plant-cells, and form _part_ of their contents. To be more precise,
these green granules of chlorophyll must be regarded as organella of
the plant-cell, or separated plasma-formations which arise beside the
nucleus in the cytoplasm. In the embryonic cells of the germs of plants
and in their vegetation points the chromatophora are as yet colorless,
and are developed, as solid, very refractive, globular, or roundish
granules, from the firm layer of plasm which immediately surrounds the
nucleus. Afterwards they are converted, by a chemical process, into
the green chlorophyll granules or chloroplasts, which have the most
important function in the plasmodomism or carbon-assimilation of the
plant.

The fact that the green chlorophyll granules grow independently
within the living plant-cell and multiply by segmentation is very
important and interesting. The globular chloroplasts are constricted
in the middle, and split into two equal daughter-globules. These
daughter-plastids grow, and multiply in turn in the same way. Hence
they behave within the plant-cell just like the free-living chromacea
in the water. On the strength of this significant comparison, one of
our ablest and most open-minded scientists, Fritz Müller-Desterro, of
Brazil, pointed out in 1893 that we may see in every green vegetal cell
a symbiosis between plasmodomous green and plasmophagous not-green
companions (_cf._ my _Anthropogeny_, figs. 277 and 278, and in the
text).

Many species of the simplest chromacea live as monobia (individually).
When the tiny plasma globules have split into two equal halves by
simple segmentation, they separate, and live their lives apart. This
is the case with the common, ubiquitous chroococcus. However, most
species live in common, the plasma granules forming more or less thick
cœnobia, or communities or colonies of cells. In the simplest case
(_aphanocapsa_) the social cytodes secrete a structureless gelatinous
mass, in which numbers of blue-green plasma globules are irregularly
distributed. In the _glœocapsa_, which forms a thin blue-green
gelatinous deposit on damp walls and rocks, the constituent cytodes
cover themselves immediately after cleavage with a fresh gelatinous
envelope, and these run together into large masses. But the majority
of the chromacea form firm, threadlike cell communities or chains
of plastids (catenal cœnobia.) As the transverse cleavage of the
rapidly multiplying cytodes always follows the same direction, and
the new daughter-cytodes remain joined at the cleavage surfaces, and
are flattened into discoid shape, we get stringlike formations or
articulated threads of considerable length, as in the oscillaria and
nostochina. When a number of these threads are joined together in
gelatinous masses, we often get large, irregular, jelly-like bodies, as
in the common "shooting-star jellies" (_nostoc communis_). They attain
the size of a plum.

In view of the extreme importance which I attach to the chromacea as
the earliest and simplest of all organisms, it is necessary to put
clearly the following facts with regard to their anatomic structure and
physiological activity:

1. The organism of the simplest chromacea is _not_ composed of
different organella or organs; and it shows no trace of purposive
construction or definite architecture.

2. The homogeneous tinted plasma granule which makes up the entire
organism in the simplest case (_chroococcus_) exhibits no plasma
structure (honeycomb, threads, etc.) whatever.

3. The original globular form of the plasma particle is the simplest of
all fundamental types, and is also that assumed by the inorganic body
(such as a drop of rain) in a condition of stable equilibrium.

4. The formation of a thin membrane at the surface of the structureless
plasma granule may be explained as a purely physical process--that of
surface strain.

5. The gelatinous envelope which is secreted by many of the chromacea
is also formed by a simple physical (or chemical) process.

6. The sole essential vital function that is common to all the
chromacea is self-maintenance, and growth by means of their vegetal
metabolism, or plasmodomism (=carbon assimilation); this purely
chemical process is on a level with the catalysis of inorganic
compounds (chapter x.).

7. The growth of the cytodes, in virtue of their continuous
plasmodomism, is on a level with the physical process of crystal growth.

8. The reproduction of the chromacea by simple cleavage is merely the
continuation of this simple growth process, when it passes the limit of
individual size.

9. All the other vital phenomena which are to be seen in some of the
chromacea can also be explained by physical or chemical causes on
mechanical principles. Not a single fact compels us to assume a "vital
force."

Especially noteworthy in regard to the physiological character of these
lowest organisms are their bionomic peculiarities, especially the
indifference to external influences, higher and lower temperatures,
etc. Many of the chromacea live in hot springs, with a temperature
of fifty to eighty degrees centigrade, in which no other organism is
found. Other species may remain for a long time frozen in ice, and
resume their vital activity as soon as it thaws. Many chromacea may be
completely dried up, and then resume their life if put in water after
several years.

Next in order to the chromacea we have the bacteria, the remarkable
little organisms which have been well known in the last few decades
as the causes of fatal diseases, and the agents of fermentation,
putrefaction, etc. The special science which is concerned with
them--modern bacteriology--has attained so important a position in
a short period--especially as regards practical and theoretical
medicine--that it is now represented by separate chairs at most of
the universities. We may admire the penetration and the perseverance
with which scientists have succeeded, with the aid of the best modern
microscopes and methods of preparation and coloring, in making so
close a study of the organism of the bacteria, determining their
physiological properties, and explaining their great importance for
organic life by careful experiments and methods of culture. The
bionomic or economic position of the bacteria in nature's household
has thus secured for these tiny organisms the greatest scientific and
practical interest.

However, we find that certain general views have been maintained by
specialists in bacteriology up to our own time which are in curious
contrast with these brilliant results. The biologist who studies the
systematic relations of the bacteria from the modern point of view of
the theory of descent is bewildered at the extraordinary views as to
the place of the bacteria in the plant-world (as segmentation-fungi),
their relations to other classes of plants, and the formation of their
species. When we carefully consider the morphological properties that
are common to all true bacteria and compare them with other organisms,
we are forced to the conclusion that I urged years ago in various
writings: the bacteria are not real (nucleated) cells, but unnucleated
cytodes of the rank of the monera; they are not real (tissue-forming)
fungi, but simple protists; their nearest relatives are the chromacea.

The individual organisms of the simplest kind, which bacteriologists
call "bacteria-cells," are not real nucleated cells. That is the clear
negative result of a number of most careful investigations which
have been made up to date with the object of finding a nucleus in
the plasma-body of the bacteria. Among recent exact investigations
we must especially note those of the botanist Reinke, of Kiel, who
sought in vain to detect a nucleus in one of the largest and most
easily studied genera of the bacteria, the _beggiatoa_, using every
modern technical aid. His conviction that this important cell-structure
is really lacking is the more valuable, as it is very prejudicial
to his own theory of "dominants." Other scientists (especially
Schaudinn) have recently claimed, as equivalent to a nucleus in some
of the larger bacteria, a number of very small granules, which are
irregularly distributed in the plasm, and are strongly tinted under
certain coloring processes. But even if the chemical identity of these
substances which take the same color were proved--which is certainly
not the case--and even if the appearance of scattered nuclein-granules
in the plasm could be regarded as a preliminary to, or a beginning
of, the differentiation of an individual, morphologically distinct
nucleus, we should not yet have shown its independence as an organellum
of the cell.

Nor is this any more proved from the circumstance that in some bacteria
(not all) we find a severance of the plasm into an inner and outer
layer, or a frothy structure with vacuole-formation, or a special
sharply outlined membrane on the plastid. Many bacteria (but not all)
have such a membrane, like the nearly related chromacea, and also the
secretion of a gelatine envelope. Both classes have also in common
an exclusively monogenetic reproduction. The bacteria multiply, like
the chromacea, by simple segmentation; as soon as the structureless
plasma-granule has reached a certain size by simple growth, it is
constricted and splits into two halves. In the long-bodied bacteria
(the rod-shaped bacilli) the constriction always goes through the
middle of the long axis, and is, therefore, simple transverse cleavage.
Many bacteria have also been said to multiply by the formation of
spores. But these so-called "spores" are really permanent quiescent
forms (without any multiplication of individuals); the central part
of the plastid (endoplasm) condenses, separates from the peripheral
part (exoplasm), and undergoes a chemical change which makes it very
indifferent to external influences (such as a high temperature).

The great majority of the bacteria differ so little morphologically
from the chromacea that we can only distinguish these two classes
of monera by the difference in their metabolism. The chromacea,
as protophyta, are plasmodomous. They form new plasm by synthesis
and reduction from simple inorganic compounds--water, carbonic
acid, ammonia, nitric acid, etc. But the bacteria, as protozoa, are
plasmophagous. They cannot, as a rule, form new plasm, but have to
take it from other organisms (as parasites, saprophytes, etc.);
they decompose it by analysis and oxydation. Hence the colorless
bacteria are without the important green, blue, or red coloring matter
(phycocyan) which tints the plastids of the chromacea, and is the real
instrument of the carbon-assimilation. However, there are exceptions
in this respect: _bacillus virens_ is tinted green with chlorophyll,
_micrococcus prodigiosus_ is blood-red, other bacteria purple, and
so on. Certain earth-dwelling bacteria (_nitro-bacteria_) have the
vegetal property of plasmodomism; they convert ammonia by oxydation
into nitrous acid, and this into nitric acid, using as their source of
carbon the carbonic acid gas in the atmosphere. They are thus quite
independent of organic substances, and feed, like the chromacea, on
simple inorganic compounds.

Hence the affinity between the plasmodomous chromacea and plasmophagous
bacteria is so close that it is impossible to give a single safe
criterion that will effectually separate the two classes. Many
botanists accordingly combine both groups in a single class with the
name of _schizophyta_, and within this distinguish as "orders" the
blue-green chromacea as _schizophycæ_ (cleavage-algæ) and the colorless
bacteria as _schizomycetes_ (cleavage-fungi). However, we must not
take this division too rigidly; and the absolute lack of a nucleus
and tissue-formation separates the chromacea just as widely from the
multicellular tissue-forming algæ as the bacteria from the fungi. The
simple multiplication by the halving of the cell, which is expressed in
the name "cleavage-plants" (_schizophyta_), is also found in many other
protists.

The number of forms that can be distinguished as species in the
technical sense is very great in the case of the bacteria, in
spite of the extreme simplicity of their outward appearance; many
biologists speak of several hundred, and even of more than a thousand,
species. But when we look solely to the outer form of the living
plasma-granule, we can only distinguish three fundamental types: (1)
Micrococci, or spherobacteria (briefly, cocci), globular or ellipsoid;
(2) bacilli, or rhabdo-bacteria (also called eubacteria, or bacteria in
the narrower sense), rod-shaped, cylindrical, and often twisted like
worms (comma-bacilli); (3) spirilla, or spirobacteria, screw-shaped
rods (vibriones when the screw is slight, and spirochæta when it
has many coils). Besides this threefold difference in the forms of
the cytodes, we have a ground of distinction in many bacilli and
spirilla in the possession of one or more very thin lashes (flagella),
which proceed from one of both poles of the lengthened plastid. The
construction and vibration of these serves for locomotion in the
swimming bacteria; but they are only found for a time in many species,
and in many others are altogether wanting.

Since, then, neither the simple outer form of the bacterium-cytodes
nor their homogeneous internal structure provides a satisfactory
ground for the systematic distinction of the numerous species,
their physiological properties are generally used for the purpose,
especially their different behavior towards organic foods (albumin,
gelatine, etc.), their chemical actions, and the various effects of
poisoning and decomposition which they produce in the living organism.
No bacteriologist now doubts that all the vital activities of the
bacteria are of a chemical nature, and precisely on this account
these microbes are of extreme importance. When we bear in mind how
complicated are the relations of the various species of bacteria to
the tissues of the human body, in which they cause the diseases of
typhus, hypochondriasis, cholera, and tuberculosis, we are bound to
admit that the real cause of these maladies must be sought in the
peculiar molecular structure of the bacterium-plasm, or the particular
arrangement of its molecules and the innumerable atoms (more than a
thousand) which are, in a very loose way, made up into special groups
of molecules. The chemical products of their mutual action are what we
call ptomaines, which are partly very virulent poisons (toxins). We
have succeeded in producing several of these poisonous matters in large
quantities by artificial culture, and isolating them and experimentally
ascertaining their nature; as, for instance, tetanin, which causes
tetanus, typhotoxin, the poison of typhus, etc.

In thus declaring the action of bacteria to be purely chemical and
analogous to that of well-known inorganic poisons, I would particularly
point out that this very justifiable statement is a pure hypothesis;
it is an excellent illustration of the fact that we cannot get on
in the explanation of the most important natural phenomena without
hypotheses. We can see nothing whatever of the chemical molecular
structure of the plasm, even under the highest power of the microscope;
it lies far below the limit of microscopic perception. Nevertheless,
no expert scientist has the slightest doubt of its existence, or that
the complicated movements of the sensitive atoms and the molecules and
groups of molecules they make up are the causes of the vast changes
which these tiny organisms effect in the tissues of the human and the
higher animal body.

Moreover, the distinction of the many species of bacteria is of
interest in connection with the general question of the nature and
constancy of a species. Whereas formerly in biological classification
only definite morphological characters, or definable differences in
outer form or inner structure, were regarded as of any moment in the
distinction of species, here, in view of the vagueness or total lack
of these characters, we have to look mainly to the physiological
properties, and these are based on the chemical differences in their
hypothetical molecular structure. But even these are not absolutely
constant; on the contrary, many bacteria lose their specific qualities
by progressive culture under changed food-conditions. By a change in
the temperature and the nutritive field in which a number of poisonous
bacteria have been reared, or by the action of certain chemicals, not
only the growth and multiplication are altered, but also the injurious
effect they have on other organisms by the generation of poisons.
This poisonous effect is weakened, and--what is most important--the
weakening is transmitted by heredity to the following generations. On
this is based the familiar process of inoculation, an admirable example
of the inheritance of acquired characteristics.

As the bacteria are still often described as "cleavage-fungi" and
classified along with the real fungi, we must particularly point
out the wide gulf that separates the two groups. The real fungi (or
_mycetes_) are metaphyta, their multicellular body (_thallus_) forming
a very characteristic sort of tissue, the mycelium; this is composed
of a number of interlaced and interwoven threads (or hyphens). Each
fungus-thread consists of a row of lengthened cells, which have a thin
membrane and enclose a number of small nuclei in the colorless plasm.
Moreover, the two sub-classes of the real fungi, the ascomycetes and
basimycetes, form peculiar fruit-bodies which generate spores (ascodia
and basidia). There is no trace whatever of these real characteristics
of the true fungus in the bacteria. Nor is it less incorrect to class
them with the fungilli, the so-called unicellular fungi or phycomycetes
(ovomycetes and zygomycetes); these form a special class of protists
which has the closest affinity to the gregarinæ.

Like the closely related chromacea, many of the bacteria show a marked
tendency to form communities or cell-colonies. These cell-communities
arise, as elsewhere, from the fact that the individuals, which
multiply rapidly by continuous cleavage, remain joined together.
This may happen in two ways. When the social bacteria secrete large
quantities of gelatine, and remain distributed in this, we have the
_zooglœa_ (as in the case of the _aphanocapsa_ and _glœocapsa_
among the chromacea). If, on the other hand, the long-bodied
bacilli remain fastened together in rows, we get the knotted
threads of _leptothrix_ and _beggiatoa_ (which may be compared with
the oscillaria). And, if these threads go into branches, we have
_cladothrix_. Other cœnobia of bacteria have the appearance of
disks, the cytodes dividing in a plane, usually in groups of four (as
in _merismopedia_), or of cube-shaped packets when they are in all
three directions of space (_sarcina_).

The two classes of bacteria and chromacea seem, in the present
condition of our knowledge, on account of their simple organization,
to be the simplest of all living things, real monera, or organisms
without organs. Hence we have to put them at the lowest stage of
the protist kingdom, and must regard the difference between them
and the most highly differentiated unicellular beings (such as the
radiolaria, ciliated infusoria, diatomes, or siphonea) as no smaller
than the difference (in the realm of the histona) between a lower
polyp (_hydra_) and a vertebrate, or between a simple alga (_ulva_)
and a palm. But if the kingdom of the protists is badly divided, on
the older rule, into a plant kingdom and an animal kingdom, the only
discriminating mark we have left is the difference in metabolism; in
that case we have to include the plasmophagous bacteria in the animal
kingdom (as Ehrenberg did in 1838) and the plasmodomous chromacea
in the plant kingdom. The remarkable class of the flagellata, which
includes ciliated unicellulars of both groups, contains several
forms which are only distinguished from the typical bacterium by the
possession of a nucleus. If it is true that in some of the protists
which were counted as bacteria a real nucleus has been detected, these
must be separated from the others (unnucleated) and included in the
nucleated flagellata.

The monera which I described in 1866, and on which I based the theory
of the monera in my monograph, belong to a different division of the
protists from the classes of bacteria and chromacea. These are the
forms which I described as _protamœba_, _protogenes_, _protomyxa_,
etc. Their naked mobile plasma-bodies thrust out pseudopodia, or
variable "false feet," from their surface, like the (nucleated) real
rhizopods (=sarcodinæ); but they differ essentially from the latter in
the absence of a nucleus. Afterwards (in my _Systematic Phytogeny_)
I proposed to separate these unnucleated rhizopods from the others,
giving the name of _lobomonera_ (_protamœba_) to the amœba-like
monera with flap-shaped feet, and the name of _rhizomonera_
(_protomyxa_, _pontomyxa_, _biomyxa_, _arachnula_, etc.) to the
gromia-like, root-feet forming monera. However, of late years, real
nuclei have been detected in each of these large monera, and so they
have been proved to be true cells. This discovery was made possible by
the improved modern methods of coloring the nucleus which I had not the
use of thirty years ago in my first observations. On the strength of
these recent discoveries many scientists claim that all the monera I
described are true cells, and must have nuclei. This baseless assertion
is much employed by the opponents of the theory of evolution in order
to deny the existence of the monera altogether.

Of the genus of monera which we call protamœba I have given an
illustration in my _History of Creation_ (tenth edition), which has
been frequently reproduced. Several species (at least two or three)
of this genus still exist, and are distinguished by the shape of
their flap-formation and their method of motion. They resemble
ordinary simple amœbæ, and only differ from these to any extent
in the absence of a nucleus. The _protamœba primitiva_ seems
to be pretty widely distributed; it has been found repeatedly by
observers (Gruber, Cienkowski, Leidy, etc.) in inland waters. In the
zoological demonstrations which I have given at the University of Jena
for forty years, and in the course of which the lowly inhabitants
of our fresh water are regularly examined with the microscope, the
_protamœba primitiva_ has been found four or five times. It
always had the same form, as I described it, moved about by the slow
formation of flaps at its surface, multiplied by simple cleavage,
and showed no trace of a nucleus in its homogeneous plasma-body even
with the most careful application of the modern methods of tinting
the nucleus. A larger number of very fine granules (microsoma) that
were irregularly distributed in the plasm, and were more or less
colored by nucleus-reagents, cannot be reckoned as clear equivalents
of the nucleus in this or in similar cases; they are probably products
of metabolism. The same may be said of the larger marine form of
rhizomoneron, which A. Gruber has recently called _pelomyxa pallida_.

The large marine form of rhizomoneron to which Huxley gave the name
of _bathybius Haeckelii_ in 1868, and as to the real nature of which
many opinions have been expressed, seems, according to the latest
investigation, not to have the significance ascribed to it. However,
the much-discussed question of the bathybius is superfluous as far as
our monera theory and the associated hypothesis of archigony (chapter
xv.) are concerned, since we have now a better knowledge of the much
more important monera-forms of the chromacea and bacteria.

In the case of some of the protists I described in my _Monograph on the
Monera_, it is at present doubtful whether their plasma-body contains
a nucleus or not, and, therefore, whether they are to be classed as
true cells or cytodes. This applies especially to the forms which
only happened to come under observation once, such as _protomyxa_
and _myxastrum_. In these obscure cases we must wait for fresh
investigations and the application of the modern methods of tinting
the nucleus. I may, however, point out, in passing, that these famous
methods of nucleus-coloring give by no means the absolute certainty
which is ascribed to them; there are other substances which take color
in the same way as chromatin. As far as my monera theory is concerned,
or the great general importance which I attach to these unnucleated
living granules of plasm, it does not matter whether a nucleus is
detected in these problematic monera or not. The chromacea alone--the
most important of all monera--completely suffice to provide a base for
the far-reaching theoretical conclusions which I draw from it.

At the close of these observations on the monera I will briefly
recapitulate the weighty inferences which we can deduce from their
simple organization. They serve as a solid foundation for the chief
theses of our monistic biology; and they are inconsistent with the
dualistic views of modern vitalists. In the first place, I emphasize
the fact that the structureless plasm-body of the simple monera has
no sort of organization and no composition from dissimilar parts
co-operating for definite vital aims. Reinke's conscious "dominant"--as
well as Weismann's mechanical "determinants"--have nothing to do here.
The whole vital activity of the simplest monera, especially of the
chromacea, is confined to their metabolism, and is therefore a purely
chemical process, that may be compared to the catalysis of inorganic
compounds. The simple formation of individuals in this primitive living
matter is merely a question of the cleavage of plasma globules of a
certain size (_chroococcus_); and their primitive multiplication (by
simple self-division) is only a continued growth (analogous to that
of the crystal). When this simple growth passes a certain limit, that
is fixed by the chemical constitution, it leads to the independent
existence of the redundant growth-products.




