XII

MOVEMENT

 Mechanics as the science of motion (kinematics and
 phoronomism)--Chemistry of vital movement--Active and passive
 movements--Undulatory movement--Mechanism of imbibition--Autonomous
 and reflex movements--Will and willing--Mixed movements--Movements
 of growth--Direction of the vital movement--Direction of the
 crystallizing force--Direction of cosmic motion--Movements of
 protists--Amœboid, myophenous, hydrostatic, secretory, vibratory
 movements: cilia and lashes--Movements of histona, metaphyta, and
 metazoa--Locomotion of tissue animals: ciliary motion and muscular
 movements--Muscles of the skin--Active and passive organs of
 movement--Radiata, articulata, vertebrata, mammalia--Human movements.


All things in the world are in perpetual motion. The universe is a
_perpetuum mobile_. There is no real rest anywhere; it is always
only apparent or relative. Heat itself, which constantly changes, is
merely motion. In the eternal play of cosmic bodies countless suns and
planets rush hither and thither in infinite space. In every chemical
composition and decomposition the atoms, or smallest particles of
matter, are in motion, and so are the molecules they compose. The
incessant metabolism of the living substance is associated with a
constant movement of its particles, with the building up and decay of
plasma-molecules. But here we must disregard all these elementary kinds
of movement, and be content with a brief consideration of those forms
of motion which are peculiar to organic life, and a comparison of them
with the corresponding motions of inorganic bodies.

The science of motion, or mechanics, is now taken in very different
senses: (1) in the widest sense as a philosophy of life [generally
called mechanism or mechanicism in England], equivalent to either
monism or materialism; (2) in the stricter sense as the physical
science of motion, or of the laws of equilibrium and movement in
the whole of nature (organic and inorganic); (3) in the narrowest
sense as part of physics, or dynamics, the science of moving forces
(in opposition to statics, the science of equilibrium); (4) in the
purely mathematical sense as a part of geometry, for the mathematical
definition of magnitudes of movement; and (5) in the biological sense
as phoronomy, the science of the movements of organisms in space.
However, these definitions are not yet universally adopted, and
there is a good deal of confusion. It would be best to follow the
lead of Johannes Müller, as we are going to do here, and restrict
the name phoronomy to the science of the vital movements which are
peculiar to organisms, in contrast to kinematics, the exact science
of the inorganic movements of all bodies. The real material object
of phoronomy is the plasm, the living matter that forms the material
substratum of all active vital movements.

On our monistic principles the inner nature of organic life consists in
a chemical process, and this is determined by continuous movements of
the plasma-molecules and their constituent atoms. As we have already
considered this metabolism in the tenth chapter, we need do no more
here than point out that both the general phenomena of molecular
plasma-movement and their special direction in the various species of
plants and animals can be reduced in principle to chemical laws, and
are subject to the same laws of mechanics as all chemical processes
in organic and inorganic bodies. In this we emphasize our opposition
to vitalism, which sees in the _direction_ of plasma-movement the
supernatural influence of a mystical vital force or of some ghostly
"dominant" (Reinke). We agree with Ostwald, who also reduces these
complex movements to the play of energy in the plasm--that is to say,
in the last instance to modifications of chemical energy. In regard to
the visible movements of the living things which concern us at present,
we must first distinguish passive and active, and subdivide the latter
into reflex and autonomous.

Many movements of the living organism which the inexpert are inclined
to attribute to life itself are purely passive; they are due either to
external causes which do not proceed from the living plasm, or to the
physical composition of the organic but no longer living substance.
Purely passive movements, which play an important part in bionomy and
chorology, comprise such as the flow of water and the rush of the wind;
they cause considerable changes of locality and "passive" migrations
of animals and plants. Purely physical, again, is what is known as the
Brownian molecular movement which we observe with a powerful microscope
in the plasm of both dead and living cells. When very fine granules
(for instance, of ground charcoal) are equally distributed in a liquid
of a certain consistency, they are found to be in a constant shaking or
dancing movement. This movement of the solid particles is passive, and
is due to the shocks of the invisible molecules of the fluid which are
continually impinging upon each other. In the rhizopods--the remarkable
protozoa whose unicellular organism sheds so much light on the obscure
wonders of life--we notice a curious streaming of the granules in
the living plasm. Within the cytoplasm of the amœbæ particles
travel up and down in all directions. On the long thin plasma-threads
or pseudopodia which stream out from the unicellular body of the
radiolaria and thalamophora, thousands of fine particles move about,
like promenaders in a street. This movement does not come from the
passive granules, but from the active invisible molecules of the
plasm, which are always changing their relative positions. Thus also
the movements of the blood-cells which we can see with the microscope
in the circulation of a young transparent fish, or in the tail of a
frog-larva, are not due to the action of the blood-cells themselves,
but to the flow of the blood caused by the beat of the heart.

An important factor in the life of many organisms, especially the
higher plants, is the physical phenomenon called _imbibition_; it
consists in the penetration of water between the molecules of solid
bodies (drawn to them by molecular attraction), and the consequent
displacement of the molecules by the fluid. In this way the volume of
the solid body is increased, and movements are produced which may have
the appearance of vital processes. The energy of these imbibitional
bodies is notoriously very powerful; we can, for instance, split large
blocks of stone by the insertion of a piece of wood dipped in water. As
the cellulose membrane of plant-cells has this property of imbibition
in a high degree (either in the living or the dead cell), the movements
it causes are of great physiological importance. This is especially
the case when the imbibition of the cell wall is one-sided, and causes
a bending of the cell. In consequence of the unequal strain in the
drying of many fruits, they split open and project their seeds to some
distance (as do the poppy, snap-dragon, etc.). The moss-capsules also
empty their spores as a result of imbibition-curving (in the teeth
of the openings of the spore-cases). The hygroscopic points of the
heron-bill (_erodium_) curl up in the dry state and stretch out when
moist; hence they are used as hygrometers in the construction of
meteorological huts. The so-called "resurrection plants" (_anastatica_,
the rose of Jericho, and _selaginella lepidophylla_), which close up
like a fist when dry, spread their leaves out flat when moistened (the
leaves imbibing strongly on the inner side). There is no more real
case of "resuscitation" (as many believe) in these cases than in the
mythological resurrection of the body. However, these phenomena of
imbibition are not active vital processes; they are independent of the
living plasm, and due solely to the physical constitution of the dead
cell-membranes.

In contrast with these passive movements of organisms, we have
the active movements which proceed from the living plasm. In the
ultimate analysis, it is true, these may be reduced to the action of
physical laws just as well as the passive movements. But the causes
of them are not so clear and obvious; they are connected with the
complicated chemical molecular processes of the living plasm, of the
physical regularity of which we are now fully convinced, though their
complicated mechanism is not yet understood. We may divide into two
groups the many different movements, which are called vital in this
stricter sense, and were formerly regarded as evidences of the presence
of a mystic vital force, according as the stimulus--the sensation of
which is caused by the movement--is directly perceptible or not. In
the first case, we have stimulated (or reflex or paratonic) movements,
and in the second voluntary (autonomous or spontaneous) movements. As
the will appears to be free in the latter, they have been left out of
consideration by many physiologists, and handed over to the treatment
of the metaphysical psychologist. On our monistic principles this is a
grave error; nor is it improved when "psychonomism" appeals to a false
theory of knowledge. On the contrary, the conscious will (and conscious
sensation) is itself a physical and chemical process like unconscious
and involuntary movement (and unconscious feeling). They are both
equally subject to the law of substance. However, only the external
stimuli which cause reflex movements are known to us to any great
extent and experimentally recognizable; the internal stimuli, which
affect the will, are mostly unknown, and are not directly accessible
to investigation. They are determined by the complicated structure of
the psychoplasm, which has been gradually acquired by phylogenetic
processes in the course of millions of years.

The great problem of the will and its freedom--the seventh and last
of Dubois-Reymond's world-riddles--has been dealt with fully in the
_Riddle_ (chapter vii.). But as we still meet with the most glaring
contradictions and confusion in regard to this difficult psychological
question, I must touch upon it briefly once more. In the first place, I
would remind the reader that it is best to restrict the name "will" to
the purposive and conscious movements in the central nervous system of
man and the higher animals, and to give the name of impulses (tropisms)
to the corresponding unconscious processes in the psychoplasm of the
lower animals, as well as of the plants and protists. For it is only
the complicated mechanism of the advanced brain structure in the higher
animals, in conjunction with the differentiated sense-organs on the one
side and the muscles on the other, that accomplishes the purposive and
deliberate actions which we are accustomed to call acts of will.

But the distinction between voluntary (autonomous) and involuntary
(reflex) movements is as difficult to carry out in practice as it is
clear in theory. We can easily see that the two forms of movement
pass into each other without any sharp boundary (like conscious and
unconscious sensation). The same action, which seems at first a
conscious act of the will (for instance, in walking, speaking, etc.),
may be repeated the next moment as an unconscious reflex action. Again,
there are many important mixed or instinctive movements, the impulse to
which comes partly from internal and partly from external stimuli. To
this class belong especially the movements of growth.

Every natural body that grows increases its extent, fills a larger
part of space, and so causes certain movements of its particles; this
is equally true of inorganic crystals and the living organism. But
there are important differences between the growth in the two cases.
In the first place, crystals grow by the external apposition of fresh
matter, while cells grow by the intussusception of fresh particles
within the plasm (_cf._ chapter x.). In the second case, in growth,
which determines the whole shape of the organism, two important factors
always co-operate, the inner stimulus, which depends on the specific
chemical constitution of the species, and is transmitted by heredity,
and the external stimulus which is due to the direct action of light,
heat, gravity, and other physical conditions of the environment, and is
determined by adaptation (phototaxis, thermotaxis, geotropism, etc.).

A peculiar property of many vital movements (but by no means all)
is the definite direction they exhibit; these are generally called
purposive movements. For the teleologist they afford one of the chief
and most welcome proofs of the dualistic theory of the older and the
modern vitalism. Baer, especially, has laid stress on the purposiveness
of all vital movement. It has been given a more precise expression
recently by Reinke. His "dominants" are "intelligent directive
forces," essentially different from all forms of energy or natural
forces, and not subject to the law of substance. These metaphysical
"vital spirits" are much the same as the immortal soul of dualistic
psychology or the divine emanations of ancient theosophy. They are
supposed not only to regulate the special development and construction
of every species of animal and plant, and direct it to a predetermined
end, but also to control all the various movements of the organism
and its organs down to the cells. These "hyperenergetic forces" are
equivalent to the "organizing principle" and the "unconscious will"
of Edward Hartmann, the "arranging and controlling protoplasmic
forces" of Hanstein and others. All these metaphysical, supernatural,
and teleological ideas, like the older mystic notion of a special
vital force, rest on a perversion of judgment by the apparent freedom
of will and purposiveness of organization in the higher organisms.
These thinkers overlook the fact that this purposiveness can be
traced phylogenetically to simple physical movements in the lower
organisms. Moreover, they overlook or deny the definite direction of
inorganic forms of energy, though this is just as clear in the origin
of a crystal as in the composition of the whole world-structure, in
the direction of the mind as in the orbit of a planet. Hence it is
important to bear in mind always these two forms of mechanical energy,
and emphasize their identity with the direction of vital movement.

The force of gravitation which is at work in crystal-formation in
the simple chemical body exhibits just as definite a direction as
that which appears in the plasm in cell-construction. In this and
other respects the comparison of the cell with the crystal, which was
made even by the founders of the cell-theory, Schleiden and Schwann,
in 1838, is thoroughly justified, though it is not correct in some
other aspects. When the crystal is formed in the mother-water, the
homogeneous particles of the chemical substance arrange themselves
in a perfectly definite direction and order, so that mathematical
planes of symmetry and axes arise within, and definite angles at the
surface. On the strength of this, modern crystallography distinguishes
six different systems of crystals. But, in different conditions, the
same substance may crystallize in two or even three different systems
(dimorphism and trimorphism of the crystal); thus, for instance,
carbonate of lime crystallizes as calcspar in the hexagonal, and as
arragonite in the rhombic system. If Reinke would be consistent, he
ought to postulate a "dominant" for every crystal, to control the order
and direction of the particles in its formation. He makes the curious
statement (in 1899) that direction "is not a measurable magnitude" like
energy, and so is not subject, like it, to the law of substance. We can
mathematically determine the direction of the constructive force in the
crystal just as well as in the cell.

If we comprise under the head of cosmokinesis the whole of the
movements of the heavenly bodies in space, we cannot deny that they
have a definite direction in detail, although our knowledge of this is
still very incomplete. We can calculate the distances and speeds and
movements of the planets round the sun with mathematical accuracy; and
we gather from our astronomical observations and calculations that a
similar regularity prevails in the movements of the other countless
bodies in infinite space. But we do not know either the first impulse
to these complex movements or their final goal. We can only conclude
from the great discoveries of modern physics, supported by spectrum
analysis and celestial photography, that the universal law of substance
on the one side and the law of evolution on the other control the
gigantic movements of the heavenly bodies just as they do the living
swarm of tiny organisms that have inhabited our little planet for
millions of years. Reinke ought, consistently, to admire the cosmic
intelligence of the Supreme Being in these movements of the cosmic
masses and its emanations, the "dominants," in the actual direction
of their movements, as much as he does in the plasma-flow in the tiny
organism.

The manifold gradation of vital movement which we find everywhere in
the higher organisms is not without expression even in the protist
realm. In this respect the chromacea, the simplest forms of vegetal
monera, and the bacteria, which we regard as corresponding animal
forms, developed from the former by metasitism, are of great interest.
As microscopic scrutiny fails to detect any purposive organization in
these unnucleated cells, and it is impossible to discover different
organs in their homogeneous plasma-body, we have to look upon their
movements as direct effects of their chemical molecular structure. But
the same must be said also of a number of nucleated cells, both among
the protophyta and the protozoa; only in this case the structure is
less simple, in so far as both the nucleus itself and the surrounding
cell-body exhibit, in indirect division, complicated movements in the
plasm (caryokinesis). Apart from these, however, there is nothing to
be seen in many unicellular beings (_e.g._, paulotomea, or calcocytea)
that we need call "vital movement." On the border between the organic
and inorganic worlds we have, as regards movement, the simplest forms
of the chromacea, chroococcacea. We can see no vital movement in
these structureless particles of plasm except slight changes of form,
which occur when they multiply by cleavage. The internal molecular
movements of the living matter, which effect their simple plasmodomous
metabolism and growth, lie beyond our vision. The reproduction itself,
in its simplest form of self-cleavage, seems to be merely a redundant
growth, exceeding the limit of individual size for the homogeneous
plasma-globule (_cf._ chapters ix. and x.).

The great majority of the protists have the appearance of real,
nucleated cells. Hence we have to distinguish two different forms
of movement in the unicellular organism--the inner movement in the
caryoplasm of the nucleus and the outer in the cytoplasm of the
cell-body; the two enter into close mutual relations during the
remarkable process of partial resolution of the nucleus (caryolysis).
In this modification and partial dissolution of their constituents we
observe, during indirect cell-division, certain complicated movements
(the significance of which is as yet entirely unknown), that are
accomplished by both the granules of chromatin and the threads of
achromin, and which are comprised under the head of nuclear movements
(caryokinesis). It has lately been attempted to explain them on purely
physical principles. The same may be said of the internal flow of the
plasm which we find in the plasmodia of the amœbæ and mycetozoa, and
in the endoplasm of many of the protophyta and protozoa.

The slow displacement of the molecules of plasm which is at the
bottom of these plasma-movements also causes a variety of external
changes of form in simple naked cells. Variable processes like folds
or fingers (the "fold-feet," _lobopodia_) appear on their surface. As
they are best observed in the common amœbæ (naked nucleated cells
of the simplest kind), they are called amœboid movements. With
these is connected the variable movement of the larger rhizopods, the
radiolaria and thalamophora, in which hundreds of fine threads radiate
from the surface of the naked plasma-body. A number of recent experts
on the rhizopods, such as Bütschli, Richard Hertwig, Rhumbler, and
others, have attempted to trace to purely physical causes this varying
formation of pseudopodia, and their branching and net-like structure
(without definite direction).

It is more difficult to do this in the case of the most highly
differentiated of the protozoa, the infusoria. With these the free
movement of the unicellular protozoon is farther advanced through
the formation of permanent hairlike processes (long single lashes in
the flagellata, and a number of short lashes in the ciliata) on the
cell-surface and the movement of these by contraction and expansion,
like the limbs, tentacles, and bones of the higher animals. The
apparent spontaneity and various modulation in the ever-changing
movements of these cell-feet is, in many of the infusoria, so like the
autonomous voluntary movements in the metazoa that several experts on
the infusoria have been moved on this account to ascribe individual
(and even conscious) souls to them. Hence the difference between the
various kinds of living movement is already very considerable before
we leave the kingdom of the protists. On the one hand, the lowest
monera (chromacea) join on directly to inorganic phenomena. On the
other hand, the highly differentiated infusoria (ciliata) show so
great a resemblance to the higher animals in their differentiated and
autonomous movements that they have been credited with the possession
of "free-will." There is no such thing as a sharp division.

In a large section of the higher protozoa differentiated organs of
movement are developed, which may be compared to the muscles of the
metazoa. In the cytoplasm threadlike, contractile structures are
formed, and these have, like the muscular fibres of the metazoa, the
power to contract and expand again in definite directions. These
myophæna or myonema form, in many of the infusoria, both ciliata
and flagellata, a special thin layer of parallel or crossed fibres
underneath the exoplasm or the hyaline skin-layer of the cell. The
metabolic body of the infusorium may be altered in various ways by the
autonomous contraction of these. Special instances of these myophæna
are the _myophrisca_ of the acantharia--contractile threads which
surround the radial needles of these radiolaria like a crown. They
are found in their outer gelatine envelope, the calymma, and by their
contraction extend it, and so lessen the specific gravity.

Many of the aquatic protophyta and protozoa have the power of
autonomous and independent locomotion, and this often has the
appearance of being voluntary. Among the simplest fresh-water
protozoa are the arcellina or thecolobosa (_difflugia_, _arcella_),
little rhizopods that are distinguished from the naked amœbæ by
the possession of a firm envelope. They usually creep about in the
slime at the bottom, but in certain circumstances rise to the surface
of the water. As Wilhelm Engelmann has shown, they accomplish this
hydrostatic movement by means of a small vesicle of carbonic acid,
which expands their unicellular body like an air-balloon; the specific
weight of the cell-body, which is of itself heavier than water, is
sufficiently lowered by this. The same method is followed by the pretty
radiolaria which live floating (as plankton) at various depths of the
sea. Their unicellular (originally globular) body is divided by a
membrane into a firm inner central capsule and a soft outer gelatine
covering. The latter, known as the calymma, is traversed by a number
of water-vesicles or vacuoles. As a result of an osmotic process,
carbonic acid may be secreted or pure water (without the salt of the
sea-water) be imbibed in these vacuoles; by this means the specific
gravity of the cell is lessened, and it rises to the surface. When
it desires to make itself heavier and sink, the vacuoles discharge
their lighter contents. These hydrostatic movements of the radiolaria
(for which the myophrisca, still more complicated structures, have
been developed in the acantharia) attain by simple means the same end
that is accomplished in the siphonophora and fishes by air-filled and
voluntarily contractile swimming-bladders.

Numbers of the unicellulars alter their position very
characteristically by secreting a thick mucus at one side of their body
and fastening this to the ground. If the secretion continues, a longish
jelly-like stalk is produced by which the cell slowly pushes itself
along, like a boat with a rowing-pole. This secretory locomotion is
found, among the protophyta, in the desmidiacea and diatomes, and in
some of the gregarinæ and rhizopods among the protozoa. The peculiar
rolling movements of the oscillaria (threadlike chains of blueish-green
unnucleated cells, closely related to the chromacea) are also effected
by the secretion of mucus. On the other hand, it is probable that the
sliding movements of many of the diatomes are due to fine processes
(vibratory hairs?) in the plasm, which proceed either out of the seams
(_raphe_) of the bivalvular silicious shells or through the fine pores
in them.

Especially important in the easy and rapid locomotion of many
unicellulars is the formation of fine hairlike processes at the surface
of the body; in the broadest sense, they are called vibratory hairs.
If only a few whiplike threads are formed, they are called _whips_
(_flagella_); if many short ones, _lashes_ (_cilia_). Flagelliform
movement is found in some of the bacteria, but especially in the
mastigophorous "whip-infusoria," in the mastigota among the protophyta,
and the flagellata among the protozoa. As a rule, we have in these
cases one or two (rarely more) long and very thin whip-shaped
processes, starting from one pole of the long axis of the oval, round,
or long cell-body. These whips (_flagella_) are set in vibratory motion
(apparently often voluntary) in various ways, and serve not only for
swimming or creeping, but also for feeling and securing food. Similar
whip-cells (_cellulæ flagellatæ_) are also found very commonly in the
body of tissue-animals, usually packed together in an extensive layer
at the inner or outer surface (ciliated epithelium). If single cells
are released from the group, they may live independently for some time,
continuing their movements and resembling free infusoria. The same may
be said of the travelling spores of many of the algæ, and of the most
remarkable of all ciliated cells--the spermia or spermatozoa of plants
and animals.

As a rule they are cone-shaped, having an oval or pear-shaped (though
often also rod-shaped) head, which tapers into a long and thin thread.
When their lively movements were first noticed in the male seminal
fluid (each drop of which contains millions of them) two hundred years
ago, they were thought to be real independent animalcules, like the
infusoria, and so obtained their name of seed-animals (spermatozoa).
It was a long time (sixty years ago) before we learned that they are
detached glandular cells, which have the function of fertilizing the
ovum. It was discovered at the same time that similar vibratory cells
are found in many of the plants (algæ, mosses, and ferns). Many of the
latter (for instance, the spermatozoids of the cycadea) have, instead
of a few long whips, a number of short lashes (_cilia_), and resemble
the more highly developed ciliated infusoria (_ciliata_).

The ciliary movement of the infusoria is held to be a more perfect form
of vibratory movement, because the many short lashes found on them are
used for different purposes, and have accordingly assumed different
forms in the division of labor. Some of the cilia are used for running
or swimming, others for grasping or touching, and so on. In social
combinations we have the ciliated cells of the ciliated epithelium of
the higher animals--for instance, in the lungs, nostrils, and oviducts
of vertebrates.

In the unicellular, non-tissue forming protists, all the vital
movements seem to be active functions of the plasm of the single
cell; but in the histona, the multicellular tissue-forming organisms,
they are the outcome of the combined movements of the many cells
which compose the tissue. Careful anatomic study and experimental
physiological scrutiny of the motor processes are, therefore, first
directed, in the case of the histona, to clearing up the nature and
activity of the special cells which compose the tissue, and then the
structure and functions of the tissue itself. When we start from this
point, and survey the manifold active motor phenomena of the histona
as a whole, we see at once an essential agreement in the phoronomy of
the two kingdoms of the metaphyta and metazoa, in the sense that at the
lower stages the chemical and physical character of the motor processes
can be clearly shown and can be traced to an interchange of energy in
the plasm of the cells that make up the tissue. In the higher stages,
however, we find striking differences, the voluntary character of many
autonomous movements being very conspicuous in the higher animals,
and thus the great problem of the freedom of the will is added to the
purely physiological questions of stimulated movement, growth-movement,
etc.

Moreover, the movements of the metazoa are much more varied and
complicated than those of the metaphyta, in consequence of the higher
differentiation of their sense-organs and the centralization of their
nervous system. The former have generally free locomotion and the
latter not. The special mechanism of the organs of movement is also
very different in the two groups. In most of the metazoa the chief
motor organs are the muscles, which have developed in the highest
degree the power of definitely directed contraction and expansion.
In most of the metaphyta, on the other hand, the chief part of the
movements depend on the strain of the living plasm, or what is called
the _turgor_ or expansibility of the plant-cells. This is effected
by the osmotic pressure of the internal cell-fluid and the elasticity
of the cellulose wall, which is thus expanded. Nevertheless, in both
cases--and in all "vital" phenomena--the real cause of the process is,
in the ultimate analysis, the chemical play of energy in the active
plasm.

The metaphyta, with few exceptions, are fixed in one spot for life, or
only mobile for a short time when they are young. In this they resemble
the lower metazoa, the sponges, polyps, corals, bryozoa, etc. They have
not free locomotion. The motor phenomena which we find in them affect
only special parts or organs. They are mostly reflex or paratonic,
and due to external stimuli. Only a few of the higher plants exhibit
autonomous or spontaneous movement, the stimulating cause of which is
unknown to us, and which may be compared to the apparently voluntary
actions of the higher animals. The lateral feather-leaves of an Indian
butterfly flower (_hedysarum gyrans_) move in circles through the air,
like a pair of arms swinging, without any external cause; they complete
a circle in a couple of minutes. Variations in the intensity of light
have no effect on them. Similar spontaneous movements of the leaves
of several species of clover (_trifolium_) and sorrel (_oxalis_) are
performed only in the dark, not in the light. The terminal leaf of
the meadow-clover repeats its rotation, which describes more than one
hundred and twenty degrees of an arc, every two to four hours. The
mechanical cause of these spontaneous "variation movements" seems to
lie in variations of expansibility.

Voluntary and autonomous turgescence-movements of this kind are only
observed in a few of the higher plants, but stimulated movements that
are accomplished by the same mechanism are very common in the vegetal
world. We have, especially, the well-known "sleep," or nyktitropic
movements, of many plants. Many leaves and flowers hold themselves
vertically to the streaming rays of the sun. When darkness comes on
they contract, and the calices of the flowers close. Many flowers are
open for only a few hours a day. The mechanism of turgescence, which
effects these swelling movements, consists in the co-operation of the
osmotic pressure of the internal cell-fluid and the elasticity of the
strained cell-membrane enclosing the cytoplasm. The strain of the outer
cellulose membrane on the plasmatic primordial sac within it grows so
much on the accession of osmotically active matter that the internal
pressure is equal to several atmospheres, and the elastic strained
membrane stretches from ten to twenty percent. When water is withdrawn
again from one of these swollen or turgescent cells, the membrane
contracts; the cell becomes smaller, and the tissue looser. Other
stimuli besides light (heat, pressure, electricity) may produce these
expansional variations, and, as a consequence of it, certain reflex
movements (or paratonic variational movements). The most striking and
familiar examples are the flesh-eating fly-trap (_dionæa muscipula_)
and the sensitive plant (_mimosa pudica_); their contraction is caused
by mechanical stimuli, shaking, pressure, or the touching of the leaves.

Most of the higher animals have the power of free and voluntary
locomotion. It is, however, wanting in some of the lower classes,
which spend the greater part of their life at the bottom of the water,
like plants. Hence these were formerly held to be vegetable--thus
the sponges, polyps, and corals among the cœlenteria. A number
of classes of the cœlomaria have also adopted the stationary
life, such as the bryozoa and the spirobranchia among the vermalia,
many mussels (oysters, etc.), the actinia among the tunicates, the
sea-lilies (_crinoidea_) among the echinoderms, and even highly
organized articulate, such as the tube-worms (_tubicolæ_), among the
annelids, and the crawling crabs (_cirripedia_), among the crustacea.
All these stationary metazoa move freely in their youth, and swim about
in the water as _gastrulæ_, or in some other larva form. They have
taken only gradually to stationary habits, and have been considerably
modified, and often greatly degenerated, in consequence; for instance,
in the loss of the higher sense-organs, the bones, and even of the
whole head. Arnold Lang has shown this very clearly in his excellent
work on the influence of stationary life on animals. The study of
these retrogressive metamorphoses is very important for the theory of
progressive heredity and selection; it also shows the great value of
free locomotion for the higher sensitive and intellectual development
of the animals and man.

In many of the lower aquatic metazoa the surface of the body is covered
with vibratory epithelium--that is to say, with a layer of skin-cells
which bear either one long whip (_flagellum_) or several short lashes
(cilia). Flagellated epithelium is especially found in the cnidaria
and platodes; ciliated epithelium mostly in the vermalia and mollusca.
As the lashing motion of these hairlike processes brings a constant
stream of fresh water to the surface of the body, they first of all
effect respiration through the skin. But in many of the smaller metazoa
they also serve the purpose of locomotion, as in the gastræads,
the turbellaria, the rotifera, the nemertina, and the young larvæ
of many other metazoa. The vibratory apparatus reaches its highest
development in the _ctenophora_. The extremely delicate and soft body
of these gherkin-shaped cnidaria swims slowly in the water by means
of the strokes of thousands of tiny oar-blades. They are arranged in
eight longitudinal rows which stretch from the mouth to the opposite
pole. Each oar-blade consists of the long hair-lashes of a group of
epithelial cells glued together.

The chief motor organs in the metazoa are the muscles which constitute
the "flesh" of the body. Muscular tissue consists of contractile
cells--that is to say, of cells with the sole property of contraction.
When the muscular cell contracts, it becomes shorter and its diameter
increases. This brings nearer together the two parts of the body to
which its ends are attached. In the lower metazoa the muscle-cells
have, as a rule, no particular structure; but in the higher animals the
contractile plasm undergoes a peculiar differentiation, which has the
appearance under the microscope of a transverse streaking of the long
cells. On this ground a distinction is drawn between striated muscles
and simple non-striated or smooth muscles. The more vigorous, rapid,
and definite is the contraction of the muscle, the more marked is the
streaky character, and the more pronounced the difference between the
doubly refractive muscular particles from the simple refractive. The
striated muscle is "the most perfect dynamo we know of" (Verworn). The
normal heart of a man accomplishes every day, according to Zuntz, a
work of about twenty thousand kilogrammetres--in other words, an energy
that would suffice to lift to a height of one metre a weight of twenty
thousand kilogrammes. In many flying insects (gnats, for instance) the
flying muscles make three hundred to four hundred contractions a second.

In the lower and higher classes of the metazoa the muscle amounts to
no more than a thin layer of flesh underneath the skin. This layer
consists of muscular cells, which come originally from the ectoderm
in the form of internal contractile processes of the skin-cells
themselves, as in the polyps. In other cases the muscle-cells are
developed from the connective-tissue cells of the mesoderm, the
middle skin-layer, as in the ctenophora. This mesenchymic muscle is
less common than epithelial muscle. In most of the askeletal vermalia
the subdermal muscle divides into two layers--an outer deposit of
concentric muscles and an inner layer of longitudinal muscles; in the
cylindrical worms (nematodes, sagittæ, etc.) the latter fall into
four longitudinal bands, one pair of upper (dorsal) and a pair of
lower (ventral) muscular bands. At those parts of the body which are
especially used for locomotion the muscle is more strongly developed,
as in the belly-side of the crawling worms and mollusks. This muscular
surface develops into a kind of fleshy "foot" (_podium_); it assumes
a great variety of forms in the various classes of mollusks. In most
of the snails which creep on the solid ground it grows into a muscular
"flat-foot" (_gasteropoda_); in the mussels which cut like a plough
through the soft slime it forms a sharp "hatchet-foot" (_pelecypoda_).
The keel-snails (_heteropoda_) swim by means of a "keel-foot," which
works like the screw of a ship; the floating-snails (_pteropoda_) swim
unsteadily (like butterflies flying) by means of a pair of head-folds,
which develop from the side of the anterior foot-section. In the
highest mollusks, the cuttle-fishes (_cephalopoda_), this fore-foot
divides into four or five pairs of folds, which grow into long and very
muscular "head-arms"; the numbers of strong suckers on the latter have
also special muscles. In all these non-articulate mollusks and vermalia
hard skeletons are either altogether wanting or (like the external
shells of the mollusks) they have no functional relation to the motor
muscles. It is otherwise in the higher animals, in which we find this
relation to a solid jointed skeleton that becomes a passive motor
apparatus.

The higher groups of the animal kingdom in which a characteristic solid
skeleton is developed and forms an important starting-point for the
muscles, as well as a support and protection for the whole body, are
the three stems of the echinoderms, articulates, and vertebrates.
All three groups are very rich in forms, and far surpass all the
other stems of the animal world in the perfection of their locomotive
apparatus. However, the disposition and development of the skeleton as
a passive support, and the correlation of the muscles to it as active
pulling-organs, differ very much in the three classes, and are the
chief factors in determining their characteristic types; they show
clearly (even apart from other radical differences) that the three
stems have arisen independently of each other from three different
roots in the vermalia-stem. In the echinoderms the calcareous skeleton
is formed from chalky deposits in the corium, in the articulates from
chitine secretions of the epidermis, and in the vertebrates from
cartilage of an internal chord-sheath (_cf._ _Anthropogeny_, chapter
xxvi.).

The remarkable stem of the sea-dwelling echinoderms or "prickly skins"
is distinguished from all the other animal groups by a number of
striking peculiarities; prominent among these are the special formation
of their active and passive motor organs and the curious form of their
individual development. In this ontogenesis two totally different
forms appear successively--the simple astrolarva and the elaborately
organized and sexually mature astrozoon. The small, free-swimming
astrolarva has the general structural features of the rotatoria, and
so shows, in accordance with the biogenetic law, that the original
stem-form of the echinoderms (the amphoridea) belonged to this group
of the vermalia. I have briefly explained these structures in the
_History of Creation_ (chapter xxii.), and more fully in my essay on
the amphoridea and cystoidea (1896). The little astrolarva has no
muscles, and no water-vessels or blood-vessels. It moves by means
of vibratory lashes or bands, which are attached to special armlike
processes at the surface. These arms are regularly developed to the
right and left of the bilateral symmetrical larva (which as yet shows
no trace of the five-rayed structure). By a very curious modification
the small bilateral astrolarva is transformed into the totally
different pentaradial astrozoon, the large sexually mature echinoderm
with a pronounced five-rayed structure. (See _Art-forms in Nature_,
plates 10, 20, 30, 40, 60, 70, 80, 90, and 95.) It has a most elaborate
organization, with muscles and cuticular skeleton, blood-vessels and
water-vessels, etc. A section of the astrozoa--the living crinoidea,
or sea-lilies, and the extinct classes of blastoidea (sea-buds),
cystoidea (sea-apples), and amphoridea (sea-urns)--grow in stationary
fashion at the bottom of the sea. The other four extant classes
creep about in the sea--the sea-gherkins (holothuria), the star-fish
(asteridea and ophoidea), and the sea-urchins (echinidea). Their
creeping motion is accomplished by two kinds of organs--water-feet
and skin-muscles. The latter find their support and attachment in
solid calcareous needles, which develop from chalky deposits in the
corium. As these calcareous needles (which are particularly conspicuous
in the sea-urchin) are set movably in special protuberances of the
calcareous plates of the cuticular skeleton, and moved by little
muscular needles, the echinoderms walk on them as if they were stilts.
Between these, however, a number of water-feet arise from inside--thin
tubes like the fingers of a glove, which are filled with water by
an internal conduit-system (the so-called ambulacral system) and
become stiff. These very extensible ambulacral feet, often provided
with a suctorial plate at the closed outer end, serve for creeping,
sucking, touching, and grasping. As these distinctive motor organs
of the echinoderms--both the ambulacral feet with their complicated
water-tubes and the movable needles with their joints and muscles--are
found in hundreds, often in thousands, on every individual five-rayed
astrozoon, we might say that the echinoderms have the most advanced
and complicated motor organs of all animals. Their historical
development is perfectly understood from its earliest stages, since
Richard Semon found, in his ingenious pentact æatheory (1888),
the correct phylogenetic meaning of the curious embryology of the
echinoderms discovered in 1845 by Johannes Müller. I endeavored in 1896
to establish it in detail, in relation to paleontological discoveries,
in the essay I have mentioned.

The large stem of the articulata (the richest in forms of all the
animal stems) comprises three chief classes--the annelids, crustacea,
and tracheata. All three groups agree in the essential features
of their organization, especially in the external articulation or
metamerism of the long bilateral body, and also in the repetition of
the internal organs in each joint or segment. In each joint there is
originally a knot of the ventral nervous system (the ventral marrow), a
chamber of the dorsal heart, a chitine-ring of the cutaneous skeleton,
and a corresponding group of muscles.

Of the three great classes of the articulates the annelids are
developed directly from the vermalia, of which both the nematoda and
nemertinæ approach very closely to them. The two other and more highly
organized classes, the crustacea and tracheata, are younger groups,
independently evolved from two different stems of the annelids. The
annelids, or "ringed-worms" (to which, _e.g._, the rain-worms belong),
have mostly a very homogeneous articulation; their segments or metamera
repeat the same structure to a great extent, especially the subdermal
muscles. In a transverse section we see in every joint underneath the
layer of concentric muscles a pair of dorsal and a pair of ventral
muscles. Their epidermis has secreted a thin covering of chitine, in
the tubular worms a leather-like or calcified tube. There are no bones
in the oldest annelids; in the younger bristle-worms (_polychæta_) one
or two pairs of short unjointed feet (_parapodia_) are found in every
joint.

The other two chief classes of the articulates develop long and jointed
feet of very varied forms, and at the same time assume different shapes
of limbs in the division of labor. This heterogeneous articulation
(heteronomy) is the more pronounced the higher the whole organization.
This is equally true of the aquatic, gill-breathing crustacea (crabs,
etc.) and the tracheata (terrestrial animals breathing through a
trachea, the myriopods, spiders, and insects). In the higher groups of
both classes the number of limbs is usually not higher than fifteen to
twenty; and they are distributed in three principal sections--head,
breast, and posterior part of the body. The firm covering of chitine,
which was delicate and thin in most of the annelids, is much thicker in
most of the crustacea and tracheata, and often hardened by a calcareous
deposit; it forms a solid ring of chitine in each segment, inside which
the motor muscles are attached. The successive hard rings are connected
by thin, mobile, intermediate rings, so that the whole body combines
firmness, elasticity, and mobility in a high degree. The structure of
the long jointed legs, which are fixed in pairs on each segment, is
very similar. Hence the typical character of the motor organs of the
crustacea lies in the circumstance that both in the body and the limbs
the muscles are attached to the interior of hollow chitine tubes, and
go in these from member to member.

The vertebrates are just the reverse in structure. In their case
a solid internal skeleton is formed in the longitudinal axis of
the body, and the muscles are external to these supporting organs.
The articulation or metamerism itself is not visible externally in
the vertebrates; it is only seen in the muscular system when the
non-articulated skin has been removed. Then, even in the lowest
skull-less vertebrates, the acrania, the internal skeleton of which
consists merely of a cylindrical, solid, and elastic axial rod
(_chorda_), we see on each side a row of muscular plates (fifty to
eighty in the amphioxus). In this case there are not pairs of limbs,
and it is the same with the oldest craniate animals, the cyclostoma
(myxinoida and petromyzonta). It is only with the third class of the
vertebrates, the true fishes (_pisces_), that two pairs of lateral
limbs appear--the breast-fins and belly-fins. From these, in their
terrestrial descendants, the oldest amphibia of the Carboniferous
Period, the two pairs of jointed legs--fore-legs (carpomela) and
hind-legs (tarsomela)--are derived. These four lateral five-toed legs
have a very characteristic and complicated articulation, both in the
internal bony skeleton and the muscular system that encloses this and
is attached to it. From the amphibia, the earliest quadrupeds, this
locomotive apparatus is transmitted by heredity to their descendants,
the three higher classes of the vertebrates, reptiles, birds, and
mammals. As I have dealt with these important structures fully in my
_Anthropogeny_ (chapter xxvi.), and given a number of illustrations of
them, I must refer the reader to that work,[8] and will only make a few
observations on the mammals.

Both parts of the motor apparatus, the internal bony skeleton (the
passive supporting apparatus) and the external muscular system (the
active motor), exhibit a great variety of construction within the
mammal class, in consequence of adaptation to the most different
habits and functions. We have only to compare the running carnivora
and ungulata, the leaping kangaroos and jerboas, the burrowing moles
and hyperdæi, the flying cheiroptera and bats, the fishlike swimming
sirens and whales, and climbing lemures and apes. In all these and the
remaining orders of the mammals the whole regular structure of the
motor apparatus is strikingly adapted to the habits of life which have
been formed by this adaptation itself. Nevertheless, we see that the
essential character of the inner organization which distinguishes the
mammals as a class is not affected by this adaptation, but constantly
maintained by heredity. These recognized facts of comparative anatomy
and ontogeny, and the concordant results of paleontology, prove
convincingly that all living and fossil mammals, from the lowest
ungulates and marsupials to the ape and man, have descended from one
common stem-form, a pro-mammal, that lived in the Triassic Period;
its earlier ancestors in the Permian Period were reptiles, and, in
the Carboniferous Period, amphibia. Among the characters of the
locomotive apparatus which are peculiar to mammals we have, on the
one hand, the structure of the vertebral column and the skull, and,
on the other hand, the formation of the muscles which are attached
to these supporting organs. In the skull we particularly notice the
formation of the lower jaw and the joint by which it is connected with
the temporal bone. This joint is temporal, and so distinguished from
the square joint of the other vertebrates. The latter is found in the
mammals in the tympanic cavity of the middle-ear, between the hammer
(the modified joint of the lower jaw, _articulare_) and the anvil (the
original _quadratum_). In harmony with this remarkable modification
of the maxillary joint, the corresponding muscles have naturally
also undergone a considerable transformation. A distinctive muscle
that is only found in the mammals and regulates their respiration is
the diaphragm, which completely divides the abdominal and thoracic
cavities; the various muscles, from the blending of which it has been
formed, still remain separate in the other vertebrates.

The many organs by means of which our human organism accomplishes its
manifold movements are just the same as in the apes, and the mechanism
of their action is in no way different. The same two hundred bones,
in the same order and composition, form our internal bony skeleton;
the same three hundred muscles effect our movements. The differences
we find in the form and size of the various muscles and bones (and
which are, as is well known, also found between lower and higher
races of men) are due to differences in growth in consequence of
divergent adaptation. On the other hand, the complete agreement in the
construction of the whole motor apparatus is explained by heredity from
the common stem-form of the apes and men. The most striking difference
between the movements of the two is due to man's adaptation to the
erect posture, while the climbing of trees is the normal habit of the
ape. However, it is unquestionable that the former is an evolution
from the latter. A double parallel to this modification is seen in the
jerboa among the ungulates, and in the kangaroo among the marsupials.
Both these, in springing, use only the strong hinder extremities, and
not the weaker fore-limbs; as a result of this their posture has become
more or less erect. Among the birds we have an analogous case in the
penguins (_aptenodytes_); as they no longer use their atrophied wings
for flight, but only in swimming, they have developed an erect posture
when on land.

The human will is also not specifically different from that of the ape
or any other mammal; and its microscopic organs, the neurona in the
brain and the muscular cells in the flesh, work with the same forms
of energy, and are similarly subject to the law of substance. Hence
it is immaterial for the moment whether one believes in the freedom
of the will according to the antiquated creed of indeterminism, or
whether one holds it to be refuted scientifically by the arguments
of modern determinists; in either case the acts of the will and
voluntary movements follow the same laws in man as in the ape. The high
development of the function in civilized man, the ample differentiation
of speech and morality, art and science--in a word, the ethical
significance of the will for higher culture--is in no way discordant
to this monistic and zoologically grounded conception. In the lower
races these privileges of the civilized will are only found in a slight
degree, and some of them are wholly wanting among the lowest races. The
distance between the lowest savage and the most civilized human being
is greater, in this respect also, than that which separates the savage
from the anthropoid ape. However, I refer the reader to the remarks
I made at the close of the seventh chapter of the _Riddle_ on the
problem of the freedom of the will and the infinite literature relating
thereto. The reader who desires to go further into this subject will
find it well treated in the works of Traugott Trunk (1902) and Paul Rée
(1903) [also in Dr. Stout's recent little manual of psychology and Mr.
W. H. Mallock's _Religion as a Credible Doctrine_].




