XVI

THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE

 Inorganic and organic evolution--Biogenesis and
 cosmogenesis--Mechanical evolution--Mechanics of phylogenesis--Theory
 of selection--Theory of idioplasm--Phyletic vital force--Theory of
 germ-plasm--Progressive heredity--Comparative morphology--Germ-plasm
 and hereditary matter--Theory of mutation--Zoological and botanical
 transformism--Neo-Lamarckism and Neo-Darwinism--Mechanics of
 ontogenesis--Biogenetic law--Tectogenetic ontogeny--Experimental
 evolution--Monism and biogeny.


I fully explained in my _General Morphology_ (1866) the profound
importance of the science of evolution in relation to our monistic
philosophy. A popular synopsis of this is given in my _History of
Creation_, and is briefly repeated in the thirteenth chapter of the
_Riddle_. I must refer the reader to these works, especially the
latter, and confine myself here to a consideration of some of the
principal general questions of evolution in the light of modern
science. The first thing to do is to compare the conflicting views on
the nature and significance of biogenesis which still face each other
at the beginning of the twentieth century.

The essential unity of inorganic and organic nature, which I endeavored
to establish in the second book of the _General Morphology_, and the
significance of which I explained in the fourteenth chapter of the
_Riddle_, is found through the whole course of its development, in
the causes of phenomena and their laws. Hence, in dealing with the
evolution of organisms, we reject vitalism and dualism, and maintain
our conviction that it can always be traced to physical forces (and
especially chemical energy). As we regard plasm as the basis of it
(chapter vi.), we may say that organic evolution depends on the
mechanics and chemistry of the plasm. We postulate no supernatural
vital force for the explanation of physiological functions, and we are
just as far from admitting it as regulator or agency of the biogenetic
process.

If we understand by biogeny the sum total of the organic evolutionary
processes on our planet, by geogeny the processes at work in the
formation of the earth itself, and by cosmogony those that produced the
whole world, biogeny is clearly only a small part of geogeny, and this
in turn only a small section of the vast science of cosmogony. This
important relation is evident enough, yet often overlooked; it holds
both of time and space. Even if we suppose that the biogenetic process
occupied more than a hundred million years, this period is probably
much shorter than that which our planet has needed for its development
as a cosmic body--from the first detachment of the nebular ring from
the shrinking body of the sun to its condensation into a rotating
sphere of gas, and from this to the formation of the incandescent
globe, the stiffening of the crust at its surface, and finally the
downpour of fluid water. It was not until this last stage that carbon
could begin its organogenetic activity and proceed to the formation of
plasm. But even this long geogenetic process is, as regards space and
time, only a very small part of the illimitable history of the world.
If we further assume that organic life develops on other cosmic bodies
(_Riddle_, chapter xx.) in the same way as on our earth under like
conditions, the whole sum of all these biogenetic processes is only a
small part of the all-embracing cosmogenetic process. The vitalistic
belief that its mechanical course was interrupted from time to time
by the supernatural creation of organisms is opposed to pure reason,
the unity of nature, and the law of substance. We must, therefore, hold
fast above all to the conviction that all biogenetic processes are
just as reducible to the mechanics of substance as all other natural
phenomena.

The mechanical and natural character of the development of inorganic
nature, the earth and the whole material world, was established
mathematically at the end of the eighteenth century by the great
atheist Laplace in his _Mécanique Céleste_ (1799). The similar
cosmogony which Kant had expounded in 1755 in his _General Natural
History and Theory of the Heavens_ only obtained recognition at a
later date (_Riddle_, chapter xiii.). But the possibility of giving
a mechanical explanation of organic nature was not seen until Darwin
provided a solid foundation for the theory of descent by his theory of
selection in 1859. I made the first comprehensive attempt to do this in
1866 in my _General Morphology_, the aim of which is expressed in the
title: "General outlines of the science of organic forms, mechanically
grounded on Darwin's improvement of the theory of descent." Especially
in the second volume of the work, the "General Evolution of Organisms,"
I endeavored to show that both sections of the science, ontogeny (or
embryology) and phylogeny, can be reduced to physiological activities
of the plasm, and so explained mechanically, in the wider meaning of
the word.

When I stated the nature and the aim of phylogeny in 1866, most
biologists regarded my attempt as unjustifiable, as they did Darwinism
itself, of which it was a natural consequence. Even the famous Émil
Dubois-Reymond, to whom as a physiologist it should have been welcome,
described it as "a poor romance"; he compared my first attempts
to construct the genealogical tree of the organic classes, on the
evidence of paleontology, comparative anatomy, and ontogeny, to the
hypothetical labors of philologists to draw up the genealogical tree
of the legendary Homeric heroes. As a matter of fact, I had myself
described my imperfect effort as merely a provisional sketch, as a
temporary hypothesis that would open the way for later and better
research. A single glance at the immense literature of phylogeny
to-day shows how much has been done since in this province, and how
far we have advanced in the establishment of the features of evolution
by means of the united labors of numbers of able paleontologists,
anatomists, and embryologists. Ten years ago I attempted, in the three
volumes of my _Systematic Phylogeny_, to give a comprehensive statement
of the results attained. My chief aim was, on the one hand, to
construct a natural system of organisms on the basis of their ancestral
history, and on the other hand to prove the mechanical character of
the phylogenetic process. All the activities of organisms which are at
work in the transformation of species and the production of new ones
in the struggle for existence may be reduced to their physiological
functions--to growth, nutrition, adaptation, and heredity; and these
again to the mechanics and chemistry of the plasm. The struggle for
life is itself a mechanical process, in which natural selection uses
the disproportion between the excess of germs and the restricted
means of existence, in conjunction with the variability of species,
in order to produce new purposive structures mechanically and without
any preconceived design. This teleological mechanicism has no need of
a mysterious design or finality; it takes its place in the general
order of mechanical causality which controls all the processes in the
universe. Natural finality is only a special instance of mechanical
causality. The one is subordinate to the other, not opposed to it, as
Kant would have it.

The effort that the great Lamarck made in 1809, in his _Philosophie
Zoologique_, to establish transformism deserves high appreciation from
monists, because it was the first attempt to give a natural explanation
of the origin of the countless species of organic forms which inhabit
our planet. Up to that time it had been the fashion to attribute their
origin to a miraculous intervention of the Creator. This metaphysical
creationism had now to face physical evolutionism. Lamarck explained
the gradual formation of organic species by the interaction of
two physiological functions--adaptation and heredity. Adaptation
consists in the improvement of organs by use, and degeneration by
disuse; heredity acts by transmitting the features thus acquired to
posterity. New species arise by physiological transformation from
older species. The fact that this great thought was overlooked for
half a century does not detract from its profound significance. But it
only obtained general recognition when Darwin had supplemented it and
filled up its causal gaps by the theory of selection in 1859. Apart
from this specifically Darwinian feature (whether it be true or not),
the fundamental idea of transformism is now generally received; it
is admitted to-day even by metaphysicians who maintained a spirited
opposition to it thirty years ago. The fact of the progressive
modification of species is only intelligible on Lamarck's theory
that the actual species are the transformed descendants of older
species. In spite of all the learning and zeal with which the theory
has been attacked, it has proved irrefutable; nor can any one suggest
a better theory to replace it. This may be said particularly of its
chief consequence--the descent of man from a series of other mammals
(proximately from the apes).

The high value of Darwin's theory of selection for the monistic biology
is now acknowledged by all competent and impartial authorities
on the science. In the course of the forty-four years since it
found its way into every branch of biology, it has been employed
in more than a hundred large works and several thousand essays in
explaining biological phenomena. This alone is enough to show its
profound importance. Hence it is mere ignorance of the subject and
its literature to say, as has been done several times of late, that
Darwinism is in decay, or even "dead and buried." However, absurd
writings of this kind (such as Dennert's _At the Death-bed of
Darwinism_) have a certain practical influence, because they fall
in with the prevailing superstition in theology and metaphysics.
Unfortunately, they also seem to obtain notice from the circumstance
that a few botanists persistently attack the Darwinian theory. One of
the most conspicuous of these is Hans Driesch, who affirms that all
Darwinists (and therefore the great majority of modern biologists) have
softening of the brain, and that Darwinism is (like Hegel's philosophy)
the delusion of a generation. The arrogance of this conceited writer is
about equal to the obscurity of his biological opinions, the confusion
of which is covered by a series of most extravagant metaphysical
speculations. All these attacks have lately been met very ably by
Plate in his work, _On the Significance of the Darwinian Principle
of Selection and the Problem of the Foundation of Species_ (second
edition, 1903). The most thorough of recent defences of Darwinism
is that made by August Weismann in his _Lectures on the Theory of
Descent_ (1902) and other works. But the distinguished zoologist
goes too far when he seeks to prove the omnipotence of selection and
wishes to ground it on an untenable molecular hypothesis--the theory
of germ-plasm, which we will consider presently. Apart from these or
other exaggerations, we may say with Weismann that Lamarck's theory of
descent received a sound causal basis by Darwin's theory of selection.
Its real foundations are these three phenomena: heredity, adaptation,
and the struggle for existence. All three are, as I have often said,
of a purely mechanical and not a teleological nature. Heredity is
closely bound up with the physiological function of reproduction, and
adaptation with nutrition; the struggle for life follows logically and
mathematically from the disproportion between the number of potential
individuals (germs) and of actual individuals that grow to maturity and
propagate the species.

When I had, in my _General Morphology_, endeavored to gain acceptance
for Darwin's theory of selection, and had presented evolution as a
comprehensive theory from the point of view of the monistic philosophy,
a number of works, sometimes of value, appeared, which made special
studies of the various parts of the immense province. Eighteen years
afterwards a greater work was published, which started from the same
monistic principles, but reached the same conclusion by a different
way. In 1884 Carl Nägeli, one of our ablest and most philosophic
botanists, issued his _Mechanical-physiological Theory of Evolution_.
This interesting book consists of various parts. It is especially
notable that evolution is presented in it as the one possible
and natural theory of the origin of species; even morphology and
classification are treated explicitly as "phylogenetic sciences." The
chapter on archigony--a dark and dangerous problem that is generally
avoided by scientists!--is one of the best that has been written on the
subject. On the other hand, Nägeli rejects Darwin's theory of selection
altogether, and would explain the origin of species by an inner
"definitely directed variation," independently of the conditions of
existence in the outer world. As Weismann has properly observed, this
internal principle of evolution, which dispenses with adaptation in
the true sense of the word, is at the bottom merely a "phyletic vital
force." It is not made more acceptable by Nägeli when he builds up a
subtle metaphysical system on it and postulates a special "principle
of isagitation." But the idioplasm theory he connects with it is of
some value, since it goes more fully into the differentiation of the
cell-plasm into two physiologically different parts--the idioplasm of
the hereditary matter and the trophoplasm as nutritive matter of the
cell.

The vitalist and teleological idea of an internal principle of
evolution, that determines the origin of animal and plant species
independently of the environment and its conditions, is not only
found in the "mechanical-physiological" theory of Nägeli, but also in
several other attempts to explain the agencies of the transformation of
species. All these efforts are welcomed by the academic philosophers
with their Kantist dualism (mechanicism on the right, teleology on
the left), and who are particularly anxious to save the supernatural
element, Reinke's "cosmic intelligence," or the wisdom of the Creator,
or the divine creative thought. All these dualistic and teleological
efforts have the same fault: they overlook, or fail to appreciate
properly, the immense influence of the environment on the shaping
and modification of organisms. When, moreover, they deny progressive
heredity and its connection with functional adaptation, they lose the
chief factor in transformation. This applies also to the theory of
germ-plasm.

The desire to penetrate deeper into the mysterious processes that
take place in the plasm in the physiological activities of heredity
and adaptation has led to the formulation of a number of molecular
theories. The chief of these are the pangenesis theory of Darwin
(1878), my own perigenesis theory (1876), the idioplasm theory of
Nägeli (1884), the germ-plasm theory of Weismann (1885), the mutation
theory of De Bries, etc. As I have already dealt with these in the
sixth chapter (as well as in the ninth chapter of the _History of
Creation_), I may refer the reader thereto. None of these or similar
attempts has completely solved the very difficult problems in question,
and none of them has been generally received. There is, however, one
of them that we must consider more closely, because it is not only
regarded by many biologists as the greatest advance of the theory of
selection since Darwin, but it also touches the roots of several of
the chief problems of biogeny. I mean the much-discussed germ-plasm
theory of August Weismann (of Freiburg), one of our most distinguished
zoologists. He has not only promoted the theory of descent by his
many writings during the last thirty years, but has also put in its
proper light the great importance and entire accuracy of the theory of
selection. But, in his efforts to provide a molecular-physiological
basis for it, he has proceeded by way of metaphysical speculation to
frame a quite untenable theory of the plasm. While fully recognizing
the ability and consistency and the able treatment which Weismann
has shown, I am compelled once more to dissent from him. His ideas
have recently been completely refuted by Max Kassowitz (1902) in his
_General Biology_, and Ludwig Plate in the work I mentioned on the
Darwinian principle of selection. We need not go into the details of
the complicated hypothesis as to the molecular structure of the plasm
which Weismann has framed in support of his theory of heredity--his
theory of biophora, determinants, ideas, etc.--because they have no
theoretical basis and are of no practical use. But we must pass some
criticism on one of their chief consequences. In the interest of his
complicated hypotheses, Weismann denies one of Lamarck's most important
principles of transmutation--namely, the inheritance of acquired
characters.

When I made the first attempt in 1866 to formulate the phenomena of
heredity and adaptation in definite laws and arrange these in series,
I drew a distinction between conservative and progressive heredity
(chapter ix., _History of Creation_). Conservative heredity, or the
inheritance of inherited characters, transmits to posterity the
morphological and physiological features which each individual has
received from his parents. Progressive heredity, or the inheritance of
acquired characters, transmits to offspring a part of those features
which were acquired by the parents in the course of their individual
lives. The chief of these are the characters that are caused by the
activity of the organs themselves. Increase in the use of the organs
causes a greater access of nourishment and promotes their growth;
decrease in the exercise of organs has the contrary effect. We have
examples at hand in the modification of the muscles or the eyes, the
action of the hand or throat in painting or singing, and so on. In
these and all the arts the rule is: Practice makes perfect. But this
applies almost universally to the physiological activity of the plasm,
even its highest and most astounding function--thought; the memory and
reasoning capacity of the phronema are improved by constant exercise of
the cells which compose this organ, just as we find in the case of the
hands and the senses.

Lamarck recognized the great morphological significance of this
physiological use of the organs, and did not doubt that the
modification caused was transmitted to offspring to a certain extent.
When I dealt with this correlation of direct adaptation and progressive
heredity in 1866, I laid special stress on the "law of cumulative
adaptation" (_General Morphology_, ii., p. 208). "All organisms undergo
important and permanent (chemical, morphological, and physiological)
changes when acted on by a change in its life-conditions, slight in
itself, but continuing for a long time or being frequently repeated."
At the same time I pointed out that in this case two groups of
phenomena are closely connected which are often separated--namely,
cumulative heredity: firstly _external_, by the action of the external
conditions (food, climate, environment, etc.), and secondly _internal_,
by the reaction of the organism, the influence of internal conditions
(habit, use and disuse of organs, etc.). The action of outer influences
(light, heat, electricity, pressure, etc.) not only causes a reaction
of the organism affected (energy of movement, sensation, chemosis,
etc.), but it has an especial effect as a trophic stimulus on its
nutrition and growth. The latter element has been particularly studied
by Wilhelm Roux; his functional adaptation (1881) coincides with my
cumulative adaptation, the close relation of which to correlative
adaptation I had pointed out in 1866. Plate has recently given this
"definitely directed variation" the name of ectogenetic orthogenesis,
or, briefly, ectogenesis.

The controversy about progressive heredity still continues here and
there. Weismann completely denies it, because he cannot bring it into
harmony with his germ-plasm theory, and because he thinks there are
no experimental proofs in support of it. A number of able biologists
agree with him, led away by his brilliant argumentation. However,
many of them foolishly lay great stress on experiments in heredity
which prove nothing; for instance, the fact that the offspring of a
mammal that has had its tail cut off do not inherit the feature. A
number of recent observations seem to prove that in a few cases even
defects of this sort (when they have caused profound and lasting
disease of the part affected) may be transmitted to offspring.
However, as far as the formation of new species is concerned, the
fact is of no consequence; in this it is a question of cumulative or
functional adaptation. Experimental proofs of this are difficult to
find, if one wants a strict demonstration of the type of physical
experiments; the biological conditions are generally too complicated
and offer too many weak points to rigorous criticism. The beautiful
experiments of Standfuss and C. Fisher (Zurich) have shown that changes
in the environment (such as temperature or food) can cause striking
modifications that are transmitted to offspring. In any case, there are
plenty of luminous proofs of progressive heredity in the vast arsenal
of morphology, comparative anatomy, and ontogeny.

Comparative anatomy affords a number of most valuable arguments for
other phylogenetic questions as well as progressive heredity; and the
same may be said of comparative anatomy and comparative ontogeny. I
have collected and illustrated a good many of these proofs in the new
edition of my _Anthropogeny_. However, in order to understand and
appreciate them aright, the reader must have some acquaintance with
the methods of critical comparison. This means not only an extensive
knowledge of anatomy, ontogeny, and classification, but also practice
in morphological thinking and reasoning. Many of our modern biologists
lack these qualifications, especially those "exact" observers who
erroneously imagine they can understand vast groups of phenomena by
accurate description of detailed microscopic structures, etc. Many
distinguished cytologists, histologists, and embryologists have
completely lost the larger view of their work by absorption in these
details. They even reject some of the fundamental ideas of comparative
anatomy, such as the distinction between homology and analogy;
Wilhelm His, for instance, declared that these "academic ideas" are
"unreliable tools." On the other hand, physiological experiments ought
to contribute to the solution of morphological problems, and of these
they can say nothing. To show the incalculable value of comparative
anatomy for phylogeny, I need only point to one of its most successful
departments, the skeleton of the vertebrates, the comparison of the
various forms of the skull, the vertebral column, the limbs, etc. It
is not in vain that for more than a hundred years gifted scientists,
from Goethe and Cuvier to Huxley and Gegenbaur, have devoted years
of laborious research to the methodical comparison of these similar
yet dissimilar forms. They have been rewarded by the discovery of the
common laws of structure, which can only be explained in the sense of
modern evolution by descent from common ancestors.

We have a striking example of this in the limbs of mammals, which, with
the same internal skeletal structure, show a very great variety in
outer form--the slender bones of the running carnivora and ungulates,
the oar-bones of the whale and seal, the shovel-bones of the mole and
hypudæus, the wings of the bat, the climbing bones of the ape, and the
differentiated limbs of the human body. All these different skeletal
forms have descended from the same common stem-form of the oldest
Triassic mammals; their various forms and structures are adapted in
scores of ways to different functions; but they rise _through_ these
functions, and all these functional adaptations can only be understood
by progressive heredity. The theory of germ-plasm gives no causal
explanation whatever of them.

The majority of recent biologists are of opinion that of the two chief
constituents of the nucleated cell the cytoplasm of the cell-body
discharges the function of nutrition and adaptation, while the
caryoplasm of the nucleus accomplishes reproduction and heredity.
I first advanced this view in the ninth chapter of the _General
Morphology_ (in 1866); and it was afterwards solidly and empirically
established by the excellent investigations of Eduard Strasburger, the
brothers Oscar and Richard Hertwig, and others. The elaborate finer
structures which these observers discovered in cell-division led to
the theory that the colorable part of the nucleus, chromatin, is the
real hereditary matter, or the material substratum of the energy of
heredity. Weismann added the theory that this germ-plasm lives quite
separately from the other substances in the cell, and that the latter
(the soma-plasm) cannot transmit to the germ-plasm the characters it
has acquired by adaptation. It is on the strength of this theory that
he opposes progressive heredity. The representatives of the latter
(including myself) do not accept this absolute separation of germ-plasm
from body-plasm; we believe that even in the process of cell-division
in the unicellular organism there is partial blending of the two kinds
of plasm (caryolysis), and that in the multicellular organism of the
histona also the harmonious connection of all the cells by their
plasma-fibres makes it possible enough for all the cells in the body to
act on the germ-plasm of the germ-cells. Max Kassowitz has shown how we
can explain this influence by the molecular structure of the plasm.

At the beginning of the twentieth century a new biological theory
aroused a good deal of interest, and was welcomed by some as an
experimental refutation of Darwin's theory of selection and by others
as a valuable supplement to it. The distinguished botanist Hugo de
Bries (of Amsterdam) gave an interesting lecture at the scientific
congress at Hamburg in 1901 on "The Mutations and Mutation-periods
in the Origin of Species." Supported by many years of experiments in
selection and some ingenious speculations, he thinks he has discovered
a new method of the transformation of species, an abrupt modification
of the specific form at a bound, and so discredited Darwin's theory of
their gradual change through long periods of time. In a large work on
_Experiments and Observations on the Origin of Species in the Plant
Kingdom_ (1903), De Bries has endeavored to demonstrate the truth of
his theory of mutation. The warm approval which it won from a number
of eminent botanists, and especially vegetal physiologists, was not
shared by zoologists. Of these Weismann, in his _Lectures on the
Theory of Descent_ (1902, ii. p. 358), and Plate in his _Problems of
Species-formation_ (1903, p. 174), have dealt fully with the theory
of mutation, and, while appreciating the interesting observations
and experiments of De Bries, have rejected the theory he has built
on them. As I share their opinion, I may refer the reader who is
interested in these difficult problems to their works, and will
restrict myself here to the following observations. The chief weakness
of the theory of mutation of De Bries is on its logical side, in
his dogmatic distinction between species and variety, mutation and
variation. When he holds the constancy of species as a fundamental
"fact of observation," we can only say that this (relative) permanence
of species is very different in the different classes. In many
classes (for instance, insects, birds, many orchids and graminea) we
may examine thousands of specimens of a species without finding any
individual differences; in other classes (such as sponges, corals, in
the genera _rubus_ and _hieracium_) the variability is so great that
classifiers hesitate to draw up fixed species. The marked difference
between various forms of variability which De Bries alleges cannot
be carried through; the fluctuating variations (which he takes to be
unimportant) cannot be sharply distinguished from the abrupt mutations
(from which new species are supposed to result at a bound). De Bries's
mutations (which I distinguished in the _General Morphology_ as
"monstrous changes" from other kinds of variation) must not be confused
with the paleontological mutations of Waagen (1869) and Scott (1894)
which have the same name. The sudden and striking changes of habit
which De Bries observed only in one single species of _œnothera_
very rarely occur, and cannot be regarded as common beginnings of
the formation of new species. It is a curious freak of chance that
this species bears the name _œnothera Lamarckiana_; the views of
the great Lamarck on the powerful influence of functional adaptation
have not been refuted by De Bries. It must be carefully noted, in
fact, that De Bries is firmly convinced of the truth of Lamarck's
theory of descent, like all competent modern biologists. This must be
well understood, because recent metaphysicians see in the supposed
refutation of Darwinism the death of the whole theory of transformism
and evolution. When they appeal in this sense to its most virulent
opponents, Dennert, Driesch, and Fleischmann, we may remind them that
the curious sermons of these minor sophists are no longer noticed by
any competent and informed scientist.

Not only in the brilliant speculations of De Bries and Nägeli, but
also in many other botanical works that have lately attempted to
advance the theory of descent, we find a striking difference from
the prevailing views of zoologists in the treatment of a number of
general biological problems. This difference is, of course, not
due to a disproportion of ability in the two great and neighboring
camps of biology, but to the differences in the phenomena that we
observe in plant life on the one hand and animal life on the other.
It must be noted particularly that the organism of the higher animals
(including our own) is much more elaborately differentiated in its
various organs and much more exposed to our direct experience than
that of the higher plants. The chief properties and activities of our
muscles, skeleton, nerves, and sense-organs, are understood at once
in comparative anatomy and physiology. The study of the corresponding
phenomena in the bodies of the higher plants is much more difficult.
The features of the innumerable elementary organs in the cell-monarchy
of the animal body are much more intricate, yet at the same time much
more intelligible, than those of the cell-republic of the higher
plant-body. Thus the phylogeny of the plants encounters much greater
difficulties than that of the animals; the embryology of the former
says much less in detail than that of the latter. We can understand,
therefore, why the biogenetic law is not so generally recognized by
botanists as by zoologists. Paleontology, which provides such valuable
fossil material for many groups of the animal kingdom that we can
more or less correctly draw up their ancestral tree on the strength
of this, gives us very little for most groups of the plant kingdom.
On the other hand, the large and sharply demarcated plant-cell, with
its various organella, is much more valuable in connection with many
problems than the tiny animal-cell. For many physiological purposes,
in fact, the higher plant body is more accessible to exact physical
and chemical research than the higher animal body. The antithesis is
less in the kingdom of the protists, as the difference between animal
and vegetal life is mostly confined to difference of metabolism, and
finally disappears altogether in the province of the unicellular forms
of life. Hence, for a clear and impartial treatment of the great
problems of biology, and especially of phylogeny, it is imperative to
have a knowledge of both zoological and botanical investigation. The
two great founders of the theory of descent--Lamarck and Darwin--were
able to penetrate so deeply into the mysteries of organic life and its
development because they had extensive attainments both in botany and
zoology.

Of the various tendencies that have recently made their appearance
among zoologists and botanists in the discussion of the theory
of descent, we frequently find Neo-Lamarckism and Neo-Darwinism
distinguished as opposing schools. This opposition has no meaning
unless we understand by it the alternatives of transformism--with or
without the theory of selection. The one principle that distinguishes
Darwinism proper from the older Lamarckism is the struggle for
existence and the theory of selection based on it. It is quite wrong
to make the test an acceptance or rejection of progressive heredity.
Darwin was just as firmly convinced as Lamarck or myself of the great
importance of the inheritance of acquired characters, and particularly
of the inheritance of functional adaptations; he merely ascribed to it
a more restricted sphere of influence than Lamarck. Weismann, however,
denies progressive heredity altogether, and wants to trace everything
to "the omnipotence of natural selection." If this view of Weismann
and the theory of germ-plasm he has based on it are correct, he alone
has the honor of founding a totally new (and in his opinion very
fruitful) form of transformism. But it is quite wrong to describe this
Weismannism as Neo-Darwinism, as frequently happens in England. It is
just as wrong to call Nägeli, De Bries, and other modern biologists who
reject selection Neo-Lamarckists.

If the theory of descent is right, as all competent biologists now
admit, it puts on morphology the task of assigning approximately the
origin of each living form. It must endeavor to explain the actual
organization of each by its past, and to recognize the causes of its
modification in the series of its ancestors. I made the first attempt
to achieve this difficult task in founding stem-history or phylogeny
as an independent historical science in my "General Evolution" (in
the second volume of the _General Morphology_). With it I associated
as a second and equally sound part ontogeny; I understood by this the
whole science of the development of the individual, both embryology and
metamorphology. Ontogeny enjoys the privileges (especially in the way
of certainty) of a purely descriptive science, when it confines itself
to the faithful description of the directly observed facts, either the
embryonic processes in the womb or the later metamorphic processes.
The task of phylogeny is much more difficult, as it has to decipher
long-past processes by means of imperfect evidence, and has to use its
documents with the utmost prudence.

The three most valuable sources of evidence in phylogeny are
paleontology, comparative anatomy, and ontogeny. Paleontology seems
to be the most reliable source, as it gives us tangible facts in
the fossils which bear witness to the succession of species in the
long history of organic life. Unfortunately, our knowledge of the
fossils is very scanty and often very imperfect. Hence the numerous
gaps in its positive evidence have to be filled up by the results of
two other sciences, comparative anatomy and ontogeny. I have dealt
fully with this in my _Anthropogeny_. As I have also spoken of the
general features of these phyletic evidences in the sixteenth chapter
of the _History of Creation_, I need do no more here than repeat
that it is necessary to make equal and discriminating use of all
three classes of documents if we are to attain the aim of phylogeny
correctly. Unfortunately, this necessitates a thorough knowledge of
all three sciences, and this is very rare. Most embryologists neglect
paleontology, most paleontologists embryology, while comparative
anatomy, the most difficult part of morphology, involving most
extensive knowledge and sound judgment, is neglected by both. Besides
these three sources of phylogeny there is valuable proof afforded
by every branch of biology, especially by chorology, œcology,
physiology, and biochemistry.

Although there has been very extensive phylogenetic research during the
last thirty years, and it has yielded a number of interesting results,
many scientists still seem to look on them with a certain distrust;
some contest their scientific value altogether, and say that they are
nothing but airy and untenable speculations. This is especially the
case with many physiologists who look upon experiment as the only
exact method of investigation, and many embryologists who think their
sole task is description. In view of these sceptical strictures, we
may recall the history and the nature of geology. No one now questions
the great importance and the various uses of this science, although
in it there is no possibility of directly observing the historical
processes as a rule. No scientist now doubts that the three vast
successive formations of the Mesozoic Period--the Triassic, Jurassic,
and Cretaceous--have been formed from sea-deposits (lime, sandstone,
and clay), though no one was a witness to the actual formation; no one
doubts to-day that the fossil skeletons of fishes and reptiles which
we find in these groups are not mysterious freaks of nature, but the
remains of extinct fishes and reptiles that lived on the earth during
those millions of years long ago. And when comparative anatomy shows us
the genealogical connection of these related forms, and phylogeny (with
the aid of ontogeny) constructs their ancestral trees, their historical
hypotheses are just as sound and reliable as those of geology; the
only difference is that the latter are much simpler, and thus easier
to construct. Phylogeny and geology are, in the nature of the case,
_historical sciences_.

Hypotheses are necessary in phylogeny and geology, where the empirical
evidence is incomplete, as in every other historical science. It is no
detraction from the value of these to urge that they are sometimes weak
and have to be replaced by better and stronger ones. A weak hypothesis
is always better than none. We must, therefore, protest against the
foolish dread of hypotheses which is urged against our phylogenetic
methods by the representatives of the exact and descriptive sciences.
This shrinking from hypotheses often hides a defective knowledge of
other sciences, an incapacity for synthetic thought, and a feeble sense
of causality. The delusions into which it leads many scientists may be
seen from the fact that chemistry, for instance, is reckoned an "exact"
science; yet no chemist has ever seen the atoms and molecules of
compounds with which he is occupied daily, or the complicated relations
on the assumption of which the whole of modern structural chemistry
is based. All these hypotheses rest on inferences, not on direct
observation.

I have, from the first, insisted on the close causal connection between
ontogeny and phylogeny, ever since I distinguished these two parts of
biogeny in the fifth book of the _General Morphology_. I also laid
stress on the mechanical character of these sciences, and endeavored
to give a physiological explanation of their morphological phenomena.
Until then embryology had been regarded as a purely descriptive
science. Carl Ernst Baer, who had provided a solid foundation for it
in his classic _Animal Embryology_ (1828), was convinced that all the
phenomena of individual development might be reduced to the laws of
growth; but he was quite unconscious of the real direction of this
growth, its "purposiveness," the real causes of construction. The
distinguished Würtzburg anatomist, Albert Kölliker, whose _Manual of
Human Embryology_ (1859) gave the first comprehensive treatment of the
science from the cellular point of view, adhered, even in the fourth
edition (1884), to the opinion that "the laws of the development of
the organism are still completely unknown." In opposition to this
generally received opinion, I endeavored, in 1866, to prove that Darwin
had, by his improvement of the theory of descent, not only solved
the phylogenetic problem of the origin of species, but, at the same
time, given us the key to open the closed doors of embryology, and to
learn the causes of the ontogenetic processes as well. I formulated
this view in the twentieth chapter of the _General Morphology_, in
forty-four theses, of which I will quote only the following three: 1.
The development of organisms is a physiological process, depending on
mechanical causes, or physico-chemical movements. 40. Ontogenesis, or
the development of the organic individual, is directly determined by
phylogenesis, or the evolution of the organic stem (_phylon_) to which
it belongs. 41. Ontogenesis is a brief and rapid recapitulation of
phylogenesis, determined by the physiological functions of heredity and
adaptation. The pith of my biogenetic principle is expressed in these
and the remaining theses on the causal nexus of biontic and phyletic
development. At the same time I make it quite clear that I reduce the
physical process of ontogenesis, and also phylogenesis, to a pure
mechanics of the plasm (in the sense of the critical philosophy).

The comprehensive fundamental law of organic development was briefly
formulated by me in the fifth book of the _General Morphology_ and in
the tenth chapter of the _History of Creation_ (developed more fully
in the fourteenth chapter of the tenth edition, 1902). I afterwards
sought to establish it securely in two different ways. In the first
place, I proved in my _Studies of the Gastræa Theory_ (1872-1877)
that in all the tissue-animals, from the lowest sponges and polyps to
the highest articulata and vertebrates, the multicellular organism
develops from the same primitive embryonic form (the _gastrula_),
and that this is the ontogenetic repetition, in virtue of heredity,
of a corresponding stem-form (the _gastræa_). In the second place, I
made the first attempt in my _Anthropogeny_ (1874) to illustrate this
recapitulation theory from the instance of our own human organism, by
trying to explain the complex process of individual development, for
the whole frame and every single part of it, by causal connection with
the stem-history of our animal ancestors. In the latest edition of this
monistic "ontogeny of man" I gave numbers of illustrations (thirty
plates and five hundred engravings) of these intricate structures,
and endeavored to make the subject still plainer by the addition of
sixty genetic tables. I may refer the reader to this work,[10] and
not dwell any further here on the biogenetic law, especially as one
of my pupils, Heinrich Schmidt (of Jena), has recently described its
biological significance and its earlier history and present position in
a very clear and reliable little work (_Haeckel's Biogenetic Law and
its Critics_). I will only add a word or two on the struggle that has
taken place for thirty years over the complete or partial recognition
of the biogenetic law, its empirical establishment, and its philosophic
application.

In the very name, "fundamental law of biogeny," which I have given to
my recapitulation theory, I claim that it is universal. Every organism,
from the unicellular protists to the cryptogams and cœlenteria, and
from these up to the flowering plants and vertebrates, reproduces in
its individual development, in virtue of certain hereditary processes,
a part of its ancestral history. The very word "recapitulation"
implies a partial and abbreviated repetition of the course of the
original phyletic development, determined by the "laws of heredity
and adaptation." Heredity brings about the reproduction of certain
evolutionary features; adaptation causes a modification of them by
the conditions of the environment--a condensation, disturbance, or
falsification. Hence I insisted from the first that the biogenetic law
consists of two parts, one positive and palingenetic and the other
restrictively negative and cenogenetic. _Palingenesis_ reproduces a
part of the original history of the stem; _cenogenesis_ disturbs or
alters this picture in consequence of subsequent modifications of the
original course of development. This distinction is most important, and
cannot be too often repeated in view of the persistent misunderstanding
of my opponents. It is overlooked by those who (like Plate and
Steinmann) grant it only a partial validity, and by those who reject
it altogether (like Keibel and Hensen). The embryologist Keibel is the
most curious of these, as he has himself afforded a good many proofs
of the biogenetic law in his careful descriptive-embryological works.
But he has so little mastered it that he has never understood the
distinction between palingenesis and cenogenesis.

It is especially unfortunate that one of our most distinguished
embryologists, Oscar Hertwig, of Berlin, who provided a good deal of
evidence in favor of the biogenetic law thirty years ago, has lately
joined the opponents of it. His supposed "correction" or modification
of it is, as Keibel has rightly said, a complete abandonment of it.
Heinrich Schmidt has partly explained the causes of this change
in his work on the biogenetic law. They are not unconnected with
the psychological metamorphosis which Oscar Hertwig has undergone
at Berlin. In the discourse on "The Development of Biology in the
Nineteenth Century," which he delivered at the scientific congress at
Aachen in 1900, he openly accepted the dualist principles of vitalism
(although he says they are "just as unreliable as the chemico-physical
conception of the opposing mechanical school"). The views which he has
lately advanced on the worthlessness of Darwinism and the unreliability
of phylogenetic hypotheses are diametrically opposed to the opinions
he represented at Jena twenty-five years ago, and to those which his
brother, Richard Hertwig, of Munich, has consistently maintained in his
admirable _Manual of Zoology_.

In opposition to the mechanical ontogeny which I formulated in 1866
and embodied in the biogenetic law, a number of other tendencies
in embryology afterwards appeared, and, with the common title of
"mechanical embryology," branched out in every direction. The chief of
these to attract attention thirty years ago were the pseudo-mechanical
theories of Wilhelm His, who has rendered great service to ontogeny
by his accurate descriptions and faithful illustrations of
vertebrate-embryos, but who has no idea of comparative morphology,
and so has framed the most extraordinary theories about the nature
of organic development. In his _Study of the First Sketch of the
Vertebrate-body_ (1868), and many later works, His endeavored to
explain the complicated ontogenetic phenomena on direct and simple
physical lines by reducing them to elasticity, bending, folding of the
embryonic layers, etc., while explicitly rejecting the phylogenetic
method; he says that this is "a mere by-way, and quite unnecessary for
the explanation of the ontogenetic facts (as direct consequences of
physiological principles of development)." As a matter of fact, nature
rather plays the part of an ingenious tailor in His's pseudo-mechanical
and tectogenetic speculations, as I have shown in the third chapter of
the _Anthropogeny_. Hence they have been humorously called the "tailor
theory." However, they misled a few embryologists by opening the way
to a direct and purely mechanical explanation of the complex embryonic
phenomena. Although they were at first much admired, and immediately
afterwards abandoned, they have found a number of supporters lately in
various branches of embryology.

The great success that modern experimental physiology achieved by its
extensive employment of physical and chemical experiments inspired a
hope of attaining similar results in embryology by means of the same
"exact" methods. But the application of them in this science is only
possible to a slight extent on account of the great complexity of the
historical processes and the impossibility of "exactly" determining
historical matters. This is true of both branches of evolution,
individual and phyletic. Experiments on the origin of species have
very little value, as I said before; and this is generally true of
embryological experiments also. However, the latter, especially
careful experiments on the first stages of ontogenesis, have yielded
some interesting results, particularly in regard to the physiology
and pathology of the embryo at the earliest stages of development.
The _Archiv für Entwickelungsmechanik_, which is edited by the chief
representative of this school, Wilhelm Roux, contains, besides these
valuable inquiries, a good number of ontogenetic articles, which partly
rely on and partly ignore the biogenetic law.

Psychology and biogeny have been up to the present regarded as the
most difficult branches of biology for monistic explanation, and the
strongest supports of dualistic vitalism. Both departments become
accessible to monism and a mechanico-causal explanation by means
of the biogenetic law. The close correlation which it establishes
between individual and phyletic development, and which depends on the
interaction of heredity and adaptation, makes it possible to explain
both. In regard to the first, I formulated the following principle
thirty years ago in my first study of the gastræa theory: "Phylogenesis
is the mechanical cause of ontogenesis." This single principle clearly
expresses the essence of our monistic conception of organic development:

 In the future every student will have to declare himself for or
 against this principle, if in biogeny he is not content with a mere
 admiration of the wonderful phenomena, but desires to understand
 their significance. The principle also makes clear the wide gulf
 that separates the older teleological and dualistic morphology from
 the modern mechanical and monistic science. If the physiological
 functions of heredity and adaptation are proved to be the sole causes
 of organic construction, every kind of teleology, and of dualistic
 and metaphysical explanation, is excluded from the province of
 biogeny. The irreconcilable opposition between the leading principles
 of the two is clear. Either there is or is not a direct and causal
 connection between ontogeny and phylogeny. Either ontogenesis is a
 brief compendium of phylogenesis or it is not. Either epigenesis and
 descent--or pre-formation and creation.

In repeating these principles here, I would lay stress particularly on
the fact that, in my opinion, our "mechanical biogeny" is one of the
strongest supports of the monistic philosophy.




