XIII

SENSATION

 Sensation and consciousness--Unconscious and conscious
 sensation--Sensibility and irritability--Reflex sensation and
 perception of stimuli--Sensation and living force--Reaction
 to stimuli--Resolution of stimuli--External and internal
 stimuli--Conveyance of stimuli--Sensation and striving--Sensation
 and feeling--Inorganic and organic sensation--Light sensation,
 phototaxis, sight--Sensation of warmth, thermotaxis--Sensation of
 matter, chemotaxis--Taste and smell--Erotic chemicotropism--Organic
 sensations--Sensation of pressure--Geotaxis--Sensation of
 sound--Electric sensation.


Sensation is one of those general terms that have at all times been
liable to the most varied interpretations. Like the cognate idea of
the "soul," it is still extremely ambiguous. During the eighteenth
century it was generally believed that the function of sensation was
peculiar to animals, and was not present in plants. This opinion found
its most important expression in the well-known principle in Linné's
_Systema Naturæ_: "Stones grow: plants grow and live: animals grow,
live, and feel." Albrecht Haller, who gathered up all the knowledge
of his time relating to organic life in his _Elementa Physiologiæ_
(1766), distinguished as its two chief characters "sensibility" and
"irritability." The one he ascribed exclusively to the nerves, and the
other to the muscles. This erroneous idea was subsequently refuted, and
in our own time irritability is conceived to be a general property of
all living matter.

The great advance made by the comparative anatomy and experimental
physiology of animals and plants in the first half of the nineteenth
century brought to light the fact that irritability or sensibility is
a common quality of all organisms, and that it is one of the principal
characteristics of vital force (_cf._ chapter ii.). The greatest merit
in connection with its experimental study attaches to the famous
Johannes Müller. In his classical _Manual of Human Physiology_ (1840)
he established his theory of the specific energy of the nerves and
their dependence on the sense-organs on the one hand and the mental
life on the other. He devoted the fifth chapter of his book to the
former and the sixth to the latter, approaching particularly to
Spinoza in his general psychological views; he treated psychology as
a part of physiology, and thus put on a sound scientific basis that
naturalistic conception of the place of psychology in the biological
system which we now regard as the correct view. At the same time he
proved that sensation is a function of the organism as much as movement
or nutrition.

The view of sensation that prevailed in the second half of the
nineteenth century was very different. On the one hand the experimental
and comparative physiology of the sense-organs and the nervous system
immensely enriched our exact knowledge by the invention of ingenious
methods of research and the use of the great advance made by physics
and chemistry. The famous investigations of Helmholtz and Hertwig on
the physics of the senses, of Matteucci and Dubois-Reymond on the
electricity of the muscles and nerves, and the great progress made in
vegetal physiology by Sachs and Pfeffer, and in physiological chemistry
by Moleschott and Bunge, enabled us to realize that even the most
mysterious of the wonders of life depend on physical and chemical
processes. By the application of the different stimuli--light, heat,
electricity, and chemical action--to the various sensitive or irritable
organs under definitely controlled conditions, scientists succeeded in
subjecting with exactness a great part of the phenomena of stimulation
to mathematical measurements and formulæ. The science of the stimuli
and their effects acquired a strictly physical character.

On the other hand, in most striking contradiction to the immense
advance of experimental physiology, we see that the general
conception of the various vital processes, and especially of the
inner nerve-action that converts the functions of the senses into
mental life, is most curiously neglected. Even the fundamental idea
of sensation, which plays the chief part in it, is disregarded more
and more. In many of the most valuable modern manuals of physiology,
containing long chapters on stimuli and stimulation, there is little or
no mention of sensation as such. This is chiefly due to the mischievous
and unjustifiable gulf that has once more been artificially created
between physiology and psychology. As the "exact" physiologists
found the study of the inner psychic processes which take place in
sense-action and sensation inconvenient and unprofitable, they gladly
handed over this difficult and obscure field to the "psychologists
proper"--in other words, to the metaphysicians, who had for the
starting-point of their airy speculations the belief in an immortal
soul and divine consciousness. The psychologists readily abandoned the
inconvenient burden of experience and _a posteriori_ knowledge, to
which the modern anatomic physiology of the brain laid special claim.

The greatest and most fatal error committed by modern physiology in
this was the admission of the baseless dogma that all sensation must
be accompanied by consciousness. As most physiologists share the view
of Dubois-Reymond, that consciousness is not a natural phenomenon,
but a hyperphysical problem, they leave it and this inconvenient
"sensation" outside the range of their researches. This decision is,
naturally, very agreeable to the prevalent metaphysics; it has just as
much interest in the transcendental character of sensation as in the
liberty of the will, and thus the whole of psychology passes from the
empirical province of natural science into the mystical province of
mental science. For its foundation they then take the "critical theory
of knowledge," which ignores the results of the real physiological
organs--the senses, nerves, and brain--and draws its "superior wisdom"
from the inner mirroring of self by the introspective analysis of
presentations and their associations. It is extraordinary that even
distinguished monistic physiologists suffer themselves to be taken
in with this sort of metaphysical jugglery, and dismiss the whole of
psychology from their province; their psychomonism readmits the soul as
a supernatural entity, and delivers it, in contrast with the "world of
bodies," from the yoke of the law of substance.

Impartial reflection on our personal experience during sensation and
consciousness will soon convince us that these are two different
physiological functions, which are by no means necessarily associated;
and the same may be said of the third principal function of the
soul--the will. When we learn an art--for instance, painting or
playing the piano--we need months of daily practice in order to become
expert at it. In this we experience every day hundreds of thousands
of sensations and movements which are learned and repeated with full
consciousness. The longer we continue the practice and the more we
adapt and accustom ourselves to the function, the easier and less
conscious it becomes. And when we have practised the art for some
years, we paint our picture or play our piano unconsciously; we think
no longer of all the small, subtle shades of sensation and acts of
will which were necessary in learning. The mere impulse of the will to
paint the picture once more or play the piece again suffices to release
the whole chain of complicated movements and accompanying sensations
which had originally to be learned slowly, laboriously, and with
full consciousness. An experienced pianist plays the most difficult
piece--if he has learned it and repeated it thousands of times--"half
in a dream." But it needs only a slight accident, such as a mistake
or a sudden interruption, to bring back the wandering attention to
the work. The piece is now played with clear consciousness. The same
may be said of thousands of sensations and movements which we learned
at first consciously in childhood, and then repeat daily afterwards
without noticing--such as in walking, eating, speaking, and so on.
These familiar facts prove of themselves that consciousness is a
complicated function of the brain, by no means necessarily connected
with sensation or will. To bind up the ideas of consciousness and
sensation inseparably is the more absurd, as the mechanism or the real
nature of consciousness seems very obscure to us, while the idea of it
is perfectly clear: we know that we know, feel, and will.

The word "irritability" is generally taken by modern physiology to mean
that the living matter has the property of reacting on stimuli--that
is to say, of responding by changes in itself to changes in its
environment. The stimulus, or action of a foreign energy, must,
however, be felt by the plasm before the corresponding stimulated
movement (in the form of various manifestations of energy) will be
produced. Hence the question whether this sensation is (in certain
cases) associated with consciousness or (generally) remains unconscious
is of a subordinate interest. The plant that is caused to open its
floral calyx by the stimulus of light acts just as unconsciously in
this as the coral that spreads out its crown of tentacles under the
same influence; and when the sensitive carnivorous plant (_dionæa_ or
_drosera_) closes its leaves in order to catch and destroy the insect
sitting on them, it acts in the same way as the sensitive actinia or
coral when it draws in its crown of tentacles for the same object--in
both cases without consciousness! We call these unconscious movements
"reflex actions." I have dealt somewhat fully with these reflex
movements in the seventh chapter of the _Riddle_, and must refer the
reader thereto. This elementary psychic function always depends on
a conjunction of sensation and movement (in the widest sense). The
movement that the stimulus provokes is always preceded by a sensation
of the influence exerted.

Modern physiology makes desperate efforts to avoid the use of the
word "sensation" and substitute for it "perception of stimulus." The
chief blame for this misleading expression is due to the arbitrary
and unjustified separation of psychology from physiology. The latter
is supposed to occupy itself with the material phenomena and physical
changes, leaving to psychology the privilege of dealing with the
higher mental phenomena and metaphysical problems. As we reject this
distinction altogether on monistic principles, we cannot consent
to separate sensation from the perception of stimuli--whether this
sensation be accompanied with consciousness or not. Moreover, modern
physiology, in spite of its desire to keep clear of psychology, sees
itself compelled in a thousand ways to use the words "sensation" and
"sensitive," especially in the science of the organs of sense.

What we call sensation or perception of stimuli may be regarded
as a special form of the living force or actual energy (Ostwald).
Sensitiveness or irritability, on the other hand, is a form of virtual
or potential energy. The living substance at rest, which is sensitive
or irritable, is in a state of equilibrium and indifference to its
environment. But the active plasm, that receives and feels a stimulus,
has its equilibrium disturbed, and corresponds to the change in its
environment and its internal condition. This response of the organism
to a stimulus is called "reaction"--a term that is also used (in
the same sense) in chemistry to express the interaction of bodies
on each other. At each stimulation the virtual energy of the plasm
(sensitiveness) is converted into living or kinetic force (sensation).
The share of the stimulus in this conversion is described as a
"release" of energy.

The term "reaction" stands in general for the change which any body
experiences from the action of another body. Thus, for instance, to
take the simplest case, the interaction of two substances in chemistry
is called a reaction. In chemical analysis the word is used in a
narrower sense to denote that action of one body on another which
serves to reveal its nature. Even here we must assume that the two
bodies feel their different characters; otherwise they could not act
on each other. Hence every chemist speaks of a more or less "sensitive
reaction." But this process is not different in principle from the
reaction of the living organism to outer stimuli, whatever be their
chemical or physical nature. And there is no more essential difference
in psychological reaction, which is always bound up with corresponding
changes in the psychoplasm, and so with a chemical conversion of
energy. In this case, however, the process of reaction is much more
complicated, and we can distinguish several parts or phases of it:
1, the outer excitation; 2, the reaction of the sense-organ; 3, the
conducting of the modified impression to the central organ; 4, the
internal sensation of the conducted impression; and, 5, consciousness
of the impression.

The important idea of a release of energy--the term we give to the
effect of the stimulus--is also used in physics. If we put a piece of
burning wood in a barrel of powder, the flame causes an explosion. In
the case of dynamite a simple mechanical shock is enough to produce
the most enormous expenditure of force in the explosive matter. When
we discharge a bow the slight pressure of the finger on the tense
cord suffices to send out the arrow or bolt on its deadly mission. So
also a sound or a ray of light that strikes the ear or eye suffices
to bring about a number of complex effects by means of the nervous
system. In the fertilization of the ovum by the male sperm the chemical
conjunction of the two formative principles is sufficient to cause the
growth of a new human being out of the microscopic plasma-globule, the
stem-cell (_cytula_). In these and thousands of other reactions a very
slight shock suffices to provoke the largest effects in the stimulated
substance. This shock, which we call a release of energy, is not the
direct cause of the considerable result, but merely the occasion for
bringing it about. In these cases we have always a vast accumulation
of virtual energy converted into living force or work. The magnitude
of the two forces has no relation at all to the smallness of the shock
which led to the conversion. In this we have the difference between
stimulated action and the simple mechanical action of two bodies on
each other, in which the quantity of the energy expended is equal on
both sides, and there is no stimulus.

The immediate effect of a stimulus on living matter can best be
followed in external physical or chemical stimuli, such as light,
heat, pressure, sound, electricity, and chemical action. In these
cases physical science is often able to reduce the life-process to the
laws of inorganic nature. This is more difficult with the internal
stimuli within the organism itself, which are only partly exposed
to physiological investigation. It is true that here also the task
of science is to reduce all the biological phenomena to physical and
chemical laws. But it can only discharge a part of this difficult task,
as the phenomena are too complicated, and their conditions too little
known in detail, to say nothing of the crudeness and imperfectness of
our methods of research. Yet, in spite of all this, comparative and
phylogenetic physiology convinces us that even the most complicated
of our internal excitations, and particularly the mental activity of
the brain, depend just as much as the outer stimulations on physical
processes, and are equally subject to the law of substance. This is, in
fact, true of reason and consciousness.

In man and all the higher animals the stimuli are received by the
organs of sense and conducted by their nerves to the central organ. In
the brain they are either converted into specific sensations in the
sense-centres, or conveyed to the motor region, where they provoke
movements. The conduction of stimuli is simpler in the lower animals
and the plants; the tissue-cells either directly affect each other or
are connected by fine threads of plasm. In the unicellular protists
the stimulus which strikes one particular spot of the surface may be
immediately communicated to the other parts of the unified plasmic body.

We shall see in the course of our inquiry that the simplest form of
sensation (in the widest sense) is common to inorganic and organic
bodies, and thus that sensitiveness is really a fundamental property
of all matter, or, more correctly, all substance. We may, therefore,
ascribe sensation to the constituent atoms of matter. This fundamental
thought of hylozoism, expressed long ago by Empedocles, has lately
been very definitely urged, especially by Fechner. However, the able
founder of psychophysics (_cf._ the _Riddle_, p. 35) assumes that
consciousness (or thought, in the Spinozistic sense) always accompanies
this universal property of sensation. In my opinion, consciousness is a
secondary psychic function, only found in man and the higher animals,
and bound up with the centralization of the nervous system. Hence it is
better to speak of the unconscious sensation of the atoms as _feeling_
(_æsthesis_), and their unconscious will as _inclination_ (_tropesis_).
It finds expression in the one-sided action of a stimulus as a
"directed movement" or "stimulated movement" (_tropismus_ or _taxis_).

The familiar ideas of sensation and feeling are often confused, and
employed in very different ways in both physiology and psychology. The
metaphysical tendency which so completely separates the two sciences,
and the physiological tendency which agrees with it, regard feeling
as a purely psychic or spiritual function, whereas in the case of
sensation they have to admit the connection with bodily functions,
especially sense-action. In my opinion, the two ideas are purely
physiological and cannot be sharply separated, or only in the sense
that sensation relates more to the external (objective) part of the
sensory nerve-process, and feeling to the internal (subjective) part.
Hence we may define the difference in a general way by saying that
sensation perceives the different qualities of the stimuli, and feeling
only the quantity, the positive or negative action of the stimulus
(pleasure or pain). In this last and widest sense we may ascribe
the feeling of pleasure and pain (in the contact with qualitatively
differing atoms) to all atoms, and so explain the elective affinity in
chemistry (synthesis of loving atoms, inclination; analysis of hating
atoms, disinclination).

Our monistic system (whether it be taken as energism or materialism,
or more correctly as hylozoism) regards all substance as having
"soul"--that is to say, endowed with energy. In the chemical analysis
of organisms we do not find any elements that are not found in
inorganic nature; we find that the movements in organisms obey the
same laws of mechanics as the latter; we believe that the conversion
of energy in the living matter occurs in the same way, and is provoked
by the same stimuli, as in inorganic matter. We are forced to conclude
from. these experiences that the perception of stimuli--sensation in
the objective and feeling in the subjective sense--is also generally
present in the two. All bodies are in a certain sense "sensitive." It
is just in this dynamic conception of substance that monism differs
essentially from the materialistic system, which regards one part of
matter as "dead" and insensitive. In this we have the best means of
joining consistent materialism or realism with consistent spiritualism
or idealism. But, as a first condition of such a union, we must demand
a recognition that organic life is subject to the same general laws
as inorganic nature. In both cases the outer world acts alike as
a stimulus on the inner world of the body. We can easily see this
if we glance at the various kinds of sensation which correspond to
the various kinds of stimuli. Light and heat, external and internal
chemical stimuli, pressure and electricity, cause analogous sensations
and modifications in their effect on organic and inorganic bodies.

The effect which the light-stimulus has on living matter, the sensation
of light that results, and the chemical changes of energy that follow,
are of great physiological importance in all organisms. We might even
say that sunlight is the first, oldest, and chief source of organic
life; all other exertions of force depend in the long run on the
radiant energy of sunlight. The oldest and most important function
of plasm--one which is at the same time a cause of its formation--is
carbon-assimilation; and this plasmodomism is directly dependent on
sunlight. If it acts in a one-sided way, it causes the particular form
of stimulation which we call phototaxis or heliotropism. This is of a
positive character--that is to say, they turn towards the source of the
light--in the great majority of organisms, both protists and histona.
Everybody knows that flowers that are growing in the window of a room
turn to the light. However, many organisms which have grown accustomed
to living in the dark are heliotropically negative; they shun the light
and seek darkness, such as the fungi, many lucifugous mosses and ferns,
and many deep-sea animals.

The principal organs of light-sensation in the higher animals are the
eyes; they are wanting in many of the lower animals as well as the
plants. The essential difference between the real eye and a part of
the skin that is merely sensitive to light is that the eye can form a
picture of objects in the outer world. This faculty of vision begins
with the formation of a small convergent lens, a biconvex refracting
body at a certain spot on the surface. Dark pigment-cells which
surround it absorb the light-rays. From this first phylogenetic form of
the organ of vision up to the elaborate human eye there is a long scale
of evolutionary stages--not less extensive and remarkable than the
historical succession of artificial optical instruments from the simple
lens to the complicated modern telescope or microscope. This great
"wonder of life"--the long scale of the evolution of the eye--has an
interesting tearing on many important questions of general physiology
and phylogeny. We can, in this case, see clearly how a very complicated
and purposive apparatus can arise in a purely mechanical way, without
any preconceived design or plan. In other words, we can see how an
entirely new function--and one of its principal functions, vision--has
arisen in the organism by mechanical means.

The advanced vision of the higher animals is made up of a great number
of different functions, with a corresponding complexity of detail in
the anatomic structure of the eye. No other organ, after the brain,
is so necessary as the eye for the multifarious vital activities of
the higher animals, and especially for the mental life of civilized
man and the progress of art and science. What would the human mind be
if we could not read, write, and draw, and have a direct knowledge
through the eye of the forms and colors of the outer world? Yet this
invaluable structure is only the highest and most perfect stage in
the long chain of evolutionary processes which has its starting-point
in the general sensitiveness to light, or the photic irritability of
plasm. However, we find a number of varieties and grades of this even
among the unicellular protists, and, indeed, the very lowest and oldest
of the protists, the monera. Various species of both the chromacea and
the bacteria are heliotropic to different degrees, and have a fine
sensitiveness to the strength of the light stimulus.

The stimulating effect which light has on the homogeneous plasm of the
monera is also found in a number of inorganic bodies. In these cases
the photic stimulus produces partly chemical and partly mechanical
changes. Every chemist speaks of substances that are more or less
"sensitive" to light; the photographer speaks of his "sensitive
plates," the painter of his "sensitive colors." Many chemical compounds
are so sensitive to light that they are destroyed at once in sunlight,
and so have to be kept in the dark. There is no other word but
"sensation" to express the attitude of the atoms towards each other
which becomes so conspicuous in these cases under the influence of
sunlight. It seems to me that this phenomenon is a clear justification
of our hylozoic monism when it affirms that all matter is psychic. In
metaphysics sensation is held to be an essential property of the soul.

In the same general way as light the heat-stimulus acts on organisms,
and causes the sensations, sometimes pleasant and sometimes unpleasant,
which we call the subjective feeling of heat, warmth, coolness, or
cold. The sense-organ that receives these impressions of temperature is
the surface of the unicellular plasmic body in the protists, and the
skin (epidermis) that protects the surface from the outer world in the
histona. In all living things the temperature of the surrounding medium
(water or air) has a great influence in regulating the life-processes;
in the stationary animals and plants it is the temperature of the
ground to which they are attached. This temperature must always be
between the freezing-point and boiling-point of water, as fluid water
is indispensable for the imbibition of the living matter and the
molecular movements within the plasm. At the same time, some of the
lower protists (chromacea, bacteria) can endure very high and very
low temperatures, but only for a short time. Some protists (monera
and diatomes) can stand a temperature of 200° C. for several days,
and others can be heated above boiling-point without being killed.
Arctic and High-Alpine plants and animals may be in a frozen condition
for several months, yet live again when they are thawed. However, the
resistance to these extremes of cold lasts for only a limited time, and
in the frozen state all vital functions are at a standstill.

In the great majority of living things the vital activity is confined
within narrow limits of temperature. Many plants and animals in the
tropics which have been accustomed for thousands of years to the
constancy of the hot equatorial climate can endure only very restricted
variations of temperature. On the other hand, many of the inhabitants
of Central Siberia, where the climate is very hot in the short summer
and very cold in the long winter, can stand great variations. Thus
the living plasm has experienced considerable changes in its sense
of warmth through adaptation to different environments; not only the
maximum and the minimum, but the optimum (most agreeable point),
is subject to very great variations. This can easily be observed
and followed experimentally in the phenomena of thermotaxis or
thermotropism--that is to say, the effect that follows from a one-sided
action of the heat-stimulus. The organism that falls below the minimum
of temperature is said to be stiff with cold, while the organism that
rises above the maximum is stiff with heat.

The heat-stimulus acts on inorganic as well as organic bodies, like
the light-stimulus. The law holds good in both cases that higher
temperatures increase sensation, while lower ones paralyze it. There is
a minimum, an optimum, and a maximum, for many chemical and physical
processes in the inorganic world. As far as the melting effect of water
is concerned, freezing is the minimum of the heat stimulus and boiling
the maximum. As the various chemical compounds meet in water at very
different temperatures, we have an optimum for many substances--that is
to say, a degree of warmth which is most favorable to the solution of
a given quantity of a solid body in water. On the whole, the law holds
for chemical processes that they are accelerated by high temperatures
and retarded by low ones (like the human passions!); the former have
a stimulating and the latter a benumbing effect. As the action of the
various chemical compounds on each other is determined by the nature
of the elements and their affinities, we must trace the variations in
their conduct towards thermic stimuli to a sensation of temperature in
the constituent atoms; increase of temperature stimulates it, while
decrease lessens or paralyzes it. Here, again, the simple inorganic
processes have a general resemblance to the complicated vital phenomena
in the organic body.

Since we regard the whole of organic life as, in the ultimate analysis,
merely a very elaborate chemical process, we shall quite expect that
chemical stimuli are the most important factors in sensation. And this
is so in point of fact; from the simplest moneron up to the most highly
differentiated cell and on to the flower in the plant and the mental
life of man, the vital processes are dominated by chemical forces and
conversions of energy, which are set in play by external or internal
chemical stimuli. The excitation which they produce is called, in a
general way, "sensation of matter" or chemæsthesis; the basis of it
is the mutual relation of the chemical elements which we describe as
chemical affinity. In this affinity we have the play of attractive
forces which lie in the nature of the elements themselves, especially
in the peculiar properties of their constituent atoms; and this cannot
be explained unless we ascribe unconscious sensation (in the widest
sense) to the atoms, an inherent feeling of pleasure and the reverse,
which they experience in the contact of other atoms (the "loves and
hatreds of the elements" of Empedocles).

The numbers of different stimuli that act chemically on the plasm
and excite its "sensation of matter" may be divided into two
groups--external and internal stimuli. The latter lie within the
organism itself, and cause the internal "organic sensations";
the former are in the outer world, and are felt as taste, smell,
sex-impulse, etc. In the higher animals special chemical sense-organs
have been developed for these chemical stimuli. As these are well known
to us from our own human experience, and comparative physiology shows
us the same structures in the higher animals, we will deal first with
them. In general the same law holds for these external chemical stimuli
as for optical and thermic stimuli; we can recognize a maximum limit
of their action, a minimum below which they fail to stimulate, and an
optimum or stage in which their influence is strongest.

The important part played in human life by taste and the pleasure
associated with it is well known. The careful choice and preparation
of savory food--which has become an art in gastronomy and a branch
of practical philosophy in gastrosophy--was just as important two
thousand years ago with the Greeks and Romans as it is to-day in royal
banquets or the Lucullic dinners of millionaires. The excitement that
we see associated with this refined combination of rich foods and
drinks, and that finds expression in so many speeches and toasts, has
its philosophic root in the harmony of gustatory sensations and the
varying play of stimuli that the delicate dishes and wines exercise
on the organs of taste, the tongue and palate. The microscopic organs
of these parts of the mouth are the gustatory papillæ--cup-shaped
structures, covered with spindle-shaped "taste-cells," and having a
narrow opening into the cavity of the mouth. When sapid matters, drinks
and fluid or loose particles of food, touch the taste-cells, they
excite the fine terminal branchlets of the gustatory nerve which enters
the cells. As we find that there are similar structures in most of the
higher animals, and that they also choose their food with some care,
we may confidently assume that they have sensations of taste like man.
However, no trace of this is found in many of the lower animals; in
these cases it is impossible to lay down a line of demarcation between
taste and smell.

In man and the higher air-breathing vertebrates the seat of the sense
of smell is in the nostrils; in man it is especially that part of the
mucous lining of the nasal cavity which we call the "olfactory region"
(the uppermost part of the nasal dividing wall, the superior and middle
meatus). It is necessary for a sensation of smell that the odorous
matter, or olfactory stimuli, be brought in a finely divided condition
over the moist olfactory membranes. When they touch the olfactory
cells--slender, rod-shaped cells with very fine hairs at the free
end--they excite the ends of the olfactory nerve which are connected
with the cells.

In many animals, especially mammals, the sense of smell has a much more
important part in life than it has in man, in whom it is relatively
feeble. It is well known that dogs and other carnivora, and even
ungulates, have a much keener smell. In these cases the nasal cavity,
which is the seat of the sense, is much larger, and the muscles in it
are much stronger. The nostrils of the air-breathing vertebrates have
been developed from a pair of open nasal depressions in the skin of
the fish's head. But in these aquatic vertebrates the chemical action
of the olfactory stimuli must be of a different character, like the
sensation of taste. The odorous matter is, in these cases, brought
into contact with the olfactory membrane in a liquid form (in which
condition it is not perceptible to man). In fact, the division between
the senses of smell and taste disappears altogether in the lower
animals. These two "chemical senses" are closely related, and have a
common feature in the direct chemical action of the stimulus on the
sensitive part of the skin.

A chemical sensation of matter that corresponds completely to the real
taste-sensation in the higher animals is found in some of the higher
carnivorous plants. The leaves of the sun-dew (_drosera rotundifolia_)
are very sensitive insect-traps, and are armed at the edge with
knob-like tentacles, sticky hairs that secrete an acid, flesh-digesting
juice. When a solid body (but not a raindrop) touches the surface of
the leaf the stimulus acts in such a way on the tentacle heads as to
contract the leaf. But the acid fluid which serves for digestion,
and corresponds to the gastric juice in the animal, is only secreted
by the corpuscles if the solid foreign body is nitrogenous (flesh or
cheese). Hence the leaves of these insectivorous plants taste their
meat diet, and distinguish it from other solids, to which they are
indifferent. In the broader sense, in fact, we may describe the points
of the roots of plants as organs of taste; they plunge into the richer
parts of the earth which yield more nourishment, and avoid the poor
parts. In unicellular plants and animals the action of chemical stimuli
is especially conspicuous when it is one-sided, and provokes definite
movements in one particular direction (_chemotaxis_).

The movements of unicellular organisms that are provoked by chemical
stimuli and are known as chemotropism (more recently as chemotaxis) are
particularly interesting because they show the existence of a chemical
sensitiveness, somewhat resembling taste or smell, in the lowest
organisms, and even in the homogeneous plasm of the monera. Repeated
experiments of Wilhelm Engelmann, Max Verworn, and others, have shown
that many bacteria, diatomes, infusoria, rhizopods, and other protists,
have a similar sense of taste; they move towards certain acids (for
instance, a drop of malic acid) or a bubble of oxygen that lies on
one side of the drop of water in which the protists are under the
microscope. Many pathogenetic bacteria secrete poisonous substances
which are very injurious to the human frame. The active white
blood-cells, leucocytes, in the human blood have a special "taste" for
these bacteria-poisons, and concentrate in large quantities, by means
of their amœboid movements, at those parts of the body where they
are secreted. If the leucocytes prove the stronger in their struggle
with the bacteria, they destroy them, and in this way they act as
sanitary officers in keeping poisonous infection out of our organism.
But if the bacteria win the battle, they are transported into other
parts of the body by the leucocytes; they distinguish their plasm by
taste, and may cause a deadly infection.

We have a particularly interesting and important species of chemical
irritation in the mutual attraction of the two sex-cells, to which
I gave the name of chemotropism thirty years ago, and which I
described as the earliest phylogenetic source of sexual love (see the
_Anthropogeny_, chapters vii. and xxix.). The remarkable phenomena
of impregnation, the most important of all the processes of sexual
generation, consist in the coalescence of the female ovum and the
male sperm-cell. This could not take place if the two cells had not a
sensation of their respective chemical constitution and disposition
for union; they come together under this impulse. This sexual affinity
is found at the lowest stages of plant life, in the protophyta and
algæ. With these both cells--the smaller male microgameta and the
larger female macrogameta--are often mobile, and swim about in order
to effect a union. In the higher plants and animals only the small
male cell is mobile as a rule, and swims towards the large immobile
ovum in order to blend with it. The sensation that impels it is of a
chemical nature, allied to taste and smell. This has been proved by
the splendid experiments of Pfeffer, who showed that the male ciliated
cells of ferns are attracted by malic acid, and those of the mosses by
cane-sugar, just in the same way as by the exhalation from the female
ovum. Conception depends on exactly the same erotic chemotropism in the
fertilization of all the higher organisms.

Erotic chemotropism must be regarded as a general sense-function of the
sexual cells in all amphigonous organisms, but in the higher organisms
special forms of the sex-sense, connected with specific organs, are
developed; as the source of sexual love they play a most important
part in the life of many of the histona. In man and most of the higher
animals these feelings of love are associated with the highest features
of psychic life, and have led to the formation of some most remarkable
customs, instincts, and passions. Wilhelm Bölsche has given us an
admirable selection from this infinitely rich and attractive realm
in his famous _Life of Love in Nature_ (1903). It is well known that
this sexual sense as we have it in man has been developed from the
nearest related mammals, the apes. But while it offers a shameless and
repulsive spectacle in many of the apes, it has been greatly ennobled
and refined in man in the development of civilization. However, the
sexual sense-organs and their specific energy have remained the same.
In the vertebrates and the articulates and many other metazoa the
copulative organs are equipped with special cell-forms (voluptuous
particles), which are the seat of intensely pleasurable feelings (see
the _Anthropogeny_, chapter xxix., plate 30). The pubic hairs which
clothe the _mons Veneris_ are also delicate organs of the sex-sense,
and so are the tactile hairs about the mouth. In these cases the
correlation between the sensitive forms of energy in the copulative
organs and the psychic functions of the central nervous system has
been remarkably developed. Moreover, a large part of the rest of the
skin may co-operate as a secondary organ of the sex-sense, as is seen
in the effect of caressing, stroking, embracing, kissing, etc. Goethe,
at once the greatest lyric poet and the subtlest and profoundest
monistic philosopher of Germany, has given unrivalled expression to
this sensual, yet supersensual, basis of sexual love. Ontogeny teaches
unmistakably that its elementary organs, the epidermic cells, develop
entirely from the ectoderm.

By "organic sensations" modern physiology understands the perception
of certain internal bodily states, which are mostly brought about by
chemical stimuli (to a small extent by mechanical and other irritation)
in the organs themselves. As subjective feelings of the organism itself
these states are most aptly called "feelings"--the positive states,
pleasure, comfort, delight; the negative, discomfort, pain, etc.
These organic sensations (also called common sensations or feelings)
are of great importance for the self-regulation of the complicated
organism. To the positive organic sensations belong not only the bodily
feeling of satiety, repose, or comfort, but also the psychic feelings
of joy, good humor, mental rest, etc. Among negative common feelings
we have not only hunger and thirst, bodily fatigue, bodily pain,
sea-sickness, etc., but also mental strain, vertigo, bad humor, and
so on. Between the two groups we have the third category of neutral
organic sensations, which involve neither pleasure nor pain, but merely
the perception of certain internal conditions, such as muscular strain
(in lifting heavy objects), the disposal of the limbs (in crossing the
legs), and so on.

Chemical sensation is just as general and important in organic nature
as in the life of organisms. In this case it is nothing less than the
basis of chemical affinity. No chemical process can be thoroughly
understood unless we attribute a mutual sensation to the atoms,
and explain their combination as due to a feeling of pleasure and
their separation to a feeling of displeasure. The great Empedocles
(fifth century B.C.) explained the origin of all things long ago by
the various combination of pure elements, the interaction of love
(attraction) and hate (repulsion). This attraction or repulsion is, of
course, unconscious, just as in the instincts of plants and animals. If
one prefers to avoid the term "sensation," it may be called "feeling"
(_æsthesis_), while the (involuntary) movement it provokes may be
called "inclination" (_tropesis_), and the capacity for the latter
"tropism" (more recently _taxis_, _cf._ chapter xii. of the _Riddle_).
We may illustrate it from the simplest case of chemical combination.
When we rub together sulphur and mercury, two totally different
elements, the atoms of the finely divided matter combine and form a
third and different chemical body, cinnabar. How would this simple
synthesis be possible unless the two elements _feel_ each other, move
towards each other, and _then_ unite?

We find universally distributed in nature the sensation of the
mechanical stimulus of gravitation, the most comprehensive statement
of which is given in Newton's law of gravity. According to this
fundamental and all-ruling law, any two particles of matter are
attracted in direct proportion to their mass and inverse proportion to
the square of their distance. This form of attraction, also, can be
traced to a "sensation of matter" in the mutually attracting atoms.
The local sensation that any body provokes by contact with the surface
of an organism is felt as pressure (_baros_). A stimulus that causes
this pressure alone brings about a counter-pressure as a reaction,
and an effort to neutralize it, the pressure-movement (_barotaxis_
or _barotropism_). Sensitiveness to pressure or the contact of solid
bodies is found throughout the organic world; it can be proved
experimentally among the protists as well as the histona. Special
sense-organs have been developed in the skin of the higher animals as
the instruments of this pressure-sense (baræsthesis) in the form of
tactile corpuscles; they are most numerous at the finger-tips and other
particularly sensitive parts. In many of the higher animals there is
a fine sense of touch in the feelers or tentacles, or (in the higher
articulates) in the horns or antennæ. Moreover, these tactile and
prehensile organs are also very widely found among the higher plants,
especially the climbing plants (vines, bryony, etc.). Their slender
creepers, which roll out spirally, have a very delicate feeling
for the nature of the supports which they embrace; they distinguish
between smooth and rough, thick and thin supports, and prefer the
latter. Many of the higher plants, which are particularly sensitive to
pressure, have, to an extent, special organs of touch (tentacles), and
reveal this by the movements of their leaves (the sensitive plants,
_mimosa_, _dionæa_, _oxalis_). But even among the unicellular protists
we find that the contact of solid bodies has an irritating effect, the
perception of which provokes corresponding movements (_thigmotaxis_ or
_thigmotropismus_). A peculiar form of pressure-sensation is produced
in many organisms by the flow of liquids; in the mycetozoa, for
instance, it provokes counter-movements (_rheotaxis_, _rheotropismus_),
as Ernst Strahl showed by his experiments on _æthelium septicum_.

We have an interesting analogy to the thigmotaxis of the viscous living
plasm in the elasticity of solid inorganic bodies, such as an elastic
steel-rod. In virtue of its springy nature, the elastic rod reacts
on the pressure of force that has bent it, and endeavors to regain
its former position. The spiral spring sets the works of the clock in
motion in virtue of its elasticity.

A very important part is played in botany by the action of gravitation
on the growth of plants. The attraction towards the centre of the earth
causes the positively geotropic roots to grow vertically into the
earth, while the negatively geotropic stalk pushes out in the opposite
direction. This applies also to a number of stationary animals which
are attached to the ground by roots, such as polyps, corals, bryozoa,
etc. And even the locomotion of free animals, the disposition of
their bodies to the ground, the position and posture of their limbs,
etc., is determined partly by the feeling of gravitation, and partly
by adaptation to certain functions which resist this, as in running,
swimming, and so on. All these geotropic sensations belong to the
same group of barotactile phenomena, as the fall of a stone or any
other effect of gravitation that depends on an inorganic feeling of
attraction.

As a result of these adaptations, we find a distinct sense of space
developed in the higher, free-moving animals. The feeling of the three
dimensions of space becomes an important means of orientation, and in
the vertebrates, from the fishes up to man, the three spiral canals
in the inner ear are developed as special organs of this. These three
semicircular canals, which lie vertically to each other in the three
dimensions of space, are the organs of the sensation that guides the
movements of the head, and, in relation to this, for the normal posture
of the body and the feeling of equilibrium. If the three spiral canals
are destroyed, the equilibrium is lost; the body totters and falls.
Hence, these organs are not of an acoustic, but a static or geotactic
character; and the same may be said of the so-called "auditory
vesicles" of many of the lower animals--round vesicles which contain
a liquid and a solid body, the otolith. When this body changes its
position with the change of posture of the whole frame, it presses on
the fine auditory hairs, or delicate terminations of the auscultory
nerve, which enters the vesicle. In fact, the sense of equilibrium is
often combined with the sense of hearing.

The perception of noises and tones, which we call hearing, is
restricted to a section of the higher, free-moving animals; if, that is
to say, the above-mentioned "auditory vesicles" in the lower animals
do not have acoustic as well as static sensations. The specific
sensation of hearing is due to vibration of the medium in which the
animal lives (air or water), or to vibrations of solid bodies (such as
tuning-forks) which are brought into touch with them. If the vibrations
are irregular, they are felt as "noises"; if regular, they are heard
as "tones" or notes; when a number of tones together (fundamental
and over-tones) excite a complex sensation, we have "timbre." The
vibrations of the sounding body are borne to the auditory cells, which
represent the terminal extensions of the auscultory nerve. The specific
sensation of hearing can, therefore, be traced originally to the sense
of pressure, from which it has been evolved. As the organ of hearing
is, like the eye, one of the principal instruments of the higher mental
life, and as the refined musical hearing of civilized man is often
taken to be a metaphysical power of the soul, it is important to note
that here again the starting-point was purely physical--that is to say,
it can be traced to the sense of pressure of matter, or gravitation.

The great importance of electricity as an agency in nature, both
organic and inorganic, has only lately been fully appreciated. Electric
changes are connected with many (if not, as is now supposed, with
all) chemical and optical processes. Man himself and most of the
higher animals have no electric organs (apart from the eye), and no
sense-organs that experience a specific electric sensation. It is
probably otherwise with many of the lower animals, especially those
that develop free electricity, such as the electric fishes. The larvæ
of frogs and embryos of fishes, if put in a vessel of water through
which a galvanic current is sent, place themselves when it is closed
with their longitudinal axis in the direction of the current, with
the head directed to the anode and the tail to the cathode (Hermann).
Again, the luminous sea-animals which cause the beautiful phenomenon
of the illumination of the sea, and the glow-worms and other luminous
organisms, have probably an unconscious feeling of the flow of electric
energy associated with these phenomena. Many plants show a direct
reaction to electric stimuli; when, for instance, we send a constant
galvanic current for some time through the points of their roots (very
sensitive organs, compared by Darwin to the brain of the animal), they
bend towards the cathode.

Many of the protists are very sensitive to electric currents, as Max
Verworn especially proved by a series of beautiful experiments. Most
of the ciliated infusoria and many of the rhizopods (_amœba_) are
cathodically sensitive or negatively galvanotactic. When we send a
constant electric current through a drop of water in which thousands of
_paramœcium_ are moving about, all the infusoria swim at once, with
the anterior pole of the body foremost, towards the cathode or negative
pole; they accumulate about it in great crowds. If the direction of the
current is now changed, the whole swarm at once make in the opposite
direction for the new cathode. Most of the flagellate infusoria do just
the reverse; they are anodically sensitive or positively galvanotactic.
In a drop of water, in which swarms of _polytoma_ are moving about,
all the cells swim at once towards the anode or positive pole, when an
electric current is sent through. The opposite galvanotropic behavior
of these two groups of infusoria in a drop of water, in which they
are mixed together, is very interesting; as soon as a constant stream
enters it, the ciliata fly to the cathode and the flagellata to the
anode. When the current is reversed the two swarms rush at each other
like hostile armies, cross in the middle of the drop, and gather at the
opposite poles. These and other phenomena of galvanic sensation show
clearly that the living plasm is subject to the same physical laws as
the water that is decomposed into hydrogen and oxygen by an electric
current. Both elements _feel_ the opposite electricities.


SCALE OF SENSATION AND IRRITABILITY

 1st Stage: SENSATION OF ATOMS. Affinity of the elements in every
 chemical combination.

 2d Stage: SENSATION OF MOLECULES (groups of atoms): in the attraction
 and repulsion of molecules (positive and negative electricity, etc.).

 3d Stage: SENSATION OF PLASTIDULES (micella, biogens, or
 plasma-molecules): in the simplest vital process of the monera
 (chromacea and bacteria).

 4th Stage: SENSATION OF CELLS: irritability of the unicellular
 protists (protophyta and protozoa): erotic chemotropism connected
 with the nucleus and trophic with the cell-body.

 5th Stage: SENSATION OF CŒNOBIA (volvox, magosphæra). With the
 formation of cell-communities we have association of sensations
 (individual feeling on the part of the social cells together with
 common feeling on the part of the community).

 6th Stage: SENSATION OF THE LOWER PLANTS. In the metaphyta or
 tissue-plants all the cells are still equally sensitive at the lower
 stages: there are no special sense-organs.

 7th Stage: SENSATION OF THE HIGHER PLANTS. In the higher metaphyta
 specially sensitive cells, or groups of cells, with a specific
 energy, are developed at certain points: sense-organs.

 8th Stage: SENSATION OF THE LOWER METAZOA, without differentiated
 nerves or sense-organs. Lower cœlenteria: sponges, polyps,
 platodaria.

 9th Stage: SENSATION OF THE HIGHER METAZOA, with differentiated
 nerves and sense-organs, but still without consciousness(?). The
 higher cœlenteria and most of the cœlomaria.

 10th Stage: SENSATION WITH DAWNING CONSCIOUSNESS, with independent
 formation of the phronema. The higher articulata (spiders and
 insects) and vertebrates (amphibia, lower reptiles, lower mammals).

 11th Stage: SENSATION WITH CONSCIOUSNESS AND THOUGHT: amniotes:
 higher reptiles, birds, and mammals: savages.

 12th Stage: SENSATION WITH PRODUCTIVE MENTAL ACTION IN ART AND
 SCIENCE: civilized men.




