XIX

DUALISM

 Dualistic systems of Kant I. and Kant II.--His
 antinomies--Cosmological dualism--The two worlds--The world
 of bodies and the world of spirits--Truth and fiction--Goethe
 and Schiller--Realism and idealism--Anti-Kant--Law of
 substance--Attributes of substance--Sensation and energy--Passive
 and active energy--Trinity of substance: matter, force, and
 sensation--Constancy of sensation--Psyche and physics--Reconciliation
 of principles.


The history of philosophy shows how the mind of man has pressed along
many paths during the last two thousand years in pursuit of truth.
But, however varied are the systems in which its efforts have found
embodiment, we may, from a general point of view, arrange them all
in two conflicting series--monism, or the philosophy of unity; and
dualism, or the philosophy of the duality of existence. Lucretius
and Spinoza are distinguished and typical representatives of monism;
Plato and Descartes the great leaders of dualism. But besides the
consistent thinkers of each school there are a number of philosophers
who vacillate between the two, or who have held both views at different
periods of life. Such contradictions represent a personal dualism on
the part of the individual thinker. Immanuel Kant is one of the most
famous instances of this class; and as his critical philosophy has
had a profound influence, and I was compelled to contrast my chief
conclusions with those of Kant, I must once more deal briefly with his
ideas. This is the more necessary as one of the ablest of the many
attacks on the _Riddle_, the _Kant against Haeckel_ of Erich Adick, of
Kiel, belongs to this school.

In the _Creed of Pure Reason_, which I published as an appendix to
the popular edition of the _Riddle_ in 1903, I pointed out, in view
of this and similar Kantist criticisms, the clear inconsistency of
the great evolutionary principles of Kant, the natural philosopher,
with the mystic teaching which he afterwards made the foundation of
his theory of knowledge, and that is still greatly esteemed. Kant I.
explained the constitution and the mechanical origin of the universe
on Newtonian principles, and declared that mechanicism alone afforded
a real explanation of phenomena; Kant II. subordinated the mechanical
principle to the teleological, explaining everything as a natural
design. Kant I. convincingly proved that the three central dogmas
of metaphysics--God, freedom, and immortality--are inacceptable to
pure reason. Kant II. claimed that they are necessary postulates of
practical reason. This profound opposition of principles runs through
Kant's whole philosophic work from beginning to end, and has never been
reconciled. I had already shown in the _History of Creation_ that this
inconsistency has a good deal to do with Kant's position in regard to
evolution. However, this radical contradiction of Kant's views has
been recognized by all impartial critics. It has lately been urged
with great force by Paul Rée in his _Philosophy_ (1903). We need not,
therefore, linger in proving the fact, but may go on to consider the
causes of it.

A subtle and comprehensive thinker like Kant was naturally perfectly
conscious of the existence of this inconsistency of his dualistic
principles. He endeavored to meet it by his theory of antinomies,
declaring that pure reason is bound to land in contradictions when
it attempts to conceive the whole scheme of things as a connected
totality. In every attempt to form a unified and complete view
of things we encounter these unsolvable antinomies, or mutually
contradictory theses, for both of which sound proof is available.
Thus, for instance, physics and chemistry say that matter must consist
of atoms as its simplest particles; but logic declares that matter
is divisible _in infinitum_. On the one theory time and space are
infinite; on the other theory, finite. Kant attempted to reconcile
these contradictions by his transcendental idealism, by the assumption
that objects and their connection exist only in our imagination, and
not in themselves. In this way he came to frame the false theory of
knowledge which is honored with the title of "criticism," while as a
matter of fact it is only a new form of dogmatism. The antinomies are
not explained by it, but thrust aside; nor was there more truth in the
assertion that equal proof is available for theses and antitheses.

The famous work of Kant's earlier years, _The General Natural History
and Theory of the Heavens_ (1755), was purely monistic in its chief
features. It embodied a fine attempt "to explain the constitution
and mechanical origin of the universe on Newtonian principles." It
was mathematically established forty years afterwards by Laplace in
his _Exposition du système du monde_ (1796). This fearless monistic
thinker was a consistent atheist, and told Napoleon I. that there was
no room for "God" in his _Mécanique celeste_ (1799). Kant, however,
afterwards found that, though there was no rational evidence of the
existence of God, we must admit it on moral grounds. He said the same
of the immortality of the soul and the freedom of the will. He then
constructed a special "intelligible world" to receive these three
objects of faith; he declared that the moral sense compelled us to
believe in a supersensual world, although pure theoretical reason
is quite unable to form any distinct idea of it. The categorical
imperative was supposed to determine our moral sense and the
distinction between good and evil. In the further progress of his
ethical metaphysics Kant expressly urged that practical reason should
take precedence of theoretical--in other words, that faith is superior
to knowledge. In this way he enabled theology and irrational faith
to find a place in his system and claim supremacy over all rational
knowledge of nature.

The older Greek philosophy had been purely monistic, Anaximander and
his disciple Anaximenes (in the sixth century B.C.) conceiving the
world in the sense of our modern hylozoism, but Plato introduced (two
hundred years afterwards) the dualistic view of things. The world of
bodies is real, accessible to our sensible experience, changeable and
transitory; opposed to it is the world of spirits, only to be reached
by thought, supersensual, ideal, immutable, and eternal. Material
things, the objects of physics, are only transient symbols of the
eternal ideas, which are the subject of metaphysics. Man, the most
perfect of all things, belongs to both worlds; his material frame is
mortal, the prison of the immortal and invisible soul. The eternal
ideas are only embodied for a time in the world of bodies here below;
they dwell eternally in the world of spirits beyond, where the supreme
idea (God, or the idea of the good) controls all in perfect unity.
The human soul, endowed with free-will, is bound to develop the three
cardinal virtues (wisdom, fortitude, and prudence) by the cultivation
of its three chief moral faculties (thought, courage, and zeal). These
fundamental principles of Plato's teaching, systematically presented
by his pupil Aristotle, met with a very general acceptance, as they
could easily be combined with the teaching of Christianity which arose
four hundred years afterwards. The great majority of later philosophic
and religious systems followed the same dualistic paths. Even Kant's
metaphysics is only a new form of it; only its dogmatic character
is hidden by the ascription to it of the convenient title of the
"critical" system.

Modern science has opened out to us immense departments of the real
world that are accessible to observation and rational inquiry; but it
has not taught us a single fact that points to the existence of an
immaterial world. On the contrary, it has shown more and more clearly
that the supposed world beyond is a pure fiction, and only merits to be
treated as a subject for poetry. Physics and chemistry in particular
have proved that all phenomena that come under our observation depend
on physical and chemical laws, and that all can be traced to the
comprehensive and unified law of substance. Anthropogeny has taught us
the evolution of man from animal ancestors. Comparative anatomy and
physiology have shown that his mind is a function of the brain, and his
will not free; and that his soul, absolutely bound up with its material
organ, passes away at death like the souls of other mammals. Finally,
modern cosmology and cosmogony have found no trace whatever of the
existence and activity of a personal and extramundane God. All that
comes within the range of our knowledge is a part of the material world.

In his observations on the supersensual world Kant lays stress on the
fact that it lies beyond the range of experience, and is known only by
faith. Conscience, he thinks, assures us of its existence, but does
not give us any idea of its nature; and so the three central mysteries
of metaphysics are mere words without meaning. But, as nothing can
be done with mere words, Kant's followers have attempted to put a
positive substance into them, generally in relation to traditional
ideas and religious dogmas. Not only orthodox Kantians, but even
critical philosophers like Schleiden, have dogmatically asserted that
Kant and his disciples have established the transcendental ideas of
God, freedom, and immortality, just as Kepler, Newton, and Laplace
established the laws of celestial motion. Schleiden imagined that this
dogmatic affirmation would refute "the materialism of modern German
science." Lange has shown, on the contrary, that such dogmatism is
utterly foreign to the spirit of the _Critique of Pure Reason_, and
that Kant held the three ideas to be quite incapable of either positive
or negative proof, and so thrust them into the domain of practical
philosophy. Lange says: "Kant would not see, as Plato would not see
before him, that the intelligible world is a world of poetry, and has
no value except in this respect." But if these ideas are mere figments
of the poetic imagination, if we can form neither positive nor negative
idea of them, we may well ask: What has this imaginary spirit-world to
do with the pursuit of truth?

As I have raised the question of the limits of truth and fiction, I
may take the opportunity of pointing out the general importance of
this distinction. Undoubtedly man's knowledge is limited, from the
very nature of our faculties or the organization of our brain and
sense-organs. Hence, Kant is right when he says that we perceive only
the phenomena of things, and not their inner essence, which he calls
the "thing in itself." But he is wrong and altogether misleading
when he goes on to doubt the reality of the external world, and says
it exists only in our presentations--in other words, that life is a
dream. It does not follow, from the fact that our senses and phronema
can reach only a part of the properties of things, that we call into
question their existence in time and space. But our rational craving
for a knowledge of causes impels us to fill up the gaps in our
empirical knowledge by our imagination, and thus form an approximate
idea of the whole. This work of the imagination may be called
"fiction" in a broad sense--hypotheses when they are in science, faith
when they belong to religion. However, these imaginative constructions
must always take a concrete form. As a fact, the imagination that
constructs the ideal world is never content merely to assume its
existence, but always proceeds to form an image of it. But these forms
of faith have no theoretical value for philosophy if they contradict
scientific truth, or profess to be more than provisional hypotheses;
otherwise they may be of practical service, but are theoretically
useless. Hence we fully recognize the great ethical and pedagogical
value of poetry and myths, but are by no means disposed to give them
precedence of empirical knowledge in our quest of the truth. I agree
entirely with the excellent criticism of Kant which Albert Lange gives
in his _History of Materialism_ (vol. ii.); but I am unable to follow
him when he transfers his idealism from practical to theoretical
questions, and urges the erroneous theory of knowledge derived from it
in opposition to monism and realism. It is true that, as Lange says:

 Kant did not lack the sense for the conception of this intelligible
 world (as an imaginative world); but his whole education and the
 period in which his mental life developed prevented him from
 indulging it. As he was denied the liberty of giving a noble form,
 free from all mediæval distortion, to the vast structure of his
 ideas, his positive philosophy was never fully developed. His system,
 with its Janus face, stands at the limit of two ages. He himself,
 in spite of all the defects of his deductions, is a teacher of the
 ideal. Schiller especially has grasped with prophetic insight the
 very essence of his teaching, and purified it of its scholastic
 dross. Kant held that we must only think, not see, the intelligible
 world; though what he thinks must have objective reality. Schiller
 has rightly brought the intelligible world visibly before us by
 treating it as a poet, and thus following in the footsteps of Plato,
 who, in contradiction to his own dialectic, reached his highest
 thought when he allowed the supersensual to become a thing of sense
 in the myth. Schiller, the poet of freedom, dared to carry freedom
 openly into the land of dreams and of shadows; then there arose under
 his hand the dreams and shadows of the ideal.

In view of the great influence that Schiller's idealism has had in
the spread of Kant's practical moral philosophy, we may for a moment
consider it in contrast with the realistic views of Goethe.

The profound opposition of the views of the two greatest poets of
the classical period of German literature is rooted deep in their
natures. This has been proved so often and so thoroughly, and has so
frequently been represented as the complementary quality of the two
poets, that I need merely recall it here. As for Goethe, I have, in my
_General Morphology_, shown his historical importance in connection
with the theory of evolution and the system of monism. With all his
versatile occupations, this great genius found time to devote to the
morphological study of organisms, and to establish his comprehensive
biological theories on this empirical basis. His discovery of the
metamorphosis of plants and his vertebral theory of the skull justify
us in classifying him as one of the chief forerunners of Darwin.
When I dealt with this in the fourth chapter of the _History of
Creation_, I pointed out how great an influence these morphological
studies, together with his idea of evolution, had on the realism of
his philosophy. They led him direct to monism and to an admiration of
Spinoza's monistic pantheism. Schiller had neither great interest nor
clear insight for these studies. His idealistic philosophy disposed
him rather to Kant's dualistic metaphysics and to an acceptance of
the three central mysteries--God, soul, and freedom. Both Schiller
and Goethe had a thorough knowledge of anthropology and psychology.
But the anatomic and physiological studies that Schiller made as a
military surgeon had very little influence on his transcendental
idealism, in which the ethical-æsthetic element preponderated. On the
other hand, Goethe's empirical realism was profoundly influenced by his
medical studies at Strasburg, and especially by his later comparative
anatomical and botanical investigations at Jena and Weimar.

The philosophic antithesis which we thus find in the biological
foundations of the views of Goethe and Schiller represents to an extent
the Janus face that the philosophic genius of the German people bears
to our own day. Goethe, the realist, penetrated deep into the empirical
study of the material world, and sought, with Spinoza, to establish
the unity of the universe. Schiller, the idealist, lives rather
in the spirit-world, and seeks, with Kant, to utilize its ethical
ideals--God, freedom, and immortality--for the education of the human
race. Both tendencies of thought have led the genius of Germany--like
the genius of Greece, two thousand years ago--to a great number of vast
intellectual achievements. Goethe wrought the ideal in his practical
life, Kant discovered it, Schiller proclaimed it to be the fittest aim
of the future.

It is wrong to conclude from isolated quotations from Goethe that he
occasionally betrayed the dualism of Schiller in his opinions. Some
of the remarks in this connection that Eckermann has left us from his
conversations with Goethe must be taken very carefully. Generally
speaking, this source is not reliable; many of the observations that
the mediocre Eckermann puts into the mouth of the great Goethe are
quite inconsistent with his character, and are more or less perverted.
Hence, when recent high-placed orators declare at Berlin that Goethe
saved the high ideals of God, freedom, and immortality, like Schiller,
and thus borrow a certain support for their Christian belief, they only
show how little they have grasped the profound antithesis of the views
of the two poets. Goethe notoriously described himself as a "renegade
non-Christian." The creed of the "great heathen" Goethe, as we find
it in _Faust_ and _Prometheus_ and _God and the World_, and a hundred
other magnificent poems, is pure monism, of the pantheistic character
which we take to be alone correct--hylozoism; he is equally far from
the one-sided materialism of Holbach or Carl Vogt and the extreme
dynamism of Leibnitz and Ostwald. Schiller by no means shared this
realistic view of things; his idealistic sense fled beyond nature into
the spirit world. However, our theoretic hylozoism does not exclude
practical idealism, as Goethe's whole life showed. On the other hand,
princes and priests often let us see how easily theoretical idealism
goes with practical materialism, or hedonism.

In the month of February, 1904, the centenary of the death of Kant was
celebrated throughout the world of culture. In numbers of academic
speeches and writings he was greeted as the greatest thinker of
Germany. He died on the same date (February 12th) on which Darwin
was born five years later. It is unquestionable that Kant has had
an immense influence on the whole development of German philosophy.
But while recognizing his extraordinary genius, we must not be blind
to the glaring contradictions and defects of his dualist system.
From the monistic point of view, we can only regard his profound
influence during the whole of the nineteenth century as mischievous.
Most certainly he had a quite exceptional talent for philosophic
speculation and penetrating thought, and he added to his great mental
qualities a blameless character and an undeniable sense of truth in
life (though not in thought). It was a serious misfortune for Kant and
for the philosophic school he led that his education prevented him
from acquiring a thorough knowledge and correct conception of the real
world. Shut up throughout life within the narrow bounds of his native
town, Königsberg, he never travelled beyond the frontier of Prussia,
and so did not obtain that knowledge of the world that comes of
travelling. In the study of nature he confined himself to the physics
of the inorganic world, in the study of man to the immortal soul. At
the close of his university studies Kant had to earn his living as a
house-teacher for nine years (from twenty-two to thirty-one), just
at the most important period of his life, in which the independent
development of the personal and scientific character is decided when
the academic studies are over.

In such adverse circumstances of mental adaptation a deep mystic trait,
which had been inherited from pious parents and confirmed by the
strictly religious training of his early years, was fixed in Kant's
character. Hence it was that faith in the three central mysteries came
upon him more and more in later years: he gave them precedence over all
the attainments of theoretical reason, while granting that we can form
neither a negative nor positive idea of them. But how can the belief
in God, freedom, and immortality determine one's whole view of life as
a postulate of practical reason if we cannot form any definite idea of
them?

Every philosophy that deserves the name must have clear ideas as
the bases of its thought-structure; it must have definite views in
connection with its fundamental conceptions. Hence most of Kant's
followers have not been content to follow his direction merely
to _believe_ in the three central mysteries; they have sought to
associate definite mental pictures with the empty concepts of God,
freedom, and immortality. In this they have drawn upon the religious
imagination, and have passed from the real knowledge of nature into the
transcendental realm of poetry. Monism, based on this real knowledge of
nature, has to keep clear of such dualism.

The extraordinary glorification of Kant that took place on the occasion
of his centenary must have seemed strange to many scientists who
recognize in his idealism one of the greatest hinderances to the spread
of the modern monistic philosophy of nature. But it is not difficult to
explain this. We must remember, in the first place, the contradictory
views that are embodied in Kant's system; every one could find in
Kant's works something to correspond to his own convictions--the
monistic physicist could read of the mechanical sway of natural law
throughout the whole knowable world, and the dualistic metaphysician of
the free play of the divine aim in the spiritual world. The physician
and physiologist would note with satisfaction that in his criticism of
pure reason Kant had been unable to find any evidence for the existence
of God, the immortality of the soul, or the freedom of the will. The
jurist and theologian would find with equal gratification that in the
practical reason Kant claims these three central dogmas as necessary
postulates. I have shown to some extent, in the sixth chapter of the
_Riddle_, how these irreconcilable contradictions in Kant's system are
due to a psychological metamorphosis.

It is just these very contradictions, which run through Kant's
philosophy from beginning to end, that maintain its popularity.
Educated people who desire to form a view of life rarely read Kant's
difficult (and often obscure) works in the original, but are content
to learn from extracts, or from a history of philosophy, that the
Königsberg thinker succeeded in squaring the circle, or in reconciling
natural science with the three central dogmas of metaphysics. The
"higher powers," who are particularly concerned to save the latter,
favor the teaching of Kant's dogmas, because it closes the way to real
explanation and prevents independent thinking. This is especially
true of the ministers of public instruction in the two chief German
states--Prussia and Bavaria. In their open attempt to subordinate the
school to the Church, they desire, above all, the primacy of practical
reason--that is to say, the subjection of pure reason to faith and
revelation. In German universities to-day belief in Kant is a sort of
ticket of admission to the study of philosophy. The reader who would
realize the pernicious effect of this official faith in Kant on the
advance of scientific knowledge will do well to read the able criticism
in the brilliant posthumous work of Paul Rée.

In the face of the dualism which still prevails in the academic
teaching of philosophy (especially in Germany) we must base our
monistic system on the universality of the law of substance. This
harmoniously combines the laws of the conservation of matter and of
energy. As I have fully explained my own conception of this law in
the twelfth chapter of the _Riddle_, I will only say here that its
validity is quite independent of any particular theory of the relations
of matter and force.[12] The materialism of Holbach and Büchner lays a
one-sided stress on the importance of matter: the dynamism of Leibnitz
and Ostwald on that of force. If we avoid these extremes, and conceive
matter and force as inseparable attributes of substance, we have pure
monism, as we find it in the systems of Spinoza and Goethe. We might
then substitute for the word "substance" as Hermann Cröll does, the
term "force-matter." The further question as to the correctness of any
particular physical conception of matter is quite independent of this.

The two knowable attributes or inalienable properties of substance,
without which it is unthinkable, were described by Spinoza as extension
and thought; we speak of them as matter and force. The "extended" (or
space-occupying) is matter; and in Spinoza "thought" does not mean a
particular function of the human brain, but energy in the broadest
sense. While hylozoistic monism conceives the human soul in this
sense as a special form of energy, the current dualism or vitalism
affirms, on the authority of Kant, that psychic and physical forces
are essentially different; that the former belong to the immaterial
and the latter to the material world. The theory of psycho-physical
parallelism, as developed especially by Wundt (1892), gives a very
sharp and definite expression to this dualism; it says that "physical
processes correspond to every psychic phenomenon, but the two are
completely independent of each other and have no natural causal
connection."

This wide-spread dualism finds its chief support in the difficulty of
directly connecting the processes of sensation with those of movement;
and so the one is regarded as a psychic and the other as a physical
form of energy. The conversion of the outer stimulus (waves of light,
sound, etc.) into an inner sensation (sight or hearing) is regarded
by monistic physiology as a conversion of force, a transformation of
photic or acoustic energy into specific nerve-energy. The important
theory of the specific energy of the sensory nerves, as formulated by
Johannes Müller, forms a bridge between the two worlds. But the idea
which these sensations evoke, the central process in the thought-organ
or phronema that brings the impressions into consciousness, is
generally regarded as an incomprehensible mystery. However, I have
endeavored to prove, in the tenth chapter of the _Riddle_, that
consciousness itself is only a special form of nervous energy, and
Ostwald has lately developed the theory in his _Natural Philosophy_.

The processes of movement which we observe in every change of one form
of energy into another, or every passage of potential into actual
energy, are subordinate to the general laws of mechanics. The dualist
metaphysic has rightly said that the mechanical philosophy does not
discover the inner causes of these movements. It would seek these in
psychic forces. On our monistic principles they are not immaterial
forces, but based on the general sensation of substance, which we
call _psychoma_, and add to energy and matter as a third attribute of
substance.

The difficulty of combining our monism with Spinoza's doctrine of
substance is met by detaching the idea of energy from sensation and
restricting it to mechanics, so as to make movement a third fundamental
property of substance with matter (the "extended") and sensation (the
"thinking"). We may also divide energy into active (= will in the sense
of Schopenhauer) and passive (= sensation in the broadest sense). As a
matter of fact, the energy to which modern energism would reduce all
phenomena has not an independent place in Spinoza's system besides
sensation; the attribute of thought (the psyche, soul, force) comprises
the two. I am convinced that sensation is, like movement, found in
all matter, and this trinity of substance provides the safest basis
for modern monism. I may formulate it in three propositions: (1) No
matter without force and without sensation. (2) No force without matter
and without sensation. (3) No sensation without matter and without
force. These three fundamental attributes are found inseparably united
throughout the whole universe, in every atom and every molecule. In
view of the great importance of this view for our hylonistic system of
monism, it may be well to consider each of these three attributes in
connection with the law of substance.

_A._ MATTER.--As extended substance, matter occupies infinite space,
and each individual body forms a part of the universe as real
substance. The law of the conservation of matter teaches us that the
sum of matter is eternal and unchangeable. This applies equally to
the various kinds of matter which we call the chemical elements, or
ponderable matter, and to the ether that fills the spaces between
the atoms and molecules, or imponderable matter. The mischievous
depreciation of matter (and the consequent disdain of materialism) and
its antithesis to "spirit" is partly due to the use of such phrases as
"raw" and "dead" matter, and partly to the deep-rooted mysticism we
have inherited from barbaric ancestors, and find it hard to shake off.

_B._ ENERGY.--All parts of the substance that fills infinite space
are in constant and eternal motion. Every chemical process and every
physical phenomenon is accompanied by a change in the position of the
particles which compose the matter. The law of the conservation of
energy teaches us that the sum of force or energy that is ever at work
in the universe is unchangeable. In the formation or decomposition of a
chemical compound the particles of matter move about, and so in every
mechanical, thermic, electric, and other process. The changes that
take place depend on a constant change of force, both in organic and
inorganic bodies; one form of force is converted into another without
a particle of the whole being lost. This law of the conservation of
force has lately been called, as a rule, the conservation of energy (or
the principle of energy) since the ideas of force and energy have been
more clearly distinguished in physics; energy is now usually defined as
the product of force and direction. It must be noted, however, that
the word "energy" (as an equivalent to "work" in the physical sense)
is still used in many different senses, as is also the word "force."
Others define energy as "work or all that comes of work and may be
converted into work." One particular school of voluntarism (Wundt)
reduces the motive-force of energy to will. Crusius said in 1744: "Will
is the dominating force in the world." And Schopenhauer defines the
world (or substance) as "will and presentation."

_C._ SENSATION.--In describing sensation (in the broadest sense) as
a third attribute of substance, and separating "sensitive substance"
from energy as "moving substance," I rely on the observations I made in
the thirteenth chapter of the _Riddle_ on sensation in the organic and
inorganic world. I cannot imagine the simplest chemical and physical
process without attributing the movements of the material particles to
unconscious sensation. In this sense the chemist speaks every day of a
sensitive reaction, and the photographer of a sensitive plate. The idea
of chemical affinity consists in the fact that the various chemical
elements perceive the qualitative differences in other elements,
experience "pleasure" or "revulsion" at contact with them, and execute
their specific movements on this ground. The sensitiveness of the plasm
to all kinds of stimuli, which is called "soul" in the higher animals,
is only a superior degree of the general irritability of substance.
Empedocles and the panpsychists spoke in the same sense of sensation
and effort in all things. As Nägeli said: "If the molecules possess
something that is related, however distantly, to sensation, it must
be comfortable to be able to follow their attractions and repulsions;
uncomfortable when they are forced to do otherwise. Thus we get a
common spiritual bond in all material phenomena. The mind of man is
only the highest development of the spiritual processes that animate
the whole of nature." These views of the distinguished botanist fully
agree with my monistic principles.

When sensation in the widest sense (as _psychoma_) is joined to matter
and energy as a third attribute of substance, we must extend the
universal law of the permanence of substance to all three aspects of
it. From this we conclude that the quantity of sensation in the entire
universe is also eternal and unchangeable, and that every change of
sensation means only the conversion of one form of psychoma into other
forms. If we start from our own immediate sensations and thoughts, and
look out on the whole mental life of humanity, we see through all its
continuous development the constancy of the psychoma, which has its
roots in the sensations of each individual. This highest achievement
of the work of the plasm in the human brain was, however, first
developed in the sensations of the lower animals, and these are in turn
connected by a long series of evolutionary stages with the simpler
forms of sensation that we find in the inorganic elements, and that
reveal themselves in chemical affinity. Albrecht Rau expressly says
in his excellent _Sensation and Thought_ (1896) that "perception or
sensation is a universal process in nature. This involves, moreover,
the possibility of reducing thought itself to this universal process."
Recently Ernst Mach has said, in his _Analysis of Sensation and the
Relation of the Physical to the Psychical_, that "sensations are the
common elements of all possible physical and psychic occurrences, and
consist simply in the different mode of the combination of the elements
and their dependence on each other." It is true that Mach, in his
one-sided emphasis of the subjective element of sensation, goes on to
form a similar psychomonism to that of Verworn, Avenarius, and other
recent dynamists; but the fundamental character of his system is purely
monistic, like the energism of Ostwald.

In thus uniting sensation with force and matter as an attribute of
substance, we form a monistic trinity, and are in a position to do away
with the antitheses that are rigidly maintained by dualists between the
psychic and the physical, or the material and the immaterial world.
Of the three great monistic systems materialism lays too narrow a
stress on the attribute of matter, and would trace all the phenomena
of the universe to the mechanics of the atoms or to the movements of
their ultimate particles. Spiritualism, with equal narrowness, builds
on the attribute of energy; it would either explain all phenomena by
motor forces or forms of energy (energism), or reduce them to psychic
functions, to sensation or psychic action (panpsychism). Our system of
hylonism (or hylozoism) avoids the faults of both extremes, and affirms
the identity of the psyche and the physis in the sense of Spinoza and
Goethe. It meets the difficulties of the older theory of identity by
dividing the attribute of thought (or energy) into two co-ordinate
attributes, sensation (psychoma) and movement (mechanics).




