VIII

FORMS OF LIFE

 Morphology--Laws of symmetry--Fundamental forms of animals
 and plants--Fundamental forms of protists and histona--Four
 chief classes of fundamental forms: (1) Centrostigma: vesicles
 (smooth vesicle and tabular vesicle); (2) Centraxonia: typical
 forms with central axis--Uniaxial (monaxonia, equipolar and
 unequipolar)--Transverse-axial (stauraxonia, double-pyramidal
 and pyramidal); (3) Centroplana: fundamental forms with
 central plane--Bilateral symmetry--Bilateral-radial and
 bilateral-symmetrical fundamental forms--Asymmetrical fundamental
 forms; (4) Anaxonia: irregular fundamental forms--- Causes of
 form-construction--Fundamental forms of monera, protists, and
 histona--Fundamental form and mode of life--Beauty of natural
 forms--Æsthetics of organic forms--Art forms in nature.


The infinite variety of forms which we observe in the realm of organic
life not only delight our senses with their beauty and diversity, but
also excite our curiosity, in suggesting the problem of their origin
and connection. While the æsthetic study of the forms of life provides
inexhaustible material for the plastic arts, the scientific study of
their relations, their structures, their origin and evolution, forms
a special branch of biology, the science of forms or morphology. I
expounded the principles of this science in my _General Morphology_
thirty-eight years ago. They are so remote from the ordinary curriculum
of education, and are so difficult to explain without the aid of
numerous illustrations, that I cannot think of going fully into
them here. In the present chapter I will only briefly describe those
features of living things which relate to the difficult question of
their ideal fundamental forms, the laws of their symmetry, and their
relation to crystal-formation. I have treated these intricate questions
somewhat fully in the last (eleventh) part of _Art-forms in Nature_.
The hundred plates contained in this work may serve as illustrations of
morphological relations. In the following pages the respective plates
are indicated by the letters A-f, with the number of each.

The unity of the organic structure, which expresses itself everywhere
in the fundamental features of living things and in the chemical
composition and constructive power of their plasm, is also seen in
the laws of symmetry in their typical forms. The infinite variety of
the species may, both in the animal and plant worlds, be reduced to
a few principal groups or classes of fundamental forms, and these
show no difference in the two kingdoms (_cf._ plate 6). The lily has
the same regular typical form as the hexaradial coral or anemone
(A-f, 9, 49), and the bilateral-radial form is the same in the
violet and the sea-urchin (clypeaster, A-f, 30). The dorsiventral or
bilateral-symmetrical form of most green leaves is repeated in the
frame of most of the higher animals (the cœlomaria); the distinction
of right and left determines in each the characteristic antithesis of
back and belly.

The distinction between protists and histons is much more important
than the familiar division of organisms into plants and animals, in
respect of their fundamental forms and their configuration. For the
protists, the unicellular organisms (without tissue) exhibit a much
greater freedom and variety in the development of their fundamental
forms than the histons, the multicellular tissue-forming organisms. In
the protists (both protophyta and protozoa) the constructive force of
the elementary organism, the individual cell, determines the symmetry
of the typical form and the special form of its supplementation; but in
the histons (both metaphyta and metazoa) it is the plasticity of the
tissue, made up of a number of socially combined cells, that determines
this. On the ground of this tectological distinction we may divide
the whole organic world into four kingdoms (or sub-kingdoms), as the
morphological system in the seventh table shows.

In respect of the general science of fundamental forms (promorphology),
the most interesting and varied group of living things is the class
of the radiolaria. All the various fundamental forms that can be
distinguished and defined mathematically are found realized in the
graceful flinty skeletons of these unicellular sea-dwelling protozoa.
I have distinguished more than four thousand forms of them, and
illustrated by one hundred and forty plates, in my monograph on the
_Challenger_ radiolaria [translated].

Only a very few organic forms seem to be quite irregular, without any
trace of symmetry, or constantly changing their formless shape, as we
find, for instance, in the amœbæ and the similar amœboid cells
of the plasmodia. The great majority of organic bodies show a certain
regularity both in their outer configuration and the construction of
their various parts, which we may call "symmetry" in the wider sense
of the word. The regularity of this symmetrical construction often
expresses itself at first sight in the arrangement side by side of
similar parts in a certain number and of a certain size, and in the
possibility of distinguishing certain ideal axes and planes cutting
each other at measurable angles. In this respect many organic forms
are like inorganic crystals. The important branch of mineralogy that
describes these crystalline forms, and gives them mathematical
formulæ, is called crystallography. There is a parallel branch of the
science of biological forms, promorphology, which has been greatly
neglected. These two branches of investigation have the common aim of
detecting an ideal law of symmetry in the bodies they deal with and
expressing this in a definite mathematical formula.

The number of ideal fundamental forms, to which we may reduce the
symmetries of the innumerable living organisms, is comparatively
small. Formerly it was thought sufficient to distinguish two or three
chief groups: (1) radial (or actinomorphic) types, (2) bilateral (or
zygomorphic) types, and (3) irregular (or amorphic) types. But when
we study the distinctive marks and differences of these types more
closely, and take due account of the relations of the ideal axes and
their poles, we are led to distinguish the nine groups or types which
are found in the sixth table. In this promorphological system the
determining factor is the disposition of the parts to the natural
middle of the body. On this basis we make a first distinction into four
classes or types: (1) the centrostigma have a _point_ as the natural
middle of the body; (2) the centraxonia a straight line (axis); (3) the
centroplana a plane (median plane); and (4) the centraporia (acentra or
anaxonia), the wholly irregular forms, have no distinguishable middle
or symmetry.


 I. CENTROSTIGMATIC TYPES.--The natural middle of the body is a
 mathematical point. Properly speaking, only one form is of this
 type, and that is the most regular of all, the sphere or ball.
 We may, however, distinguish two sub-classes, the smooth sphere
 and the flattened sphere. The smooth sphere (_holospœra_) is a
 mathematically pure sphere, in which all points at the surface are
 equally distant from the centre, and all axes drawn through the
 centre are of equal length. We find this realized in its purity
 in the ovum of many animals (for instance, that of man and the
 mammals) and the pollen cells of many plants; also cells that
 develop freely floating in a liquid, the simplest forms of the
 radiolaria (_actissa_), the spherical cœnobia of the volvocina
 and catallacta, and the corresponding pure embryonic form of the
 _blastula_. The smooth sphere is particularly important, because it
 is the only absolutely regular type, the sole form with a perfectly
 stable equilibrium, and at the same time the sole organic form which
 is susceptible of direct physical explanation. Inorganic fluids
 (drops of quicksilver, water, etc.) similarly assume the purely
 spherical form, as drops of oil do, for instance, when put in a
 watery fluid of the same specific weight (as a mixture of alcohol and
 water).

 The flattened sphere, or facetted sphere (_platnosphæra_), is known
 as an endospherical polyhedron; that is to say, a many-surfaced body,
 all the corners of which fall in the surface of a sphere. The axes
 or the diameters, which are drawn through the angles and the centre,
 are all unequal, and larger than all other axes (drawn through the
 facets). These facetted spheres are frequently found in the globular
 silicious skeletons of many of the radiolaria; the globular central
 capsule of many spheroidea is enclosed in a concentric gelatine
 envelope, on the round surface of which we find a net-work of fine
 silicious threads. The meshes of this net are sometimes regular
 (generally triangular or hexagonal), sometimes irregular; frequently
 starlike silicious needles rise from the knots of the net-work (A-f,
 1, 51, 91). The pollen bodies in the flower-dust of many flowering
 plants also often assume the form of facetted spheres.

 II. CENTRAXONIA TYPES.--The natural middle of the body is a straight
 line, the principal axis. This large group of fundamental forms
 consists of two classes, according as each axis is the sole fixed
 ideal axis of the body, or other fixed transverse axes may also
 be distinguished, cutting the first at right angles. We call the
 former uniaxial (_monaxonia_), and the latter transverse-axial
 (_stauraxonia_). The horizontal section (vertically to the chief
 axis) is round in the uniaxials and polygonal in the transverse-axial.

 In the monaxonia the form is determined by a single fixed axis,
 the principle axis; the two poles may be either equal (_isopola_)
 or unequal (_allopola_). To the isopola belong the familiar simple
 forms which are distinguished in geometry as spheroids, biconvex,
 ellipsoids, double cones, cylinders, etc. A horizontal section,
 passing through the middle of the vertical chief axis, divides the
 body into two corresponding halves. On the other hand, many of the
 parts are unequal in size and shape in the _allopola_. The upper pole
 or vertex differs from the basal pole or ground surface; as we find
 in the oval form, the planoconvex lens, the hemisphere, the cone,
 etc. Both sub-classes of the monaxonia, the allopola (conoidal) and
 the isopola (spheroidal), are found realized frequently in organic
 forms, both in the tissue-cells of the histona and the independently
 living protists (A-f, 4, 84).

 In the stauraxonia the vertical imaginary principal axis is cut by
 two or more horizontal cross-axes or radial-axes. This is the case in
 the forms which were formerly generally classed as regular or radial.
 Here also, as with the monaxonia, we may distinguish two sub-classes,
 isopola and allopola, according as the poles of the principal axis
 are equal or unequal.

 Of the _stauraxonia isopola_ we have, for instance, the double
 pyramids, one of the simplest forms of the octahedron. This form is
 exhibited very typically by most of the acantharia, the radiolaria
 in which twenty radial needles (consisting of silicated chalk) shoot
 out from the centre of the vertical chief axis. These twenty rays
 are (if we imagine the figure of the earth with its vertical axis)
 distributed in five horizontal zones, with four needles each, in
 this wise: two pairs cross at right angles in the equatorial zone,
 but on each side (in north and south hemispheres) the points of four
 needles fall in the tropical zone, and the points of four polar
 needles in the polar circles; twelve needles (the four equatorial
 and eight polar) lie in two meridian planes that are vertical to
 each other; and the eight tropical needles lie in two other meridian
 planes which cross the former at an angle of forty-five degrees.
 In most of the acantharia (the radial acanthometra and the mailed
 acanthophracta)--there are few exceptions--this remarkable structural
 law of twenty radial needles is faithfully maintained by heredity.
 Its origin is explained by adaptation to a regular attitude which
 the sea-dwelling unicellular body assumes in a certain stage of
 equilibrium (A-f, 21, 41). If the points of the real needles are
 connected by imaginary lines, we get a polyhedrical body, which may
 be reduced to the form of a regular double pyramid. This typical form
 of the equipolar stauraxonia is also found in other protists with a
 plastic skeleton, as in many diatomes and desmidiacea (A-f, 24). It
 is more rarely found embodied in the tissue-cells of the histona.

 Unequipolar stauraxonia are the pyramids, a fundamental form that
 plays an important part in the configuration of organic bodies. They
 were formerly described as regular or fundamental forms. Such are the
 regular blooms of flowering plants, the regular echinoderms, medusæ,
 corals, etc. We may distinguish several groups of them according to
 the number of the horizontal transverse axes that cut the vertical
 main axis in the middle.

 Two totally different divisions of the pyramidal types are the
 regular and the amphithecta pyramids. In the regular pyramids the
 transverse axes are equal, and the ground-surface (or base) is a
 regular polygon, as in the three-rayed blooms of the iris and crocus,
 the four-rayed medusæ (A-f, 16, 28, 47, 48, etc.), the five-rayed
 "regular echinoderms," most of the star-fish, sea-urchins, etc. (A-f,
 10, 40, 60), and the six-rayed "regular corals" (A-f, 9, 69).

 The amphithecta (or two-edged) pyramids, a special group of
 pyramidal types, are characterized by having as their basis a
 rhombus instead of a regular polygon. We may, therefore, draw two
 imaginary transverse axes, vertical to each other, through the
 ground-surface, both equipolar, but of unequal length. One of the
 two may be called the sagittal axis (with dorsal and ventral pole),
 and the other the transverse axis (with right and left pole); but
 the distinction is arbitrary, as the two are equipolar. In this lies
 the chief difference from the centroplane and dorsiventral forms, in
 which only the lateral axis is equipolar, the sagittal axis being
 unequipolar. We find the bisected pyramid in a very perfect form in
 the class of the ctenophora (or comb-medusæ, A-f, 27), where it is
 quite general. The striking typical form of these pelagic cnidaria
 is sometimes called biradial, sometimes four-rayed and bilateral,
 and sometimes eight-rayed-symmetrical. Closer study shows it to be a
 rhombus-pyramid. The originally four-rayed type, which it inherited
 from craspedote medusæ, has become bilateral by the development of
 different organs to the right and left from those before and behind.

 Similar rhombo-pyramidal forms to those of the ctenophora are also
 found in some of the medusæ and siphonophora, many of the corals and
 other cnidaria, and many flowers. The name "two-edged" which is given
 to this special type is taken from the ancient two-edged sword. Its
 chief axis is unequipolar, the handle being at the basic pole and
 the point at the verticle pole; but the two edges left and right are
 equal (poles of the lateral axis), and also the two broad surfaces
 (dorsal and ventral, joined by the sagittal axis).

 III. CENTROPLANE TYPES.--The natural middle of the body is a plane,
 the median or chief plane (_planum medianum_ or _sagittale_); it
 divides the bilateral body into two symmetrical halves, the right
 and the left. With this is associated the characteristic antithesis
 of back (_dorsum_) and belly (_venter_); hence, in botany this
 type (found, for instance, in most green leaves) is called the
 dorsiventral, and in zoology the bilateral in the narrower sense. One
 characteristic of this important and wide-spread type is the relation
 of three different axes, vertical to each other; of these three
 straight axes (enthyni) two are unequipolar and the third equipolar.
 Hence, the centroplanes may also be called tri-axial (_triaxonia_).
 In most of the higher animals (as in our own frame) the longest of
 the three axes is the principal one (_axon principalis_); its fore
 pole is the oral or mouth pole, and its hinder pole is the aboral
 or caudal (tail) pole. The shortest of the three enthyni is, in our
 body, the sagittal (arrow) or dorsiventral axis; its upper pole is
 at the back and its lower pole at the belly. The third axis--the
 transverse or lateral axis--is equipolar, one pole being called the
 right and the other the left. The various parts which make up the two
 halves of the body have relatively the same disposition in each half;
 but absolutely speaking (namely, in relation to the middle plane)
 they are oppositely arranged.

 Further, the centroplane or bilateral forms are also characterized
 by three vertical axes which may be drawn through each of the normal
 axes. The first of these normal planes is the median plane; it is
 defined by the chief axis and the sagittal axis, and divides the body
 into two symmetrical halves, the right and left. The second normal
 plane is the frontal plane; this passes through the chief axis and
 the transverse axis (which is parallel to the frontal surface in
 our body), and divides the dorsal half from the ventral half. The
 third normal plane is the cingular (waist) plane: this is defined by
 the sagittal and transverse axes. It divides the head half (or the
 vertical part) from the tail half (or the basal part).

 The name "bilateral symmetry," which is especially applied to the
 centroplane and dorsiventral types, is ambiguous, as I pointed out
 in 1866 in an exhaustive analysis and criticism of these fundamental
 forms in the fourth book of the _General Morphology_. It is used in
 five different senses. For our present general purpose it suffices to
 distinguish two orders of centroplane types, the bilateral-radial and
 the bilateral-symmetrical; in the former the radial (pyramidal) form
 is combined with the bilateral, but not in the latter.

 The bilateral-radial type comprises those forms in which the radial
 structure is combined in a very characteristic fashion with the
 bilateral. We have striking examples in the three-rayed flowers
 of the orchids (A-f, 74), the five-rayed blooms of the labiate
 and papilionaceous flowers, etc., in the plant world; and in the
 five-rayed "irregular" echinoderms, the bilateral sea-urchins
 (spatangida, clypeastrida, A-f, 30) in the animal world. In these
 cases the bilateral symmetry is recognizable at the first glance, as
 is also the radial structure, or the composition from three to five
 or more raylike parts (paramera), which are arranged bilaterally
 round a common central plane.

 The bilateral-symmetrical type is general among the higher animals
 which move about freely. The body consists of two antithetic parts
 (_antimera_), and has no trace of radial structure. In the free
 moving, creeping, or swimming animals (vertebrates, articulates,
 mollusks, annelids, etc.) the ventral side is underneath, against the
 ground, and the dorsal side upward. This form is clearly the most
 useful and practical of all conceivable types for the movement of
 the body in a definite direction and position. The burden is equally
 distributed between the two sides (right and left); the head (with
 the sense organs, the brain, and the mouth) faces frontward and the
 tail behind. For thousands of years all artificial vehicles (carts on
 land and ships in water) have been built on this type. Selection has
 recognized it to be the best and preserved it, while it has discarded
 the rest. There are, however, other causes that have produced the
 predominance of this type in green leaves--the relation to the
 supporting stalk, to the sunlight that falls from above, etc.

Special notice must be taken of those bilateral forms which were
originally symmetrical (by heredity), but have subsequently become
asymmetrical (or of unequal halves), by adaptation to special
conditions of life. The most familiar example among the vertebrates
are the flat-fishes (_pleuronectides_), soles, flounders, turbots,
etc. These high and narrow and flattened boney-fishes have a perfect
bilateral symmetry when young, like ordinary fishes. Afterwards they
form the habit of laying on one side (right or left) at the bottom of
the sea; and in consequence the upper side, exposed to the light, is
dark colored, and often marked with a design (sometimes very like the
stony floor of the ocean--a protective coloring), while the side the
flat-fish lies on remains without color. But, what is more curious,
the eye from the under side travels to the upper side, and the two
eyes lie together on one side (the right or left); while the bones of
the skull and the softer parts of each side of the head grow quite
crooked. Naturally, this ontogenetic process, in which a striking lack
of symmetry succeeds to the early complete symmetry of each individual,
can only be explained by our biogenetic law; it is a rapid and brief
recapitulation (determined by heredity) of the long and slow phyletic
process which the flat-fish has undergone for thousands of years in its
ancestral history to bring about its gradual modification. At the same
time, this interesting metamorphosis of the _pleuronectides_ gives us
an excellent instance of the inheritance of acquired characteristics,
as a consequence of constant œcological habit. It is quite
impossible to explain it on Weismann's theory of the germ-plasm.

We have another striking example among the invertebrates in the snails
(_gasteropoda_). The great majority of these mollusks are characterized
by the spiral shape of their shells. This variously shaped, and often
prettily colored and marked, snail's house is in essence a spirally
coiled tube, closed at the upper end and open at the lower (or mouth):
the mollusk can at any moment withdraw into its tube. The comparative
anatomy and ontogeny of the snails teach us that this spiral shell
came originally from a simple discoid or cylindrical dorsal covering
of the once bilateral-symmetrical mollusk, by the two sides of the
body having an unequal growth. The cause of it was a purely mechanical
factor--the sinking of the growing visceral sac, covered with the
shell, to one side; one part of the viscera contained in it (the
heart, kidneys, liver, etc.) grew more strongly on one side than the
other in consequence of this; and this was accompanied by considerable
displacement and modification of the neighboring parts, especially the
gills. In most snails one of the gills and kidneys and the ventricle
of the heart corresponding to these have disappeared altogether,
only those of the opposite side remaining; and the latter have moved
from the right side to the left, or vice versa. The conspicuous lack
of symmetry between the two halves of the body which resulted from
this finds expression in the spiral form of the snail's shell. This
remarkable ontogenetic metamorphosis also can be fully explained by a
corresponding phylogenetic process, and affords a very fine instance of
the inheritance of acquired characters.

There are also many examples of this asymmetry of bilateral forms in
the plant world, such as the green foliage-leaves of the familiar
begonia and the blooms of _canna_.

IV. THE CENTRAPORIA.--Few organic forms are completely irregular and
without axes, as usually the attraction to the earth (geotaxis) or to
the nearest object determines the special direction of growth, and so
the formation of an axis in some direction or other. Nevertheless,
we may instance as quite irregular the soft and ever-changing
plasma-bodies of many rhizopods, the amœbinæ, mycetozoa, etc. Most
of the sponges also--which we regard as stocks of gastræads--are
completely irregular in structure; the most familiar example is the
common bath-sponge.

An impartial and thorough study of organic forms has convinced me that
their actual, infinitely varied configurations may all be reduced
to the few typical forms I have described. Comparative anatomy and
ontogeny further teach us that the countless modifying processes
which have led to the appearance of the various species have acted by
adaptation to different environments, habits, and customs, and give
us, in conjunction with heredity, a physiological explanation of this
morphological transformation. But the question arises as to the origin
of these few geometrically definable types, and the cause of their
divergence.

In this important and difficult question we find a great variety
of opinions and a strong leaning to dualistic and mystic theories.
Educated laymen, who have only a partial and imperfect acquaintance
with the biological facts, think that they are justified here in
appealing to a supernatural creation of forms. They contend that only a
wise creator, following a rational and conscious design, could produce
such structures. Even distinguished and informed scientists lean in
this matter towards mystic and transcendental ideas; they believe that
the ordinary natural forces do not suffice to explain these phenomena,
and that at least for the first construction of these fundamental types
we must postulate a deliberate creative thought, a design, or some such
teleological cause, and therefore consciously acting final causes. So
say Nägeli and Alexander Braun.

In direct opposition to this, I have ever maintained the view that the
action of familiar physical forces--mechanical efficient causes--fully
suffices to explain the origin and transformation of these fundamental
types, as well as for all other biological and inorganic processes. In
order to understand this monistic position thoroughly, and to meet the
errors of dualism, we must bear in mind always the radical processes of
growth which control all organic and inorganic configuration, and also
the long chain of advancing stages of development, which lead us from
the simplest protists, the monera, to the most advanced organisms.

The unicellular organisms exhibit the greatest variety from the
promorphological point of view. In the single class of the radiolaria
we find all imaginable geometrical types represented. This is seen
in a glance at the one hundred and forty plates on which I have
depicted thousands of these graceful little protozoa in my monograph
(_Challenger Report_, vol. xviii.). On the other hand, the monera, at
the lowest stage of organic life, the structureless organisms without
organs that live on the very frontier of the inorganic world, are very
simple. Especially interesting in this connection are the chromacea,
which have hitherto been so undeservedly and so incomprehensibly
neglected. Among the well-known and widely distributed chroococcacea,
the chroococcus, cœlosphærium, and aphanocapsa are quite the most
primitive of all organisms known to us--and at the same time the
organisms that enable us best to understand the origin of life by
spontaneous generation (archigony). The whole organism is merely a
tiny, bluish-green globule of plasm, without any structure, or only
surrounded by a thin membrane; its fundamental form is the simplest of
all, the centraxial smooth sphere. Next to these are the oscillaria
and nostochina, social chromacea, which have the appearance of thin,
bluish-green threads. They consist of simple primitive (unnucleated)
cells joined to each other; they seem often to be flattened into a
discoid shape as a result of close conjunction. Many protists are found
in two conditions, one mobile with very varied and changeable forms,
and one stationary with a globular shape. But when the separate living
cell begins to form a firm skeleton or protective cover for itself,
it may assume the most varied and often most complicated forms. In
this respect the class of the radiolaria among the protozoa, and the
class of the diatomes among the protophyta (both of which have flinty
shells), surpass all the other groups of the diversified realm of the
protists. In my _Art-forms in Nature_ I have given a selection of their
most beautiful forms (diatomes, A-f, 4, 84; radiolaria, A-f, 1, 11, 21,
22, 31, 41, 51, 61, 71, 95). The most remarkable and most important
fact about them is that the artistic builders of these wonderful and
often very ingenious and intricate flinty structures are merely the
plastidules or micella, the molecular and microscopically invisible
constituents of the soft viscous plasm (sarcode).

The configuration of the histona differs essentially from that of
the protists, since in the case of the latter the simple unicellular
body produces for itself alone the whole form and vital action of the
organism, while in the histona this is done by the cell state, or the
social combination of a number of different cells, which make up the
tissue body. Hence the ideal type which we can always define in the
actual histonal form has quite a different significance from that in
the unicellular protists. In the latter we find the utmost diversity in
the configuration of the independent living cells and the protective
cover it forms; among the histona the number of fundamental forms
is limited. It is true that the cells themselves which make up the
tissues may exhibit a great variety in form and structure; but the
number of the different tissues which they make up is small, and so
is the number of ideal types exhibited by the organism they combine
to form--the sprout (_culmus_) in the plant kingdom and the person in
the animal kingdom. The same may be said of the stock (_cormus_) in
both kingdoms--that is to say, of the higher individual unity which is
constituted by the union of several sprouts or persons.

The two classes of fundamental forms which are especially found in the
plant sprouts or the animal persons are the radial and bilateral. The
one is determined by the stationary life, the other by free movement in
a certain attitude and direction (swimming in water or creeping on the
ground). Hence we find the radial form (as pyramidal) predominant in
the blooms and fruits of the metaphyta, and the persons of the polyps,
corals, and regular echinoderms. On the other hand, the bilateral or
dorsiventral form preponderates in most free-moving animals; though
it is also found in many flowers (papilionaceous and labial flowers,
orchids, and others that are fertilized by insects). Here we have
to seek the cause of the bilateralism in different features, in the
relations with the insects, in the mode of their fastening to and
distribution on the stalk (for the green foliage leaves), and so on.

The complex individuals of the first order, the stocks (_cormi_), are
more dependent in their growth on the spatial conditions of their
environment than the sprouts or persons; hence their typical form is
generally more or less irregular, and rarely bilateral.

The interest which we take in natural and artistic forms, and which
has for thousands of years prompted men to reproduce the former in
the latter, depends for the most part, if not altogether, on their
beauty--that is to say, on the feeling of pleasure we experience in
looking at them. The causes of this pleasure and joy in the beautiful
and the naturalness of its development are explained in æsthetics. When
we combine this science with the results of modern cerebral physiology,
we may distinguish two classes of beauty--direct and indirect. In
direct or sensible beauty the internal sense-organs, or the æsthetic
neurona or sense-cells of the brain, are immediately affected with
pleasure. But in indirect or associational beauty these impressions
are combined with an excitement of the phronetic neurona--the rational
brain-cells which effect presentation and thought.

Direct or sensible beauty (the subject of sensual æsthetics) is the
direct perception of agreeable stimuli by the sense-organs. We may
distinguish the following stages of its perfection: 1. Simple beauty
(the subject of primordial æsthetics); the pleasure is evoked by the
direct sense-impression of a simple form or color. Thus, for instance,
a wooden sphere makes an agreeable impression as compared with a
shapeless piece of wood, a crystal as compared with a stone, a sky-blue
or golden-yellow spot as compared with a greenish-blue or dull-yellow
one (in music a simple pure bell-tone as compared with a shrill
whistle). 2. Rhythmic beauty (the subject of linear æsthetics); the
æsthetic sensation is caused by the serial repetition of some simple
form--for instance, a pearl necklace, a chainlike community of monera
(nostoc) or of cells (diatomes, A-f, 84, figs. 7 and 9): in music a
tasteful series of simple notes. 3. Actinal beauty (the subject of
radial æsthetics); the pleasure is excited by the orderly arrangement
of three or more homogeneous simple forms about a common centre, from
which they radiate; for instance, a regular cross or a radiating
star, the three counter-pieces in the iris-bloom, the four paramera
in the body of the medusa, the five radial-pieces in the star-fish.
The familiar experience of the kaleidoscope shows how amply the simple
radial constellation of three or more simple figures may delight
our æsthetic sense (in music we have the simple harmony of several
simultaneous notes). 4. Symmetrical beauty (the subject of bilateral
æsthetics); the pleasure is caused by the relation of a simple object
to its like, the mutual completion of two similar halves (the right and
left parts). When we fold a piece of paper over an ink-stain in such a
way that it is equally impressed on both halves of the fold, we get a
symmetrical figure which makes an agreeable impression on our natural
sense of space or equilibrium.

The æsthetic impressions in indirect associational beauty (the subject
of associative or symbolical æsthetics) are not only much more varied
and complex than those we have described, but they also play a much
more important part in the life of man and the higher animals. The
anatomic condition for this higher physiological function is the
elaborate construction of the brain in the higher animals and man,
and particularly the development of the special association-centres
(thought-centres, reason-sphere) and their differentiation from the
internal sense-centres. In this millions of different neurona or
psychic cells co-operate, the sensual æstheta acting in conjunction
with the rational phroneta, and thus, by complex associations of
ideas, much higher and more valuable functions arise. We may indicate
four chief groups of this associational or indirect beauty. 5.
Biological beauty (the subject of botanical and zoological æsthetics):
the various forms of organisms and their organs (for instance, a
flower, a butterfly) excite our æsthetic interest by association with
their physiological significance, their movements, their bionomic
relations, their practical use, and so on. 6. Anthropistic beauty
(the subject of anthropomorphic æsthetics): man, as "the measure of
all things," regards his own organism as the chief object of beauty,
either morphologically considered (beauty of the whole body and
its various organs--the eyes, mouth, hair, flesh-tint, etc.), or
physiologically (beauty of movements or positions), or psychologically
(the expression of the emotions in the physiognomy). As man transfers
to the objective world this personal gratification he experiences from
self-consideration, and anthropomorphically regards other beings in
the light of them, this anthropistic æsthetic obtains a far-reaching
significance. 7. Sexual beauty (the subject of erotic æsthetics): the
pleasure is caused by the mutual attraction of the sexes. The supreme
importance of love in the life of man and most other organisms,
the powerful influence of the passions, the sexual selection that
is associated with reproduction, have evoked an infinite number of
æsthetic creations in every branch of art relating to the antithesis of
man and woman. The special pleasure which is caused by the bodily and
mental affinities of the sexes can be traced phylogenetically to the
cell-love of the two sexual cells, or the attraction of the sperm-cell
to ovum. 8. Landscape beauty (the subject of regional æsthetics): the
pleasure which is caused by the sight of a fine landscape, and that
finds satisfaction in modern landscape-painting, is more comprehensive
than that of any other æsthetic sensations. In point of space the
object is larger and richer than any of the individual objects in
nature which are beautiful and interesting in themselves. The varying
forms of the clouds and the water, the outline of the blue mountains
in the background, the woods and meadows in the middle-distance,
and the living figures in the foreground, excite in the mind of the
spectator a number of different impressions which are woven together
into a harmonious whole by a most elaborate association of ideas. The
physiological functions of the nerve-cells in the cortex which effect
these æsthetic pleasures, and the interaction of the sensual æstheta
with the rational phroneta, are among the most perfect achievements
of organic life. This "regional æsthetics," which has to establish
scientifically the laws of landscape beauty, is much younger than the
other branches of the science of the beautiful. It is very remarkable
that absolute irregularity, the absence of symmetry and mathematical
forms, is the first condition for the beauty of a landscape (as
contrasted with architecture, and the beauty of separate objects in
nature). Symmetrical arrangement of things (such as a double row of
poplars or houses) or radial figures (a flower-bed or artificial wood)
do not please the finer taste for landscape; they seem tedious.

A comparative survey of these eight kinds of beauty in natural forms
discovers a connected development, rising from the simple to the
complex, from the lower to the higher. This scale corresponds to the
evolution of the sense of beauty in man, ontogenetically from the
child to the adult, phylogenetically from the savage to the civilized
man and the art critic. The stem-history of man and his organs, which
explains to us in anthropogeny the gradual rise from lower to higher
forms by the interaction of heredity and adaptation, also finds an
application in the history of æsthetics and ornamentation. It teaches
us how feeling, taste, emotion, and art have been gradually evolved. On
the other hand, we have corresponding to this evolutionary series the
scale of the typical forms which lie at the root of the real forms of
bodies both in nature and art.




SEVENTH TABLE

THE MORPHOLOGICAL SYSTEM OF ORGANISMS

Division of living things (plants and animals) into two kingdoms
(protista and histona) on the ground of their cell-structure and
body-structure.


  ┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
  │  First organic kingdom: UNICELLULAR, protista.           │
  │                                                          │
  │Organisms which as a rule remain unicellular              │
  │throughoutlife (_monobia_), less frequently they          │
  │form loose cell communities (_cœnobia_) by                │
  │repeated cleavage, but never real tissues.                │
  │                                                          │
  │            Sub─kingdom of the protista.                  │
  ├───────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────────┤
  │    A. PRIMITIVE PLANTS    │     B. PRIMITIVE ANIMALS     │
  │       (protophyta).       │          (protozoa).         │
  │                           │                              │
  │      A. Character:        │        B. Character:         │
  │      Plasmodomous.        │        Plasmophagous.        │
  │                           │                              │
  │     Unicellulars with     │      Unicellulars with       │
  │    vegetal metabolism:    │      animal metabolism:      │
  │   Carbon─assimilation.    │    Albumin─assimilation.     │
  │                           │                              │
  │      CHIEF GROUPS:        │        CHIEF GROUPS:         │
  │                           │                              │
  │     I. Phytomonera        │        I. Zoomonera.         │
  │                           │                              │
  │Protophyta without nucleus │  Protozoa  without  nucleus  │
  │         (monera)          │          (monera).           │
  │        Chromacea          │          Bacteria.           │
  │                           │                              │
  │     II. Algariæ.          │        II. Sporozoa.         │
  │                           │                              │
  │Unicellular algæ with      │ Nucleated protozoa without   │
  │nucleus, without ciliary   │ mobile processes: Gregarinæ, │
  │motion: Paulotomea,        │ chytridinæ.                  │
  │diatomea.                  │                              │
  │                           │                              │
  │     III. Algettæ.         │        III. Rhizopoda.       │
  │                           │                              │
  │Unicellular algæ with      │ Nucleated  protozoa  with    │
  │nucleus, and with ciliary  │ pseudopodia: Labosa,         │
  │motion: Mastigota,         │ radiolaria.                  │
  │melthallia, siphonea.      │                              │
  │                           │        IV. Infusoria.        │
  │                           │                              │
  │                           │ Nucleated protozoa with      │
  │                           │ cilia or lashes:             │
  │                           │ Flagellata, ciliata.         │
  └───────────────────────────┴──────────────────────────────┘


  ┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
  │      Second organic kingdom: MULTICELLULAR, histona.       │
  │                                                            │
  │ Organisms which are only unicellular at the                │
  │ beginning of their existence, are later                    │
  │ multicellular, and always form real tissues                │
  │ (_histobia_) by the firm conjunction of social cells.      │
  │                                                            │
  │              Sub─kingdom of the histona.                   │
  ├────────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────────┤
  │      C. TISSUE PLANTS      │    D. TISSUE ANIMALS          │
  │        (metaphyta).        │        (metazoa).             │
  │                            │                               │
  │        C. Character:       │       D. Character:           │
  │        Plasmodomous.       │       Phasmophagous.          │
  │                            │                               │
  │    Multicellulars with     │    Multicellulars with        │
  │    vegetal metabolism:     │     animal metabolism:        │
  │   Carbon─assimilation.     │    Albumin─assimilation.      │
  │                            │                               │
  │       CHIEF GROUPS:        │       CHIEF GROUPS:           │
  │                            │                               │
  │      I. Thallophyta.       │       I. Cœlenteria           │
  │                            │       (cœlenterata).          │
  │ Thallus─plants. Metaphyta  │                               │
  │ with thallus: Algæ, mycetæ │ Metazoa without body          │
  │ (fungi).                   │ cavity and anus: Gastræada.   │
  │                            │ Sponges, cnidaria, platodes.  │
  │       II. Mesophyta.       │                               │
  │                            │        II. Cœlomaria          │
  │ Median plants, with        │        (bilaterals).          │
  │ prothallium: Mosses, ferns │                               │
  │ (muscinæ filicinæ).        │ Metazoa with body cavity      │
  │                            │ and anus (generally also      │
  │                            │ blood─vessels). Vermalia,     │
  │      III. Anthophyta       │ mollusca, echinoderma,        │
  │       (phanerogams).       │ articulata, tunicata,         │
  │                            │ vertebrata.                   │
  │ Flowering  plants, with    │                               │
  │ blooms and seeds           │                               │
  │ (spermophyta):             │                               │
  │ Gymnosperms, angiosperms.  │                               │
  │                            │                               │
  │                            │                               │
  │                            │                               │
  │                            │                               │
  └────────────────────────────┴───────────────────────────────┘




