XI

REPRODUCTION


 Reproduction and generation--Sexual
 and asexual reproduction--Superfluous
 growth--Monogony--Self-cleavage--Budding--Formation of
 spores--Amphigony--Ovum and sperm-cell--Hermaphrodite formation
 and separation of the sexes--Hermaphrodism and gonochorism
 of the cells--Monoclinism and diclinism--Monœcism and
 diœcism--Alternation of sex-division--Sexual glands of
 the histona--Hermaphroditic glands--Sexual ducts--Generative
 organs--Parthenogenesis--Pædogenesis--Metagenesis--Heterogenesis--
 Strophogenesis--Hypogenesis--Hybridism--Generation of hybrids and
 the species--Graduation of forms of reproduction.


While nutrition secures the maintenance of the organic individual,
reproduction insures that of the organic species, or the group of
definite forms which we distinguish from others by the name "species."
All individuals are more or less restricted in the duration of their
lives, and die off after the lapse of a certain time. The succession
of individuals, connected by reproduction and belonging to a species,
makes it possible for the specific form itself to last for ages. In
the end, however, the species is temporary; it has no "eternal life."
After existing for a certain period, it either dies or is converted by
modification into other forms.

The rise of new individuals by reproduction from parent organisms
is a natural phenomenon with definite time-restriction. It cannot
have continued from eternity on our planet, as the earth itself is
not eternal, and even long after its formation was incapable of
supporting organic life on its surface. This only became possible when
the surface of the glowing planet had sufficiently cooled for liquid
water to settle on it. Until this stage carbon could not enter into
those combinations with other elements (oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, and
sulphur) which led to the formation of plasm. As I intend to deal with
this process of _archigony_, or spontaneous generation, in a special
chapter, I leave it for the present, and confine myself to the study of
_tocogony_, or parental generation.

       *       *       *       *       *

The various forms of tocogony, or the reproduction of living things,
are generally divided into two large groups; on the one hand there is
the simple form of asexual generation (monogony), and on the other the
complex form of sexual generation (amphigony). In asexual generation
the action of one individual only is needed, this providing a product
of transgressive (redundant) growth which develops into a new organism.
In sexual generation it is necessary for two different individuals to
unite in order to produce a new being from themselves. This amphigony
(or _generatio digenea_) is the sole form of reproduction in man and
most of the higher animals. But in many of the lower animals and most
of the plants we find also asexual multiplication, or monogony, by
cleavage or budding. In the lowest organisms, the monera and many of
the protists, fungi, etc., the latter is the only form of propagation.

Strictly speaking, monogony is a universal life-process; even the
ordinary cell-cleavage, on which depends the growth of the histona, is
a cellular monogony. Hence historical biology must say that monogony
is the older and more primitive form of parental generation, and
that amphigony was secondarily developed from it. It is important to
emphasize this because, not only some of the older writers, but even
some recent ones, regard sexual generation as a universal function of
organisms, and declare that it dates from the very beginning of organic
life.

The complex and frequently very intricate phenomena of sexual
generation, as we find them in the higher organisms, become
intelligible to us when we compare them with the simpler forms of
asexual generation at the lowest stages of life. We then learn that
they are by no means unintelligible and supernatural marvels, but
natural physiological processes, which, like all others, may be traced
to the action of simple physical forces. The form of energy which
lies at the root of all tocogony is _growth_ (_crescentia_). And as
this phenomenon is also the cause, in the form of gravitation, of the
formation of crystals and other inorganic individuals, we do away with
another of the boundaries which people would establish between organic
and inorganic nature. Reproduction is a kind of nutrition and growth of
the organism beyond the individual standard, building up a part of it
into a whole. This _limit_ of individual size is determined for each
species by two factors--the inner constitution of the plasm, which is
inherited, and the dependence on the outer environment, which controls
adaptation. When this limit has been passed, the transgressive growth
takes the form of reproduction. Every species of crystal has also a
definite limit of growth; when this is passed, new crystal-individuals
are formed in the mother-water on the old individual, which grows no
further.

Asexual or monogenetic tocogony (also called "vegetative
multiplication") is always effected by a single organic individual,
and so must be traced to its transgressive growth. When this affects
the entire body as a total growth, the whole dividing into two or
more equal parts, we call the monogenetic process division (or
segmentation). But when the growth is partial, and affects only a
part of the individual, or when this special part separates from
the generating organism in the form of a bud (_gemma_), the process
is called budding or gemmation (_gemmatio_). Hence the essential
difference between the two forms of generation is that in division the
parent disappears in its partial products (children); these are of
the same age and form. But in budding the generating parent retains
its individuality; it is larger and older than the young bud. This
important difference between division and gemmation, which is often
overlooked, holds good both for protists (unicellulars) and histona
(multicellulars). The fact that in division the individual as such
is destroyed is a sufficient refutation of Weismann's theory of the
immortality of the unicellulars. (See above, and also the _Riddle_,
chapter xi.)

Reproduction by division is by far the most common of all forms of
propagation. It is the normal form of monogony, not only in many of the
protists, but also in the tissue-cells which compose the tissues of
the histona. It is, moreover, the sole method of propagation for most
of the monera, both chromacea and bacteria, which are in consequence
often comprised under the title of "cleavage-plants" (_schizophyta_).
Self-cleavage is also found among the higher multicellular
organisms--namely, the cnidaria (polyps, medusæ). It usually takes the
form of division into two parts (_dimidiatio_ or hemitomy), the body
splitting into two equal halves. The plane of division is sometimes
indefinite (fragmentary-cleavage), sometimes coincident with the long
axis (length-cleavage), sometimes with the transverse axis, vertical
to the long axis (transverse-cleavage), and less frequently with a
diagonal axis (oblique-cleavage). When the segmentation of a cell
proceeds so rapidly that the transverse-cleavage follows immediately
on the length-cleavage, and the two are at length made to coincide,
twofold division is changed into fourfold division. And when the
process is repeated in quick succession, and the body falls at last
into a number of small and equal pieces, we have manifold division
(polytomy); as in the spore-formation of the sporozoa and rhizopoda,
and in the embryonic sac of the phanerogams.

Asexual propagation by budding is chiefly distinguished from
segmentation by the fact that the determining transgressive growth is
only partial in the one and total in the other. The bud produced is,
therefore, younger and smaller than the parent from which it issues;
the latter may replace the lost part by regeneration and produce a
number of buds simultaneously or successively without losing its
individuality (whereas this is destroyed in division). Propagation
by budding is rare among the protists, and more common among the
histona--that is, with most of the tissue-plants and the lower,
stock-forming, tissue-animals (cœlenteria and vermalia). Most stocks
(cormi) are formed by a sprout or person shooting out buds which remain
united to it. The layer and shoots of tissue-plants are detached
buds. The two chief kinds of gemmation are terminal and lateral.
Terminal budding takes place at the end of the long axis, and is not
far removed from transverse division (for instance, the strobilation
of the acraspedæ medusæ and the chain tape-worms). Lateral budding is
much more common; it determines the branching of trees and generally of
complex plants, and also of the tree-shaped stocks of sponges, cnidaria
(polyps, corals), bryozoa, etc.

A third form of asexual reproduction is the formation of spores or
"germ-cells," which are usually produced in great numbers inside the
organism, then detached from it, and developed into new organisms
without needing fertilization. The spores are sometimes motionless
(rest-spores or paulospores); sometimes they have one or more lashes
which enable them to swim about (rambling-spores or planospores).
This monogenetic propagation is very common among the protists, both
protophyta and protozoa. Among the latter the sporozoa (gregarinæ,
coccidia, etc.) are remarkable for the passing away of the whole
unicellular organism in the formation of spores; in this case and
in many of the rhizopods (_mycetozoa_) the process coincides with
manifold cell-division. In other cases (radiolaria, thalamophora)
only a portion of the parental cells is used for the production of
spores. Spore-formation is very common among the cryptogams; here it
usually alternates with sexual propagation. The spores are generally
formed in special spore-capsules (sporangia). In the flowering plants
(anthophyta) sporogony has disappeared. It is found at times in the
tissue-animals (in the fresh-water sponges); in this case the sporangia
are called _gemmulæ_.

The essential feature of sexual generation is the coalescence of two
different cells, a female ovum (egg-cell) and a male sperm-cell.
The simple new cell which arises from the blending of these is the
stem-cell (_cytula_), the stem-mother of all the cells that make up
the tissues of the histon. But even among the unicellular protists
we find in many places the beginnings of sexual differentiation; it
is foreshadowed in the blending or copulation of two homogeneous
cells, the gameta. We may conceive this process, or zygosis, as a
peculiar and very favorable kind of growth, that is connected with a
rejuvenescence of the plasm; the latter is enabled to propagate by
repeated cleavage through the mixing of the two different plasma-bodies
on either side (_amphimixis_). When these two gameta become unequal
and differ in size and shape, the larger female body is called the
macrogameton or macrogonidion, and the smaller, male part, the
microgameton or microgonidion. Among the histona the first is called
the egg-cell (_ovulum_), and the latter the sperm-cell (_spermium_, or
_spermatozoon_). As a rule the latter is a very mobile ciliated cell,
the former an inert or amœboid cell. The vibratory movements of the
sperm-cells serve for approaching the ovulum in order to fertilize it.

The qualitative difference between the two copulating sexual cells
(_gonocyta_), or the chemical difference between the ovoplasm of the
female and the sperm-plasm of the male cell, is the first (and often
the only) condition of amphigony; subsequently we find in addition (in
the higher histona) a very elaborate apparatus of secondary structures.
With this chemical difference is associated a peculiar double form of
sensitive perception and an attraction based thereon, which is called
sexual chemotaxis or erotic chemotropism. This "sex-sense" of the two
gonocyta, or elective affinity of the male androplasm and the female
gynoplasm, is the cause of mutual attraction and union. It is very
probable that this sexual sense-function, akin to smell or taste, and
the movements it stimulates, are located in the cytoplasm of the two
sex-cells, while heredity is the function of the caryoplasm of the
nucleus. (_Cf._ the _Anthropogeny_, chapters vi. and vii.)

The sexual difference between the two forms of gonoplasm, the ovoplasm
of the female and spermoplasm of the male cell, is noticeable at the
very beginning of sexual differentiation in the different sizes of
the copulating gameta, and later in their increasing divergence as to
shape, composition, movement, etc. It leads further to the distribution
of the germinal regions (in which the sex-cells are formed) into two
different individuals. When the ovum and the sperm-cell are produced in
one and the same individual, we call this an hermaphrodite; and when
they are formed in two different individuals (male and female), we
call them monosexual, or gonochorists. In accordance with the various
stages of individuality which we distinguished above (chapter vii.), we
may indicate the following stages of hermaphrodism and gonochorism.

Some groups of protists, especially the highly organized ciliated
infusoria (_ciliata_), are distinguished by having a separation of
male and female plasm within the unicellular organism. The ciliata
propagate, as a rule, in large numbers by repeated division (by
indirect cell-cleavage). But this monogony has its limits, and has to
be interrupted from time to time by amphigony, a rejuvenation of the
plasm, which is effected by the conjugation of two different cells and
the partial destruction of their nuclear matter. By conjugation is
meant the partial and momentary union of two different unicellulars,
while copulation is a total and permanent coalescence. When two
ciliated infusoria conjugate they place themselves side by side, and
connect for a time by means of a bridge of plasm. A part of the nucleus
of each has already divided into two portions, one of which functions
as the female standing-nucleus (_paulocaryon_) and the other as the
male travelling-nucleus (_planocaryon_). The two mobile nuclei enter
the plasm-bridge, and move through it, pushing against each other,
into the body of the opposite cell; they then coalesce with the deeper
lying standing-nucleus. When a fresh nucleus has been thus formed (by
_amphimixis_) in each of the copulating cells, they again separate. The
two rejuvenated cells have once more acquired the power to propagate
for a long time by division.

This peculiar hermaphroditic formation of the cells, which
distinguishes the ciliated infusoria and some other protists, and
which we now know in its smallest details through the investigations
of Richard Hertwig, Maupas, and others, is especially interesting
because it proves that the chemical difference between the female
gynoplasm and the male androplasm can be found within a single cell.
This erotic division of labor is so important that formerly it was
universally ascribed to two different cells. Recent accurate research,
penetrating into the smallest visible processes of fertilization, has
shown that the essential feature in the formation of a fresh individual
(the stem-cell) is the blending of equal portions (hereditary parts)
of the male and female nuclei; the caryoplasm of the two copulating
cells is the vehicle of heredity from the parents. The cytoplasm of the
cell-body, on the other hand, serves the purposes of adaptation and
nutrition. As a rule the cell-body of the ovulum is very large, and
is, as a food-store, very richly provided with albumin, fat, and other
nutritive matter (food-yolk); while the cytoplasm of the sperm-cell is
very small, and generally forms a vibrating lash, with which it moves
along and seeks the ovum.

In most of the plants the female and male cells are produced by the
same sprout, and in many of the lower animals by one and the same
person. This kind of hermaphrodism in "individuals of the second order"
is called monoclinism ("one-beddedness"). In many of the higher plants
(monœcic stocks) and most of the higher animals we have diclinism
("two-beddedness")--in other words, the one sprout or person has
only male, and the other sprout or person only female, organs--this
is gonochorism of individuals of the second order. Monoclinism is
generally associated with sedentary life (and often necessary for it),
and diclinism with free movement. Adaptation to parasitic habits also
favors monoclinism; thus, the crabs, for instance, are for the most
part gonochoristic individuals, but the creeping crabs (_cirripedia_),
which have adopted sedentary (and to an extent parasitic) habits, have
become hermaphrodites in consequence. Many intestinal parasites among
the lower animals (such as tape-worms, suctorial worms, wonder-snails),
which live isolated lives inside other animals, have to be
hermaphroditic and able to fertilise themselves if the species is to be
maintained. On the other hand, many hermaphroditic flowers, although
they have both sorts of sex-organs, are incapable of fertilizing
themselves and have to receive this from insect visitors which carry
the pollen from one flower to another.

Individuals of the third order, which we call stocks (_cormi_) in both
the plant and animal worlds, also exhibit varying features in the
sex-persons which compose them. When male and female diclinic sprouts
or persons are found side by side on the same stock, we call this
hermaphrodism of the cormi _monœcia_ ("one-housedness"); this is the
case with most of the siphonophora and some of the corals. _Diœcia_
("two-housedness") is less common: in this one stock has only male and
the other only female sprouts or persons, as in poplars and osiers,
most of the corals, and some of the siphonophora. The physiological
advantages of crossing--the union of sex-cells of different
individuals--favor progressive sex-division in the higher organisms.

A comparative study of the features of hermaphrodism and sex-division
in the plant and animal worlds teaches us that both forms of
sex-activity are often found in closely related organisms of one and
the same group, sometimes even in different individuals of the same
species. Thus, for instance, the oyster is usually gonochoristic, but
sometimes hermaphroditic; and so with many other mollusks, vermalia,
and articulata. Hence, the question often raised, which of the two
forms of sex-division is original, is hardly susceptible of a general
answer, or without relation to the stage of individuality and the place
in classification of the group under discussion. It is certain that in
many cases hermaphrodism represents the original feature; for instance,
in most of the lower plants and many of the stationary animals
(sponges, polyps, platodes, tunicates, etc.). Where we find exceptions
in these groups, they are of secondary origin. It is equally certain,
on the other hand, that in other cases the separation of the sexes is
the primitive arrangement; as in siphonophoræ, ctenophoræ, bryozoa,
cirripedia, and mollusks. In these cases the hermaphrodism is clearly
secondary in the sense that the hermaphrodites descend originally from
gonochorists.

It is only in a few sections of the lowest histona that the two kinds
of sex-cells arise without a definite location in different parts of
the simple tissue, as in a few groups of the lower algæ and in the
sponges. As a rule they are formed only at definite positions and in a
special layer of the tissue-body, and mostly in groups, in the shape
of sexual glands (_gonades_). These bear special names in different
groups of the histona. The female glands are called archegonia in
the cryptogams, _nucellus_ (formed from the macrosporangia of the
pteridophyta) in the phanerogams, and ovaries in the metazoa. The male
glands are called antheridia in the cryptogams, pollen-sacs (formed
from the microsporangia of the ferns) in the phanerogams, and testicles
(_as spermaria_) in the metazoa. In many cases, especially in aquatic
lower animals, the ovula (as products of the ovaries) are discharged
directly outward. But, in most of the higher organisms, special sexual
ducts (_gonoductus_) have been formed to conduct both kinds of the
gonocyta out of the organism.

While the two kinds of sexual glands are usually located in different
parts of the generating organism, there are, nevertheless, a few cases
in which the sex-cells are formed directly and together from one and
the same gland. These glands are called hermaphroditic glands. Such
structures are very notable in several highly differentiated groups
of the metazoa, and have clearly been developed from gonochoristic
structures in lower forms. The class of crested medusæ, or ribbed
medusæ (ctenophoræ), contains glasslike, sea-dwelling cnidaria of a
peculiar and complicated build, which probably descend from hydromedusæ
(or craspedota). But whereas the latter have very simple gonochoristic
structures (four or eight monosexual glands in the course of the
radial canals or in the gastric wall), in the ctenophoræ the eight
hermaphroditic canals run in a meridian arch from one pole of the
cucumber-shaped body to the other. Each canal corresponds to a ciliary
streamer, and forms ovaries at one border and testicles at the other;
and these are so arranged that the eight intercostal fields (the spaces
between the eight streamers) are alternately male and female. Still
more curious are the hermaphroditic glands of the highly organized,
land-dwelling, and air-breathing lung-snails (_pulmonata_), to which
our common garden snail (_arion_) and vineyard snail (_helix_) belong.
Here we have a hermaphroditic gland with a number of tubes, each of
which forms ovaries in its outer part and sperma in the inner. Still
the two kinds of sex-cells lead separately outward.

In most of the lower and aquatic histona both kinds of sex-cells,
when they are ripe, fall directly into the water, and come together
there. But in most of the higher, and especially the terrestrial,
organisms special exits or conducting canals have been formed for the
sex-products, the sexual ducts (_gonoductus_); in the metazoa the
female have the general name of oviducts and the male spermaducts (or
_vasa deferentia_). In the viviparous histona special canals serve
for the conveyance of the sperm to the ovum, which remains inside the
mother's body; such are the neck of the archegonium in the cryptogams,
the pistil in the phanerogams, and the vagina in the metazoa. At the
outer opening of these conducting canals special copulative organs are
developed, as a rule.

When the ejected sex-cells do not directly encounter each other (as in
many aquatic organisms), special structures have to be formed to convey
the fertilizing sperm from the male to the female body. This process of
copulation becomes important, as it is associated with characteristic
feelings of pleasure, which may cause extreme psychic excitement; as
sexual love it becomes, in man and the higher animals, one of the most
powerful springs of vital activity. In many of the higher animals
(namely, vertebrates, articulates, and mollusks) there are also formed
a number of glands and other auxiliary organs which co-operate in the
copulation.

The manifold and intimate relations which exist, in man and the higher
animals (especially vertebrates and articulates), between their sexual
life and their higher psychic activity, have given rise to plenty of
"wonders of life." Wilhelm Bölsche has so ably described them in his
famous and popular work, _The Life of Love in Nature_, that I need only
refer the reader to it. I will only mention the great significance of
what are called "secondary sexual characters." These characteristics
of one sex that are wanting in the other, and that are not directly
connected with the sexual organs--such as the man's beard, the woman's
breasts, the lion's mane, or the goat's horns--have also an æsthetic
interest; they have, as Darwin showed, been acquired by sexual
selection, as weapons of the male in the struggle for the female,
and vice versa. The feeling of beauty plays a great part in this,
especially in birds and insects; the beautiful colors and forms which
we admire in the male bird of paradise, the humming-bird, the pheasant,
the butterfly, etc., have been formed by sexual selection (_cf._ the
_History of Creation_).

In various groups of the histona the male sex has become superfluous
in the course of time; the ovula develop without the need of
fertilization. That is particularly the case in many of the platodes
(trematodes) and articulates (crustacea and insects). In the bees we
have the remarkable feature that it is only decided at the moment
of laying the egg whether it is to be fertilized or not; in the one
event a female and in the other a male bee is formed from it. When
Siebold proved at Munich these facts of miraculous conception in
various insects, he was visited by the Catholic archbishop of the
city, who expressed his gratification that there was now a scientific
explanation possible of the conception of the Virgin Mary. Siebold
had, unfortunately, to point out to him that the inference from the
parthenogenesis of the articulate to that of the vertebrate was not
valid, and that all mammals, like all other vertebrates, reproduce
exclusively from impregnated ova. We also find parthenogenesis
among the metaphyta, as in the _chara crinita_ among the algæ, the
_antennaria alpina_ and the _alchemilla vulgaris_ among the flowering
plants. We are, as yet, ignorant for the most part of the causes
of this lapse of fertilization. Some light has been thrown on it,
however, by recent chemical experiments (the effect of sugar and
other water-absorbing solutions), in which we have succeeded in
parthenogenetically developing unfertilized ova.

In the higher animals the complete maturity and development of
the specific form are requisite for reproduction, but in many of
the lower animals it has been observed recently that ovula and
sperm-cells are even formed by the younger specimens in the larva
stage. If impregnation takes place under these conditions, larvæ of
the same form are born. And when these larvæ have afterwards reached
maturity and reproduced in this form, we call the process _dissogony_
("double-generation"). It is found in many of the cnidaria, especially
the medusæ. But if larvæ propagate by unfertilized ova, and so
reproduce their kind parthenogenetically, the process is known as
_pædogenesis_ ("young-generation"). It is found particularly in the
platodes (trematodes) and some of the insects (larvæ of _cecidomyca_
and other flies).

In a large number of lower animals and plants sexual and asexual
generation regularly alternate. Among the protists we find this
alternation of generation in the sporozoa; among the metaphyta in the
mosses and ferns; and among the metazoa in the cnidaria, platodes,
tunicates, etc. Often the two generations differ considerably in shape
and degree of organization. Thus, in the mosses the asexual generation
is the spore-forming moss capsule (_sporogonium_), while the sexual is
the moss plant with stalk and leaves (_culmus_). In the case of the
ferns, on the other hand, the latter is spore-forming and monogenetic,
while the thallus-formed, simple, and small fore-germ (_prothallium_)
is sexually differentiated. In most of the cnidaria a small stationary
polyp is developed out of the ovum of the free-swimming medusa, and
this polyp, in turn, generates by budding medusæ, which reach sexual
maturity. In the tunicates (salpa) a sexual social form alternates with
an asexual solitary form; the chain-salpa of the former are smaller and
differently shaped than the large individual salpa of the latter, which
again generate chains by budding. This special form of metagenesis was
the first to be observed, as it was in 1819 by the poet Chamisso, when
he sailed round the world. In other cases (for instance, in the closely
related _doliolum_) a sexual generation alternates with two (or more)
neutral ones. The explanation of these various forms of alternating
generations is given in the laws of latent heredity (atavism), division
of labor, and metamorphosis, and especially by the biogenetic law.

While in real metagenesis (alternation of generations in the strict
sense) the asexual generation propagates by budding or spore-formation,
this is done parthenogenetically in the cognate process of
heterogenesis. This it is which, especially in many of the articulates,
causes an immense increase of the species in a short time. Among the
insects we have the leaf-lice (aphides), and among the crustacea the
water-fleas (daphnides), that propagate in great numbers during warm
weather by unfertilized "summer-ova." It is not until the autumn that
males appear and fertilize the large "winter-ova"; in the following
spring the first parthenogenetic generation issues from the winter
eggs. The two heterogenetic generations are very different in the
parasitic suctorial worms (trematodes). From the fertilized ovum of the
hermaphrodite distoma we get simply constructed nurses (pædogenetic
larvæ), inside which cercaria are generated from unfertilized ova;
these travel, and are afterwards converted (inside another animal) into
distoma once more.

I have given (_General Morphology_, chap, ii., p. 104) the name of
strophogenesis to the complicated process of cell-reproduction,
which we find in the ontogeny of most of the higher histona, both
phanerogams and cœlomaria. In these there is not a real alternation
of generations, as the multicellular tissue-forming organism develops
directly from the impregnated ovum. But the process resembles
metagenesis in so far as the ontogenetic construction consists itself
in a repeated division of the cells. Many generations of cells proceed
by cleavage from the one stem-cell (the impregnated ovum) before two
of these cells become sexually differentiated, and form a generation
of sexual cells. However, the essential difference consists in the
fact that all these generations of cells--in the body of both the
higher animals and the flowering plants--remain joined together as
parts of a single bion (a unified physiological individual); but in
the alternation of generations each group produced is made up of a
number of bionta, which live as independent forms--often so different
from each other that they were formerly thought to be animals of
separate classes, such as the polyps and medusæ. Hence we must not
describe the reproductive circle of the phanerogams as an alternation
of generations, although it has started from the fern (by abbreviated
heredity).

All simple forms of sexual reproduction without alternation of
generations are comprised under the title of _hypogenesis_. The
generative cycle proceeds from ovum to ovum in one and the same
bion or physiological individual. This form of development is usual
with most of the higher animals and plants; it may proceed with or
without metamorphosis. The younger forms which arise temporarily in
the latter case, and are distinguished from the sexually ripe form
by the possession of the provisional (and subsequently disappearing)
organs--larva organs (for instance, the tadpole or the pupa), are
comprised under the general head of larvæ.

As a rule, only organisms of the same species seem to have sexual
union and generate fertile progeny. This was formerly a rigid dogma,
and served the purpose of defining the loose idea of the species.
It was said: "When two animals or plants can have fertile offspring
they belong to the same real species." This principle, which once
afforded support to the dogma of the constancy of species, has long
been discarded. We now know by numbers of sound experiments that not
only two closely related species, but even two species of different
genera, may have sexual intercourse in certain circumstances, and that
the hybrids thus generated can have fertile offspring, either by union
among themselves or with one of the parents. However, the disposition
to hybridism varies considerably, and depends on the unknown laws of
sexual affinity. This sexual affinity must be based on the chemical
properties of the plasm of the copulating cells, but it seems to show
a good deal of vagueness in its effect. As a rule, hybrids exhibit a
combination of the features of both parents.

It has been proved by many recent experiments that hybrids have a more
powerful build and can reproduce more strongly than pure offspring,
whereas pure selection has generally in time an injurious effect. A
freshening by the introduction of new blood seems to be good from time
to time. Hence, it is just the reverse of what the former dogma of the
constancy of species affirmed. The question of hybridism has, generally
speaking, no value in defining the species. Probably many so-called
"true species," which have relatively constant features, are really
only permanent hybrids. This applies especially to lower sea-dwelling
animals, the sexual products of which are poured into the water and
swarm together in millions. As we know of various species of fishes,
crabs, sea-urchins, and vermalia, that their hybrids are very easily
produced and maintained by artificial impregnation, there is nothing to
prevent us from believing that such hybrids are also maintained in the
natural state.

The short survey we have made of the manifold varieties of reproduction
is sufficient to give an idea of the extraordinary wealth of this world
of wonders. When we go more closely into details we find hundreds of
other remarkable variations of the process on which the maintenance
of the species depends. But the most important point of all is the
fact that all the different forms of tocogony may be regarded as
connected links of a chain. The steps of this long ladder extend
uninterruptedly from the simple cell-division of the protists to the
monogony of the histona, and from this to the complicated amphigony
of the higher organisms. In the simplest case, the cell-cleavage of
the monera, propagation (by simple transverse division) is clearly
nothing more than transgressive growth. But even the preliminary
stage of sexual differentiation, the copulation of two equal cells
(_gameta_), is really nothing but a special form of growth. Then, when
the two gameta become unequal in the division of labor, when the larger
inert macrogameton stores up food in itself, and the smaller, mobile
microgameton swims in search of it, we have already expressed the
difference between the female ovum and the male sperm-cell. And in this
we have the most essential feature of sexual reproduction.

The reproduction of the organism is often regarded as a perfect mystery
of life, and as the vital function which most strikingly separates
the living from the lifeless. The error of this dualistic notion is
clear the moment one impartially considers the whole gradation of
forms of reproduction, from the simplest cell-division to the most
elaborate form of sexual generation, in phylogenetic connection. It is
obvious all through that transgressive growth is the starting-point
in the formation of new individuals. But the same must be said of
the multiplication of inorganic bodies--the cosmic bodies on the
larger scale, crystals on the smaller scale. When a rotating sun
passes a certain limit of growth by the constant accession of falling
meteorites, nebulous rings are detached at its equator by centrifugal
force, and form into new planets. Every inorganic crystal, too, has
a certain limit of individual growth (determined by its chemical and
molecular constitution). However much mother-water you add, this
is never passed, but new crystals (daughter-crystals) form on the
mother-crystal. In other words, growing crystals propagate.




