CHAPTER XXXV


The Leave-taking--Spirit of the Hearth--What's o'Clock?

The next morning, having breakfasted with my old friend, I went into the
stable to make the necessary preparations for my departure; there, with
the assistance of a stable lad, I cleaned and caparisoned my horse, and
then, returning into the house, I made the old female attendant such a
present as I deemed would be some compensation for the trouble I had
caused.  Hearing that the old gentleman was in his study, I repaired to
him.  "I am come to take leave of you," said I, "and to thank you for all
the hospitality which I have received at your hands."  The eyes of the
old man were fixed steadfastly on the inscription which I had found him
studying on a former occasion.  "At length," he murmured to himself, "I
have it--I think I have it;" and then, looking at me, he said, "So you
are about to depart?"

"Yes," said I, "my horse will be at the front door in a few minutes; I am
glad, however, before I go, to find that you have mastered the
inscription."

"Yes," said the old man, "I believe I have mastered it; it seems to
consist of some verses relating to the worship of the Spirit of the
Hearth."

"What is the Spirit of the Hearth?" said I.

"One of the many demons which the Chinese worship," said the old man;
"they do not worship one God, but many."  And then the old man told me a
great many highly-interesting particulars respecting the demon worship of
the Chinese.

After the lapse of at least half an hour I said, "I must not linger here
any longer, however willing.  Horncastle is distant, and I wish to be
there to-night.  Pray can you inform me what's o'clock?"

The old man, rising, looked towards the clock which hung on the side of
the room at his left hand, on the farther side of the table at which he
was seated.

"I am rather short-sighted," said I, "and cannot distinguish the number,
at that distance."

"It is ten o'clock," said the old man; "I believe somewhat past."

"A quarter, perhaps?"

"Yes," said the old man "a quarter or--"

"Or?"

"Seven minutes, or ten minutes past ten."

"I do not understand you."

"Why, to tell you the truth," said the old man, with a smile, "there is
one thing to the knowledge of which I could never exactly attain."

"Do you mean to say," said I, "that you do not know what's o'clock?"

"I can give a guess," said the old man, "to within a few minutes."

"But you cannot tell the exact moment?"

"No," said the old man.

"In the name of wonder," said I, "with that thing there on the wall
continually ticking in your ear, how comes it that you do not know what's
o'clock?"

"Why," said the old man, "I have contented myself with giving a tolerably
good guess; to do more would have been too great trouble."

"But you have learnt Chinese," said I.

"Yes," said the old man, "I have learnt Chinese."

"Well," said I, "I really would counsel you to learn to know what's
o'clock as soon as possible.  Consider what a sad thing it would be to go
out of the world not knowing what's o'clock.  A millionth part of the
trouble required to learn Chinese would, if employed, infallibly teach
you to know what's o'clock."

"I had a motive for learning Chinese," said the old man, "the hope of
appeasing the misery in my head.  With respect to not knowing what's
o'clock, I cannot see anything particularly sad in the matter.  A man may
get through the world very creditably without knowing what's o'clock.
Yet, upon the whole, it is no bad thing to know what's o'clock--you, of
course, do?  It would be too good a joke if two people were to be
together, one knowing Armenian and the other Chinese, and neither knowing
what's o'clock.  I'll now see you off."




CHAPTER XXXVI


Arrival at Horncastle--The Inn and Ostlers--The Garret--Figure of a Man
with a Candle.

Leaving the house of the old man who knew Chinese, but could not tell
what was o'clock, I wended my way to Horncastle, which I reached in the
evening of the same day, without having met any adventure on the way
worthy of being marked down in this very remarkable history.

The town was a small one, seemingly ancient, and was crowded with people
and horses.  I proceeded, without delay, to the inn to which my friend
the surgeon had directed me.  "It is of no use coming here," said two or
three ostlers, as I entered the yard--"all full--no room whatever;"
whilst one added in an undertone, "That ere a'n't a bad-looking horse."
"I want to see the master of this inn," said I, as I dismounted from the
horse.  "See the master," said an ostler--the same who had paid the
negative kind of compliment to the horse--"a likely thing, truly; my
master is drinking wine with some of the grand gentry, and can't be
disturbed for the sake of the like of you."  "I bring a letter to him,"
said I, pulling out the surgeon's epistle.  "I wish you would deliver it
to him," I added, offering a half-crown.  "Oh, it's you, is it?" said the
ostler, taking the letter and the half-crown; "my master will be right
glad to see you; why, you ha'n't been here for many a year; I'll carry
the note to him at once."  And with these words he hurried into the
house.  "That's a nice horse, young man," said another ostler, "what will
you take for it?" to which interrogation I made no answer.  "If you wish
to sell him," said the ostler, coming up to me, and winking knowingly, "I
think I and my partners might offer you a summut under seventy pounds;"
to which kind and half-insinuated offer I made no reply, save by winking
in the same kind of knowing manner in which I observed him wink.  "Rather
leary!" said a third ostler.  "Well, young man, perhaps you will drink to-
night with me and my partners, when we can talk the matter over."  Before
I had time to answer, the landlord, a well-dressed, good-looking man,
made his appearance with the ostler; he bore the letter in his hand.
Without glancing at me, he betook himself at once to consider the horse,
going round him, and observing every point with the utmost minuteness.  At
last, having gone round the horse three times, he stopped beside me, and
keeping his eyes on the horse, bent his head towards his right shoulder.
"That horse is worth some money," said he, turning towards me suddenly,
and slightly touching me on the arm with the letter which he held in his
hand; to which observation I made no reply, save by bending my head
towards the right shoulder as I had seen him do.  "The young man is going
to talk to me and my partners about it to-night," said the ostler who had
expressed an opinion that he and his friends might offer me somewhat
under seventy pounds for the animal.  "Pooh!" said the landlord, "the
young man knows what he is about; in the meantime lead the horse to the
reserved stall, and see well after him.  My friend," said he, taking me
aside after the ostler had led the animal away, "recommends you to me in
the strongest manner, on which account alone I take you and your horse
in.  I need not advise you not to be taken in, as I should say, by your
look, that you are tolerably awake; but there are queer hands at
Horncastle at this time, and those fellows of mine, you understand me--;
but I have a great deal to do at present, so you must excuse me."  And
thereupon went into the house.

That same evening I was engaged at least two hours in the stable, in
rubbing the horse down, and preparing him for the exhibition which I
intended he should make in the fair on the following day.  The ostler, to
whom I had given the half-crown, occasionally assisted me, though he was
too much occupied by the horses of other guests to devote any length of
time to the service of mine; he more than once repeated to me his firm
conviction that himself and partners could afford to offer me summut for
the horse; and at a later hour when, in compliance with his invitation, I
took a glass of summut with himself and partners, in a little room
surrounded with corn-chests, on which we sat, both himself and partners
endeavoured to impress upon me, chiefly by means of nods and winks, their
conviction that they could afford to give me summut for the horse,
provided I were disposed to sell him; in return for which intimation,
with as many nods and winks as they had all collectively used, I
endeavoured to impress upon them my conviction that I could get summut
handsomer in the fair than they might be disposed to offer me, seeing as
how--which how I followed by a wink and a nod, which they seemed
perfectly to understand, one or two of them declaring that if the case
was so, it made a great deal of difference, and that they did not wish to
be any hindrance to me, more particularly as it was quite clear I had
been an ostler like themselves.

It was late at night when I began to think of retiring to rest.  On
inquiring if there was any place in which I could sleep, I was informed
that there was a bed at my service, provided I chose to sleep in a two-
bedded room, one of the beds of which was engaged by another gentleman.  I
expressed my satisfaction at this arrangement, and was conducted by a
maid-servant up many pairs of stairs to a garret, in which were two small
beds, in one of which she gave me to understand another gentleman slept;
he had, however, not yet retired to rest; I asked who he was, but the
maid-servant could give me no information about him, save that he was a
highly respectable gentleman, and a friend of her master's.  Presently,
bidding me good night, she left me with a candle; and I, having undressed
myself and extinguished the light, went to bed.  Notwithstanding the
noises which sounded from every part of the house, I was not slow in
falling asleep, being thoroughly tired.  I know not how long I might have
been in bed, perhaps two hours, when I was partially awakened by a light
shining upon my face, whereupon, unclosing my eyes, I perceived the
figure of a man, with a candle in one hand, staring at my face, whilst
with the other hand, he held back the curtain of the bed.  As I have said
before, I was only partially awakened, my power of conception was
consequently very confused; it appeared to me, however, that the man was
dressed in a green coat; that he had curly brown or black hair, and that
there was something peculiar in his look.  Just as I was beginning to
recollect myself, the curtain dropped, and I heard, or thought I heard, a
voice say, "Don't know the cove."  Then there was a rustling like a
person undressing, whereupon being satisfied that it was my
fellow-lodger, I dropped asleep, but was awakened again by a kind of
heavy plunge upon the other bed, which caused it to rock and creak, when
I observed that the light had been extinguished, probably blown out, if I
might judge from a rather disagreeable smell of burnt wick which remained
in the room, and which kept me awake till I heard my companion breathing
hard, when, turning on the other side, I was again once more speedily in
the arms of slumber.




