CHAPTER XIII


Visit to the Landlord--His Mortifications--Hunter and his
Clan--Resolution.

On the following morning, after breakfasting with Belle, who was silent
and melancholy, I left her in the dingle, and took a stroll amongst the
neighbouring lanes.  After some time I thought I would pay a visit to the
landlord of the public-house, whom I had not seen since the day when he
communicated to me his intention of changing his religion.  I therefore
directed my steps to the house, and on entering it found the landlord
standing in the kitchen.  Just then two mean-looking fellows, who had
been drinking at one of the tables, and who appeared to be the only
customers in the house, got up, brushed past the landlord, and saying in
a surly tone, we shall pay you some time or other, took their departure.
"That's the way they serve me now," said the landlord, with a sigh.  "Do
you know those fellows," I demanded, "since you let them go away in your
debt?"   "I know nothing about them," said the landlord, "save that they
are a couple of scamps."  "Then why did you let them go away without
paying you?" said I.  "I had not the heart to stop them," said the
landlord; "and, to tell you the truth, everybody serves me so now, and I
suppose they are right, for a child could flog me."  "Nonsense," said I,
"behave more like a man, and with respect to those two fellows run after
them, I will go with you, and if they refuse to pay the reckoning I will
help you to shake some money out of their clothes."  "Thank you," said
the landlord; "but as they are gone, let them go on.  What they have
drank is not of much consequence."  "What is the matter with you?" said
I, staring at the landlord, who appeared strangely altered; his features
were wild and haggard, his formerly bluff cheeks were considerably sunken
in, and his figure had lost much of its plumpness.  "Have you changed
your religion already, and has the fellow in black commanded you to
fast?"  "I have not changed my religion yet," said the landlord, with a
kind of shudder; "I am to change it publicly this day fortnight, and the
idea of doing so--I do not mind telling you--preys much upon my mind;
moreover, the noise of the thing has got abroad, and everybody is
laughing at me, and what's more, coming and drinking my beer, and going
away without paying for it, whilst I feel myself like one bewitched,
wishing but not daring to take my own part.  Confound the fellow in
black, I wish I had never seen him! yet what can I do without him?  The
brewer swears that unless I pay him fifty pounds within a fortnight he'll
send a distress warrant into the house, and take all I have.  My poor
niece is crying in the room above; and I am thinking of going into the
stable and hanging myself; and perhaps it's the best thing I can do, for
it's better to hang myself before selling my soul than afterwards, as I'm
sure I should, like Judas Iscariot, whom my poor niece, who is somewhat
religiously inclined, has been talking to me about."  "I wish I could
assist you," said I, "with money, but that is quite out of my power.
However, I can give you a piece of advice.  Don't change your religion by
any means; you can't hope to prosper if you do; and if the brewer chooses
to deal hardly with you, let him.  Everybody would respect you ten times
more provided you allowed yourself to be turned into the roads rather
than change your religion, than if you got fifty pounds for renouncing
it."  "I am half inclined to take your advice," said the landlord, "only,
to tell you the truth, I feel quite low, without any heart in me."  "Come
into the bar," said I, "and let us have something together--you need not
be afraid of my not paying for what I order."

We went into the bar-room, where the landlord and I discussed between us
two bottles of strong ale, which he said were part of the last six which
he had in his possession.  At first he wished to drink sherry, but I
begged him to do no such thing, telling him that sherry would do him no
good under the present circumstances; nor, indeed, to the best of my
belief, under any, it being of all wines the one for which I entertained
the most contempt.  The landlord allowed himself to be dissuaded, and,
after a glass or two of ale, confessed that sherry was a sickly,
disagreeable drink, and that he had merely been in the habit of taking it
from an idea he had that it was genteel.  Whilst quaffing our beverage,
he gave me an account of the various mortifications to which he had of
late been subject, dwelling with particular bitterness on the conduct of
Hunter, who he said came every night and mouthed him, and afterwards went
away without paying for what he had drank or smoked, in which conduct he
was closely imitated by a clan of fellows who constantly attended him.
After spending several hours at the public-house I departed, not
forgetting to pay for the two bottles of ale.  The landlord, before I
went, shaking me by the hand, declared that he had now made up his mind
to stick to his religion at all hazards, the more especially as he was
convinced he should derive no good by giving it up.




CHAPTER XIV


Preparations for the Fair--The Last Lesson--The Verb Siriel.

It might be about five in the evening, when I reached the gypsy
encampment.  Here I found Mr. Petulengro, Tawno Chikno, Sylvester, and
others in a great bustle, clipping and trimming certain ponies and old
horses which they had brought with them.  On inquiring of Jasper the
reason of their being so engaged, he informed me that they were getting
the horses ready for a fair, which was to be held on the morrow, at a
place some miles distant, at which they should endeavour to dispose of
them, adding--"Perhaps, brother, you will go with us, provided you have
nothing better to do?"  Not having any particular engagement, I assured
him that I should have great pleasure in being of the party.  It was
agreed that we should start early on the following morning.  Thereupon I
descended into the dingle.  Belle was sitting before the fire, at which
the kettle was boiling.  "Were you waiting for me?" I inquired.  "Yes,"
said Belle, "I thought that you would come, and I waited for you."  "That
was very kind," said I.  "Not half so kind," said she, "as it was of you
to get everything ready for me in the dead of last night, when there was
scarcely a chance of my coming."  The tea-things were brought forward,
and we sat down.  "Have you been far?" said Belle.  "Merely to that
public-house," said I, "to which you directed me on the second day of our
acquaintance."  "Young men should not make a habit of visiting public-
houses," said Belle, "they are bad places."  "They may be so to some
people," said I, "but I do not think the worst public-house in England
could do me any harm."  "Perhaps you are so bad already," said Belle,
with a smile, "that it would be impossible to spoil you."  "How dare you
catch at my words?" said I; "come, I will make you pay for doing so--you
shall have this evening the longest lesson in Armenian which I have yet
inflicted upon you."  "You may well say inflicted," said Belle, "but pray
spare me.  I do not wish to hear anything about Armenian, especially this
evening."  "Why this evening?" said I.  Belle made no answer.  "I will
not spare you," said I; "this evening I intend to make you conjugate an
Armenian verb."  "Well, be it so," said Belle; "for this evening you
shall command."  "To command is hramahyel," said I.  "Ram her ill,
indeed," said Belle; "I do not wish to begin with that."  "No," said I,
"as we have come to the verbs, we will begin regularly; hramahyel is a
verb of the second conjugation.  We will begin with the first."  "First
of all tell me," said Belle, "what a verb is?"  "A part of speech," said
I, "which, according to the dictionary, signifies some action or passion;
for example, I command you, or I hate you."  "I have given you no cause
to hate me," said Belle, looking me sorrowfully in the face.

"I was merely giving two examples," said I, "and neither was directed at
you.  In those examples, to command and hate are verbs.  Belle, in
Armenian there are four conjugations of verbs; the first ends in al, the
second in yel, the third in oul, and the fourth in il.  Now, have you
understood me?"

"I am afraid, indeed, it will all end ill," said Belle.

"Hold your tongue," said I, "or you will make me lose my patience."  "You
have already made me nearly lose mine," said Belle.  "Let us have no
unprofitable interruptions," said I; "the conjugations of the Armenian
verbs are neither so numerous nor so difficult as the declensions of the
nouns; hear that, and rejoice.  Come, we will begin with the verb hntal,
a verb of the first conjugation, which signifies to rejoice.  Come along;
hntam, I rejoice; hntas, thou rejoicest; why don't you follow, Belle?"

"I am sure I don't rejoice, whatever you may do," said Belle.  "The chief
difficulty, Belle," said I, "that I find in teaching you the Armenian
grammar, proceeds from your applying to yourself and me every example I
give.  Rejoice, in this instance, is merely an example of an Armenian
verb of the first conjugation, and has no more to do with your rejoicing
than lal, which is, also a verb of the first conjugation, and which
signifies to weep, would have to do with your weeping, provided I made
you conjugate it.  Come along; hntam, I rejoice; hntas, thou rejoicest;
hnta, he rejoices; hntamk we rejoice: now, repeat those words."

"I can't," said Belle, "they sound more like the language of horses than
human beings.  Do you take me for--?"  "For what?" said I.  Belle was
silent.  "Were you going to say mare?" said I.  "Mare! mare! by the bye,
do you know, Belle, that mare in old English stands for woman; and that
when we call a female an evil mare, the strict meaning of the term is
merely a bad woman.  So if I were to call you a mare without prefixing
bad, you must not be offended."  "But I should though," said Belle.  "I
was merely attempting to make you acquainted with a philological fact,"
said I.  "If mare, which in old English, and likewise in vulgar English,
signifies a woman, sounds the same as mare, which in modern and polite
English signifies a female horse, I can't help it.  There is no such
confusion of sounds in Armenian, not, at least, in the same instance.
Belle, in Armenian, woman is ghin, the same word, by the by, as our
queen, whereas mare is madagh tzi, which signifies a female horse; and
perhaps you will permit me to add, that a hard-mouthed jade is, in
Armenian, madagh tzi hsdierah."

"I can't bear this much longer," said Belle.  "Keep yourself quiet," said
I; "I wish to be gentle with you; and to convince you, we will skip
hntal, and also for the present verbs of the first conjugation and
proceed to the second.  Belle, I will now select for you to conjugate the
prettiest verb in Armenian; not only of the second, but also of all the
four conjugations; that verb is siriel.  Here is the present
tense:--siriem, siries, sire, siriemk, sirek, sirien.  You observe that
it runs on just in the same manner as hntal, save and except that the e
is substituted for a; and it will be as well to tell you that almost the
only difference between the second, third, and fourth conjugation, and
the first, is the substituting in the present, preterite and other tenses
e or ou, or i for a; so you see that the Armenian verbs are by no means
difficult.  Come on, Belle, and say siriem."  Belle hesitated.  "Pray
oblige me, Belle, by saying siriem!"  Belle still appeared to hesitate.
"You must admit, Belle, that it is much softer than hntam."  "It is so,"
said Belle; "and to oblige you I will say siriem."  "Very well indeed,
Belle," said I. "No vartabied, or doctor, could have pronounced it
better; and now, to show you how verbs act upon pronouns in Armenian, I
will say siriem zkiez.  Please to repeat siriem zkiez!"  "Siriem zkiez!"
said Belle; "that last word is very hard to say."  "Sorry that you think
so, Belle," said I.  "Now please to say siria zis."  Belle did so.
"Exceedingly well," said I.  "Now say, yerani the sireir zis."  "Yerani
the sireir zis," said Belle.  "Capital!" said I; "you have now said, I
love you--love me--ah! would that you would love me!"

"And I have said all these things?" said Belle.  "Yes," said I; "you have
said them in Armenian."  "I would have said them in no language that I
understood," said Belle; "and it was very wrong of you to take advantage
of my ignorance, and make me say such things."  "Why so?" said I; "if you
said them, I said them too."  "You did so," said Belle; "but I believe
you were merely bantering and jeering."  "As I told you before, Belle,"
said I, "the chief difficulty which I find in teaching you Armenian
proceeds from your persisting in applying to yourself and me every
example I give."  "Then you meant nothing after all," said Belle, raising
her voice.  "Let us proceed," said I; "sirietsi, I loved."  "You never
loved any one but yourself," said Belle; "and what's more--"  "Sirietsits,
I will love," said I; "sirietsies, thou wilt love."  "Never one so
thoroughly heartless," said Belle.  "I tell you what, Belle, you are
becoming intolerable, but we will change the verb; or rather I will now
proceed to tell you here, that some of the Armenian conjugations have
their anomalies; one species of these I wish to bring before your notice.
As old Villotte says--from whose work I first contrived to pick up the
rudiments of Armenian--'Est verborum transitivorum, quorum infinitivus--'
but I forgot, you don't understand Latin.  He says there are certain
transitive verbs, whose infinitive is in outsaniel; the preterite in
outsi; the imperative in one; for example--parghatsout-saniem, I
irritate--"

"You do, you do," said Belle; "and it will be better for both of us, if
you leave off doing so."

"You would hardly believe, Belle," said I, "that the Armenian is in some
respects closely connected with the Irish, but so it is; for example,
that word parghatsout-saniem is evidently derived from the same root as
feargaim, which, in Irish, is as much as to say I vex."

"You do, indeed," said Belle, sobbing.

"But how do you account for it?"

"O man, man!" said Belle, bursting into tears, "for what purpose do you
ask a poor ignorant girl such a question, unless it be to vex and
irritate her?  If you wish to display your learning, do so to the wise
and instructed, and not to me, who can scarcely read or write.  Oh, leave
off your nonsense; yet I know you will not do so, for it is the breath of
your nostrils!  I could have wished we should have parted in kindness,
but you will not permit it.  I have deserved better at your hands than
such treatment.  The whole time we have kept company together in this
place, I have scarcely had one kind word from you, but the strangest--"
and here the voice of Belle was drowned in her sobs.

"I am sorry to see you take on so, dear Belle," said I.  "I really have
given you no cause to be so unhappy; surely teaching you a little
Armenian was a very innocent kind of diversion."

"Yes, but you went on so long, and in such a strange way, and made me
repeat such strange examples, as you call them, that I could not bear
it."

"Why, to tell you the truth, Belle, it's just my way; and I have dealt
with you just as I would with--"

"A hard-mouthed jade," said Belle, "and you practising your
horse-witchery upon her.  I have been of an unsubdued spirit, I
acknowledge, but I was always kind to you; and if you have made me cry,
it's a poor thing to boast of."

"Boast of!" said I; "a pretty thing indeed to boast of; I had no idea of
making you cry.  Come, I beg your pardon; what more can I do?  Come,
cheer up, Belle.  You were talking of parting; don't let us part, but
depart, and that together."

"Our ways lie different," said Belle.

"I don't see why they should," said I.  "Come, let us be off to America
together."

"To America together?" said Belle, looking full at me.

"Yes," said I; "where we will settle down in some forest, and conjugate
the verb siriel conjugally."

"Conjugally?" said Belle.

"Yes," said I; "as man and wife in America, air yew ghin."

"You are jesting, as usual," said Belle.

"Not I, indeed.  Come, Belle, make up your mind, and let us be off to
America; and leave priests, humbug, learning, and languages behind us."

"I don't think you are jesting," said Belle; "but I can hardly entertain
your offers; however, young man, I thank you."

"You had better make up your mind at once," said I, "and let us be off.  I
shan't make a bad husband, I assure you.  Perhaps you think I am not
worthy of you?  To convince you, Belle, that I am, I am ready to try a
fall with you this moment upon the grass.  Brynhilda, the valkyrie, swore
that no one should ever marry her who could not fling her down.  Perhaps
you have done the same.  The man who eventually married her, got a friend
of his, who was called Sygurd, the serpent-killer, to wrestle with her,
disguising him in his own armour.  Sygurd flung her down, and won her for
his friend, though he loved her himself.  I shall not use a similar
deceit, nor employ Jasper Petulengro to personate me--so get up, Belle,
and I will do my best to fling you down."

"I require no such thing of you, or anybody," said Belle; "you are
beginning to look rather wild."

"I every now and then do," said I; "come, Belle, what do you say?"

"I will say nothing at present on the subject," said Belle, "I must have
time to consider."

"Just as you please," said I, "to-morrow I go to a fair with Mr.
Petulengro, perhaps you will consider whilst I am away.  Come, Belle, let
us have some more tea.  I wonder whether we shall be able to procure tea
as good as this in the American forest."




