CHAPTER XLIII


The Church.

The next morning I began to think of departing; I had sewed up the money
which I had received for the horse in a portion of my clothing, where I
entertained no fears for its safety, with the exception of a small sum in
notes, gold, and silver, which I carried in my pocket.  Ere departing,
however, I determined to stroll about and examine the town, and observe
more particularly the humours of the fair than I had hitherto an
opportunity of doing.  The town, when I examined it, offered no object
worthy of attention but its church--an edifice of some antiquity; under
the guidance of an old man, who officiated as sexton, I inspected its
interior attentively, occasionally conversing with my guide, who,
however, seemed much more disposed to talk about horses than the church.
"No good horses in the fair this time, measter," said he; "none but one
brought hither by a chap whom nobody knows, and bought by a foreigneering
man, who came here with Jack Dale.  The horse fetched a good swinging
price, which is said, however, to be much less than its worth; for the
horse is a regular clipper; not such a one, 'tis said, has been seen in
the fair for several summers.  Lord Whitefeather says that he believes
the fellow who brought him to be a highwayman, and talks of having him
taken up, but Lord Whitefeather is only in a rage because he could not
get him for himself.  The chap would not sell it to un; Lord Screw wanted
to beat him down, and the chap took huff, said he wouldn't sell it to him
at no price, and accepted the offer of the foreigneering man, or of Jack,
who was his 'terpreter, and who scorned to higgle about such a hanimal,
because Jack is a gentleman, though bred a dickey-boy, whilst t'other,
though bred a lord, is a screw and a whitefeather.  Every one says the
cove was right, and I says so too; I likes spirit, and if the cove were
here, and in your place, measter, I would invite him to drink a pint of
beer.  Good horses are scarce now, measter, ay, and so are good men,
quite a different set from what there were when I was young; that was the
time for men and horses.  Lord bless you, I know all the breeders about
here; they are not a bad set, and they breed a very fairish set of
horses, but they are not like what their fathers were, nor are their
horses like their fathers' horses.  Now there is Mr. --- the great
breeder, a very fairish man, with very fairish horses; but, Lord bless
you, he's nothing to what his father was, nor his steeds to his father's;
I ought to know, for I was at the school here with his father, and
afterwards for many a year helped him to get up his horses; that was when
I was young, measter--those were the days.  You look at that monument,
measter," said he, as I stopped and looked attentively at a monument on
the southern side of the church near the altar; "that was put up for a
rector of this church, who lived a long time ago, in Oliver's time, and
was ill-treated and imprisoned by Oliver and his men; you will see all
about it on the monument.  There was a grand battle fought nigh this
place, between Oliver's men and the Royal party, and the Royal party had
the worst of it, as I'm told they generally had; and Oliver's men came
into the town, and did a great deal of damage, and ill-treated the
people.  I can't remember anything about the matter myself, for it
happened just one hundred years before I was born, but my father was
acquainted with an old countryman, who lived not many miles from here,
who said he remembered perfectly well the day of the battle; that he was
a boy at the time, and was working in a field near the place where the
battle was fought; and heard shouting, and noise of firearms, and also
the sound of several balls, which fell in the field near him.  Come this
way, measter, and I will show you some remains of that day's field."
Leaving the monument, on which was inscribed an account of the life and
sufferings of the Royalist Rector of Horncastle, I followed the sexton to
the western end of the church, where, hanging against the wall, were a
number of scythes stuck in the ends of poles.  "Those are the weapons,
measter," said the sexton, "which the great people put into the hands of
the country folks, in order that they might use them against Oliver's
men; ugly weapons enough; however, Oliver's men won, and Sir Jacob Ashley
and his party were beat.  And a rare time Oliver and his men had of it,
till Oliver died, when the other party got the better, not by fighting,
'tis said, but through a General Monk, who turned sides.  Ah, the old
fellow that my father knew, said he well remembered the time when General
Monk went over and proclaimed Charles the Second.  Bonfires were lighted
everywhere, oxen roasted, and beer drunk by pailfuls; the country folks
were drunk with joy, and something else; sung scurvy songs about Oliver
to the tune of Barney Banks, and pelted his men, wherever they found
them, with stones and dirt."  "The more ungrateful scoundrels they," said
I.  "Oliver and his men fought the battle of English independence against
a wretched king and corrupt lords.  Had I been living at the time, I
should have been proud to be a trooper of Oliver."  "You would, measter,
would you?  Well, I never quarrels with the opinions of people who come
to look at the church, and certainly independence is a fine thing.  I
like to see a chap of an independent spirit, and if I were now to see the
cove that refused to sell his horse to my Lord Screw and Whitefeather,
and let Jack Dale have him, I would offer to treat him to a pint of
beer--e'es, I would, verily.  Well, measter, you have now seen the
church, and all there's in it worth seeing--so I'll just lock up, and go
and finish digging the grave I was about when you came, after which I
must go into the fair to see how matters are going on.  Thank ye,
measter," said he, as I put something into his hand; "thank ye kindly;
'tis not every one who gives me a shilling now-a-days who comes to see
the church, but times are very different from what they were when I was
young; I was not sexton then, but something better; helped Mr. --- with
his horses, and got many a broad crown.  Those were the days, measter,
both for men and horses--and I say, measter, if men and horses were so
much better when I was young than they are now, what, I wonder, must they
have been in the time of Oliver and his men?"




CHAPTER XLIV


An Old Acquaintance.

Leaving the church, I strolled through the fair, looking at the horses,
listening to the chaffering of the buyers and sellers, and occasionally
putting in a word of my own, which was not always received with much
deference; suddenly, however, on a whisper arising that I was the young
cove who had brought the wonderful horse to the fair which Jack Dale had
bought for the foreigneering man, I found myself an object of the
greatest attention; those who had before replied with stuff! and
nonsense! to what I said, now listened with the greatest eagerness to any
nonsense I wished to utter, and I did not fail to utter a great deal;
presently, however, becoming disgusted with the beings about me, I forced
my way, not very civilly, through my crowd of admirers; and passing
through an alley and a back street, at last reached an outskirt of the
fair, where no person appeared to know me.  Here I stood, looking
vacantly on what was going on, musing on the strange infatuation of my
species, who judge of a person's words, not from their intrinsic merit,
but from the opinion--generally an erroneous one--which they have formed
of the person.  From this reverie I was roused by certain words which
sounded near me, uttered in a strange tone, and in a strange cadence--the
words were, "them that finds, wins; and them that can't find, loses."
Turning my eyes in the direction from which the words proceeded, I saw
six or seven people, apparently all countrymen, gathered round a person
standing behind a tall white table of very small compass.  "What!" said
I, "the thimble-engro of --- Fair here at Horncastle."  Advancing nearer,
however, I perceived that though the present person was a thimble-engro,
he was a very different one from my old acquaintance of --- Fair.  The
present one was a fellow about half-a-foot taller than the other.  He had
a long, haggard, wild face, and was dressed in a kind of jacket,
something like that of a soldier, with dirty hempen trousers, and with a
foreign-looking peaked hat on his head.  He spoke with an accent
evidently Irish, and occasionally changed the usual thimble formule,
"them that finds wins, and them that can't--och, sure!--they loses;"
saying also frequently, "your honour," instead of "my lord."  I observed,
on drawing nearer, that he handled the pea and thimble with some
awkwardness, like that which might be expected from a novice in the
trade.  He contrived, however, to win several shillings, for he did not
seem to play for gold, from "their honours."  Awkward, as he was, he
evidently did his best, and never flung a chance away by permitting any
one to win.  He had just won three shillings from a farmer, who, incensed
at his loss, was calling him a confounded cheat, and saying that he would
play no more, when up came my friend of the preceding day, Jack, the
jockey.  This worthy, after looking at the thimble-man a moment or two,
with a peculiarly crafty glance, cried out, as he clapped down a shilling
on the table, "I will stand you, old fellow!"  "Them that finds wins; and
them that can't--och, sure!--they loses," said the thimble-man.  The game
commenced, and Jack took up the thimble without finding the pea; another
shilling was produced, and lost in the same manner; "this is slow work,"
said Jack, banging down a guinea on the table; "can you cover that, old
fellow?"  The man of the thimble looked at the gold, and then at him who
produced it, and scratched his head.  "Come, cover that, or I shall be
off," said the jockey.  "Och, sure, my lord!--no, I mean your honour--no,
sure, your lordship," said the other, "if I covers it at all, it must be
with silver, for divil a bit of gold have I by me."  "Well, then, produce
the value in silver," said the jockey, "and do it quickly, for I can't be
staying here all day."  The thimble-man hesitated, looked at Jack with a
dubious look, then at the gold, and then scratched his head.  There was
now a laugh amongst the surrounders, which evidently nettled the fellow,
who forthwith thrust his hand into his pocket, and pulling out all his
silver treasure, just contrived to place the value of the guinea on the
table.  "Them that finds wins, and them that can't find--_loses_,"
interrupted Jack, lifting up a thimble, out of which rolled a pea.
"There, paddy, what do you think of that?" said he, seizing the heap of
silver with one hand, whilst he pocketed the guinea with the other.  The
thimble-engro stood, for some time, like one transfixed, his eyes glaring
wildly, now at the table, and now at his successful customers; at last he
said, "Arrah, sure, master!--no, I manes my lord--you are not going to
ruin a poor boy!"  "Ruin you!" said the other; "what! by winning a
guinea's change? a pretty small dodger you--if you have not sufficient
capital, why do you engage in so deep a trade as thimbling? come, will
you stand another game?"  "Och, sure, master, no! the twenty shillings
and one which you have cheated me of were all I had in the world."
"Cheated you," said Jack, "say that again, and I will knock you down."
"Arrah! sure, master, you knows that the pea under the thimble was not
mine; here is mine, master; now give me back my money."  "A likely
thing," said Jack; "no, no, I know a trick worth two or three of that;
whether the pea was yours or mine, you will never have your twenty
shillings and one again; and if I have ruined you, all the better; I'd
gladly ruin all such villains as you, who ruin poor men with your dirty
tricks, whom you would knock down and rob on the road, if you had but
courage; not that I mean to keep your shillings, with the exception of
the two you cheated from me, which I'll keep.  A scramble, boys! a
scramble!" said he, flinging up all the silver into the air, with the
exception of the two shillings; and a scramble there instantly was,
between the rustics who had lost their money and the urchins who came
running up; the poor thimble-engro tried likewise to have his share; and
though he flung himself down, in order to join more effectually in the
scramble, he was unable to obtain a single sixpence; and having in his
rage given some of his fellow-scramblers a cuff or two, he was set upon
by the boys and country fellows, and compelled to make an inglorious
retreat with his table, which had been flung down in the scuffle, and had
one of its legs broken.  As he retired, the rabble hooted, and Jack,
holding up in derision the pea with which he had outmanoeuvred him,
exclaimed, "I always carry this in my pocket in order to be a match for
vagabonds like you."

The tumult over, Jack gone, and the rabble dispersed, I followed the
discomfited adventurer at a distance, who, leaving the town, went slowly
on, carrying his dilapidated piece of furniture; till coming to an old
wall by the roadside, he placed it on the ground, and sat down, seemingly
in deep despondency, holding his thumb to his mouth.  Going nearly up to
him, I stood still, whereupon he looked up, and perceiving I was looking
steadfastly at him, he said, in an angry tone, "Arrah! what for are you
staring at me so?  By my shoul, I think you are one of the thaives who
are after robbing me.  I think I saw you among them, and if I were only
sure of it, I would take the liberty of trying to give you a big bating."
"You have had enough of trying to give people a beating," said I; "you
had better be taking your table to some skilful carpenter to get it
repaired.  He will do it for sixpence."  "Divil a sixpence did you and
your thaives leave me," said he; "and if you do not take yourself off,
joy, I will be breaking your ugly head with the foot of it."  "Arrah,
Murtagh!" said I, "would ye be breaking the head of your friend and
scholar, to whom you taught the blessed tongue of Oilien nan Naomha, in
exchange for a pack of cards?"  Murtagh, for he it was, gazed at me for a
moment with a bewildered look; then, with a gleam of intelligence in his
eye, he said, "Shorsha! no, it can't be--yes, by my faith it is!"  Then,
springing up, and seizing me by the hand, he said, "Yes, by the powers,
sure enough it is Shorsha agra!  Arrah, Shorsha! where have you been this
many a day?  Sure, you are not one of the spalpeens who are after robbing
me?"  "Not I," I replied, "but I saw all that happened.  Come, you must
not take matters so to heart; cheer up; such things will happen in
connection with the trade you have taken up."  "Sorrow befall the trade,
and the thief who taught it me," said Murtagh; "and yet the trade is not
a bad one, if I only knew more of it, and had some one to help and back
me.  Och! the idea of being cheated and bamboozled by that one-eyed thief
in the horseman's dress."  "Let bygones be bygones, Murtagh," said I; "it
is no use grieving for the past; sit down, and let us have a little
pleasant gossip.  Arrah, Murtagh! when I saw you sitting under the wall,
with your thumb to your mouth, it brought to my mind tales which you used
to tell me all about Finn-ma-Coul.  You have not forgotten Finn-ma-Coul,
Murtagh, and how he sucked wisdom out of his thumb."  "Sorrow a bit have
I forgot about him, Shorsha," said Murtagh, as we sat down together, "nor
what you yourself told me about the snake.  Arrah, Shorsha! what ye told
me about the snake, bates anything I ever told you about Finn.  Ochone,
Shorsha! perhaps you will be telling me about the snake once more?  I
think the tale would do me good, and I have need of comfort, God knows,
ochone!"  Seeing Murtagh in such a distressed plight, I forthwith told
him over again the tale of the snake, in precisely the same words as I
have related it in the first part of this history.  After which, I said,
"Now, Murtagh, tit for tat; ye will be telling me one of the old stories
of Finn-ma-Coul."  "Och, Shorsha!  I haven't heart enough," said Murtagh.
"Thank you for your tale, but it makes me weep; it brings to my mind
Dungarvon times of old--I mean the times we were at school together."
"Cheer up, man," said I, "and let's have the story, and let it be about
Ma-Coul and the salmon and his thumb."  "Arrah, Shorsha!  I can't.  Well,
to oblige you, I'll give it you.  Well, you know Ma-Coul was an exposed
child, and came floating over the salt sea in a chest which was cast
ashore at Veintry Bay.  In the corner of that bay was a castle, where
dwelt a giant and his wife, very respectable and decent people, and this
giant, taking his morning walk along the bay, came to the place where the
child had been cast ashore in his box.  Well, the giant looked at the
child, and being filled with compassion for his exposed state, took the
child up in his box, and carried him home to his castle, where he and his
wife, being dacent respectable people, as I telled ye before, fostered
the child and took care of him, till he became old enough to go out to
service and gain his livelihood, when they bound him out apprentice to
another giant, who lived in a castle up the country, at some distance
from the bay.

"This giant, whose name was Darmod David Odeen, was not a respectable
person at all, but a big old vagabond.  He was twice the size of the
other giant, who, though bigger than any man, was not a big giant; for,
as there are great and small men, so there are great and small giants--I
mean some are small when compared with the others.  Well, Finn served
this giant a considerable time, doing all kinds of hard and unreasonable
service for him, and receiving all kinds of hard words, and many a hard
knock and kick to boot--sorrow befall the old vagabond who could thus ill-
treat a helpless foundling.  It chanced that one day the giant caught a
salmon, near a salmon-leap upon his estate--for, though a big ould
blackguard, he was a person of considerable landed property, and high
sheriff for the county Cork.  Well, the giant brings home the salmon by
the gills, and delivers it to Finn, telling him to roast it for the
giant's dinner; 'but take care, ye young blackguard,' he added, 'that in
roasting it--and I expect ye to roast it well--you do not let a blister
come upon its nice satin skin, for if ye do, I will cut the head off your
shoulders.'  'Well,' thinks Finn, 'this is a hard task; however, as I
have done many hard tasks for him, I will try and do this too, though I
was never set to do anything yet half so difficult.'  So he prepared his
fire, and put his gridiron upon it, and lays the salmon fairly and softly
upon the gridiron, and then he roasts it, turning it from one side to the
other just in the nick of time, before the soft satin skin could be
blistered.  However, on turning it over the eleventh time--and twelve
would have settled the business--he found he had delayed a little bit of
time too long in turning it over, and that there was a small, tiny
blister on the soft outer skin.  Well, Finn was in a mighty panic,
remembering the threats of the ould giant; however, he did not lose
heart, but clapped his thumb upon the blister in order to smooth it down.
Now the salmon, Shorsha, was nearly done, and the flesh thoroughly hot,
so Finn's thumb was scalt, and he, clapping it to his mouth, sucked it,
in order to draw out the pain, and in a moment--hubbuboo!--became imbued
with all the wisdom of the world.

_Myself_.  Stop, Murtagh! stop!

_Murtagh_.  All the witchcraft, Shorsha.

_Myself_.  How wonderful!

_Murtagh_.  Was it not, Shorsha?  The salmon, do you see, was a fairy
salmon.

_Myself_.  What a strange coincidence!

_Murtagh_.  A what, Shorsha?

_Myself_.  Why, that the very same tale should be told of Finn-ma-Coul,
which is related of Sigurd Fafnisbane.

"What thief was that, Shorsha?"

"Thief!  'Tis true, he took the treasure of Fafnir.  Sigurd was the hero
of the North, Murtagh, even as Finn is the great hero of Ireland.  He,
too, according to one account, was an exposed child, and came floating in
a casket to a wild shore, where he was suckled by a hind, and afterwards
found and fostered by Mimir, a fairy blacksmith; he, too, sucked wisdom
from a burn.  According to the Edda, he burnt his finger whilst feeling
of the heart of Fafnir, which he was roasting, and putting it into his
mouth in order to suck out the pain, became imbued with all the wisdom of
the world, the knowledge of the language of birds, and what not.  I have
heard you tell the tale of Finn a dozen times in the blessed days of old,
but its identity with the tale of Sigurd never occurred to me till now.
It is true, when I knew you of old, I had never read the tale of Sigurd,
and have since almost dismissed matters of Ireland from my mind; but as
soon as you told me again about Finn's burning his finger, the
coincidence struck me.  I say, Murtagh, the Irish owe much to the Danes--"

"Devil a bit, Shorsha, do they owe to the thaives, except many a bloody
bating and plundering, which they never paid them back.  Och, Shorsha!
you, edicated in ould Ireland, to say that the Irish owes anything good
to the plundering villains--the Siol Loughlin."

"They owe them half their traditions, Murtagh, and amongst others, Finn-
ma-Coul and the burnt finger; and if ever I publish the Loughlin songs,
I'll tell the world so."

"But, Shorsha, the world will never believe ye--to say nothing of the
Irish part of it."

"Then the world, Murtagh--to say nothing of the Irish part of it--will be
a fool, even as I have often thought it; the grand thing, Murtagh, is to
be able to believe oneself, and respect oneself.  How few whom the world
believes believe and respect themselves."

"Och, Shorsha! shall I go on with the tale of Finn?"

"I'd rather you should not, Murtagh; I know all about it already."

"Then why did you bother me to tell it at first, Shorsha?  Och, it was
doing my ownself good, and making me forget my own sorrowful state, when
ye interrupted me with your thaives of Danes!  Och, Shorsha! let me tell
you how Finn, by means of sucking his thumb, and the witchcraft he
imbibed from it, contrived to pull off the arm of the ould wagabone,
Darmod David Odeen, whilst shaking hands with him--for Finn could do no
feat of strength without sucking his thumb, Shorsha, as Conan the Bald
told the son of Oisin in the song which I used to sing ye in Dungarvon
times of old;" and here Murtagh repeated certain Irish words to the
following effect:--

   "O little the foolish words I heed
   O Oisin's son, from thy lips which come;
   No strength were in Finn for valorous deed,
   Unless to the gristle he suck'd his thumb."

"Enough is as good as a feast, Murtagh, I am no longer in the cue for
Finn.  I would rather hear your own history.  Now tell us, man, all that
has happened to ye since Dungarvon times of old?"

"Och, Shorsha, it would be merely bringing all my sorrows back upon me!"

"Well, if I know all your sorrows, perhaps I shall be able to find a help
for them.  I owe you much, Murtagh; you taught me Irish, and I will do
all I can to help you."

"Why, then, Shorsha, I'll tell ye my history.  Here goes!"




