CHAPTER V.

CONSIDERATIONS ON CORPOREAL SUBSTANCE IN ITSELF.


26. The idea of substance, such as we have thus far explained it,
implies a relation to accidents in general. The idea we are now
examining is not that of an indeterminate substance, but of corporeal
substance; and it must be confessed that it is difficult to conceive a
particular corporeal substance without any accident. If I take from
the paper, on which I am writing, its figure, extension, and all that
relates to my senses, what is there left for me to conceive something
particular and determinate, something which is not the idea of being
in general, but of this being in particular? It is clear that, in
order that the object may not disappear altogether, and losing its
individuality be confounded in the universal idea, I must reserve
something by which I can say _this_: that is to say, that which is
here, or which has affected me in this or that manner, or has been
the subject of such or such modifications. I consider at least its
position with respect to other bodies, or its causality in relation to
the effects which it has produced in me, or its nature as the subject
of determinate accidents. Just as the idea of finite substance in
general involves relation to certain accidents in general, the idea of
a particular substance involves relation to particular accidents.

27. We find this relation in our mode of conceiving corporeal
substance; we cannot assert that it is involved in the nature of the
substance. This nature is unknown to us, and when we attempt to examine
it, we pass to another question, that of the essence of bodies.

28. Neither can we say how far the identity of the corporeal substance
continues under its different transformations. The partisans of
corpuscular philosophy consider all transformations as mere local
motions, and all the variations which we see in bodies as mere results
of the different position of the corpuscles among themselves. Leibnitz
resolved matter into an infinity of monads, differing from the atoms
of Epicurus, but conducing to the substantial invariability of bodies,
which are only a collection of indivisible substances, which he calls
monads. The Aristotelians believed that, of the changes of bodies, some
were accidental, as figure, motion, density, warmth, cold, etc.; others
substantial, as the change of wood to ashes. But in all the variety of
systems, all admit something permanent, the subject of the changes. The
Atomists and Leibnitz evidently admitted the identity of the subject.
As to the Aristotelians, although the change which introduced a
substantial form different from the first substantially transformed the
being, so that after the change of the substantial form it could not
be said that one was substantially the other, they still thought there
was a common subject in these substantial transformations, and this
was what they called the first matter, _materia prima_. All systems of
philosophy admit this clear and evident truth, that in the midst of the
transformations of the corporeal world, there is something permanent.

29. This corporeal substance being a reality, must not only exist, but
it must be something determinate. This substantial determination of
the body, which makes it this particular thing, and distinguishes it
in its internal nature, in its essence, from all other bodies of other
species, the Aristotelians called the substantial form. The subject of
this form, or actuality, which was common to all bodies, they called
the _materia prima_, which was a pure potentiality, a sort of medium
between pure nothing and actual being.

30. Ever since there have been schools of philosophy, these points
have been disputed; and it is probable they always will be; but it is
to very little purpose. We know the existence of the corporeal world,
we know its relations to ourselves, we know its properties and its
laws, so far as they are subject to our observation; but its intrinsic
nature is beyond the reach of our senses, or our instruments. Increased
acuteness of observation and improvement in the power and delicacy of
instruments, discovers new mysteries, and man finds the barriers which
he believed the _ne plus ultra_, removed from him as he advances. Will
he ever be able to pass them? Will he ever make the entire circuit
of this scientific world? Is the knowledge of the intrinsic nature of
the subject of this infinity of phenomena which astonish us, reserved
to the future? It is hard to believe it. The telescope, becoming more
perfect, extends the limits of the universe, and seems to behold the
infinitely great; the perfection of the microscope, advancing in the
opposite direction, regards the infinitely little. Where are the
limits? It is probable that man is not permitted to reach them while
in this world. The mind of man in its fruitful activity, struggles
alternately after the two extremes, but just as he flatters himself
he is reaching the last limit, he feels that something stronger than
himself withholds him from attaining the object of his noble desires;
it is the chain that binds him to the mortal body, and obstructs the
flight of his pure spirit.




CHAPTER VI.

SUBSTANTIALITY OF THE HUMAN ME.


31. We have not found perfect unity in corporeal substances: all that
are subject to our senses may be resolved into a number of others
equally substances in their turn; a body is rather an aggregate of
substances, than one substance. We do not find the unity in the bodies;
we attribute it to them either inasmuch as they form a common link of
our sensations, or inasmuch as we consider the different substances
subordinated to one being and governing substance. Thus the parts of
an animated body constitute a sort of unity, inasmuch as they are
subordinate to the principle which animates them.

32. We do not conclude from this that true unity does not exist in
bodies; if we could know their essence, we should doubtless discover
it, whether in the monads, as maintained by Leibnitz, or in something
else more or less resembling them. Although this knowledge of their
essence is denied us, reason leads us to this unity. The composite
is formed of parts; if these parts are in turn formed of others, we
must at last come to something which has no parts; here we find the
indivisible, or rather, the true unity. This reasoning is equally
valid, even though we suppose matter to be infinitely divisible.
Infinite divisibility would suppose an infinity of parts into which
any body may be divided: these parts would therefore exist; these
infinitesimal elements would be real: the unity would be in them.

33. Independently of the external world, we find the idea of substance
in ourselves; consciousness reveals its real application and perfect
unity. Consciousness makes known to us that we think, desire, feel, and
experience an infinity of affections, some of which are subject to our
will and are the product of the internal activity of our soul; others
are independent of us, they come without our will, and often against
it, and it is not always in our power to reproduce them even if we wish
it.

This ebb and flow of ideas, volitions, and sentiments, have a point
in which they are connected, a subject which receives them, remembers
them, combines them, and seeks or avoids them; this being, of which we
are internally conscious, philosophers have called the _me_. It is one
and identical under all transformations; this unity, this identity, is
an indisputable fact which consciousness reveals to us. Who could make
us doubt that the _me_ which thinks at the present moment is not the
same which thought yesterday, which thought years ago? Notwithstanding
the variety of thoughts and desires, the changes of opinion and will,
who could deprive us of the firm and deep conviction which we have
that we are the same who experience them all, that there is something
here within us which is the subject of them all?

34. If there were not something in us permanent in the midst of this
variety, the consciousness of the _me_ would be impossible. Memory and
combination would also be impossible; for there would be within us only
a succession of unconnected phenomena. Thinking is impossible without
something which thinks and remains identical under the variety of the
forms of thought. There is, therefore, within us a simple subject which
connects all the changes which occur in it: there is a substance. In it
there is unity: the unity which we only find in corporeal substances
after an infinite series of decompositions, is presented to us in
the spiritual substance, at the first instant, as a simple internal
fact, without which, all the phenomena which we perceive within us are
absurd, and all experience of the external world impossible.

Without the unity of the _me_ there can be no sensation, and without
sensation no experience of the beings around us.




