CHAPTER I.

NECESSITY.


1. Beings are divided into two classes: necessary and contingent;
necessary being is that which cannot but be; contingent is that which may
be and cease to be. In these definitions every thing is said; but their
laconism does not permit all that is expressed in them to be easily
understood. Necessity and contingency may refer to different aspects
and give rise to very diverse considerations. This makes a careful
analysis of the ideas expressed by them necessary.

2. What is meant by necessity? In general that is called necessary
which cannot but be; but the expression _cannot_, may be taken in
different senses: in a moral sense, as when we say: I cannot but fulfil
this duty; in a physical, as in this proposition; a paralytic cannot
move himself; and in a metaphysical sense, as: A triangle cannot be a
quadrilateral. In the first example, the obstacle is founded on a law;
in the second, it arises from nature; in the third, it follows from the
essence of the things. In all these suppositions, necessity implies the
impossibility of the contrary, and this impossibility results from the
necessity.

3. Hence it follows that the ideas necessity and impossibility are
correlative, and that is metaphysically necessary whose opposite is
metaphysically impossible. Impossibility consists in the exclusion
of one thing by another; thus, "a circular triangle is impossible,"
means the same as "the nature of a triangle excludes the nature of a
circle." In all impossibility, therefore, there is a term denied; as in
all necessity there is a term affirmed; the metaphysically necessary
is that whose opposite is contradictory; the existence of the absurd
is impossible, the non-existence of the necessary is absurd. It is
contradictory for a triangle to have four sides; and it is absurd for a
triangle not to have three angles.

4. In the purely ideal order we see many necessities without any
relation to existence; such are all geometrical truths. Even in the
real order we conceive many hypothetical necessities in contingent
beings: such are those which are obtained by applying absolute
principles to any hypothesis furnished by experience. The principle
of contradiction serves in an infinity of cases to found a certain
necessity even in contingent beings. There is no absolute necessity
of the existence of extended beings; but on the supposition that they
exist, it is necessary for them to have the properties proceeding from
extension.

5. In no finite being can there be an absolute necessity; the only
necessity which it can have is hypothetical. The relation of its
essential attributes is necessary; but, as its essence does not exist
necessarily, whatever is necessary in it is so only hypothetically,
that is, on the supposition that it exists.

6. We must then distinguish two necessities: one absolute, the other
hypothetical. The latter relates to the essences of things, abstracting
their existence, although implying it as a condition, and supposing
another necessary as the ground of its possibility;[72] the former
relates to the existence of the thing. The absolutely necessary is that
whose existence is absolutely necessary.

[72] See Bk. IV., Chs. XXIII., XXIV., XXV., XXVI., and XXVII.

7. The essence of the necessary being must contain existence; its idea
must involve the idea of existence, not only logical and conceptual,
but also realized.

8. We can conceive the existence of the necessary being distinct from
its essence, but the reason of this is in the imperfection of the idea,
which with us is not intuitive, but discursive; and consequently, we
can distinguish between the logical order and the real order.

Here we find the defect of Descartes' argument by which he pretends
to demonstrate the existence of God from the fact that the predicate,
existence, is included in the idea of a necessary and infinite being.
The idea of necessary being involves existence, but not real existence,
only logical and conceptual; since after we have the idea of the
necessary being, it still remains to be proved that there is an object
which corresponds to this idea; the predicate belongs to the subject
according to the manner in which the subject is taken, and as this is
only in the purely ideal order, the predicate is also purely ideal.

9. The reality of the necessary idea cannot be demonstrated from its
idea alone; but it may be demonstrated with complete evidence by
introducing into the argument other elements which experience furnishes
us.

Something exists; at least ourselves; at least this perception which we
have in this act; at least the appearance of this act. I leave aside
for the present all the questions disputed between the dogmatists
and the skeptics; I only suppose a _datum_ which no one can deny me,
though he carry skepticism to the utmost exaggeration. When I say that
something exists, I only mean to affirm that not every thing is a pure
nothing.

If something exists, something has always existed, or there is no
moment in which it could be said with truth: there is nothing. If
such a moment of universal nothingness had ever been, nothing would
now exist, there never could have been any thing. Let us imagine a
universal and absolute nothingness; I then ask: Is it possible that
any thing should come from nothing? Evidently not; therefore on the
supposition of universal nothingness reality is absurd.

10. Therefore something has always existed, with a cause, without a
condition on which it depends; therefore there is a necessary being.
Its existence is supposed always, without relation to any hypothesis;
therefore its _not-being_ is always excluded under all conditions;
therefore there exists an absolutely necessary _being_, that is, a
being whose _not-being_ implies a contradiction.

11. Summing up the doctrine which precedes, we may say:

I. That we have the idea of a necessary being.

II. That we deduce its existence from its idea alone.

III. That in order to demonstrate the existence of a necessary being,
it is sufficient to know that something exists.

IV. We know by experience that something exists; for experience
presents to us, if nothing else, the existence of our own thought.




