CHAPTER XVII.

RELATIONS OF THE IDEA OF TIME AND THE PRINCIPLE OF CONTRADICTION.


117. Let us explain the true meaning of the principle of contradiction.
"It is impossible for any thing to be and not be at the same time."
The connection of the ideas contained in this principle seems at
first sight to be explained without any difficulty; so that, to raise
questions as to its true sense is to place ourselves in contradiction
with one of the fundamental truths on which rests the edifice of our
knowledge. For, if there be any doubt as to the true meaning of the
principle, it may be understood in several ways, and then there will be
another doubt as to whether the generality of men understand it as they
ought to, and whether, consequently, it is for them a solid foundation
of knowledge.

This difficulty ceases to be one when we reflect that the most
evident axioms may be considered in two manners: empirically,
or scientifically; or in other words, inasmuch as they are the
application, or the object of analytical examination. In the first
manner, they are equally certain and equally clear to all men; in
the second, they are subject to difficulties. The principle,--things
equal to a third are equal to each other,--considered empirically, is
absolutely certain and evident to all men: all men, from the wisest
to the most ignorant, compare things with a third, when they wish to
ascertain their equality or inequality; this is only an application of
the principle. If you ask them the reason of this proceeding, although
they may not enunciate the axiom in its precise terms, they refer to it
in different ways: "These two tables are equal, because I have measured
them, and they are each four feet square." Probably the generality of
men, not accustomed to reflect on their knowledge, would not express
the principle in universal and precise terms; as, "These two tables
are equal, because they have a common measure, and things equal to a
third are equal to each other." Yet they are just as clearly certain
of the principle, and apply it, without any danger of error, in all
real and possible cases. This is what I call the empirical knowledge of
principles,--a knowledge which is perfect in the direct order, and is
defective only in the reflex order.[32]

[32] See Bk. I., Ch. III.

It is very easy to reconcile the difficulty in the analysis of the
principle, with its clearness when applied to ordinary purposes, or
to those of science. Thus, in the example given, the analysis of the
term _equal_ leads to the analysis of the term _quantity_: reflection
can discover in this difficulties which, although they do not disturb
mankind in the possession of truth, are difficulties notwithstanding.
Geometry is undoubtedly a science perfectly evident and certain; but
who can deny that the idea of extension presents serious difficulties,
when examined before the tribunal of metaphysics? Universal arithmetic
is, beyond all doubt, a science; yet the ideas of quantity and number,
which are indispensable to it, give rise to the most abstruse questions
of metaphysics and ideology. In general, it may be said that there
is no branch of our knowledge which is exempt from difficulties,
considered in its root; but these difficulties, arising from
reflection, do not in any way lessen the certainty of direct knowledge.

Hence it is no objection that the analysis of the principle of
contradiction presents difficulties; nor are we therefore to fear for
the firmness of the edifice of our knowledge. It would be of no service
to us not to attend to these difficulties, if they really existed; a
difficulty does not vanish because we shut our eyes so as not to see
it. Let us not, therefore, vainly fear to examine the true sense of the
principle of contradiction.

118. It seems that this principle either does not exist, or has no
meaning, unless we presuppose the idea of time; and, on the other
hand, we cannot conceive time, unless we presuppose the principle of
contradiction. Do we thus fall into a vicious circle, and this too in
the fundamental principle of all our knowledge? This is a difficulty
which I shall first develop and present more clearly.

The principle of contradiction presupposes the idea of time,
because there would be no contradiction if being and not-being were
not referred to the same time. This last condition is altogether
indispensable; for, suppressing the simultaneousness, there is no
contradiction in a thing both being and not-being. Not only is there
no contradiction in this, but it is a thing which we constantly meet
with, in every thing around us. We see being and not-being in things
which pass from existence to non-existence, or from non-existence to
existence.

Although the simultaneousness may not be expressed in the principle of
contradiction, it is always understood, so that we should gain nothing
by adopting Kant's formula.[33] In whatever terms the principle may be
enunciated, it is always true that the same thing cannot both be and
not be at the same time, but may very well be at one time and not be at
another time.

[33] See Bk. I., Ch. XX.

The idea of time is therefore necessary in order that the contradiction
may follow in some cases, and disappear in others. If the time implies
simultaneousness, it generates the contradiction; if it implies
succession, it destroys the contradiction; because being and not-being
are impossible, unless we presuppose a successive duration, among the
different parts of which, things that would otherwise be contradictory
are distributed.

119. The idea of time also presupposes the principle of contradiction;
for, if time, in things, is only being and not-being, and in the
intellect, the perception of this being and not-being; we cannot
perceive time without having perceived being and not-being; and as
these ideas, without succession, involve a contradiction, we must
perceive the principle of contradiction when we perceive time. I have
said that succession implies the mutual exclusion of the things which
succeed; now, the first exclusion is the principle of contradiction:
in perceiving time, we perceive succession; therefore we have already
perceived the contradiction.

120. These remarks might incline us to believe it necessary to choose
between a vicious circle, which is inadmissible in the foundation of
all our knowledge, and an explanation of time, independently of being
and not-being. If we conceived time as existing by itself, as a sort of
line prolonged to infinity; as a form of things, but distinct from them
all; as a vague capacity in which successive beings might be placed,
just as we situate co-existences in space,--then the idea of time would
not be explained by the principle of contradiction, and we could only
say that it was completed by it. "When we say that it is impossible
for the same thing to be and not be at the same time, but that it is
possible for the same thing to be and not be at different times, the
contradiction is affirmed or taken away, accordingly as the being and
not-being are referred to the same point or to different points in this
vague extension, this infinite line, which we call successive duration,
and in which we conceive changeable things to be distributed." This
explanation is convenient; but it has a defect, that it cannot stand a
philosophical examination, as we have seen in the preceding chapters.
We must therefore have recourse to another class of considerations.

121. To solve this difficulty, it is necessary to determine precisely
the meaning of our ideas. The expression of _vicious circle_ is
improperly applied to this case. If we understand this, the whole
difficulty is solved at once. In explaining things, which are not
identical, a circle is a defect, and is called vicious; but when
two things are identical at bottom, although they appear distinct,
because presented under various aspects, it is impossible to explain
one without stumbling, so to speak, on the other, or to approach one
without meeting the other. Because they are presented under different
aspects we are led to believe them distinct; but examining them
analytically, we abstract the difference of aspect, and penetrate to
the reality, and discover the point where they are united, or, rather,
where they are absolutely identified.

122. We may draw from these observations a criterion which we may
use in a great many cases. When, in explaining two objects, we find
ourselves led alternately from the one to the other, without any
possibility of avoiding a circle, we may suspect that objects, which
appear distinct, are not so in reality, and that the objects presented
to the eyes of our understanding are not two objects, but only one
object perceived in different ways.

123. This is true in the present instance. In explaining the principle
of contradiction we encounter the idea of time, and in defining time
we encounter the principle of contradiction, or the ideas of being and
not-being. This is a circle, but an inevitable one; and therefore it
ceases to be vicious.

124. What is the meaning of the principle of contradiction? Its true
meaning is, that being excludes not-being, and not-being excludes
being; that the nature of these conceptions is such that the
affirmation of one implies the negation of the other, not only in the
order of our ideas, but in reality. Let us call A any being whatever:
the principle of contradiction means that A excludes not-A, and not-A
excludes A. If we think A, the conception of not-A disappears; and
if we think not-A, the conception of A disappears. If we affirm A in
reality, we deny not-A, and if we affirm not-A in reality, we deny
A. This is the true meaning of the principle of contradiction. If we
reflect, we shall find that, as far as possible, we have abstracted the
idea of time; for we have only considered the mutual exclusion of A and
not-A, in reference to a _simul_, an indivisible point of duration,
which, involving no succession, does not give us the idea of time. I
said, _as far as possible_; because as soon as we think A and not-A,
the idea of succession, and consequently of time, arises in our mind.

125. A and not-A imply contradiction; but not so that they absolutely
cannot be realized. The exclusion is conditional; that is, it exists as
long as the contradictory extremes are simultaneous, or referred to an
indivisible _now_; but we discover no intrinsic necessity of existence
in the idea of A: consequently, although we know that while A is,
not-A cannot be, we can very well conceive that A may cease to be, and
not-A may begin to be. There is, in, that case, no contradiction, and
we can easily reconcile in our mind the two ideas of A and not-A, by
referring them to different instants.

126. Hence the perception of time implies the perception of beings that
are not necessary,--of beings which, when they exist, may cease to
exist, and when they do not exist, may begin to exist. The difference
between necessary and contingent being is, that the existence of the
former absolutely excludes its non-existence, while the existence of
the latter excludes its non-existence only conditionally, or on the
supposition of simultaneousness.

127. This is why the principle of contradiction requires the condition
of time. The objects which we perceive are changeable; there is nothing
either in their nature or in their modifications which involves
existence. If they are, they may cease to be; and if this change does
not constantly occur in their substance, it does in their accidents.
Therefore we cannot affirm the absolute, but only the conditional
contradiction of their being and not-being; it exists only on the
supposition of simultaneousness.

128. If we conceived only necessary being, we could have no idea
of time: its existence absolutely excludes its non-existence, and
therefore the contradiction would be always absolute, never conditional.

129. A most important consequence results from this analysis. The
perception of time with us implies the perception of the non-necessity
of things. When we perceive a being which is not necessary, we perceive
a being which may cease to be, in which case we have the idea of
succession, of real or possible time. Here another reflection arises
which is also important: the idea of time is the idea of contingency:
the consciousness of time is the consciousness of our weakness.

130. The idea of time is so deep in our mind, that without it we could
not form the idea of the _me_. The consciousness of the identity of
the _me_ supposes a link[34] which it is impossible to find without
memory. Memory necessarily involves the relation of _past_, and,
consequently, the idea of time.

[34] See Bk. I., Ch. XXV.




