CHAPTER IV.

DEFINITION OF TIME.


22. Time is duration; but duration without something which endures, is
an absurdity. There can then be no time without something existing. The
duration which we conceive, after reducing every thing to nihility, is
a vain imagination; it is not an idea, but is rather in contradiction
with ideas.

An important consequence flows from this; it is, that time in itself,
cannot be defined with absolute elimination of every thing to which it
refers. Time, then, has no proper existence; and separated from beings
is annihilated.

23. Hence, also, it follows that that infinity which we attribute to
time, has no rational foundation. We have no other reason to affirm
this infinity than a vague conception, which presents it as such; but
we cannot fail to perceive that this conception also exists, even if
we suppose all to be reduced to nothing. If, then, there is in this
supposition a vain diversion of the imagination, it is not an idea, but
a contradiction with ideas; and what has once deceived us, no longer
deserves any credit. Those infinite ages of time which we conceive
prior to the creation, are not nothing; they are an imaginary time,
similar to an imaginary space.

24. Time has no necessary relation with movement, since if nothing
were to move, or even no bodies to exist, we should nevertheless
conceive time in the succession of operations of our soul. This last
is indispensable; we must have some succession of things in order to
conceive time. If we suppose nothing to change or to be altered, a
being subject to no external or internal change, having one single
thought always the same, one single will always the same, having no
succession of ideas or acts of any kind whatever, we conceive nothing
to which the idea of time is applicable.

Time is a measure; but what is it to measure in a being of this kind?
Succession? But there is no succession. Duration? But what is there to
measure in a duration always the same, which is only the same being?
Duration must have parts given to it before it can be measured; but
what parts has it? Those of time? But this would be a begging of the
question, since time is applied to it when we are inquiring whether
time is applicable to it. When theologians say that the existence
of God cannot be measured by time, that there is no succession in
eternity, but that all is united in a single point, they utter a
profound truth; and Clarke, before ridiculing it, should have studied
to understand it.

25. Time commences with mutable things; if they perish, it perishes
with them. There is no succession without mutation; and consequently,
no time.

26. What, then, is time? The succession of things considered in the
abstract.

What is succession? Being and not-being. A thing exists; it ceases to
exist; here we have succession. Whenever time can be calculated, there
is succession; and whenever succession can be calculated a being and
a not-being are considered. The perception of this relation, of this
being and not-being, is the idea of time.

27. Time cannot exist without being and not-being; because in this,
succession consists; wherever there is succession, there is some
mutation; and there is no mutation without something being in another
manner, and this other manner is not possible unless the prior manner
ceases to be.

Substances, modifications, and appearances have no succession without
this being and not-being. What is motion? The succession of the
positions of a body with respect to various points; and this succession
is verified by occupying some of these positions and destroying others.
What is the succession of thoughts or affections of our mind? The
not-being of some which were, and the being of others which were not.

28. Time, then, in things, is their succession, their being and
not-being. Time in the understanding, is the perception of this
mutation, this being and not-being.




CHAPTER V.

TIME IS NOTHING ABSOLUTE.


29. Is time something absolute? The definition given in the last
chapter shows clearly enough that it is not. Time in things is not
being only, nor not-being only, but the _relation_ of being and
not-being. Time in the understanding, is the perception of this
relation.

The measure of time is nothing else than the comparison of mutations
among themselves. To us, those mutations which seem to be unalterably
uniform serve as the primitive measure. For this we have taken the
movement of the sun. This movement varies when compared with that of
the stars, and ceases to be the primitive measure when referred to
this: and it was upon this the scholastics rested when they taught that
the movement of the first heavens was the primitive measure of time.

30. But what if the velocity of the sun were augmented, and it should
make its revolution in one half of its time? Would the hours continue
the same? We distinguish. If this alteration should be verified solely
in the solar movement, we should perceive the discordance between this
and all other movements; and perceiving this alteration in the sun, we
should continue to refer our hours as things fixed to other measures,
to our own movements, to our time-pieces, or to other heavenly bodies.

But if we suppose every thing to be changed at one and the same time,
and in the same proportion; the movement of all the heavens and of
every thing terrestrial to be doubly accelerated, but in such a way as
not to increase the rapidity of our thoughts; we should indeed discover
an alteration, but we should not know whether to attribute it to the
world or to ourselves; we should perceive a discrepancy between our
thoughts and these movements, but should not know whether these were
accelerated or our thoughts retarded.

If this rapidity be also communicated to us, so that such or such
a series of thoughts formerly corresponding to so many minutes is
now made in one half the number, we should then witness a perfect
correspondence in all things; we could perceive no mutation. An hour,
for example, is to us only the perception of the relation of certain
mutations: so long as this relation continues the same, there will be
no alteration in the hour.

31. To take away from time every idea of absolute, seems an absurdity
to the imagination, but not to reason. This case will make this
evident. Not the man, the best skilled in perceiving the succession of
time, can, if he look at no time-piece, nor refer to any measure for
twelve hours, say whether eleven hours and a half or twelve hours have
passed. If he live long in this way, he will become totally incapable
of estimating time; if locked up in a dark dungeon for several months,
he will believe he has spent years there. The idea, therefore, of the
measure of time, is nothing absolute; it is essentially relative; it
is the perception of the relations between various mutations. So long
as these relations remain whole and intact, time will be to us the same.




