CHAPTER X.

APPLICATION OF THE PRECEDING DOCTRINE TO SEVERAL IMPORTANT QUESTIONS.


71. This theory will be much better understood by its application to
the solution of several questions.

I. How long a time had passed before the creation? None. As there was
no succession, there was only the present, the eternity of God. All
else that we imagine is a mere illusion, contrary to sound philosophy.

II. Was it possible for another world to have existed when this world's
existence began? Undoubtedly it was; this would only require that God
had created it, without creating this world; it would only require
the being of the one and the not-being of the other. And as there was
not-being because there was no creation, it follows that if God had
created the one without creating the other, and had ceased to preserve
the first when he created the second, there would have been succession
and priority of time.

III. Here is another question which is somewhat strange, and at
first seems very difficult. Was the existence of a world _prior_
to this possible _in any time_? or, in other words, could another
world have _ceased_ to exist _some time before_ the beginning of the
existence of this world? This question implies a contradiction. It
supposes an interval of time, that is, of succession, without any
thing to succeed. If a world had ceased to exist, and no new world
should exist, there would be nothing but God; there would then be no
succession, there would be only eternity. To ask, therefore, how long a
time they were apart, is to suppose that there is time, where there is
none. The proper answer is, that the question is absurd.

But we shall be asked, were they distant, or were they not? There
is no distance of time where there is no time; this distance is a
mere illusion, by which we imagine time, while, by the state of the
question, we suppose that there is no time.

Then it may be objected, that the two successive worlds must be
necessarily immediate, that is to say, that the first instant of one
must be immediately connected with the last instant of the other.
I deny it. For immediateness of instants supposes the succession
of beings mutually connected in a certain order; the two worlds in
question would have no mutual relation; consequently, there would be
neither distance nor immediateness between them.

But, it may be replied, there is no medium between being and not-being,
and distance being the negation of immediateness, and immediateness the
negation of distance, by denying one, we affirm the other; they must,
therefore, either be distant or immediate. This reply also supposes
something which we deny. It speaks of distance and immediateness,
that is, of time, as though it were something positive, distinct from
the beings themselves. The principle, that every thing is, or is
not, _quodlibet est vel non est_, is applicable only when there is
something; but when there is nothing, there is no disjunctive. The time
of the two worlds is nothing, as distinguished from them; it is the
succession of their respective phenomena; the succession of the two
worlds, the one to the other, is nothing distinguished from them; it is
the being of the one, and the negation of the other, and the being of
the second and the negation of the first. God sees this; an intelligent
creature would also see it, if he could survive the annihilation of
the first world. To the eyes of God, who sees the reality, succession
would be simply the respective existence and non-existence of the two
objects. The intelligent creature would say, that the two worlds are
immediate, if to the perception of the last instant of the annihilated
world, the perception of a new existing world had followed without
another intermediate perception; and he would say, that there is
distance, if he had experienced various perceptions between the
annihilation of the old and the perception of the new creation. The
measure of this time would be taken from the changes of perceptions of
this creature, and would be longer or shorter, according to the number
of these perceptions.

72. The idea of time is essentially relative, as it is the ordered
perception of being and not-being. The mere perception of one of the
two extremes, would not be sufficient to produce the idea of time in
our mind; for this idea necessarily implies comparison. The same is
true of the idea of space, which has always a great resemblance to
time. We cannot conceive space, or extension of any kind, without
juxtaposition; that is to say, without relations of various objects.
Multiplicity necessarily enters into the ideas of both space and time.
Hence, we may say, that if we conceive a being, absolutely simple,
with no multiplicity, either in its essence, or in its acts, but in
which all is identified with its essence, there is no room for the
ideas of space and time; and, consequently, they are mere fictions of
the imagination, when we attribute to them any thing real, beyond the
corporeal world, and before the existence of the created.




CHAPTER XI.

THE ANALYSIS OF THE IDEA OF TIME CONFIRMS ITS RESEMBLANCE TO THE IDEA
OF SPACE.


73. Having explained the idea of time, and applied it to the most
difficult questions, we may explain this doctrine still farther, by
examining what we have already intimated concerning the resemblance
between time and space.[29] There is analogy in the difficulties;
analogy in the definitions of both ideas; analogy in the illusions
which hinder the knowledge of the truth. What we announced before with
respect to these two ideas, considering the idea of time as only what
it appeared at first sight, we may now assert as the secure result
of analytical investigations. I call attention in particular to the
following parallel, because it greatly explains the ideas of both.

[29] See Ch. III.

74. Space is nothing in itself, distinguished from bodies; it is only
the extension of bodies: time is nothing in itself, distinguished from
things. It is only the succession of things.

75. The idea of space is the idea of extension in general; the idea of
time is the idea of succession in general.

76. Where there are no bodies, there is no space: where there are no
things which succeed each other, there is no time.

77. An infinite space, before the existence of bodies, or outside of
bodies, is an illusion of the imagination: an infinite time before the
existence of things, or outside of them, is also an illusion.

78. Space is continuous: so is time.

79. One part of space excludes all others; one part of time also
excludes all others.

80. A pure space, in which bodies are situated, is imaginary: a
succession, a time, in which things succeed, is also imaginary.

81. That which is entirely simple has no need of space, and can exist
without it: that which is immutable has no need of time, and can exist
without it.

82. The simple and infinite is present to all points of space, without
losing its infinity: the immutable and infinite is present to all
instants of time, without altering its eternity.

83. Two things are distant in space, because there are bodies placed
between them; this distance is only the extension of the bodies
themselves: two beings are distant in time, because there are other
beings placed between them; this distance is the existence of the
beings which are placed between.

84. Extension needs no other extension, in which to be placed,
otherwise we should have a _processus in infinitum_: the succession
of things, for the same reason, needs no other succession in which to
succeed.

85. Just as we form the idea of continued succession in space by
distinguishing different parts of extension, and perceiving that one
excludes the others, so we also form the idea of continued succession
of time by distinguishing different facts and perceiving that one
excludes the others.

86. In order to form determinate ideas of the parts of space, we must
take a measure and refer to it: to form an idea of the parts of time we
also need a measure. The measure of space is the extension of some body
which we know: the measure of time is some series of changes which we
know. To measure space we seek for fixed things, as far as possible;
for the want of something better, men have recourse to the parts of
the body, the hand, the foot, the yard, and the pace, which give an
approximate, if not an exact measure. The exact sciences having
advanced, they have taken for their measure the forty-millionth part
of the meridian of the earth: time is measured by the motion of the
celestial bodies, by the diurnal motion, the lunar, solar, and sidereal
year.

87. The idea of number is necessary in order to determine space and
compare its different parts: the same idea is necessary in the same
manner to time. The discrete quantity explains the continuous.




