CHAPTER XIII.

KANT'S OPINION.


97. Kant uses the same theory to explain time that he used to explain
space. Time, according to him, is nothing in itself, neither is it any
thing in things; it is a subjective condition of intuition, a form of
the internal sense, by means of which phenomena are presented to us
as successive, just as space was the form by which they are presented
as continuous. To speak frankly, it seems to me that this is saying
nothing; it affirms a well-known fact, but does not explain it. Who
does not know that what we perceive we perceive in succession--that
we perceive even our own perceptions in succession? But what is
succession? This is what he ought to have explained.

98. Kant says that time is only in us; but I should like to ask him,
if succession is only in us. He pretends that we know nothing of the
external world, but that we perceive certain appearances, or phenomena;
but he does not deny that beyond the appearance there may be a reality.
If this reality is possible, changes are possible in it; and change
cannot be conceived without succession, nor succession without time.

99. According to Kant, the ideas of space and time are _à priori_, they
cannot be empirical, or experimental; for in that case they could not
be the basis of science; we could only affirm what we had experienced,
and this only with respect to the cases in which we have experienced
it. This is true, and I have demonstrated it in the last chapter; but,
conceding this priority, it proves nothing in favor of Kant's system.
The ideas of space and time, although _à priori_, may nevertheless
correspond to something in reality, as follows from the theory by which
I have explained them.

100. Time is not any thing which subsists by itself, but it is not
equally certain that it does not belong, as an objective determination,
to things, and that nothing remains of it, if we abstract it from all
the subjective impressions of intuition. I have demonstrated that time
does not subsist by itself, and that a duration without any thing
which endures, is an absurdity; but it does not follow from this that
the order represented by the idea of time is not something real in
the objects. Abstracting it from our intuition, there still remains
something which verifies the propositions by which we express the
properties of time.

101. The German philosopher makes time purely subjective, and relies
on the following argument: "If time were a condition belonging to the
things themselves, or an order, it could not precede the objects as a
condition of them, and be known and perceived _à priori_ by synthetical
judgments. This last is easily explained if time is nothing but the
subjective condition under which all intuitions are possible in us. For
then this form of the internal intuition can be represented before the
objects, and consequently _à priori_....

"If we abstract our manner of perceiving ourselves internally, and of
embracing, by means of this intuition, all external intuitions in the
faculty of representation, and consequently take objects just as they
may be in themselves, time is nothing....

"I can say that my representations are successive, but this only means
that we are conscious of them in a succession,--that is, in a form of
the internal sense. Time would not therefore be any thing in itself,
nor a determination inherent in things."[30]

[30] Trans. Æsth. II., A. § 6. w. f.

102. It is easy to see that the philosopher is struggling between two
difficulties. The first is, how to explain the necessity involved in
the idea of time, if he makes it proceed from experience. The second
is, how, if it is not derived from experience, it can be found really
in things, or, at least, how we can know that it is found in them.

Hence, he concludes, that it is not possible to save the necessity
involved in the idea of time, unless by making it a purely subjective
fact, a form of an intuition, entirely independent of the reality of
things.

It seems to me, that by attending to the principles established above,
we can give an objective value to time, independently of our intuition,
and explain its relations to experience, without destroying the
necessity contained in its idea.




CHAPTER XIV.

FUNDAMENTAL EXPLANATION OF THE OBJECTIVE POSSIBILITY AND OF THE
NECESSITY OF THE IDEA OF TIME.


103. Things in themselves, abstracted from our intuition, are
susceptible of change. Where there is change, there is succession, and
where there is succession, there is a certain order in the things which
succeed,--an order which is really in the things themselves, although
it does not subsist by itself, separated from them.

Kant might object to this, that perhaps the changes are not in things,
but in the phenomena, or the manner in which they are presented to our
intuition. But he cannot deny, that whether these changes are in the
reality, or not, they are, at least, possible, independently of the
phenomena. Therefore, he asserts, without reason, that time in the
things is nothing, and that it is only the form of our internal sense.
If he admits the possibility of real changes, he must also admit the
possibility of a real time; if he denies that it is possible for the
things in themselves to be really changed, we would ask him how he came
to know this impossibility,--he, who limits all our knowledge to the
purely phenomenal order. We cannot know that a thing is impossible in
an order, if we know nothing of this order; if Kant maintains that we
know nothing of things in themselves, he cannot prove that we know the
impossibility of their really changing.

104. It is then demonstrated that time, or a real order in things, is,
at least, possible. Therefore, we cannot say that time is a purely
subjective condition, to which nothing can correspond in the reality.

105. Admitting the possibility of an objective value of the idea of
time, not only in reference to the purely phenomenal order, but also to
the transcendental, or rather to things considered in themselves, and
abstracted from our intuition; we shall see how the objectiveness of
the idea of time and its relations to experience can be shown, without
destroying the intrinsic necessity which makes it one of the principal
elements of the exact sciences.

106. Time, considered in things, is the order of their being, and their
not-being. The idea of time is the perception of this order in its
greatest generality and abstracted from the objects which are contained
in it. As our understanding evidently can consider a purely possible
order of things, the idea of time extends to the possibility as well as
the reality. This is why we conceive time before and after the present
world, similar to the space which we imagine beyond the limits of the
universe. The idea of being, elevated to a purely possible region, in
which it is abstracted from all individual phenomena, is freed from the
instability to which the objects of our experience are subject: it can
then be an absolutely necessary element of science; for it expresses
a relation which is not affected by any thing contingent. These
observations are a solution of all difficulties.




