CHAPTER XIV.

POSSIBILITY OF THE ACTIVITY OF BODIES.


148. Having marked the limits of our intuitive knowledge with respect
to causality and activity, it is easy to answer the objections against
secondary causality, which arise from confounding intuitive and
indeterminate ideas; but we have still to examine whether there are
true second causes, that is, whether there really is in finite beings
a principle of their own and others' changes. Some philosophers,
among others the illustrious Malebranche, have denied the efficacy of
second causes, thus reducing them to mere occasions. The author of the
_Investigation de la Vérité_ goes so far as to maintain that secondary
causality not only does not exist, but is impossible.

149. The universe contains two classes of beings,--immaterial beings,
and corporeal beings: each presents difficulties which it will be well
to examine separately. Let us begin with matter. It is said that matter
is incapable of all activity, that its essence is indifferent to every
thing, susceptible of any sort of modification. I cannot discover on
what this general proposition is founded, nor do I see how it is
possible to prove it either by reason or by experience.

150. In order to maintain that matter is completely inactive, or
incapable of any activity, it would be necessary to know its essence;
but this we do not know. By what right do we deny the possibility of
an attribute when we are ignorant of the nature of the object to which
it should belong, when we do not know even one of its properties to
which this attribute is repugnant? It is true that we deny to matter
the possibility of thought, and even of sensation; but we can do so
only because we know enough of matter, to establish this impossibility.
In matter, whatever may be its intrinsic essence, there are parts,
consequently there is multiplicity; and the facts of consciousness
necessarily require a being which is one and simple.[91]

[91] See Bk. IX.

It is not the same with respect to activity; for activity, when it
does not present the intuitive idea of consciousness, gives us only
the indeterminate conception of a principle of changes in itself or
in other beings. This does not contradict the idea of multiplicity.
Suppose bodies in motion to have a true activity which really produces
motion in others, there is no contradiction in this activity being
distributed among the different parts of the other body, which at the
moment of impact produce their respective effects, causing motion in
the parts of the other body with which they come in contact.

151. Consequently, examining the question _a priori_, or considering
the idea of body, we can find no reason for denying the possibility of
its being active. It is true that the extension of bodies, inasmuch as
extension, is presented to us as something without life, indifferent
to all figures and to all motions, and that we do not discover in it
any principle of activity;[92] but this can prove nothing, unless we
suppose that the essence of bodies consists in extension, and that
extension contains nothing more than is presented to our senses, that
it includes nothing on which its activity can be founded. The first is
an opinion, but one without any foundation; the second can never be
demonstrated, because it escapes all observation, and cannot be the
object of investigations _a priori_.

[92] See Ch. XIII.

152. How can it be proved that the essence of bodies consists in
extension?[93] What we may say is, that we experience it, and that all
corporeal nature is presented to us under the form of extended. If we
assert any thing more than this we do so without any foundation, we
substitute for the reality a play of our fancy. The essence of any
thing is that which constitutes it what it is, that which serves as
the internal ground or root of the properties: who can say that we
know this ground, this root, in corporeal objects? Our senses, it is
true, perceive nothing not extended: we cannot conceive to what bodies
would be reduced if deprived of extension; but from this we can only
infer that extension is a form under which bodies are presented to our
senses; that this form is a necessary condition of the affection of our
sensibility; but not that the form is the essence of the thing, not
that there is in the object nothing more intimate in which the form
itself has its root.

[93] See Bk. III.

153. If the essence of bodies consisted in extension, such as it
appears to our senses, extension being equal there would be equality
of essence; the essences of bodies might be measured like their
dimensions; two globes of equal diameters, would be two essentially
equal bodies. Experience, and even common sense are opposed to this. It
may be said, that pure dimension, in so far as subject to measure, is
not enough to form equality of essence; but that the equality of nature
of the extension of both bodies is also requisite; but what, I ask,
is the meaning of the _nature_ of extension? If the word nature here
means any thing, it must mean something distinct from extension, in
so far as subject to our sensibility; in which case I infer that just
as in order to diversify the essences of bodies something is imagined
which is not contained in extension in so far as subject to sensible
intuition, something may in the same manner be supposed which is
capable of activity, and which offers to our understanding an accessory
idea giving life, so to speak, to the dead matter which we find in
extension, considered as the simple object of purely geometrical ideas.

154. Experience cannot demonstrate the impossibility of the activity
of bodies. Absolute inactivity cannot affect us, and therefore cannot
be known by experience. We can only experience action, or the exercise
of activity; inaction, or the state of an absolutely inactive thing,
cannot be the object of experience without a contradiction.




