CHAPTER VI.

CONNECTION OF THE IDEAS OF NUMBER WITH THEIR SIGNS.


51. The connection of ideas and impressions, in a sign, is a most
wonderful intellectual phenomenon, and at the same time of the greatest
help to our mind. Were it not for this connection, we could scarcely
reflect at all upon objects somewhat complex, and above all our memory
would be exceedingly limited.[26]

[26] See L. IV., C. XXVIII. and XXIX.

52. Condillac made some excellent remarks upon this matter: in his
opinion, we cannot, unaided by signs, count more than three or four.
If, indeed, we had no sign but that of unity, we could readily count
two, saying one and one. Having only two ideas, we could easily satisfy
ourselves that we had twice repeated one. But it is not so easy to be
certain of the exactness of our repetition when we have to count three,
by saying one and one and one; still, this is not difficult. It is more
so to count four, and next to impossible to go as far as ten. If we
undertake to abstract the signs, we shall find that it is impossible
to form an idea of ten by repeating one; and that it will be alike
impossible, if we employ no sign, to make sure that we have repeated
one exactly ten times.

53. Suppose the sign two, and one half of the difficulty is obviated;
thus it will be much easier to say two and one, than one and one and
one. In this supposition four will be no more difficult than was two,
since, just as we before said, one and one, two; we now say, two and
two, four. The attention before divided four times by the repetition of
one, is now only divided twice. Six was before a hard number to count,
but, in the present supposition, it is as easy as three was before;
for, if we repeat two and two and two, we shall have six. The attention
before distracted by six signs, is now distracted only by three.
Evidently, if we continue to form the numbers three, four, and so on,
expressive of distinct collections, we shall gradually facilitate
numeration, until we attain the decimal simplicity now in use.

54. It may here be asked if the actual system be the most perfect
possible? And if facility depend upon the distribution of collections
in signs, can there be any thing more perfect than this distribution?
Either there is question of new signs to denote new collections, or
of the combination of signs. There can be no number which we cannot
express with our present system, and consequently there is no need of
inventing any thing to denote new collections. New signs might perhaps
be invented for these collections, and these collections might possibly
be distributed in a simpler and more convenient manner. In this case
we admit an amelioration to be possible, though very difficult; but
none in the former. In a word, the only possible progress would be in
expressing better, not in expressing more.

55. The sign connects many ideas which, without it, would be isolated;
hence its necessity in many cases, its utility in all cases. With the
word hundred, or its numerical representative, 100, we know that we
have one repeated a hundred times. Were this help to fail, we could not
speak of a hundred, base calculations upon it, or even form it. It is,
however, well said that we do not succeed in forming it except by tens,
by repeating the calculation ten ten times.

56. Let it not, therefore, be thought that the idea of the number is
the idea of the sign; for evidently the same idea of ten corresponds to
the word ten, whether written, spoken, or numerically represented by
the figures 10, although these three signs are very different. Every
language has a word of its own to express ten, and all people have the
same idea of it.

57. This last remark creates a difficulty as to what the idea of
ten consists in. We cannot say that it is the recollection of the
repetition of one ten times; first, because we do not think of this
recollection when thinking of ten; and second, because, according to
what has already been said, a clear recollection of this repetition is
impossible. Neither is it the idea of the sign, for the idea signified
existed before the sign was invented, otherwise the invention would
have had no object, and would even have been impossible. There can be
no sign where there is nothing to signify.

The idea of number includes more difficulties than Condillac ever
imagined; who, if he had, after his close analysis of what facilitates
numeration, profoundly meditated upon the idea itself, would not
so readily have censured St. Augustine, Malebranche, and the whole
Platonic school, for having said that numbers perceived by the pure
understanding are something superior to those perceived by the senses.




CHAPTER VII.

ANALYSIS OF THE IDEA OF NUMBER IN ITSELF AND IN ITS RELATIONS WITH
SIGNS.


58. In order clearly to conceive the idea of number, and the way it is
engendered in our mind, let us study its formation in a deaf and dumb
person.

We have no better way of giving such a one an idea of unity than by
presenting an object to him. Now, if we would convey to him the idea of
two, we show him two fingers, then two oranges, then two books, and in
each of these operations make a sign which must be always the same. If
we repeat this operation a number of times, the deaf and dumb person
will associate the idea of two with that of the sign, and one will
suggest the others; and he will endeavor to show us that he has seen
two objects of some kind, by uniting the expression of the object with
the sign of two. The same will take place with three, or four. When we
reach higher numbers, the sign becomes more indispensable; since the
less easily the idea of number is represented, the more necessary is
the sign to secure it. But what we do to convey an idea of number to
the deaf and dumb person, what he himself must do to express the number
which he conceives, we must all do if we would obtain the idea.

59. Numeration is a repetition of operations; and the art of
facilitating it consists in instituting signs which recall to our
memory what we have done. It is an exceedingly complicated labyrinth,
and we cannot trust ourselves to its windings with any expectation of
finding our way out again, if we do not take care to mark the path we
have followed.

It is to the admirable simplicity of the decimal system, united to
its inexhaustible variety, that the facility and fecundity of our
arithmetic are due. Algebra, going a step beyond, expresses without
determining numbers, and presents the results of its operations without
effacing its footsteps on the road travelled, is far superior to
arithmetic, and has made the human mind take gigantic strides. But how?
Solely by aiding the memory. Thus, the very principle that enables the
child to say four and one, five, instead of adding unity five times to
unity, the dumb man to express five by a hand, a hundred by a grain,
enables the algebraist to express the result of his longest operations
by a formula easy of retention by the memory. Both attain their object
simply by aiding the memory. A grain of wheat denotes to the dumb man
the idea of hundred, and this he applies to all similar collections; a
few letters combined in a simple manner designate to the mathematician
a property of certain quantities, and this he applies to all which are
found in the same case.

60. Numeration is only an aggregation of formulas; and the more easy
these are of mutual transformation with a slight modification, the more
perfect will be the numeration. The better one knows the relations of
these formulas and the manner of transforming them, the better will he
know how to count. The greater a person's intellectual power of fixing
simultaneously the attention upon many formulas, and of composing them,
the more perfect arithmetician will he be, because the simultaneous
comparison of many, leads to the perception of new relations.

61. What is our idea of hundred? The union of the units composing it,
a union which we have made more or less frequently when learning to
count. But how do we know that it is the same union? Because we have a
formula called a hundred, expressed by a sign 100. This formula is so
easily recollected that we have no difficulty in recollecting the idea
of hundred and all the properties connected with it. We may be asked
if a hundred is more than ninety. Were we under the necessity counting
one and one and one, we should be bewildered, and never succeed in
distinguishing the greater; but knowing as we do that to reach the
formula hundred, we must pass by another formula ninety, and that this
was in ascending, we know, once for all, that hundred expresses ninety
and something more, that is, a hundred is more than ninety. And if
it be further inquired what is the excess, we shall not undertake to
ascertain this by adding units, but by the two formulas ninety and ten
which compose the formula hundred.

62. By generalization we unite many similar things in one idea. The
general idea is a kind of formula. Numeration unites in one sign many
things contained in a general idea, but this sign has, at the same
time, its own distinctive character. Thus the general idea belongs as a
predicate to each of its particular objects; number belongs to no one
in particular, but to all joined. We perceive in abstraction a common
property, and lay aside all the particular objects which it presents;
in numeration, we perceive similarity, but always with distinction.
Abstraction is the result of comparison, but not comparison. Numeration
implies a permanent comparison, or the recollection of it.

63. The idea of number is not conventional; a hundred is always a
hundred with all its properties and relations, and this, too, prior
to all convention and even to all human perception. The sign, and the
sign only, is conventional. Were there no intellectual creature, and
a hundred beings distinct among themselves were to exist, there would
really be this number. The number three exists in the august mystery
of the Trinity, from all eternity, and of absolute necessity. Number
requires only the existence of distinct things; since, however unlike
they may be, they always have something in common being, which may
be included in a general idea, and consequently they fulfil the two
conditions necessary to number.

64. The perception of being and of distinction, that is, of substantive
being and of relative not-being, is the perception of number. The
science of the relations of every collection, with its measure, which
is unity, is the science of numbers.




BOOK SEVENTH.

ON TIME.




