CHAPTER XII.

RELATIONS OF THE IDEA OF TIME TO EXPERIENCE.


88. If time is nothing distinct from things, how does it happen that
we conceive it in the abstract, independently of things themselves?
How does it happen that it presents itself to us as an absolute being,
subject to no transformation or motion, while within it every thing
is moved and transformed? If it is a subjective fact, why do we apply
it to things? If it is objective, why is it mingled with all our
perceptions? Because it contains a necessity sufficient to be the
object of science.

The idea of time, whatever it may be, seems prior to all perception of
transformation, the consciousness of all internal acts included. It is
impossible for us to know any of these things, unless time serves as a
receptacle in which we may place our own changes and those of others.

89. The idea of time is not the result of observation; for in that case
it would be the expression of a contingent fact, and could not be the
principle of science. We measure time with the same exactness as we
do space, and it is one of the most fundamental ideas of the exact
sciences, in so far as they have any application to the objects of
nature.

90. It might seem to follow from this that the idea of time is innate
in our mind; and that it is prior to all ideas, and even sensations;
for both are necessarily involved in successive duration.

91. The necessity of the idea of time seems to prove that time is
independent of transitory things; in this case we are obliged to
convert it into a purely subjective fact, or else to grant it an
objective reality, independent of that which is changeable. By the
former we destroy it; by the latter we make it an attribute of the
divinity. To deny time is to deny the light of the sun; to raise it to
the rank of an attribute of divinity is to admit change in an immutable
being. If we make it purely subjective, we deny it; if objective, we
make it divine: is there no middle way?

92. I agree that the idea of time is not derived from mere experience;
for experience could not furnish an element so solid and so fixed,
on which we may with perfect security rest all the observations of
science. Still less can it be maintained, that the idea of time is
derived from purely sensible experience, or that it is in itself a
sensation.

93. The idea of time is not a sensation; for it is relative, and
sensation is an affection of our being, without any reference to or
comparison with any thing. When we experience sensations, if we had
only the sensitive faculty, we should be limited to pure sensation,
without any consideration of before or after, or any relation of any
kind. Sensation, being limited to certain objects, cannot, like the
idea of time, extend to all objects. By time, we measure not only the
external world, but also the internal; not only the affections of the
body, but also the most concealed and abstract actions of our mind.
Time is, in itself, succession, and, in our mind, it is the perception
of this succession; it cannot, therefore, present any object to the
mind; even when time refers to objects, and is, as it were, the link
between them, it is not itself either these objects themselves, nor the
intuition of them. The idea of the time which measures the succession
of a sound or of a sight, clearly is not either the sound or the sight,
but the perception of their succession, of their connection. If it were
the sight alone, or the sound alone, either the sight or the sound
would alone be sufficient in order to perceive time, which is absurd;
for there is no time without succession, and consequently there can
be no time which measures two sensations without these sensations.
The idea of time is independent of either of the two; it is superior
to them; it is a sort of universal form, independent of this or that
matter; so that, if after the sound, instead of the sight, another
sound should be perceived by us, the measure of the succession would
be the same, and this measure is nothing more than the idea of time.
Sensations being mere contingent facts, cannot be the foundation of
necessary and universal truths, they cannot serve as the basis of a
science. But the idea of time is one of the principal ideas in all the
physical sciences, and, like extension, is subjected to a very rigorous
calculation; therefore, it is not a sensation, and it is not derived
from sensation.

94. Purely experimental cognitions are confined to the sphere of
experience; the idea of time extends to the whole real and possible
order, it teaches us not only what _is_, but what _may_, and what
_must_ be; its relations are of absolute necessity, and may be
subjected to the strictest calculation; therefore it contains something
more than the elements furnished by sensible or insensible experience.
It is not otherwise possible to explain the necessity which it
involves, or to pass beyond a collection of contingent facts to arrive
at the possession of an element of science.

95. Let us observe, as we pass, that here is found another proof that
the system of Condillac is neither true nor subsistent. His system
has been found insufficient to explain any fundamental idea, and it
does not explain the idea of time, any more than the rest, although it
seems as though this idea must have the most intimate relations to the
sensible order.

96. If the idea of time is not merely experimental, how explain the
priority and necessity of time?




