CHAPTER VI.

DIFFICULTIES IN THE EXPLANATION OF VELOCITY.


32. Here arises a serious difficulty: if time be nothing absolute,
greater or less velocity is inexplicable. This seems to result even
from what we have said, that if the relation of movements be not
changed, any augmentation or diminution of velocity is impossible;
because, if velocity be in necessary relation to time, and time itself
be nothing but the relation of mutations, it is inconceivable how time,
and consequently how velocity, can be changed without changing the
relation of mutations. Thus it would be impossible for the velocity of
the whole mechanism of the universe to be changed, just as it would
be absurd to say that the stars and every thing that exists may now
experience the same changes of velocity. This would destroy the very
idea of velocity; at least if taken as something absolute, wherein
different grades may be considered.

33. Let us now examine this difficulty, which indeed deserves to be
examined, for it seems to contradict our most common ideas.

First of all, we must premise that velocity is not something absolute,
but a relation. Physicists and mathematicians express it by a fraction
whose numerator is the space run over and whose denominator is the time
consumed. Making V the velocity, S the space, and T the time, we shall
have V = S/T. This shows the velocity to be essentially a _relation_;
for it cannot be otherwise expressed than by the ratio of the space to
the time.

34. This mathematic formula expresses the idea we all have of velocity;
it expresses in three letters what the unlettered man repeatedly says
to himself. The velocity of two horses is ascertained not solely by the
space they have passed over, nor solely by the time they have consumed
in their career, but by the greater or less space passed over in a
given time; or by the longer or shorter time required to pass over a
given space.

To deny, then, to velocity an absolute nature, is nothing new; for we
all of us make it essentially consist in a relation.

35. In the expression V = S/T two terms enter, space and time. Viewing
the former in the real order, abstraction made of that of phenomena, we
more easily come to regard it as something fixed; and we comprehend it
in a given case without any relation. A foot is at all times a foot;
and a yard, a yard. These are quantities existing in reality; and if
we refer them to other quantities, it is only to make sure that they
are so; not because their reality depends upon the relation. A cubic
foot of water is not a cubic foot because the measure so says, but
on the contrary, the measure so says because there is a cubit foot.
The measure itself is also an absolute quantity; and in general, all
extensions are absolute, for otherwise, we should be obliged to seek
measure of measure, and so on to infinity. True, to call things large
or small depends upon comparison; but this does not change their own
quantity. The diameter of the earth, compared with an inch measure,
is immense; but it is an almost imperceptible point compared with
the distance of the fixed stars; yet this does not prevent the inch
measure, the diameter of the earth, and the distance to the fixed
stars, from being values in themselves determinate, and independent of
each other.[27]

[27] See Lib. III., Ch. XX.

If the denominator in S/T were a quantity of the same kind as space,
that is, having determinate values, existing and conceivable by
themselves alone, the velocity, although still a relation, might also
have determinate values, not indeed, wholly absolute, but only in the
supposition that the two terms, S and T, having fixed values, are
compared. Thus, if we require a velocity of 4, we have only to take a
fixed quantity of space, and another fixed quantity of time, having the
relation to each other of 4 to 1; and this is quite easy, when S and T
are both absolute quantities. If, in this supposition, an acceleration
or delay be required in the whole universe, nothing more would be
required than to augment or diminish the time in which each part would
have to traverse its respective space. But from the difficulties which
we have on the one hand seen presented to the consideration of time as
an absolute thing, and from the fact that, on the other hand, no solid
proof can be adduced to show such a property to have any foundation, it
follows that we know not how to consider velocity as absolute, even in
the sense above explained.

36. Hence a consequence not less important than striking, as to the
possibility of a universal acceleration or retardation. If we would
have an acceleration or retardation of the whole machine of the
universe, and should abandon all motion to which we might refer time,
should at once change all, not excluding the operations of our own
soul, we should have a problem proposed to us that appears insolvable,
nothing less than the realization of an impossibility; the relation of
many terms would have to be changed without undergoing any change. If
velocity be only the relation of space and time, and time only the
relation of spaces traversed, it is the same thing to change them all
in the same proportion, and not to change them at all; it is to leave
every thing as it is.

37. The singularity of such consequences ought not to be a sufficient
excuse for abandoning them. We must not forget that we are examining
the common ideas of time and velocity in their most transcendental
aspect, and that it is by no means astonishing that our mind finds
itself, as it leaves its ordinary walks, in an entirely new atmosphere,
wherein it seems to discover contradictions. When we examine the
ideas of time and velocity, we unwittingly fall into the error of
uniting them in the same explanation. We would prescind them; but this
we do only with great difficulty, and we often fall into a vicious
circle. Hence it is that when, by a great effort, we succeed in
really prescinding, the consequences that follow seem contradictory;
but this apparent contradiction arises solely from our not having
persevered with due firmness in our prescision; and as, in this case,
the understanding starts from two different suppositions, whereas
it believes that it starts from one alone, the results seem to it
contradictory, which in reality they may not be. The same thing occurs
in the examination of the idea of space.[28]

[28] See Lib. III., Chs. XII., XIII., and XIV.




