CHAPTER XII.

SOLUTION OF VARIOUS OBJECTIONS AGAINST THE POSSIBILITY OF AN INFINITE
EXTENSION.


84. The discussions on the possibility of an infinite extension are of
a very ancient date. How could it be otherwise? Must not the glorious
spectacle of the universe, and the space which we imagine beyond the
boundaries of all worlds, naturally have given rise to questions as to
the existence or possibility of a limit to this immensity?

Some philosophers think an infinite extension impossible. Let us see on
what they found their opinion.

85. Extension is a property of a finite substance, and that which
belongs to a finite thing cannot be infinite; therefore it is
impossible to conceive infinity of any kind in a finite being. This
argument is not conclusive. It is true that an extended substance is
finite, in the sense that it does not possess absolute infinity such
as is conceived in the Supreme Being; but it does not follow from
this that it cannot be infinite under certain aspects. Neither is it
correct to say that no finite substance can have an infinite property,
because the properties flow from the substance, and the infinite cannot
proceed from the finite. In order that this argument may be valid, it
is necessary to prove that all the properties of a being emanate from
its substance: figures are accidental properties of bodies, and yet
many of them have no relation to the substance, and are mere accidents
which appear or disappear, not by the internal force of the substance,
but by the action of an external cause. We see extension in bodies; but
as we know not the essence of corporeal substance, we cannot say how
far this property is connected with the substance, whether it is an
emanation from it, or only something which has been given to it and may
be taken from it without any essential alteration.[39]

[39] See Bk. III., Chaps. XIX., XXI., XXIV., XXV., XXVI., XXVII. and
XXVIII.

Moreover, when we say that the infinite cannot proceed from the finite,
we do not deny that an infinite property may proceed from a substance
finite in its essence.

When we admit the infinite property, we admit at the same time all that
is necessary in the substance in order that this property may have its
root in it, so long as we do not deny the character of finite which
essentially belongs to every creature. When we deny that creatures are
or can be infinite, we speak of essential infinity, of that infinity
which implies necessity of being and absolute independence under every
aspect; but we do not deny them a relative infinity, such as that of
extension.

To undertake to prove that infinite extension is impossible, because
every property of a finite substance must be finite, is equivalent
to supposing the very thing in dispute; for the precise question is,
whether one of these properties, namely, extension, can be infinite. In
order to establish the negative proposition, "No property of a finite
substance can be infinite," it is necessary to prove this of extension.
Hence the argument which we are imposing implies, in some manner, a
begging of the question, when they found it on a general proposition
which can only be certain when the present question is solved.

86. Infinite extension ought to be the greatest of all extensions, but
there is no such extension. From any given extension God can take away
a certain quantity; for example, a yard: in that case the infinite
extension would become finite, for it would be less than the first;
and as the difference between the two extensions is only a yard, it is
clear that not even the first could be infinite; for it is impossible
that there should be only the difference of one yard between the finite
and the infinite.

This difficulty merits a serious consideration: at first sight it
seems so conclusive that no possibility of a satisfactory solution is
conceivable.

The proposition that the difference between the finite and the infinite
cannot be finite, is not wholly correct. We must first of all take
notice that the difference between two quantities, whether finite or
infinite, cannot be absolutely infinite, in the sense of diminution.
Difference is the excess of one quantity over another, and necessity
implies a limit; for as the excess only is considered, the quantity
exceeded is not contained in the difference. Calling the difference
D, the greater quantity A, and the smaller _a_, I say that D can in
no hypothesis be infinite. By the supposition D = A - _a_; therefore
D + _a_ = A; in order that D may equal A it is necessary to add to it
_a_; therefore D cannot be infinite. If we suppose A = ∞,
we shall have D = A - _a_ = ∞ - _a_, or D + _a_ = ∞.
Therefore to make D infinite we must add to it _a_, and we
can never have D = ∞ unless _a_ = 0; but in that case there
would be no true difference, since the equation, D = A - _a_, would be
converted into D = A - 0 = A, and the difference would not be real but
imaginary.

It follows from this that no difference between two positive quantities
can be absolutely infinite; if it is so in some sense, it is not so in
the sense of diminution; and the union of these two ideas of difference
and infinity results in a contradiction.[40]

[40] I am speaking of the difference between _positive_ quantities; for
with regard to other quantities we may express an infinite difference
algebraically. Let the two quantities be (∞ - _a_) and (-_a_). The
difference between them will be expressed in this equation, D=(∞ - _a_)
- (-_a_) = ∞ - a + a = ∞.

The difference between an infinite quantity and a given finite quantity
cannot be another given finite quantity, but it must be infinite in
some sense. Let us suppose an infinite line and a given finite line,
the difference between them cannot be expressed by a given finite
lineal value. For supposing the second line to be a finite and a given
line, we may place it upon the infinite line in any of its directions,
and from any point in it it will reach a certain point of the infinite
line. If we suppose a second given finite line, representing the
difference between the other two lines, we ought to place it upon
the infinite line at the point where the other terminates; and it is
evident that it will terminate at another point determined by its
length; therefore it will not measure the whole of the difference
between the infinite and the finite lines.

We obtain the same result in algebraic expressions. If A be a given
finite value, the difference between A and ∞ cannot be another given
finite value. For, expressing the difference by D, we shall have ∞ - D
± A D. Therefore, D + A = ∞; consequently, if both were given finite
values, an infinite would result from two given finite values, which
is absurd.

Hence, a difference may be in some sense infinite, according to the
meaning we attach to the term infinity. If from the point where we are
situated, we draw a line towards the north and produce it infinitely,
and then produce it, also, infinitely towards the south, the difference
between either of these lines and the sum of them both, will be
infinite only in a certain sense. This is also verified by algebraic
expressions. If we have the infinite value equal 2∞, and compare it
with ∞, the result is 2∞ - ∞ = ∞.

In general, from any infinite value we may subtract any finite
difference in relation to it, so long as the subtrahend is not a given
finite value. Let ∞ be the infinite value,--I say that we can find
in it any finite value; for, ∞ being an infinite value, A contains
all finite values of the same order; therefore it contains the finite
value, A; consequently we may form the equation, ∞ - A = B. Whatever be
the value of B, the relation of B to ∞ is A; for by only adding A to B
we obtain ∞. The equation, ∞ - A = B, gives B + A = ∞, and also ∞ - B =
A; and as A is a given value according to the supposition, and A is the
given finite difference between ∞ and B, it follows that we may find a
finite difference to every infinite value.

We may infer from this that the possibility of assigning a finite
difference to an infinite extension, does not prove any thing against
its true infinity. The infinite, and because it is infinite, contains
all that belongs to the order in which it is infinite. We may take any
sure value, and considering it as a difference, and we shall obtain a
finite difference. But far from proving the absence of infinity, this
confirms its existence; for it shows that all the finite is contained
in the infinite.

In this case, the subtrahend would be infinite under a certain aspect;
but not in the order of diminution, because it wants the quantity which
is taken from it.

87. There is another argument against the absolute infinity of
extension, which seems to have more weight than any of those which
precede, and I cannot see why it has never occurred to those who argue
against this possibility. It is this,--we suppose an infinite extension
to exist. God can annihilate it, and then create another equally
infinite. The sum of both is greater than either alone; therefore
neither of them alone is infinite. This annihilation we may suppose as
often as we wish; hence we may have a series of infinite extensions.
The terms of this series cannot exist at the same time, since one
actual infinite extension excludes all others. Therefore, as the sum
of the extensions is greater than any number of particular extensions,
the absolute infinite extension must be found, not in the particular
extensions, but in the sum, and hence an actual infinite extension is
intrinsically impossible.

To solve this difficulty we must distinguish between extension and the
thing extended: the whole question turns on the intrinsic possibility
of the infinity of extension, considered in itself, abstracting
absolutely the subject in which it is found. The difficulty places
before our sight a series of successive infinite extensions; but in
reality this succession is in the beings which are extended, and the
number of which goes on increasing; but not in the extension itself.
The pure idea of infinite extension in the one case, is not increased
by the new extensions which are produced; the extension appears,
disappears, reappears, and again disappears, but is not increased.
The succession shows the intrinsic possibility of its appearance
and its disappearance, its essential contingency, because it is not
repugnant for it to cease to exist when it exists, or to pass again
from non-existence to existence. If we examine our ideas, we shall
find that we cannot increase the infinite extension which we conceive,
by any imaginable supposition; and that whatever we may do, is reduced
to a succession of productions and annihilations. The idea of infinite
extension seems to be a primitive part of our mind; the infinity
which we imagine in space, is only the attempt which our mind makes
to express its idea in reality. Created with sensible intuition, we
have received the power of expanding this intuition on an infinite
scale,--to do this we require the idea of an infinite extension.




