CHAPTER VII.

FUNDAMENTAL EXPLANATION OF SUCCESSION.


38. The reasons that destroy the absolute nature of time, inasmuch
as it is subject to measure, do not seem fully to obviate another
difficulty, arising from the consideration of time in itself. If indeed
time be succession, what is this succession? It is evident that things
succeed each other; but if there be no _before_ or _after_, that is,
time existing before succession, since succession consists in some
things coming _after_ others, what is the meaning of succeeding each
other? Thus, time is explained by succession, and succession by time.
What is _afterwards_ but a part of time that is in relation with a
_heretofore_?

39. What we said in the fourth chapter does not seem completely to
solve the difficulty; for being and not-being do not form succession,
save only inasmuch as one comes _after_ the other, that is, inasmuch
as it presupposes the time to be explained already to exist. There may
be a simultaneous being and not-being of distinct things; and there is
in one and the same thing no repugnance between being and not-being,
if not referred to the same time. In such a case, therefore, this is
always presupposed so to be; since in one and the same thing, being and
not-being are inconceivable unless at different instants of time. Hence
it follows that being and not-being do not sufficiently explain time.

40. This difficulty is indeed grave; and we must, in order to solve
it, elaborate a fundamental explanation of succession. This we shall
endeavor to do, and without in any sense supposing the idea of time.

41. There are things which exclude, and things which do not exclude
each other. When we have existence of things which exclude each other,
we have succession. If in a line a--------b--------c, a body be at a,
it cannot pass to b, without ceasing to be at a. The situation at b
excludes that at a; and so also that at c excludes that at b. When we
see things exist notwithstanding this reciprocal exclusion, we find
succession.

42. Succession is, in reality, the existence of things mentally
exclusive of each other. What each involves is the being of that which
excludes, and the not-being of that which is excluded.

43. This exclusion prevails in all variations; and therefore, we find
succession in every variation. Variation is the mutation of states;
the loss of one, and the acquisition of another; therefore, there is
exclusion, for being excludes not-being, and not-being, being.

44. When we perceive these distinctions, these exclusions realized,
we perceive succession, time. When we compute these exclusions, these
distinctions in which distinct and exclusive things are offered to us,
such as being and not-being, we compute time.

45. Here arises a difficulty. If succession involves exclusion, and
there is no succession without exclusion, it follows that things which
do not exclude each other are simultaneous; and from this we infer the
absurdity of saying, that the things happening in the time of Adam,
which do not exclude those of our own time, are simultaneous. The
motion of the plants of Paradise excludes not that of plants in gardens
now existing; this motion, then, is simultaneous with that; the motion
that was then is the present; and the present motion was then; which is
inconceivably absurd.

This difficulty is serious: it seems to be based upon a reason founded
in evident truths; but it is not impossible to give a solution of it.

46. Were there to exist one thing which excluded nothing, and was
excluded by nothing, it would be simultaneous with every thing. Know
you what this thing is? There is but one, God. It is therefore that the
theologians say, with great truth, and with a profoundness which has
not, perhaps, been at all times understood even by those who have made
the remark, that God is present to all times; that to him there is no
succession, no _before_ or _after_; that to him every thing is present,
is _now_.

47. Of God alone is this true; in all else there is some exclusion,
being and not-being, and therefore succession. Let us now, for example,
examine how the motion of the plants in our gardens is excluded by that
of the garden of Eden. How are those of our gardens moved? By existing,
and also by being subject to conditions necessary to motion. How do
they exist? By a development of the germs they themselves contain. What
is this development? A series of motions, of being and of not-being,
and consequently of things that exclude each other. There is, then, no
simultaneousness between those of the garden of Eden and those of our
own gardens; for between the former and the first germ, there was no
mediation other than the movement of the first development; whereas,
between the movements of those of our gardens and the first germ, many
others have intervened. Here we have exclusion, being and not-being.
The number of exclusions necessary to existence is very different in
the two cases; therefore, there is no simultaneousness. Considering all
the developments, and all the changes of the orb, as a dilated series
of terms interlaced by a mutual dependence, as in fact they are by the
laws of nature; and calling these terms A, B, C, D, E,--N, the plants
of the garden of Eden belong to the term A, and those of ours, to the
term N.

48. The non-simultaneousness of motion is proved in the same manner
as the non-simultaneousness of existence, for motion is a manner of
existing. Moreover, the air which agitates the plants of our gardens
has been moved by another, and this other by yet another; and these
motions, subject to all the fixed and constant laws of nature, are
all interlinked from the very first motion, just as the wheels are
interlocked in a system of machinery. But as the curvature of one wheel
is not that of the other, so these motions are different, and exclude
one another down to the last, which is the air which moves the present
plants.

49. This explanation of succession and time, throws much light on the
idea of eternity; and shows that eternity, or the simultaneousness of
all existence, belongs only to the immutable being. All mutable beings,
which necessarily imply a transition from not-being to being, and from
being to not-being, involve a succession, if not in their substance, at
least in their modifications.

50. This explains how the idea of time is found in almost all our
conceptions, and is expressed in all languages. Man continually
perceives being and not-being in all around him. He perceives it within
him, in the multitude of his thoughts and affections; at one time
agreeing, at another disagreeing; sometimes connected, and sometimes
separated; but always distinguished from one another, always producing
different modifications in the mind: they therefore exclude each
other, and cannot co-exist; because the existence of one excludes the
existence of the other.




