CHAPTER VIII.

CAUSALITY IN ITSELF.--INSUFFICIENCY AND ERROR OF SOME EXPLANATIONS.


85. Causality implies relation: if in exercise, it implies actual
relation; considered not in exercise, but _in potentia_, it implies a
possible relation. Nothing causes itself; causality always relates to
another. There is no cause where there is no effect; and there is no
effect where there is no transition from not-being to being. If this
transition takes place in a substance which was not, but begins to be,
it is called creation; and is said to be passive, relatively to the
effect, and active, in relation to the cause. If the transition is of
accidents only, the effect is a _new_ modification; we do not then say
that there is a new being, but that the being is _in another manner_.

86. From this it may be inferred that causality is not the same
as activity: all causality is activity, but not all activity is
causality. God is active in himself; but he is cause only in relation
to the external. His intelligence and his will are certainly infinite
activity, considered in themselves, and abstracted from creation, as
we conceive God from all eternity before the beginning of the world;
yet, inasmuch as they are purely immanent, they are causality, for they
produce nothing new in God. His intelligence is a pure act, infinitely
perfect, and can never suffer any change; the same must be said of
his will: therefore the divine intelligence and will with respect to
God himself are not acts of causality. Even as referred to external
objects, they are a producing cause in reality, only by subjection to
the free will of the Creator; for otherwise we should have to admit
that God created the world necessarily.

Activity in creatures, even in immanent operations, is always
causality; for they cannot exercise their activity without producing
new modifications. Acts of understanding and will are the exercise of
an immanent activity, and yet they modify us in different ways. When we
think or will we are in _a different manner_ from that in which we are
when we do not think or will; and when we pass from thinking or willing
one thing to think or will another, this transition cannot take place
without our experiencing _new modes_ of being.

87. In what does the relation of efficient causality consist? What is
the meaning of the dependence of the effect in relation to the cause?
This is a difficult and a profound question; one of the most difficult
and most profound which can be presented to science. The majority of
men and even of philosophers imagine that they can solve it, by using
words which, rightly analyzed, explain nothing.

88. To cause, it is said, is to give being. What means to give? To give
is here synonymous with to produce. What means to produce? With this
the explanations are at an end, unless one should wish to fall into a
vicious circle, saying that to produce is to cause or give being.

A cause, it is also said, is that from which a thing results. What is
understood by resulting? To emanate. What is to emanate? To emanate is
to proceed, to flow from another. Always the same thing: metaphorical
expressions which at bottom have all the same meaning.

It is said that a cause is that which _gives_, _produces_, _makes_,
_communicates_, _generates_, etc., and that an effect is that which
_receives_, _proceeds_, _emanates_, _results_, _flows_, _comes_,
_springs_, etc.

89. Causality implies succession, but is not identified with it. We can
clearly conceive that B is after A, without A being the cause of B.

Internal and external experience present continual examples of
succession distinct from causality. A man goes out into the field,
another follows him: between the going out of both there is succession,
but there may be no causality. The two phenomena, whether considered
objectively in themselves, or subjectively, as known by us, are
connected by the relation of succession, but not by that of causality.
There is as great a difference in philosophy as in ordinary language
between _post_ and _propter_, _after_ and _because_ of. The same is
true in purely internal phenomena. I think of a question of philosophy,
and then pass to a literary question: the two thoughts are successive,
but one is not the cause of the other.

90. The relation of causality is not the connection of the ideas of
things. The representations of A and B may be strongly connected in
our mind without our even thinking of the relation of causality. We
have seen in a place a scene which made a profound impression on us;
ever afterwards the remembrance of the place recalls the scene, and
the recollection of the scene reminds us of the place; here we find
two internal representations strongly connected, without our therefore
attributing to the objects the relation of causality. We know that two
persons arrive at the same place and without the coming of the one
influencing the coming of the other. The idea of the coming of the
one will be associated in the mind with the idea of the coming of the
other. There will then be a connection of representations, although we
deny to the objects the relation of causality.

91. Although the connection of the ideas in our understanding may,
in consequence of a constant experience, be such that one is always
preceded by the other, as the conditioned is by the condition, this
is not enough for true causality. An observer may have remarked the
correspondence of the ebb and flow of the tide with the motion of the
moon; but whether for reasons of philosophy, or because it has never
occurred to him that the motion of the moon could influence the motion
of the sea, he considers these phenomena entirely independent of one
another, although he may try hard to explain so strange a coincidence.
In the mind of this observer the two phenomena will be always joined,
in such a way that the phenomenon of the moon will always be that of
the ebb and flow, without its being possible to invert the order and
make the ebb and flow precede the motion of the moon. Here then is a
necessary priority in an idea, and yet true causality is not attributed
to the object.

92. There is a fact in the history of philosophy which proves with the
greatest evidence the truth of what I have just said. This fact is the
system of occasional causes maintained by eminent philosophers. If a
body, they say, strike another body at rest, it will communicate to it
its motion; but this communication does not imply a true causality, but
that the motion of the impinging body is a mere occasion of the motion
of the body impinged. Here then a thing is conceived as a necessary
condition of the existence of another, and yet it is denied that there
is between them the relation of causality. In thinking of the two
phenomena we cannot invert the order, and conceive the motion of the
body impinged as the condition of the motion of the impinging body,
yet we can deny the relation of causality between the condition and
the conditioned. Therefore the idea of causality represents something
besides the necessary order of things among themselves.

93. This brings us to a new phasis of the question. Is the relation of
causality faithfully represented in the conditional proposition: if
A exists, B will exist? The connection expressed by this proposition
is not the relation of causality. If the fruit-tree N flourishes in a
certain country, M will flourish. A constant experience proves it. The
conditional proposition in this case does not express the relation of
causality of the flourishing of N with respect to the flourishing of
M; yet the proposition is true. One phenomenon may be the sign of the
immediate approach of another, without being its cause.

94. Conditional propositions, in which the existence of one object
is affirmed as the condition of the existence of another, express a
connection; but this may not be a connection of the objects with each
other, but with a third. If a gentleman's servant goes to a place, and
then another servant of the same gentleman goes to the same place, the
cause of the going of the second may not be the going of the first, but
simply that their master wished them to go one after the other. The
crops in one field indicate the state of the crops of another field,
and this indication may be expressed by a conditional proposition.
Why so? Is it on account of the causality of the crops in one field
in relation to those in another? Certainly not; but because the
circumstances of the climate and the soil produce a sufficiently fixed
order between them to verify the conditional proposition, without the
intervention of the idea of the causality of one in relation to the
other.

95. There are many cases in which the relation between the condition
is necessary, and yet the condition neither is, nor can be, the
cause of the conditioned. We are here treating of efficient cause,
of that which gives being to the thing, and it would often be absurd
to attribute this kind of causality to conditions which on the other
side are necessarily connected with the conditioned. Take away the
pillar on which a body rests, and the body will fall; the connection of
the condition with the conditioned, or of the taking away the pillar
with the fall of the body is necessary; the proposition in which this
connection is expressed is true and necessary in the natural order;
and still it cannot be said that the removal of the pillar is the
_efficient_ cause of the fall of the body.

96. Even a purely occasional connection is all that is necessary for
the truth of the conditional proposition; and no one ever confounds
the occasion with the cause. In the present example, the body cannot
fall unless the pillar is removed; and it must necessarily fall if it
is removed; but the cause of the fall is not in the removal of the
pillar, but in the weight of the body, as is evident if we suppose the
specific gravity of the body to be equal to that of the fluid in which
it is submerged, since in that case, the removal of the pillar is not
followed by the fall of the body.

97. Causality cannot express a necessary relation of the condition to
the conditioned, unless we deny all free causes. Supposing the idea of
causality to be correctly expressed in this proposition: if A exists,
B will exist; by substituting God and the world for A and B, it will
become: if God exists the world will exist; which would lead us into
the error of the necessity of the creation. By substituting man and
determinate actions for A and B, we shall have the proposition: if man
exists, his determinate actions will exist, which implies necessity,
and destroys free will.

98. Here arises the question: would the relation of causality be
correctly expressed by a conditional proposition, taken in an inverse
sense, or with the effect, as the condition and the cause as the
conditioned, (not conditioned in the order of existence, but only as
a thing necessarily supposed,) that is, if, instead of saying: if A
exists, B will exist, we say: if B exists, A exists? In this case, the
proposition may be applied even to the dependence of creatures on God,
and in general of all free actions on their causes; for we can say with
truth: if the world exists, God exists; if there is a free action,
there is a free agent.

99. Although at first sight this seems to explain the relation of
causality, this new formula cannot be regarded as correct. For, though
it is true in general, that if there is an effect there is a cause,
it is also certain that oftentimes one thing supposes another, not
as its cause, but as a mere occasion, as a condition _sine qua non_;
which is far from being true causality. Supposing the body supported
by the pillar to be so placed that it cannot fall unless the pillar
is removed, we might form the conditional proposition: if the body
has fallen, the pillar has been taken away; the proposition is true,
although the removal of the pillar is not the efficient cause of the
fall of the body.

100. God could have so created the world that creatures would have no
true action of causality upon one another, and yet have so arranged
them that the phenomena would correspond with each other in the same
manner as they now do. This is the opinion of defenders of the doctrine
of occasional causes, and to this is reduced the _pre-established
harmony_ of Leibnitz, according to which all the monads constituting
the universe are like so many clocks, which, though independent of one
another, agree with admirable exactness. On this hypothesis we might
form infinite conditional propositions expressing the correspondence of
the phenomena without the idea of causality entering into any of them.

101. From what has been said we must infer that this idea is something
distinct from the necessary connection, and that it is not correctly
expressed in all its purity by the relation contained in the
conditional propositions, whether the cause be taken as the condition
or as the conditioned. The dependence of the effect on its cause is
something more than the simple connection. To say that whatever is
necessarily connected, even successively and in a fixed order, is
connected by the relation of causality, is to confound the ideas of
common language as well as those of philosophy.




