CHAPTER XIX.

A GLANCE AT THE IDEAS OF SPACE, NUMBER, AND TIME.


157. We may now mark out and determine with perfect exactness the
necessary elements which form the object of the natural and exact
sciences. This is not only curious, but highly important; for it
presents under the simplest aspect, an immense field of knowledge, the
limits of which expand, as we advance; so that, it is impossible to
assign a limit to progress.

158. Space, number, and time, are the three elements of all the
natural and exact sciences. All else contained in them pertains to
mere experience, to the order of contingent facts, which involve no
necessity, and cannot strictly be the objects of science.

159. Universal arithmetic is founded on the idea of numbers, geometry
on that of space, and the idea of time places us in communication with
the sensible world, so as to determine the relations of its phenomena.
These phenomena are isolated contingent facts, and cannot become the
object of science, until subjected to the general ideas of space,
number, and time.

160. Hence, there are two parts in every natural science; the
theoretic, and the experimental. The former is founded on necessary
ideas, the latter on contingent facts; the first without the second,
would not come down to the real world; the second without the first,
would not rise to the regions of science.

161. The natural sciences merit the name of science, in proportion
to the quantity of necessary elements which they contain, and the
closeness of the connection by which they unite with them contingent
facts. But as no natural science can be conceived, without contingent
facts, so there is none entirely free from the contingency which they
communicate.

162. These observations reveal a great simplicity in the elements of
science, and we may push this simplicity much farther, if we recollect
what has been said when analyzing the ideas of number and time.

163. The idea of number arises from the idea of being and not-being:
the same is also true of the idea of time; therefore, at bottom, these
ideas are but one, though presented under different aspects.

164. Hence, all the natural and exact sciences may be reduced to two
elements: the intuition of extension, and the general conception of
being. Extension is the basis of all sensible intuitions: externally,
it is a necessary condition of the relations which we conceive in the
corporeal world; internally, it is a perception, without which the
sensibility could not represent external objects. The conception of
being, is the basis of all conceptions; developed in different ways,
it generates the ideas of number and time; and these, combined with
extension, constitute the necessary part of all the natural and exact
sciences.

165. The ideas of space, number, and time are common to all men; the
proof that they are identical to all is, that, in their application,
all are led to the same results, and in speaking of them they all
use the same expressions. All men measure space, and its various
dimensions; they all count, they all conceive time: why, then, is there
so great difficulty in explaining these ideas? why such difference of
opinion among philosophers? Here we have a confirmation of what we have
said[35] of the strength of direct perception, and the weakness of
reflex. When we content ourselves with the direct perception of space,
of number, and of time, our ideas are clear, and the understanding
feels its strength and energy, it extends the sphere of its knowledge
beyond all limits, and raises the edifice of the mathematical and
exact sciences. But as soon as it turns upon itself, and, leaving the
direct perception, passes to the reflex, endeavoring to perceive its
perception, its strength fails, and it falls into a confusion which
gives rise to interminable disputes. We scarce perceive that idea,
which, a moment ago, we applied to every thing, which penetrated
all our cognitions, and circulated, like our life, through all our
perceptions; but in its isolation, and its purity, it continually
escapes from us; mingled with all things, we see that it is something
distinct from them; we separate it from one, and it unites with
another; we make an effort to cut it off from all that is not itself,
and the mind feels a kind of dizziness come over it, every thing
vanishes from before it, and, unable to reach the reality, it is forced
to be contented with names, which it pronounces and repeats a thousand
times, turning over in them the little reality which they contain.

[35] See Bk. I., Chap. III.

167. One of the causes of this weakness and of the errors which are
its ordinary consequence, is, as I have before said, our mad desire of
representing every idea as an internal form, or image, whereas we ought
to consider that in many cases there is only a perception, a simple
act in the lowest depth of our mind,--an act, which can be represented
by nothing, which resembles nothing, and which cannot be explained
in words, because it cannot be decomposed, and it is only present as
a simple fact of consciousness. But this fact of consciousness is an
active fact; by it we penetrate into things, and see what they have
in common, and separate it from what is particular, establishing in
our mind, as it were, a central, culminating point, from which we
contemplate the internal and the external world, and roam through the
boundless regions of possibility.




BOOK EIGHTH.

THE INFINITE.




