CHAPTER III.

SUBSTANTIVE AND COPULATIVE BEING.


11. For the more thorough understanding of this matter, it will be well
to distinguish between the absolute and relative ideas of being; that
is between what is expressed by the word being, when it designates
reality, simple existence, and when it marks the union of a predicate
and its subject. In the two following propositions we see very closely
the different meaning of the word _is_; Peter _is_; Peter _is_ good.
In the former the word _is_ designates the reality of Peter, or his
existence; in the latter, it expresses the union of the predicate
_good_ with the subject _Peter_. In the former the verb _to be_ is
substantive, in the latter it is copulative. The substantive simply
expresses the existence; the copulative a determination, a mode of
existing. The desk is, signifies the simple existence of the desk; the
desk is high, expresses a mode of being, height.

12. Purely substantive being, is nowhere met with, except in the
following proposition: being is, or what is is; in all other
propositions there is involved, even in the subject itself, some
predicate which determines the mode. When we say, the desk is,
notwithstanding that the direct predicate of the proposition is the
word _is_, there yet enters into the subject _desk_ a determination
of the being of which we speak, and that is of a being which is a
desk. We were, then, right in saying that the verb _to be_, in its
purely substantive meaning, is met with in no other proposition than
this: being is. This is perfectly identical, absolutely necessary and
convertible, that is, the predicate may be observed of all subjects,
and the subject of all predicates. Suppose we give the proposition
a different form; being is existing; we can still say all being is
existing, or the existing is being; that is, all that exists is being.

13. If it be objected that possible being does not exist, we answer
that purely possible being is not, strictly speaking, being; but
that it does exist, in the same mode in which it is, that is, in
the possible order. As we shall, however, treat this question more
fully hereafter, we now turn to the propositions in which being is
copulative. The desk is, is equivalent to this, the desk is existing.
It is true that every real desk is existing, but real is the same as
existing; and thus it might, in one sense, be said that the proposition
resembles this other: all being is. But here we detect a difference; it
consists in this, that the idea of existence does not necessarily enter
into that of desk, for we can conceive of a desk which does not exist,
but we cannot conceive of a being as such without a being, that is,
of a being which is not being. A very notable difference is every way
perceptible between the two propositions; in the former, the subject
may be affirmed of all predicates by saying, all that is existing is
being; but it is evident that we cannot say all that is existing is
desk.

14. The reason of this is that the proposition, being is, is absolutely
identical; it is the expression of a pure conception reduced to the
form of a proposition; and, consequently, the terms which serve as
extremes may be taken indiscriminately the one for the other; being
is, whatever is, is being; being is existing; every thing existing
is being. But different orders of ideas are combined in all other
propositions; and, although the common idea of being is applicable to
all, as this idea is essentially indeterminate, it does not thence
follow that one of the things to which the general idea corresponds is
identical with the other, alike entering into the same general idea.
Being belongs to every existing desk; but not, therefore, is every
thing a desk.

15. Copulative being may be applied without the substantive; thus when
we say that the ellipse is curvilinear, we abstract both the existence
and non-existence of any one ellipse; and the proposition would be true
although no ellipse at all were to exist. The reason is that the verb
_to be_, when copulative, expresses the relation of two ideas.

16. This relation is of identity, but in such a way that more than the
union of the two is needed before a predicate can be affirmed of a
subject. The head is united to the man, but it cannot, therefore, be
said, "man is his head;" the sensibility is united to the reason in the
same man, but we cannot say, "sensibility is reason;" whiteness is in
union with the wall, but we cannot say "the wall is whiteness."

The affirmation, then, of a predicate expresses the relation of
identity, and this is why, when this identity does not exist with
respect to the predicate in the abstract, it is expressed in the
concrete, in order that something involving identity may enter into it.
The wall is whiteness: this proposition is false, because it affirms an
identity which does not exist; the wall is white: this proposition is
true, because white means something which has whiteness, and the wall
is really something which has whiteness; here, then, is the identity
which the proposition affirms.[18]

[18] See Bk. I., Chs. XXXVI., XXVII., and XVIII.

17. The predicate is, then, in every affirmative proposition,
identified with the subject. When we perceive, therefore, we affirm the
identity. Judgment, then, is the perception of the identity. We do not,
however, deny that in what we call assent there is often something more
than the simple perception of identity; but we do not understand how we
need any thing more than to see it evidently in order to assent to it.
What we call assent, adhesion of the understanding, seems to be a kind
of metaphor, as if the understanding would adhere, would yield itself
to the truth, if it were presented; but in reality we very much doubt
if, with respect to what is evident, there be any thing but perception
of the identity.

18. Hence it follows, that if the same ideas were to correspond in the
very same manner to the same words, the opposition and diversity of
judgments in different understandings would be impossible. When, then,
this diversity or opposition does exist, there is always a discrepancy
in the ideas.

19. We conceive of things, and reason upon them abstracted from their
existence or non-existence; or we even suppose them not to exist, that
is, conceive of relations between predicates and subjects without the
existence of either predicates or subjects. And as all contingent
beings may either be or cease to be, and even the first moment of their
being be designated, it follows that science, or the knowledge of
the nature and relations of beings, founded upon certain and evident
principles, has nothing contingent for its object inasmuch as it
exists. There is, then, an infinite world of truths beyond contingent
reality.

We conclude, from our reflections upon this, that there must be beyond
the contingent world a necessary being in which may be founded that
necessary truth which is the object of science. Science cannot have
nothing for its object; but contingent beings, if we abstract their
existence, are pure nothing. There can be no essence, no properties,
no relations in what is pure nothing; something therefore is necessary
whereon to base the necessary truth of those natures, properties, and
relations which the understanding conceives of in contingent beings
themselves. There is, then, a God; and to deny him, is to make science
a pure illusion. The unity of human reason furnishes us one proof of
this truth; the necessity of human science furnishes a second, and
confirms the first.[19]

[19] See Bk. IV., Ch. XXIII. to Ch. XXVII.

20. We find a conditional proposition involved in every necessary
proposition, wherein substantive being is not affirmed nor denied, but
the relative, as in this; all the diameters of a circle are equal.
Thus, the one we have just cited is equivalent to this one; if there
exists a circle all its diameters are equal. For in reality did no
circle exist, there would be no diameters, no equality, or any thing
else; nothing can have no properties; wherefore in all that is thus
affirmed we must understand the condition of its existence.

21. In general propositions the union conceived of two objects is
affirmed; but we must take good care to notice that although we are
wont to say that what is affirmed is the union of two ideas; this is
not, therefore, perfectly exact. When we assert that all the diameters
of a circle are equal, we do not mean that this is so only in ideas,
that we conceive it so to be, but that it really is so, beyond our own
understanding and in reality, and this abstracting our ideas and even
our own existence. Our understanding sees then a relation, a union of
the objects; and it affirms that whenever these exist, there will also
really exist the union, provided the conditions under which the object
is conceived be fulfilled.




