CHAPTER XIV.

RECAPITULATION AND CONSEQUENCES OF THE DOCTRINE CONCERNING THE IDEA OF
BEING.


100. We wish now to recapitulate the doctrine brought out in the
preceding chapters, so that it may be seen at a glance in all its
bearings and connections.

The idea of being is so fruitful in results, that we must sound it
under all its aspects, and never lose sight of it in investigating
transcendental philosophy.

101. We have the idea of _ens_, or of being in general; reason and our
inward sense both attest it.

102. This idea is simple, and cannot be resolved into other elements:
it expresses a general reason of things, and its nature is in a
certain manner destroyed if it be mingled with particular ideas. It is
intuitive, but indeterminate to such a degree that, by itself alone, it
affords us no idea of a real or possible being. We not only know that
every being is, but that it is _some thing_ which is its predicate:
even the Infinite Being is not only a being, but is an intelligent
and free being, and formally possesses all perfections which imply no
imperfection.

103. The idea of being may express either simple existence, in which
case it is substantive, or the relation of a predicate with a subject,
and then it is copulative. In the proposition, "the sun _is_," being is
substantive, that is, expresses existence; in the proposition, "the sun
_is luminous_," being is copulative, that is, it denotes the relation
of the predicate with a subject.

104. The ideas of identity and distinction originate in the ideas of
being and of not-being; and thus the idea of copulative being, which
affirms the identity of a predicate with a subject, flows also in a
manner from the idea of substantive being.

105. Being, which is the principal object of the understanding, is not
the possible inasmuch as possible. We conceive possibility only in
order to actuality. Possibility flows from actuality, not actuality
from possibility. We could not conceive pure possibility, that is,
possibility without existence, did we not conceive finite beings in
whose idea being is not of necessity involved, and of whose appearance
and disappearance we are incessantly reminded by experience.

106. The understanding perceives being, and this is a condition
indispensable to all its perceptions; but the idea of being is not the
only one offered to it, since it knows different modes of being, which,
by the very fact that they are _modes_, add something to the general
and absolute idea of existence.

107. When we consider the essences of things, and abstract their
reality, our cognitions always involve this condition,--if they exist.
There can be only a conditional science of the purely possible,
insomuch as it is not; that is, provided the object pass from
possibility to reality. We must, in order to establish pure possibility
so that it may have necessary relations, subject to the condition of
existence, have recourse to a necessary being, origin of all truth.

108. The essences of things in the abstract mean nothing, nor can they
become the object of affirmation or negation, unless we suppose a
necessary being in which is the reason of the relations of things, and
of the possibility of their existence.

109. Pure truth, independent of all understanding, of all being created
or uncreated, is an illusion, or rather an absurdity. With pure nothing
there is no truth. Truth cannot be _atheistic_; without God there is no
truth.

110. We not only know being, but also not-being. We have an idea of
negation, and it always refers to some being. Absolute nothing cannot
be the object of intelligence. The idea of not-being has its own
peculiar fecundity; combined with that of being, it gives the principle
of contradiction, engenders the ideas of distinction and multiplicity,
and makes negative judgments possible.

111. The idea of being does not flow from sensations; neither is
it innate, in the sense that it pre-exists in our understanding as
a type prior to all perceptions. There is no reason why it may not
be called innate, if this mean only a condition _sine qua non_ of
all our intellectual acts, and consequently of the exercise of our
innate faculties. The idea of being is mingled in every intellectual
perception, but it is not offered to us with perfect clearness and
distinctness until we separate it by reflection from the particular
ideas which accompany it.

112. Essence is not distinguished from existence even in finite
beings. It is a distinction in conceptions, to which there is no real
distinction corresponding.

113. The identity of essence with existence does not involve the
necessity of finite things. The arguments by which some pretend to
establish this consequence are founded upon an ambiguous meaning of
words.

114. Kant's opinion, which limits the idea of reality, and that also of
negation, to the purely sensible order, would destroy all intelligence,
since it overthrows the very principle of contradiction. This doctrine
of the German philosopher is also in opposition with what he himself
taught concerning purely intellectual conceptions, distinct from
sensible representations. When he refers the ideas of reality and
negation to that of time, as the primitive form of the inward sense,
he leaves out of the idea of reality what no less pertains to it, and
presents the idea of time under a point of view wholly equivocal.

115. As sensible representation is based upon the finite intuition
of extension, so the perceptive faculties of the pure understanding
receive the idea of being as their foundation. In the same manner
that extension is presented to sensibility as limitable, and from
limitability results figurability, and consequently all the objects
of geometrical science; so also does the idea of not-being, combined
with that of being, fecundate in a manner the metaphysical sciences.
The parallelism of the two ideas, extension and being, is not of such
a nature as to render the former independent of the latter. So far
as science is concerned, the idea of extension is sterile, if it be
not combined with the general idea of being and not-being. This may
be shown in many ways; but it will suffice to recollect that geometry
cannot take a single step without the principle of contradiction, into
which the ideas of being and of not-being enter.[24]

[24] See L. IV., C. V.

116. All our cognitions flow from the idea of being and not-being,
combined with intuitive ideas. We shall have occasion in the following
books to remark this admirable fecundity of an idea, which, although it
cannot of itself teach any thing, can yet, when united with others, and
modified itself in various ways, so illuminate the intellectual world
as to merit to be called the object of understanding.




BOOK SIXTH.

UNITY AND NUMBER.




