CHAPTER XIX.

SUMMING UP.


149. The examination of the idea of the infinite is of the greatest
importance, because it is inseparably united with the idea of God.

150. We have the idea of the infinite; but the disputes concerning its
nature, and even its existence, denote its obscurity.

151. The finite is that which has limits.

152. The infinite is not the same as the indefinite. The infinite is
that which has no limits--the _not-finite_; the indefinite is that to
which no limits are assigned--the _not-defined_.

153. The difference between the infinite and the finite is founded
on the principle of contradiction: the finite affirms limits; the
infinite denies them: there is no medium between yes and no.

154. Limit is the negation of a being, or of something real, applied
to a being: the limit of a line is the point which terminates it; the
limit of a force is the point beyond which it does not extend.

155. The idea of the infinite, denying limit, denies a negation;
therefore it is an affirmative idea: the idea of the finite is
negative, because it affirms a negation.

156. The idea of the infinite is applied to many orders of beings, and
presents strange anomalies, which seem contradictions. A line produced
to infinity in only one direction appears infinite, since it is greater
than all finite lines; and it is not infinite, because it has a limit
in the point where it starts. The same thing is verified in surfaces
and solids. To explain these anomalies we must attend to the following
observations.

157. The idea of the infinite is not intuitive. We have no intuition of
an object either absolutely or relatively infinite.

158. The idea of the infinite is an indeterminate conception formed by
the union of the two indeterminate ideas of being in general, and the
negation of limit in general.

159. The indeterminate conception of the infinite gives us no knowledge
of any thing infinite.

160. The anomalies and apparent contradictions, which we find in the
application of the idea of the infinite, vanish when we reflect that
the difference of the results depends on the different conditions
under which we apply the idea of the infinite. Things which would be
infinite under one condition cease to be so when considered under other
conditions: the apparent contradiction is caused by one not remarking
the change of conditions.

161. We have the conception of infinite number, for we can unite in
our mind the two indeterminate conceptions of number and the negation
of limit.

162. We have the conception of infinite extension, for we can unite the
two indeterminate ideas of extension and the negation of limit.

163. The possibility or non-contradiction of conceptions in the purely
ideal order does not prove their possibility in the real order. When
the conceptions are realized, their reality is not in an abstract
extension or an abstract number, but in individual extended beings,
or individual numbers: the determinateness implied by the reality may
involve contradiction to the true infinity, although it be impossible
for us to discover any contradiction in the indeterminate conception,
which abstracts the conditions of their realization.

164. Although we have the conception of infinite extension, it is
impossible for us to imagine it.

165. No extrinsic or intrinsic repugnance can be discovered in the
existence of infinite extension.

166. We cannot know by purely philosophical means whether the extension
of the universe is infinite or finite.

167. Although an absolutely infinite number may be indeterminately
conceived, it is not susceptible of any arithmetical or geometrical
expression: no series of what mathematicians call infinite expresses an
absolutely infinite number.

168. The intrinsic impossibility of an _actual_ infinite number may be
demonstrated from the intrinsic repugnance of the _co-existence_ of
certain things which may be _numbered_.

169. The idea of the absolutely infinite real being cannot be
indeterminate: it necessarily involves positive and formal perfections.

170. All that does not imply a contradiction must be affirmed of the
infinite being. That which is absurd is not a perfection.

171. Analyzing indeterminate and intuitive ideas, we find that all the
reality contained in them is affirmed of God.

172. The absolutely infinite being must be intelligent.

173. Intelligence is a perfection which does not imply contradiction.

174. Will and liberty must also be found in the absolutely infinite
being.

175. The indeterminate idea of the infinite is favored by the
combination of the ideas of being and not-being.

176. The idea of an absolutely infinite being consists in the idea of a
union of all being that involves no contradiction.

177. The indeterminate idea of a real infinite being, or of God, is
formed from the idea of an absolutely infinite being, combined with
the intuitive ideas of intelligence, will, liberty, causality, and all
others that can be conceived without imperfection, in any infinite
degree.




BOOK NINTH.

ON SUBSTANCE.




