CHAPTER XIII.

EXISTENCE OF INFINITE EXTENSION.


88. The question of the possibility of an infinite extension is very
different from that of its existence. The first we answer in the
affirmative, the second in the negative.

Descartes maintained that the extension of the world is indefinite; but
this is a term which, although it has a very rational meaning when it
refers to the compass of our understanding, has no meaning when applied
to things. There is no objection to saying that the extension of the
world is indefinite, if it only means that we cannot assign its limits;
but in the reality, the limits exist or do not exist, indifferently
of our power of assigning them; there is no medium between yes and
no; therefore there is no medium between the existence and the
non-existence of these limits. If they exist, the extension of the
world is finite; if they do not exist, it is infinite;--in either case,
the word indefinite expresses nothing.

The argument of Descartes proves nothing, or it proves the true
infinity of the world. For, if we must remove its limits indefinitely
because we always conceive indefinitely an extension beyond every
other extension, as, on the other hand, we know that this series of
conceptions has no limit, we may at once transfer the unlimitedness
to the object which corresponds to those conceptions, and affirm that
the extension of the world is absolutely infinite. Unfortunately,
the argument of Descartes is without any basis; for it consists in a
transition from the ideal, or, rather, imaginary order, to the real
order, which is contrary to good logic.[41]

[41] See Book III., Chapter VIII.

89. Leibnitz maintained, that although God could have made the material
universe finite in its extension, it is more in conformity with his
wisdom not to have done so. "Thus I do not say," he writes,[42] "as is
here imputed to me, that God cannot give limits to the extension of
matter; but the appearance is that he does not wish it, but preferred
to give it more." The opinion of Leibnitz is founded on his system of
optimism, which is open to a multitude of objections, but it is not the
place here to examine them.

[42] _Lettres entre Leibnitz et Clarke_, Vième Écrit. de Leibnitz, § 73.

90. To speak frankly my own opinion, I say that this is a question
which cannot be solved on purely philosophic principles; for, as
the ideas contain no intrinsic necessity, either for or against the
existence of an infinite extension, we must look for its solution to
what experience teaches us. All the time occupied in attempting to
solve this question is lost. What we can assert is, that the extension
of the world exceeds all appreciation; and as the science of astronomy
advances, greater depths are discovered in the ocean of space. Where is
the shore? or is there any? Reason cannot answer such questions. What
do we, poor insects, know, whose life is but a momentary dwelling on
this little ball of dust, which we call the globe of the earth?




CHAPTER XIV.

POSSIBILITY OF AN ACTUAL INFINITE NUMBER.


91. Is an infinite number possible? Does the union of the idea of
number with the idea of the absolute negation of limit, involve any
contradiction which prevents the realization of the conception?

Whatever number we may conceive, we can always conceive one still
greater: this seems to show that no existing number can be absolutely
infinite. If we suppose this number to be realized, an intelligence
may know it, and may multiply it by two, three, or any other number;
therefore the number may be increased, and consequently it is not
infinite.

This difficulty is far from being conclusive, if we examine it
carefully. The intellectual act of which it speaks, would be impossible
on the supposition of the existence of an infinite number. If the
intelligence should not know the infinity of the number, it might
make the multiplication, but it would fall into a contradiction
through its ignorance; for the number being absolutely infinite,
could not be increased; its multiplication would be an absurdity,
and the intelligence making it, would combine two ideas which would
still be repugnant, although not known to be so by the intelligence.
If the absolute infinity of the existing number were known to the
intelligence, the idea of multiplication could never be associated
with it; for the intelligence would know that all possible products
already exist.

92. An absolutely infinite number cannot be expressed in the algebraic
or geometrical values; the attempt so to express it limits it in a
certain sense, and therefore destroys its absolute infinity. If the
expression ∞, represented an absolutely infinite number, it
would not be susceptible of any combination which would increase it: to
suppose that it may be multiplied by other numbers, finite or infinite,
is to take its infinity in another than an absolute sense.

The fraction a/0 does not express an infinite value in all the
strictness of the word; for it is evident that whatever be the value of
a/0 it will always be less than 2a/0 or, in general, less than na/0 n
representing a value greater than unity.

93. Neither can an infinite number be represented in geometrical values.

Let us take a line one foot long. It is evident that if we produce
this line infinitely in opposite directions, the number of feet will
be in some sense infinite, since the foot is supposed to be repeated
infinite times: the expression of the number of the feet will be the
expression of an infinite value. Now, I say that this number is not
infinite, because there are other numbers still greater. In each foot
there are twelve inches; therefore, the number of inches contained
in the line will be twelve times as great as the number of feet;
consequently the number of feet is not infinite. Neither is the number
of inches infinite; for they in their turn may be divided into lines,
the lines into points; and it is evident that the number of the smaller
quantities will be proportionally greater than the number of the
greater quantities. There will be twelve times as many inches as feet,
twelve times as many lines as inches, and twelve times as many points
as lines; and this progression can never end, because the value of a
line is infinitely divisible.

94. Pushing to infinity the divisibility of an infinite line, we seem
to have an infinite number in the elements which constitute it; but a
slight reflection will dissipate this illusion. For it is evident that
we can draw other infinite lines by the side of the supposed infinite
line; and since according to the supposition, each of them may be
infinitely divided, it follows that the sum of the elements of all the
lines will give a greater number than the sum of the elements of any
one of them.

95. If we wish to find an infinite number of parts in values of
extension, we must suppose a solid infinite in all its dimensions, with
all its parts infinitely divided. But not even then should we have an
absolutely infinite number, although we should have the greatest which
can be represented in values of extension.

Conceding that an infinite extension existed which is infinitely
divisible, the number of its parts would not be absolutely infinite;
for we can conceive other beings besides extended beings, and
considering both under the general idea of being, we might unite them
in a number which would be greater than that of extended beings alone.

96. No imaginable species of beings infinitely multiplied, can give an
absolutely infinite number. The reason is the same as that given in the
last paragraph: the existence of beings of one species does not render
the existence of beings of another species impossible. Therefore,
besides the supposed infinity of the number of beings of a determinate
species, there are other numbers which, united with this, produce a
number greater than the pretended infinity.

97. The existence of an absolutely infinite number requires: first, the
existence of infinite species of beings; and secondly, the existence of
infinite individuals of each species. Let us see if these conditions
can be realized.

98. There seems to be no doubt of the intrinsic possibility of
infinite species. The scale of beings is between two extremes, nothing
and infinite perfection: the space between these extremes is infinite;
and beings may be distributed on it in an infinite gradation.

99. Admitting the intrinsic possibility of an infinite gradation in
the scale of beings, the question occurs, whether their possibility is
only ideal, or also real, that is, may be realized. God is infinitely
powerful; if the infinite gradation is intrinsically possible, God can
produce it; for whatever is intrinsically possible falls within the
reach of divine omnipotence. On the other hand, supposing, as we must,
the liberty of God, there is no doubt but God is free to create all
that he can create. If then there is nothing repugnant in an infinity
of the species of beings distributed in an infinite gradation, these
beings may exist if God will it. Therefore denying all limit to the
number of species and of individuals of each species, it seems that
the infinite number would exist, since it is impossible to imagine any
increase or limitation in the collection of all beings.

On this supposition the most perfect created beings possible would
exist, and no more perfect being in the sphere of creatures could be
conceived. All that can be imagined would already exist, from nothing
to infinite perfection.

100. Still it must be observed that the collection of created beings,
whatever be their perfection, are necessarily subject to the condition
of dependence on another being; a condition from which the infinite
being above is essentially exempt. This condition involves limitation;
therefore, all created beings must be finite.

101. Does the character of finite, which is met with in all created
beings, involve a determinate limit beyond which they cannot pass? If
this limit exists, is not the number of possible species also limited?
And if these species are not infinite, is not an infinite number an
illusion?

Although the intrinsic possibility of the infinite scale of beings
seems beyond a doubt, we must beware of solving too quickly the present
question. With respect to indeterminate conceptions, we see no possible
limit; but would this still be so, if we had an intuitive knowledge of
the species? Are we sure that in the particular qualities of beings,
combined with limitation and dependence, which are essential to them,
we should not discover a term beyond which they cannot go, by reason of
the constitution of their nature? How impotent philosophy is to solve
such questions!

102. Whatever may be concluded as to this infinity of species and their
respective perfection, I do not believe that an actually infinite
number can exist. Among these species must be counted intelligences
which exercise their acts in succession. This is evidently so; for
in this number are included human minds which think and wish in a
_successive_ manner. The acts of these intelligences may be numbered:
this we know from consciousness. Therefore there would never be an
infinite number, because these acts, being successive, can never be all
at the same time.

103. It may be answered that in this case we might suppose that
spirits, including our own, have only one act of intelligence and will.
To this I reply, that besides contradicting the nature of created
beings, which, because they are finite, must be subject to change, it
is also open to another objection, inasmuch as it eliminates at once
many species of beings, and thus, instead of preserving the infinity,
renders it impossible. Who can deny the possibility of that which
exists? If, as our experience informs us, there now exist beings of
successive activity, why would not these beings be possible on the
supposition that the divine omnipotence had exerted all its infinite
creative power?

104. This difficulty, which is founded on the nature of finite
intelligences, seems to render the existence of an infinite number
impossible, and it becomes still stronger if we examine the question
under a more general aspect.

The existence of an absolutely infinite number excludes the existence
of any other number. That which is numbered is not substance alone,
but its modifications also. This has already been demonstrated with
regard to intelligences, and is true in general of all finite beings.
Every finite being is changeable, and its changes may be counted. The
modifications produced by the changes cannot all exist at once, for
some of them exclude others. Therefore, an actual infinite number is
never possible.

105. Let us apply these considerations to the sensible world. Motion
is a modification to which bodies are subject. This modification
is essentially successive. A motion, the parts of which co-exist,
is absurd. The co-existence of different states, which result from
different motions, is also absurd: things that are contradictory cannot
exist at the same time, and many of these situations are contradictory,
because one of them necessarily involves the negation of others.
If a line falling on another line revolve around a point, it will
successively describe different angles. When it forms an angle of 45
degrees, it will not form an angle of 30 degrees, nor of 40, nor 70,
nor 80; these angles mutually exclude one another. A portion of matter
will form different figures, according to the arrangement which is
given to the parts of which it is composed. When these parts form a
globe, they will not form a cube; these two solids cannot exist at the
same time, formed of the same portion of matter.

106. This variety of motion and form can be numbered. At every step we
measure motion, applying to it the idea of number; at every instant we
count the forms of a portion of matter, as for example, a piece of wax,
to which different forms have been given successively: whatever be the
number of the beings which we suppose to exist, every one of them will
be susceptible of transformations which may be counted. Therefore, in
the very nature of things, there is an intrinsic impossibility of the
existence of an actual infinite number.

107. I believe that these arguments fully demonstrate the impossibility
of an actual infinite number; and if I do not dare to say that I am
sure of having given a complete demonstration, it is because the
nature of the question presents so many and so great difficulties, it
so bewilders and confounds the weak understanding of man, that there
is always reason to fear that even those arguments, which seem the
clearest and most conclusive, may conceal some fault which vitiates
their force, and makes an illusion appear an incontestible truth. Still
I cannot but observe that to combat this demonstration, it seems, to me
that it would be necessary to deny our primary ideas, the exclusion of
being and not-being, and the necessity of succession, of time, to the
realization of contradictory things.

108. Perhaps it may be objected to me that contradictory modifications
are not a part of the infinite number, which only relates to the
possible: but this does not destroy my demonstration; it rather
confirms it. For as the absolute infinite number implies the absolute
negation of all limit, when, in treating of the realization of this
conception, I meet with things that are contradictory, I say that the
realization of the conception is contradictory, because the general and
indeterminate conception is more extended than all possible number.

109. The origin of their greater conception is, that the indeterminate
conception abstracts all conditions, that of time included; but the
reality does not and cannot abstract these conditions. Hence arises the
conflict between the conception and its realization, and this explains
why the conception is not contradictory, although its realization is
impossible.

Let us suppose a number realized containing all the species and
individuals possible, we may reflect on the conception of the infinite
number, and say that the true infinity of the number requires the
absolute negation of all limit; but thinking of the collection of
things which exists, we can find it a limit, for concerning this
collection of units in general, we may add to it another number
expressing the new modifications which may be produced. At the instant
A, the number of units may be expressed by M. At the instant B, there
will be a new collection of units which may be expressed by N. The sum
of M + N will be greater than either M or N alone. Therefore, neither
M nor N will be absolutely infinite. The indeterminate conception
abstracts instants and relates to the sum above; hence it includes
things which cannot co-exist.




