CHAPTER I.

NAME AND GENERAL IDEA OF SUBSTANCE.


1. What is substance? Have we a clear and distinct idea of it? The
disputes of philosophers concerning the idea of substance and the
continual applications which we make of it, prove two things: first,
that the idea of substance exists; and secondly, that its clearness and
distinctness are not all that could be desired. A mere name, containing
no idea, could not so strongly draw the attention of all philosophers,
nor be used so generally, even in ordinary language; a clear and
distinct idea could not give occasion to so much dispute.

2. The importance of this idea may be seen in the results to which
philosophers are led, according to the way in which they explain
it. The entire system of Spinosa is founded on wrong definition of
substance.

3. In the present question as in many others, it does not seem to be
the shortest way to begin with a definition, unless the thing defined
is only a name: to define a thing is to explain it, and we cannot
explain it if we are ignorant of what it is, and we are ignorant, or
are supposed to be ignorant of this, when we enter on investigations
in order to ascertain what it is. If philosophers, at the beginning
of their treatises, would not say, substance is this, but only, this
is what I understand by substance, they would escape a number of
difficulties.

4. After defining the name of substance, and making a clear and
distinct idea correspond to it, it is still necessary to show how far
the idea represents objects really existing, or, whether it belongs to
the class of ideas expressing only the relation of different ideas,
without our having any means of ascertaining whether this relation is
found in the positive world or not; that is to say, whether the idea of
substance is only the work of our understanding, a mere result of the
combination of certain ideas, or is furnished us by experience itself.
I shall try not to fall into any of these faults; I know not, however,
whether I can escape them. For this purpose, I shall first analyze the
word, with respect to its etymological sense, and then examine the
various meanings which have been given to it. The analysis of words is
very useful for the analysis of ideas: words often contain a great deal
of truth, which we lose by not attending to their common meaning.

5. The word substance, _substantia_, implies something which is under,
_substat_, which is the subject on which other things are placed; just
as its correlative, accident or modification, expresses something which
happens to the subject, _accidit_; something which modifies it, which
is in it, as a mode of being, _modus_.

6. By substance we seem to understand something constant in the
midst of variation, something which, although it is in various ways
successively, according to the variety of modifications which affect
it, remains constant and identical under different transformations.
When we say that the substance has received any new modification,
although we understand by this that the substance is, in a new mode,
we do not mean that it is different in itself, that it has lost its
internal primitive being, and taken a new being; but we only consider
this change as external, and as leaving untouched a certain base, which
is what we call substance.

If it were not so, if we did not conceive something constant and
identical under modifications, we could not distinguish substance from
its modifications. The modification passes from not-being to being,
and from being to not-being; now it is, and now it resigns its post
to another and very different modification. But the substance is the
same under different modifications; it does not pass from not-being
to being with the succession of its modifications. From the moment
that we attribute to substance the instability which belongs to its
modifications, it ceases to be distinguishable from them.

Ordinary language confirms this truth. When there is a variation of
modifications we say that the substance changes, that is, we conceive
something which existed before the change, and exists after it. We say
that a modification has entirely disappeared; we do not say this of the
substance, but only that it is, or is presented to us, in a different
manner. We therefore conceive something which remains constant and
identical under different modifications: the subject in which these
changes occur, this something which does not disappear with the
disappearance of the modifications, which is not changed internally
with these changes, we call substance, _substantia_, _substratum_.




CHAPTER II.

APPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF SUBSTANCE TO CORPOREAL OBJECTS.


7. Let us apply the ideas contained in that of substance to a corporeal
object: this will help explain these ideas, and perhaps suggest others.

The paper on which I am writing is susceptible of various
modifications: I may write on it a thousand different things, in
various characters, and in different colors; I may fold it in various
ways, and give it an infinite variety of positions in relation to the
objects around it, and I may move it in all imaginable directions.
Under this infinity of changes there is something constant, something
which does not change. There are many new things, but there is one
which is not new, which is always the same. There is one which suffers
these changes, but retains something which does not change. If I make
the paper blue and then red, that which is now red is the same that was
blue, and before that white, and to this which is constant all those
changes are referred. If a white paper is shown me, and then another
paper that is blue, and then one that is red, it is clear that it is
not the same as though I gave all these transformations to the same
paper. The impression which the color produces in me remains the same;
in what, then, does the difference consist? The difference is, that in
the one case there is something permanent, which has passed through
successive changes; in the other case this _something_ is not the same,
but is another and different thing. In the one case there are different
modifications; in the other there are different substances.

8. Let us go deeper into the matter. If we only received the successive
impressions without any means of referring them to the same object,
to connect them in a common point, we should find no difference
between the two cases of which we have been speaking. If a piece of
white paper be placed before us, and, after turning our eyes aside
for a moment, we find a blue paper in the same place, with the same
dimensions, and after again turning our eyes aside we find a red paper:
it is clear that it would be impossible for us to distinguish, by the
mere succession of the visual impressions, whether the same paper has
been differently colored in succession, or different papers have been
substituted for the first. But if we keep our eyes on the place where
the paper is, we see whether the paper is colored or changed. In the
first case, the appearance of the new color will continue with the same
sensation of the paper, unmoved, the transformation is made without our
losing sight of it, and the paper receives the continued succession
of its motions and positions under the hand of the one who colors it.
We are then sure that the paper is the same, because there has been
a continuity of sensation, or rather a connection of the different
colors with a third, resulting from the situation of the paper and
its motions, and from all that by which we know what is common to the
first and the second. But if there is no new coloring of the paper, but
a substitution of a differently colored paper, we see that the first
paper is taken away; the whole order of the sensation is interrupted,
and new sensations are presented. These last have no connection with
the first; there is, consequently, for us a different _thing_.

9. This shows how the idea of substance with respect to bodies is
generated in us, or, to speak more properly, how we apply the idea of
substance to bodies. When we discover a link which unites the different
sensations in one point, we call that in which they are united,
substance. And as we meet in nature with many of these points which are
independent of one another, we naturally say there are many corporeal
substances.

10. When we perceive an impression we never call it a substance, if
we refer it to an object, or consider it as objective: for the object
is not, of itself alone, capable of connecting various sensations.
We receive the sensations of red, and not only ordinary people, but
even philosophers, when not philosophizing, make the color objective,
and consider the red, not as a simple sensation, but as an external
quality. No one would call this quality by itself a substance; for
it is not capable, of itself alone, of connecting other impressions
or qualities. If there is a change of color the red disappears,
and the new impression is connected in the order of time with the
sensation of the red, but does not reside in it. If there is a change
of form, although the red continues, we do not conceive this color as
the necessary link between the two forms, because we know that the
continuance of the red is indifferent to the variety of form, which may
be changed with or without the continuance of this color.

As in general we have experienced that no sensation is necessarily
connected with another, and that among sensations connected at a common
point, some disappear without the rest disappearing, we infer that
none of them is a necessary link; and therefore, although we make them
objective, we do not give them the character of a substance, of any
thing remaining identical through changes, of which it is, as it were,
the recipient.

11. There is a property in bodies which is necessary to all sensations,
or at least, to the two principal sensations of sight and touch. This
property is extension, which, whether considered subjectively or
objectively, we regard as a recipient of all sensations. We neither see
nor imagine the white or black; we neither touch nor imagine the hard
or the soft, the warm or the cold, without the extension in which the
whiteness or blackness, the hardness or softness, the warmth or the
cold reside. Thus extension might perhaps merit the honor of substance,
if it were not subject to another condition, which deprives it of this
title.

Although when we conceive extension in general, in the abstract,
considering it as a mere continuity, we absolutely abstract it from
all form; when we have need of an applied extension as the recipient
of sensations, it is impossible to find it without a determinate
form and figure. We do not see a color simply, but we see it in a
circular, triangular, or other extension. These forms are confounded
with extension itself as its applications; and do not serve as a link
for other sensations. Sometimes, it is true, the same figure receives
different colors, different positions, different degrees of heat or
cold, etc., but the contrary also sometimes occurs, and with the same
color, and the same degree of heat or cold, with the same continuance
of the other sensations, the object changes its form; just as a red
circle may become a green circle, a red object may become circular, and
afterwards triangular. In the first case, the circular figure is the
link connecting the sensations of the colors; in the second, the color
is the link connecting the figures.

12. Having deprived extension of the honor of substance, as well as
all other sensations, in so far as objective; we may observe that all
these variations in the objects are successive, and the sensations are
connected with each other. Thus the same circle may take different
colors; and the same color different figures; the colors may be again
changed, and the first reproduced, the figure remaining the same; or
the first figure may be reproduced, the colors remaining the same. We
conclude that under this variety there is something constant, that
under this multiplicity there is something which is one; that under
this succession of being and not-being there is something permanent;
and this which is constant, one, and permanent, the recipient of these
changes, the point outside of us which connects them, and enables us to
conceive them connected,--this is what we call substance.




