CHAPTER I.

IMPORTANCE AND DIFFICULTY OF THE SUBJECT.


1. The explanation of the idea of time is not a matter of mere
curiosity, but of the highest importance. To convince ourselves of
this we have only to consider that the explanation of the whole
edifice of human cognitions is based upon it. The most fundamental and
indispensable principle which supports all others, includes the idea
of time. A thing cannot be and not be at the same time: "impossibile
est idem simul esse et non esse." The impossibility of being and of
not-being regards only the _simul, the same time_. Therefore, the idea
of time necessarily enters into the very principle of contradiction.

2. The idea of time is involved in all our perceptions; it extends to
many more objects than does the idea of space. We estimate not only the
movements of bodies by time, but also the operations of the mind. We
know that a series of thoughts may be measured by time the same as a
series of corporal movements.

3. The idea of succession necessarily enters into that of time, and
_vice versa_, the idea of time into that of succession. We may conceive
that one thing _succeeds_ another; but this would be impossible without
succession, without a _before and after_, that is, without time. This
reasoning, apparently vicious, shows, perhaps, that we must not
explain the ideas of time and succession, the one by the other, since
they are identical.

4. Time does not seem to be distinct from things; for who can imagine
duration without that which lasts, or a succession without that which
succeeds? Is it a substance? Is it a modification inherent in things,
or distinct from them? Whatever is something exists; and yet we nowhere
meet time existing. Its nature is composed of instants divisible
to infinity, essentially successive, and consequently incapable of
simultaneousness. Imagine the minutest instant you can, and it does not
exist, for it is composed of others infinitely minute, which cannot
exist united. To conceive an existing time, we must conceive it as
actual, and in order to do this, we must surprise it in an indivisible
instant; but even this is not time; it involves no succession; it is
not _duration_, containing _a before and an after_.

5. Nothing is easier than to calculate time, and nothing more difficult
than to conceive it in its essence. As to the former the learned and
the ignorant are on the same footing; both have equally clear ideas;
the latter is excessively difficult even to the most eminent men. The
passage in the _Confessiones_ of St. Augustine, in which the Holy
Doctor endeavors to penetrate this mystery is well known.




CHAPTER II.

IS TIME THE MEASURE OF MOVEMENT?


6. Time is said by many philosophers to be the measure of movement.
This idea is fruitful, but it needs to be illustrated.

When we measure movement we refer to something fixed. Thus we measure
the rapidity with which we have traversed a certain space by noticing
the time denoted by a watch. But how do we measure time by a watch? By
the space passed over by the hand on the dial. If we reflect carefully,
we shall see that this is purely conventional, or rather, that it
depends upon an arbitrary condition. For if we suppose the time marked
to be an hour, the space passed over by the minute hand, that is, the
circumference of the dial, has no relation with the hour except what
the artificer gave it by so constructing the watch that the minute hand
would make one revolution every hour. If the watchmaker had constructed
it differently, as he did the hour hand, the time would be the same,
but the space passed over is very different.

7. The time, therefore, indicated by the watch is no measure, save
as itself is subject to another measure; consequently it is not the
primitive measure. The same can evidently be said of all other watches
which must have been regulated one after another, until we come to the
first of all watches. There was no other watch to regulate this; it
follows, therefore, that no one of the measures furnished by art is the
primitive measure.

8. Not finding this measure in the works of man, we must seek it in
nature; and here we discover fixed measures. If we regard the course
of the sun, and take for unity the time it requires from the time it
leaves the meridian until it returns, we shall have the day; this
divided into twenty-four parts gives us the hours. Here we have a great
watch which will serve to regulate all others.

9. Nevertheless, however lightly we reflect upon this, we cannot help
seeing that the solution is not so satisfactory as it seems at first
sight.

Solar time and sidereal time do not agree. Thus, if we note the moment
when a star is in the meridian conjointly with the sun, we shall the
next day see that the star reaches the meridian a little before the
sun. Which is right? Has the star taken just twenty-four hours, or the
sun? If time be a fixed thing independently of movement, neither of
these measures corresponds exactly to time.

10. This argument, which may be called practical, is corroborated by
another purely theoretical. If we take celestial movement for the
measure of time, will it be true that whenever the movement, which
serves as the rule, shall be verified, that there has passed a fixed
and determinate time? If we be answered in the affirmative, we must
infer, that even were this movement to be accelerated or retarded,
as, for instance, if a solar revolution were to be made with a half,
or with twice its ordinary velocity, it would continue to mark the
same time, which, however, is absurd. If it be said that the movement
is supposed to be uniform, we reply, that this is a begging of the
question. Uniformity of movement consists in equal times recurring
after equal intervals. Did time, then, in its nature depend upon the
movement of the sun, or of any star, as primitive measure, neither
uniformity nor variety would have any meaning. If the space of
twenty-four hours depended upon a revolution's being made, no matter in
what manner whether at a snail's pace, or with the velocity of light,
we should never have more or less than twenty-four hours. But if these
depend upon another measure, if prior to them, there was a time which
measured the velocity of movement, and determined whether it had been
accelerated or retarded, then the movement of the stars is not the
primitive measure; they are in the same category as our watches, they
marked the time passed, but time has not passed because they mark it.
Time is the measure of their movement, not their movement the measure
of time. Movement is in time, not time in movement.

11. To appeal to the movement of the superior heavens, is evidently no
solution of this difficulty, for what has been said of the sun, may
also be said of the remotest star in the firmament. Whether we appeal
to annual, solar, or sidereal movements, the same difficulty remains.
Would sidereal years be the same, if the movement be made with greater
or less velocity. If they would, an absurdity would follow; if not,
this is not the primitive measure.

12. Moreover, we perceive, when considering movement, that we seem to
conceive of greater and less velocity; and thus the idea of time, of
necessity, enters into that of velocity, since velocity is the relation
of space passed over in a given time. The idea of time is therefore
prior to, consequently independent of, _every_ particular measure.

13. We measure time by movement, and in order to measure the velocity
of movement we need that of time. Here then, perhaps, is a vicious
circle; but possibly this only shows that these are correlative ideas,
the one explanatory of the other; or, rather, they are different
aspects of one and the same idea. The difficulty of separating them,
and the intimate union which unites them on the one hand as much as
it divides them on the other, confirms this conjecture. To show this,
we ask, what time has passed? Two hours. How do we know this? By our
time-piece. But what if it be too fast or too slow? The measure fails.
This time is thus to us as a fixed measure, prior to that of the watch
by which we undertake to measure it. But what are these two hours, if
we abstract the measure of the watch, that also of the stars, and every
other measure? Two hours, in the abstract, can be found in no category
of real or possible beings; and we cannot, without a measure, give any
idea of them, nor form one for ourselves. The idea of hour refers to a
determinate movement of known bodies; and this in its turn refers to
others; and finally, we come to one in which we can discover no reason
why it should be exempted from the general law to which the others are
subject. No farther reference being possible, all measure fails; and
this failing, time, by the force of analysis, vanishes.

14. Therefore, the referring of time to movement, explains nothing; it
only expresses a thing known, and that is, the mutual relation between
time and movement, a relation known to the unlearned, and of constant
and common use; but the philosophic idea stands intact; the same
difficulty remains; what is time?




