CHAPTER VI.

ORIGIN OF THE VAGUENESS AND APPARENT CONTRADICTIONS IN THE APPLICATION
OF THE IDEA OF THE INFINITE.


41. The difficulties in the application of the idea of infinity,
seem on the one hand, to prove that either this idea does not exist
in us, or is very confused; and on the other hand, that we possess
it, and in a very perfect degree. Why do we discover that numbers
are not infinite, although at first they seem to be? Why do we deny
the infinity of certain dimensions, notwithstanding their infinite
prolongation in one sense? Because, on examining these objects, we find
that they do not correspond to the type of infinity. If this type did
not exist in our mind, how could it be possible for us to make use of
it? How could we compare beings with it, if we did not know it? Is it
possible to know when any thing arrives at a turn, if we have no idea
of that turn? It is comparing without a point of comparison; that is,
it is exercising a contradictory act.

42. Although these arguments in favor of the existence of the idea of
the infinite, if we examine our own mind, we cannot deny that we find
there a certain vagueness and confusion which inspire strong doubts as
to the reality of this idea. What is presented to our mind, when we
think of the infinite? The imagination abandoned to itself, extends
space, expands dimensions, multiplies numbers indefinitely, but it
offers nothing to the intellect which has the marks of infinity. If we
leave the imagination, and regard the understanding only, it gives a
type by which to judge of the infinity or not-infinity of the objects
presented to it, but if we reflect on the type itself, it loses the
clearness it possessed before, and we even ask if the type really
exists.

43. Do we, therefore, deny the existence of this idea? are we going to
renounce our intention of explaining it? We do neither. I believe that
it is necessary to admit the idea, that it is not impossible to explain
it, and that we may even point out the reason of its obscurity.

44. Before passing further, I wish to observe, that one of the causes
of the difficulties in the explanation of the idea of the infinite,
arises from our not distinguishing the intuitive from the abstract
cognition.[36] Many difficulties would be avoided by attending to
this distinction. When we say that the idea of the infinite is not
intuitive, but abstract, we give the key to the solution of the
principal objections brought against it.

[36] See Book V., Ch. XI.

45. We have no intuitive idea of infinity; that is to say, this idea
does not present to our mind an infinite object; we can have this
intuition only when we see the essence of God, which will happen in a
future life.

46. If we had now the intuition of an infinite object, we should see
its perfections as they are, with their true marks; or rather, we
should see how all the perfections dispersed among limited beings, are
united in one infinite perfection. We could not refer the idea of the
infinite to determinate objects, as, for example, to extension, because
these objects contradict the idea. It would be impossible for us to
modify the idea in different ways, and apply it first in one sense,
and then in another very different sense. The idea is one, and simple;
it would, therefore, always relate to an object which is also one and
simple, not vague and indeterminate, as now, but with the determination
of a necessary existence and an infinite perfection. We should have
intuition of infinite being, as we have intuition of the facts of
our consciousness: our cognition of it would be that of an object
eminently incommunicable, as predicate to any order of finite beings;
and it would be as manifest a contradiction, to apply the idea of this
infinity to any number or extension, as it would be to identify an act
of our consciousness with external objects.

47. The indeterminate character in which the idea of the infinite is
presented us, and the ease with which we modify it in various ways, and
apply it to different objects, in different senses, proves that this
idea is not intuitive, but abstract and indeterminate, that it is one
of those general conceptions, by the aid of which the mind obtains a
certain knowledge not afforded by intuition.

This will explain the origin of the vagueness of our idea of infinity.
Indeterminate conceptions, and because they are indeterminate, relate
to no particular object, or quality, which may be conceived by itself
alone, as something which may be realized; they do not contain those
determinations which fix our cognition in an absolute manner. The
indeterminate manner in which they present any property of beings,
causes a difference in the application, accordingly as the particular
properties, which are combined with the general, are different. If we
take a right-angle triangle, in which we know the measure of all the
sides and angles, the determinateness of the idea avoids the vagueness
of the intellect, and prevents the application of this idea to cases
different from that which is determinate and fixed. But if we take a
right-angle, in general, without determining the value of its sides
and angles, its applications may be infinite. The more general and
indeterminate the idea of a triangle becomes, the greater is the
variety of its applications.

48. Indeterminate ideas, in order to represent any thing, must be
applied to some property which is the condition of their actual or
possible realization. Until this application is made, they are pure
intellectual forms, which represent nothing determinate. I do not
mean by this, that these ideas are empty conceptions, which cannot be
applied outside of the sensible order, as was maintained by Kant;[37]
but only that granting them an universal value, I deny that they have
by themselves alone a value representative of any thing that can be
realized, beyond the property which they express. The idea of a _pure_
triangle can not be realized, for every _real_ triangle would contain
something more than is in the idea: it would be a right-angled or
oblique-angled, etc., all which, the pure idea abstracts. The object
will be indeterminate, in proportion to the indeterminateness of the
properties contained in the conception; consequently, that which
is presented to the understanding will also be more vague, and the
applications which may be made of the idea, will be more varied and
numerous, as is the case in the ideas of being, not-being, limit, and
the like.

[37] See Book V., Chapters XIV., XV., and XVI.




