CHAPTER IV.

THE LIMIT.


25. The word _infinite_ is equivalent to _not finite_, and seems to
express a negation. But negations are not always truly such, although
the terms imply it; for if that which is denied, be a negation, the
denial of it is an affirmation. This is the reason why two negatives
are said to be equivalent to an affirmative. If I say, it has not
varied, and you deny it, you deny my negation; for it is the same thing
to deny that it has not varied, as to affirm that it has varied. In
order, therefore, to determine whether the word _infinite_ expresses a
true negative, we must know what is meant by the word _finite_.

26. The finite is that which has a limit. A limit is the term beyond
which there is nothing of the object limited. The limits of a line,
are the points beyond which the line does not extend; the limit of
a number, is the extreme where the number stops; the limit of human
knowledge, is the point to which we may arrive, but which we cannot
go beyond. A limit being a negation, to deny a limit, is to deny a
negation, and is consequently an affirmation.

27. It is easy to see from these examples, that a limit in the ordinary
sense, expresses an idea distinct from what mathematicians define
it. They call a limit every expression, whether finite, infinite,
or a nullity, which a quantity may continually approach without
ever reaching. Thus, the value 0/a is the limit of the decrement of
a fraction, the numerator of which is variable x/a; because, if we
suppose X to be constantly diminishing, the fraction will approach
the expression 0/a, without ever being confounded with it, so long as
X does not entirely disappear. If we suppose (b + x)/a an expression
in which X is decreasing, the expression will continually approach (b
+ 0)/a = b/a, which will be the limit of the fraction. If we suppose
the expression a/x, in which X is decreasing, we shall continually
approach the expression a/0 = ∞, an infinite value which
the fraction can never attain, until X becomes 0, which cannot happen,
because X is a true quantity. These examples show that mathematicians
admit limits which are finite, infinite, or a nullity, and prove that
mathematicians employ the word limit in a different sense from its
ordinary as well as philosophical meaning.

28. A limit, therefore, expresses a true negation, and the word
finite, or limited, necessarily involves a negative idea. That which is
not, is not limited; therefore the finite is not an absolute negation.
An absolute negation is nothing, and we do not call the finite nothing.
Therefore, in the idea of finite are contained being, and a negation
of another being. A line one foot in length, involves the positive
value of one foot, and the negation of all value of more than a foot.
Therefore, the finite, in so far as finite, involves a negation
relatively to a being. If we could express this idea in the abstract,
using the word finity, as we have the word infinity, we should say that
finity in itself expresses only the negation of being relatively to a
being.

29. Hence, the word infinite is not negative; for it is the negation
of a negation. The infinite is the not-finite; it is that which has no
negation of being, consequently that which possesses all being.

30. We have, therefore, an idea of the infinite, and this idea is not a
pure negation. But it must not be supposed that we have arrived at the
last term of the analysis of the infinite. We are still far from it,
and it is even doubtful whether we shall obtain any satisfactory result
after long investigations.



CHAPTER V.

 CONSIDERATIONS ON THE APPLICATION OF THE IDEA OF THE INFINITE TO
 CONTINUOUS QUANTITIES, AND TO DISCRETE QUANTITIES, IN SO FAR AS THESE
 LAST ARE EXPRESSED IN SERIES.


31. One of the characteristic properties of the idea of the infinite is
application to different orders. This gives occasion to some important
considerations which greatly assist to make this idea clear in our
mind.

32. From the point where I am situated I draw a line in the direction
of the north; it is evident that I may prolong this line infinitely.
This line is greater than any finite line can be; for the finite line
must have a determinate value, and therefore, if placed on the infinite
line, will reach only to a certain point. This line, therefore, seems
to be strictly infinite in all the force of the word, because there is
no medium between the finite and the infinite, and we have shown that
it is not finite, since it is greater than any finite line; therefore
it must be infinite.

This demonstration seems to leave nothing to be desired; yet there is
a conclusive argument against the infinity of this line. The infinite
has no limits, and this line has a limit, because, starting from the
point from which it is drawn in the direction of the north, it does not
extend in the direction of the south.

33. This line is greater than any finite line; but we may find another
line greater still. If we suppose it produced in the direction of the
south, it will be greater by how much it is produced towards the south;
and if it be infinitely produced in this direction, its length will be
twice that of the first line.

34. By the infinite prolongation of a line in two opposite directions
we seem to obtain an absolutely infinite line; for we cannot conceive
a lineal value greater than that of a right line infinitely prolonged
in opposite directions. But it is not so: by the side of this right
line another may be drawn, either finite or infinite, and the sum of
the two will form a lineal value greater than that of the first line;
therefore that line is not infinite, because it is possible to find
another still greater. And as, on the other hand, we may draw infinite
lines and prolong them infinitely, it follows that none of them can
form an infinite lineal value, because it is only a part of the lineal
sum resulting from the addition of all the lines.

35. Reflecting on this apparent contradiction in our ideas, we discover
that the idea of the infinite is indeterminate, and consequently
susceptible of different applications. Thus, in the present instance,
it cannot be doubted that the right line, prolonged to infinity,
has some infinity, since it is certain that it has no limit in its
respective directions.

36. This example would lead us to believe that the idea of the infinite
represents nothing absolute to us; because even among those objects
which are presented the most clearly to our mind, such as the objects
of sensible intuition, we find infinity under one aspect which is
contradicted one by another.

37. What we have observed of lineal values is also true of numerical
values expressed in series. Mathematics speak of infinite series, but
there can be no such series. Let the series be _a_, _b_, _c_, _d_,
_e_, ....: it is called infinite if its terms continue _ad infinitum_.
It cannot be denied that the series is infinite under one aspect; for
there is no limit which puts an end to it in one sense; but it is
evident that the number of its terms will never be infinite, because
there are others greater; such, for instance, is the series continued
from left to right, if continued from right to left at the same time,
in this manner:

.......... _e_, _d_, _c_, _b_, | _a_, _b_, _c_, _d_, _e_, ..........

In this case the number of terms is evidently twice as great as in the
first series.

Therefore the series which are called infinite are not infinite, and
cannot be so, in the strict sense of the term.

38. But what is still more strange is, that the series is not infinite,
even though we suppose it continued in opposite directions; for by its
side we may imagine another, and the sum of the terms of both will be
greater than the terms of either; therefore neither will be infinite.
As it is evident that whatever be the series, we can always imagine
others, it follows that there can be no infinite series in the sense in
which mathematicians use the word series to express a continuation of
terms, not excluding the possibility of other continuations besides the
supposed infinite continuation.

39. The objections against lineal infinity apply equally to surfaces.
If we suppose an infinite plane, it is evident that we can describe an
infinity of planes distinct from the first plain and intersecting it in
a variety of angles; the sum of all these surfaces will be greater than
any one of them. Therefore the infinite extension of a plain in all
directions does not constitute a truly infinite surface.

40. A solid expanding in all directions seems to be infinite; but if
we consider that the mathematical idea of a solid does not involve
impenetrability, we shall see that inside of the first solid a second
may be placed, which, added to the first, will give a value double
that of the first alone. Let S be the empty space which we imagine
to be infinite; and let W be a world of equal extension placed in it
and filling it; it is evident that S + W are greater than S alone.
Therefore, although we suppose S to be infinite, = ∞, W also = ∞;
therefore S + W = ∞ + ∞ = 2 ∞. And as this value expresses the size,
the first is not infinite because it can be doubled. If we take the
impenetrability, the operation may proceed _ad infinitum_.

Therefore the first infinite, far from being infinite, seems to be a
quantity susceptible of infinite increase.




