CHAPTER III.

SIMILARITIES AND DIFFERENCES BETWEEN TIME AND SPACE.


15. Time seems to us to be something fixed. An hour is neither more
nor less than an hour, no matter how our time-pieces go, or the world
itself; just as a cubic foot of space is always a cubic foot, neither
more nor less, whether occupied or not occupied by bodies.

16. Time exists independent of all movement, of all succession; if
it is something absolute, has a determinate value of its own, is
applicable to all that changes without itself changing, the measure of
all succession without itself being measured, what is it? That it is
something accidental cannot be reconciled with its immutability and
universality. Every thing lives in it, but it lives in nothing; every
thing dies in it, but death has no power over it. When the substance
perishes, the accident perishes; but time continues the same although
no substance exist. Before all created beings, we conceive ages and
ages, that is, time; and after the destruction, the annihilation of all
beings, we still conceive a successive although unending succession,
which is time. The idea, then, of time, does not demand that of the
universe; it existed before it, and will survive it: but without time
the universe is inconceivable.

17. The idea of time seems to be independent of the idea of any being;
of all duration in it; every thing may endure in it; but it does not
begin or end with what endures in itself; it is applicable to all
that endures, but it is not itself an endurable thing. We imagine
it to be one in the multiple, uniform in the various, fixed in the
movable, eternal in the perishable; and it even seems to contain some
features of the attributes of Divinity; but it is, on the other hand,
essentially despoiled of every property excepting that of succession in
its abstractest signification. It is essentially sterile, has no power
of its own, no condition of being or action, and consequently leads to
the highest imaginations of what a pure idea really is, an abstraction,
which, like space, we have imagined in the presence of things.

18. The points of similarity between time and space are worthy of our
attention. Both are infinite, immovable; both are a general measure;
both essentially composed of continuous and inseparable parts. Limit
them you cannot, determine any limit you chose, and beyond it you will
see an ocean extended. Your powers are impotent; beyond the highest
heaven are unbounded abysses of space; before the beginning of things
there was a long chain of interminable ages.

In vain would you undertake to move space; you can only move yourself
in it, or survey its various points. Its points are all fixed; you
may mark out distances and directions with respect to them, but you
cannot change them. The result will be analogous if you attempt to move
time. The present instant is not the one just past, nor the one next
to succeed; they are of necessity distinct, and of necessity exclude
each other. Their very nature is to succeed each other. If their place
be changed with respect to time, it ceases to be the same. Imagine,
if you can, that to-morrow is to-day, that to-day is yesterday. It
is impossible for that which was at a certain time not to have then
been; but this would not be impossible if time could be moved; for in
order that what was yesterday may not be, it is necessary to convert
yesterday into to-morrow; but this would be an absurdity. The past, the
present, and the future, are essentially distinct things.

A simple space, a space without parts, is no space at all, it is a
contradiction; neither is a simple time, a time without parts, a time,
but is a contradiction.

A space whose parts are not continuous, is not a space; neither is
a time whose parts are not continuous, a time. The parts
of space are inseparable; you may distinguish them one from another,
count them one after the other, compare them one with another, and
consider them one after another, but you cannot separate them. All
imaginable bodies may exist in the apartment where we write, one or
many, at rest or in motion; but the space which we conceive is one,
fixed, and always the same; we can estimate its extent in cubic feet,
if we choose, but these feet are fixed and inseparable; we cannot
separate one cubic foot from another, even if we would; for even while
we annihilate it, it is present to us, and in the same distance that we
need in order to conceive separation. We cannot conceive separation,
if we do not conceive distance; nor conceive distance, if we do not
conceive space. We separate bodies from each other, but not one space
from another. Space remains with the same continuity when bodies are
separated, and it is by this continuity remaining unalterable that we
measure the extent of their separation. The same happens with time; it
is a chain which cannot be broken. Can we conceive three successive,
immediate instants, A, B, C, and then suppress B? Certainly not; such
a suppression would be impossible, or it would be a poor diversion.
We destroy B in our caprice, and A and C are continuous; since being
only separated by B, when it disappears the extremes meet. But in this
case it is no longer A, but B, for B is the instant which precedes C.
We have no other distinction than that of priority with respect to C,
and continuity with A. When, then, by the imaginary disappearance of
B, A is brought into contact with C, it is converted into B. Moreover,
A is not only connected with C, but is preceded by others; if, then,
by the disappearance of B, it makes a step, so also must the whole
infinite chain which precedes it. Each one is then a soldier, or rather
no soldiery is possible, for we have taken an instant from the infinite
chain, and so rendered it finite. Or, more distinctly; can we conceive
yesterday or to-morrow without to-day, a future or a past without the
present? Evidently we cannot. Time, then, is essentially composed of
inseparable parts.

19. This similarity between time and space naturally leads us to
believe that time is an abstract idea just as space is. What we have
said of space is applicable to time, only with a few modifications
exacted by the very nature of the thing. It can in no case be without
utility, in scientific investigations, to approximate and compare
these great ideas, which are as immense receptacles wherein our mind
deposits its treasures. The actual corporeal universe, and all possible
universes, are included in the idea of space; and all finite beings,
corporeal or incorporeal, are included in that of time.

20. We may well suspect that these ideas, so intimately united to our
perceptions, are formed in a similar manner; for it is probable that
they belong to the order of those primitive laws which govern the
development of our intellect.

21. The similarity between space and time must not make us ignore the
differences which distinguish them.

I. All the parts of space are co-existent; otherwise, that continuity
which is essential to them, would be inconceivable. Time is composed
of successive parts; to imagine them co-existent, is to destroy the
essence of time.

II. Space refers solely to the corporeal world, under only one aspect,
that of continuity. Time extends to all that is successive, corporeal
or incorporeal.

III. Consequently, the idea of space exists only in the geometrical
order, of which it is the basis. The idea of time is mingled with every
thing, and more especially with our own acts.

IV. Our soul, when reflecting upon itself, can totally prescind space,
and forget all its relations with extended objects; but it cannot
prescind time, which it finds necessary even to its own operations.

This last difference is a great help to the understanding in what the
idea of time consists; and we venture to recommend it to the attention
and memory of the reader.




