CHAPTER XVIII.

SUMMING UP.


Let us collect together the doctrines of the preceding chapters.

131. Time is a question difficult to explain. Whoever denies this
difficulty shows that he has meditated but superficially on the matter.

132. Motion is measured by time; but it is not a sufficient definition
of time to call it the measure of motion.

133. It is impossible to find a primitive measure of motion; we must,
at last, take some measure or another, and although arbitrarily chosen,
we must refer motion to it. It should be the most uniform measure
possible.

134. The resemblance between the ideas of time and space creates a
suspicion that they ought to be explained in a similar manner.

135. There is no duration without something which endures; therefore
there is no duration separate from things. If nothing existed, there
could be no duration.

136. There is no succession without things which succeed: therefore
succession cannot be realized as a form independent of things, although
it may be conceived in the abstract by itself.

137. Time implies _before_ and _after_, and, consequently, succession.
It is succession itself, because in conceiving succession, we conceive
time.

138. Succession involves the exclusion of some things by others. This
exclusion may either be founded on the essence of things, or be derived
from an external cause.

139. Time, therefore, involves exclusion: it is the general idea of the
order of changes, or of the mutual relation of being and not-being.

140. If there were no change there would be no time.

141. No time had passed before the existence of the world. There was no
other duration than eternity.

142. Eternity is the existence of the infinite being, without any
alteration either actual or possible.

143. Time is not any thing absolute and independent of things, but is
really in them. It is the order between being and not-being.

144. Co-existence is merely the existence of various beings. To
conceive many beings without the idea of the negation of being, is to
have the perception of co-existence.

145. Time may be considered under three aspects; the present, the past,
and the future. All other relations of time, differently expressed in
different idioms, are only combinations of these.

146. The present is the only absolute time: it is conceived without
relation to the past or the future; but the past and the future are not
conceived without relation to the present.

147. The idea of present accompanies the very idea of being; or rather,
it is confounded with the idea of existence; that which has no present
existence is not being.

148. The idea of past time is the perception of not-being, or of a
being that has been destroyed, in relation to a present being: the idea
of future time is the perception of a possible being proceeding from a
cause already determined, and in relation to a present being.

149. The idea of time is excited by experience; but it cannot be called
a fact of mere observation; for this would be opposed to its intrinsic
necessity, by virtue of which it is the object of the exact sciences.

150. Still less can we say, that this idea is confined to the sensible
order, since it includes every manner of change in general, whether
sensible or supersensible.

151. The idea of time being the perception of the order between being
and not-being, this relation, considered in general, belongs to the
pure intellectual order. The transition to experience is realized in
the same manner as in other general and indeterminate conceptions.

152. It is necessary to make a distinction between pure ideal time
and empirical time: pure ideal time is the relation between being and
not-being, considered in the greatest generality and the most complete
indeterminateness; empirical time is the same relation subjected to a
sensible measure.

153. To measure this succession, three things are necessary, and their
union forms the idea of empirical time. They are, first, the pure idea
of being and not-being, or of change; secondly, the application of this
idea to a sensible phenomenon, as, for example, the solar motion; and
thirdly, the idea of number applied to the determining of the changes
of this phenomenon.

154. We thus conceive why empirical time implies a true necessity, and
is the object of science. Of the three elements which compose it, the
first is a metaphysical idea, the second, a mathematical idea, and the
third, a fact of observation, to which these ideas are applied. If this
fact be not real, it must, at least, be possible, in order to save the
necessity of the calculation which is based upon it.

155. There is a close relation between the idea of time and the
principle of contradiction. Each is explained by the other, yet this
is not a vicious circle. The principle of contradiction consists in
the mutual exclusion of being and not-being, and the idea of time is
the perception of the order between being and not-being. Analysis must
therefore lead to a part which is identical in both, to the comparison
of the ideas of being and not-being.

156. Without the idea of time, memory would be impossible; consequently
also, the unity of consciousness.




