CHAPTER III.

UNITY AND SIMPLICITY.


16. Real unity and simplicity are identical. What is really one has no
distinction in itself; nor is it composed of parts, of which it can be
said, this _is not_ that. Evidently simplicity requires nothing more;
the simple is opposed to the composite, to what is formed of many
beings whereof one _is not_ the other.

17. We meet this simplicity in none of the objects of our intuitions,
excepting the acts of our own mind; so that even when we know, by
discursion, that there are substances really one or simple, we do not
see them in themselves.

Extension consists essentially of parts; whence it happens that we
never encounter real unity or simplicity in the corporeal world as
object of our sensibility. But as the composite must be resolved
into the simple, as it is hard to proceed _ad infinitum_, we infer
that the corporeal universe itself is a union of substances which,
whether called points without extension, or any thing else, cannot be
decomposed into others; for which reason they are really one, or simple.

18. Hence we conclude that substances may be said to be in a certain
manner simple; and that things called composite are unions of
substances, which in their turn form a third substance by virtue of
a law presiding over them and giving them that unity which we call
factitious.

19. We cannot, then, do less than to remark that the transcendental
analysis refutes those who deny simplicity to thinking beings, since we
have seen that simplicity is prior to composition, which can neither be
nor be conceived if it be not presupposed. Simplicity is a necessary
law of every being: a composite being ought to be called a union of
beings, rather than a being.

20. We have said that simple substances are not objects of our
intuition, which has none worthy to be called simple excepting the
acts of our mind. The reason of this is, that the principal medium of
our intuition is sensibility, which is founded upon representations,
themselves based upon extension. There can be no doubt that the acts
of our mind, given us by intuition, in the inward sense are perfectly
simple; for who can decompose a perception, a judgment, an act of the
reason or of the will?

21. The perception of a certain object requires preparatory acts;
and the same may be said of judgments and ratiocinations; yet these
operations are in themselves exceedingly simple, and cannot be divided
into various parts. Simplicity is met with alike in the acts of the
will, whether of the pure, intellectual, or sensible will. How shall we
divide such acts as these into parts: _I desire_, _I do not desire_, _I
love_, _I abhor_, _I suffer_, _I rejoice_?

22. We must take care not to confound the multiplicity of the acts with
the acts themselves; there may be many acts, but in themselves they are
simple. Thoughts, impressions and affections continually succeed one
another in our mind; these phenomena are all distinct from each other,
as is proved by their existing at different times, some at one time
without the others, and by some being incompatible with others, because
contradictory; but each individual phenomenon is by itself incapable of
decomposition, and admits in itself no distinction into various parts;
wherefore, it is simple.

23. True unity, therefore, is only found in simplicity; where there is
no true simplicity, there may be factitious, but not real, unity; since
even when there is no separation, there may be distinction between the
various parts of which the composite is formed.

24. It may be inferred from this that _indistinctum_ ought, perhaps, to
take the place of _indivisum_ in the definition of a one being; because
distinction is opposed to unity of identity, and division to union.
Absence of division is all that factitious unity requires; but real
unity demands that there be no distinction. However closely united two
things may be, if one is not the other they are distinct, and cannot,
in strict metaphysical language, be called one.

25. The object of these observations is only to fix our ideas, not to
modify our language. In common parlance, the idea of unity is used in
a less rigorous sense, and, far from opposing this use, we readily
accord it a reasonable foundation. There results from the union of two
really distinct things, a conjunction, rightly called one so far as it
also is subjected to a certain unity; and, were it not permitted to use
this word in a sense less rigorous than that exacted by metaphysical
analysis, we should be under the necessity of excluding unity from the
great mass of objects. Simple substances, we have said, are not offered
to us in immediate intuition, and we see compositions rather than their
component elements. Could we apply unity only to simple elements,
science would be greatly reduced, language would be impoverished, and
literature and the fine arts would be despoiled of unity, one of their
characteristic perfections.




CHAPTER IV.

ORIGIN OF THE TENDENCY OF OUR MIND TO UNITY.


26. Since we encounter multiplicity in all sensible objects, which are
those chiefly demanding our attention, how does our mind acquire the
idea of unity? In science, in literature, in the arts, and in every
thing, we seek unity; and whence this irresistible tendency towards
unity, which makes us seek a factitious when we cannot find a real
unity, and this, too, notwithstanding the multiplicity presented by all
the objects of our perception?

27. Two origins, if we mistake not, may be assigned to this tendency
towards unity, the one objective, the other subjective. The former
consists in the very character of unity in which the object of the
understanding is mainly comprised; the other is the unity found in the
intelligent being, and which it experiences in itself. We will explain
these ideas more at length.

28. Unity is being; every being is one; and, properly speaking, being
is not found without unity. Let us take a composite object: in it we
discover two things; the simple component elements of it, and the
union of them. The being, properly speaking, does not consist in the
union, but in the united elements. The union is a mere relation, not
even possible without the elements to be united. On the other hand,
these elements in themselves, abstracted from their union, are true
beings, existed before, and will exist after their union. What is an
organized body? An aggregation of molecules united under a certain law,
conformably to a principle presiding over their organization. The
parts existed before their organization, and will continue to exist
after its destruction. The being, therefore, properly consisted in the
elements; and the organization was a relation of them among themselves.

29. Organization requires a principle to rule it, and subject its
functions to determinate laws. Thus we see that even relation is
subject to unity, to the unity of end and to the unity of a ruling and
directing principle.

30. It is inconceivable how the union of distinct things can have any
meaning, or lead to any result, if unity do not preside over it. In
objects submitted to our experience, things are united in three ways:
by juxtaposition in space; by co-existence in time; and by association
in the exercise of their activity. The elements constitutive of
extension are united in the first way; all objects belonging to the
same time, in the second; and in the third all those which unite their
forces and direct them to one and the same end.

31. The union consisting in the continuity of elements in space, has no
value in the eyes of science, save inasmuch as there is an intelligent
being who perceives the forms resulting from this continuity, by
reducing them to unity under ideal types. Four lines of points,
so disposed as to form a quadrilateral figure, have no scientific
meaning until there comes an intelligence and perceives the form of a
quadrilateral figure under the aspect of unity. We do not deny that the
quadrilateral figure exists independently of intellectual perception:
these lines will certainly exist, and be arranged in the same manner,
although we prescind all intelligence; but this disposition in the
quadrilateral form is a relation, not a being distinct from the
aggregation of the elements disposed; and this relation, of itself
alone, is no object of intelligence except inasmuch as presented to it
under the unity of the quadrilateral form.

The intelligence in search of a true being, can find none, save in
elements; and if it wishes to perceive their relation, it must recur to
the unity of form.

32. Co-existence in time, is a relation, which, of itself alone,
neither gives any thing to, nor takes any thing from objects. These
exist independently of this relation; for they must, of necessity,
exist, in order to co-exist. This relation denotes something
perceptible to the understanding, only as it is presented to it under
unity, which, in this case, is unity of time, as in the former it was
unity of space.

33. Neither has the association of activities any meaning, except when
it expresses the convergence of forces towards one and the same object.
If unity be wanting to the point of their direction, their union will
express nothing, and the intelligence will have for its object only
scattered and unrelated activities.

34. We have then shown that unity is a law of our understanding,
founded upon the very nature of things. Absolute being is never found
in the composite, but only in the simple, and relative being is not
even conceivable, if it be not submitted to unity.

35. We discover in the very nature of our mind, the second origin of
its tendency to unity. It in itself is one, is simple, and therefore
disposed to assimilate every thing to itself under this same unity
and simplicity. It feels that it is one in the midst of multiplicity,
permanent even in succession, and under all the immense variety of
sensible phenomena, intellectual and moral, which it unceasingly
experiences. The inward sense attests with irresistible certainty the
identity of the _me_. This unity, this identity, is as certain, as
evident to the child who begins to feel pleasure or pain, and is sure
that he is one and the same that experiences both impressions, as
they are to the philosopher who has spent long years in profoundly
investigating the idea of the _me_ and the unity of consciousness.

The unity and simplicity which we experience in ourselves force us
to reduce the composite to the simple, the multiple to the one. The
perception of things the most composite refers to a consciousness
essentially one: even were we to perceive the whole complicated
universe by a single act, this act would be most simple, since
otherwise the _me_ could not say, _I perceive_.

36. Two reasons, then, exist why our mind in all things seeks unity.
Objects are unintelligible, except so far as subjected to a certain
perceptible unity, to a form, under which the multiple is made one, and
the composite simple. The object of the understanding is being, and
being consists in the simple. The composite involves an aggregation of
simple elements with the relation called _union_; but unless this be
presented under a certain unity, it does not constitute a perceptible
object.

Without the indivisible unity of consciousness, no intelligent subject
is conceivable. Every intelligent being requires this link to unite
the variety of phenomena of which it is the subject. If this unity
fail, the phenomena become an informal aggregation, unrelated among
themselves: intellectual acts without an intelligent being.

The tendency to unity originates in the perfection of our mind, and is
itself a perfection; but it needs to be carefully watched, lest it go
astray, and seek real unity there, where only a factitious unity can be
found. This exaggeration is the cause of pantheism, the fatal error of
our day. Our mind is one, so also is the infinite essence, cause of all
finite beings; but the aggregation of these beings is not one, for even
when united by many ties, they cease not to be distinct. There is in
the world unity of order, of harmony, of origin, and of end; but there
is no absolute unity. Number also enters into unity of harmony, but it
is incompatible with absolute unity, as reason and experience both show.




