CHAPTER V.

GENERATION OF THE IDEA OF NUMBER.


37. Unity is the first element of number, but does not of itself alone
constitute number, which is not unity, but the collection of unities.

38. _Two_ is a number. What is our idea of the number _two_? Evidently
it is not confounded with its sign, for signs are many and very
different, but it is one and always the same.

39. It would seem at first sight that the idea of two is independent
of the mode of its generation, and that, being one, it may be formed
by addition or subtraction, by adding one to one, or taking one
from three: 1 + 1 = 2; 3-1 = 2. But if we reflect upon these two
expressions, we shall see that the latter is impossible without the
former. We should not know that 3-1 = 2 if we did not previously know
that two entered into the composition of three, and how it entered. We
could know nothing of this had we not already the idea of two, and this
idea is nothing else than the perception of this sum.

40. The idea of two is no sensation, for it extends alike to the
sensible and the non-sensible, to the simultaneous and the successive.
In itself it is simple, its object is composite.

41. Since the collection of objects is small in two, the imagination
can easily figure to itself what the understanding perceives; and the
idea seems clearer to us because made sensible by a representation. The
idea of addition made, _in facto_, that is, the idea of the sum, enters
into that of two, but not of addition _in fieri_. Our idea of this
number is perfectly clear, and yet we do not continually think of one
plus one.

42. The idea of two refers to the simultaneous as well as to the
successive; but our mind does not discover it until after it has the
idea of succession. The object of this perception is the relation of
united things; the understanding perceives them as such, and then only
has it the idea of two.

43. Neither the successive nor simultaneous perception of two objects
unaccompanied by relation is the idea of two. Hence the saying: a man
and a horse do not make two, but only one and one; and the reason of
this is that the man and the horse are represented to the understanding
by their difference, not by their resemblance; and things must be
presented to the mind under a common idea in order to give number.
Thus, if we abstract their difference, and consider them only as
animals, or corporeal beings, or beings simply, or things, they will
make two.

44. In objects, then, totally unlike, or not comprehended under some
common idea, there can be no number. Abstract number is number by
excellence; because it eliminates all that distinguishes the things
numbered, and considers them only as beings, consequently as similar,
as contained in the general idea of being. Concrete numbers are
only numbers so far as they participate in this property. _Two_ is
applicable to one horse and another horse, but not to a horse and a
man, unless we identify them under the idea of animal, and abstract
rationality and irrationality. Concrete number requires a common
denomination; otherwise it is not number.

45. The idea of distinction, that is, that the one is not the other,
enters into the idea of two, so that this idea necessarily involves an
affirmation and a negation. The affirmation is of the real, possible,
or imaginary existence of the things counted; the negation is of the
one with respect to the other. Affirmation without distinction or
negation involves identity. The idea of two, as well as that of every
other number, includes the ideas of identity and distinction. The
identity is of each extreme with itself; the distinction is of the
extremes among themselves. Identity in the thing is the thing itself:
identity in the idea is the simple perception of the thing. Distinction
in the thing is the negation of it with respect to others: distinction
in the idea is the perception of negation. We always perceive a thing
as identical, and consequently every perception includes the idea
of unity. But we do not always, when we perceive a thing, observe
its negation with respect to others, and consequently do not always
perceive number. The idea of number originates in comparison, when we
see an object which _is not_ another.

46. The ideas of being, distinction, and similarity enter into that
of two. The idea of being, because nothing cannot be counted: that
of distinction, or negation of the one being the other, because the
identical does not constitute number: that of similarity, because
things are only numbered when abstraction is made of their difference.
Being is the basis of perception; distinction, of comparison; and
similarity, of union. Perception begins with unity, proceeds with
distinction, and ends with similarity, which is a kind of unity. The
perception of this similarity unites what is distinct; but the union
need not always be of the things, but may be in the idea comprising
them. There are two poles of the world, but they are not united. The
perception of the number two requires something more than the simple
perception of objects; they must be susceptible of comparison, and
consequently united in a common idea. This perception, therefore,
demands comparison and abstraction, and this is why animals cannot
numerate; they can neither compare nor generalize.

47. The analysis of the idea of two is the analysis of all numbers; the
difference is not of nature, but of more and less; in the repetition of
the same perception.

48. If any one now ask whether number be in the things, or in the mind
alone, we reply that it is in things as in its foundation, because both
distinction and similarity are in the things; that is, the one is not
the other, and both have something in common; but it is the mind that
sees all this.

49. After having perceived the distinction and union of two objects,
we can also perceive another object, which will be neither the one nor
the other of them, and will yet be comprehended in one general idea
with them. This is the perception or idea of the number _three_. No
matter how many numbers be imagined, nothing will ever be discovered in
any of them except a simultaneous perception of objects, distinction
of objects, and similarity of objects. If these be determinate, we
shall have concrete number; if they be comprised in the general idea of
being, of thing, we shall have abstract number.

50. The limits of our mind prevent it from comparing many objects at
one time, and from easily recollecting the comparisons it has already
made. To assist the memory, and the perception of these relations, we
make use of signs. When we pass beyond three or four, our power of
simultaneous perception fails, and we divide the object into groups
which serve us as new units, and are expressed by signs. Ten is clearly
the general group in the decimal system; but before we reach the number
ten we have already formed other subalternate groups; since to count
ten, we do not say one and one and one, etc., but one and one, two;
two and one, three; three and one, four, etc. Each unit added forms
a new group, which, in its turn, serves to form another. With two,
we form three; with three, four, and so on. This affords an idea of
the relation of numbers with their signs; but, as this matter is too
important to be here dismissed, we will further develop it in the
following chapters.




