CHAPTER XV.

ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE VALUE OF GENERAL CONCEPTIONS.


96. However vague the ideas an isolated being would form of objects
distinct from itself, they will never be so vague as not to refer to
a real thing. The mind may not know the nature of this reality, but
it knows for certain that it exists. A man blind from his birth can
form no clear idea of colors, nor of the sensation of seeing; but
is he therefore ignorant that sensation exists, and that the words,
color, seeing, and others which refer to sight, have a positive and
determinate object? Certainly not. The blind man does not know in what
these things, of which he hears, consist, but he knows that they are
something; those of his conceptions that refer to them may be called
imperfect, but they are not vain; the words by which he expresses them,
have for him a positive, although incomplete meaning.

97. There is a great difference between incomplete and indeterminate
conceptions; the former may refer to a positive thing, although
imperfectly known; the latter include nothing but a relation of ideas,
meaning nothing in the order of facts. We will render this difference
more apparent by explaining the example of the preceding paragraph.

A man blind from his birth has no intuition of colors, nor of any
thing that refers to the sense of sight; but he is sure that there
exist external facts which correspond to an internal affection called
_seeing_. This idea is incomplete, but it has a determinate object.
The words of those who possess the sense of sight reveal to him its
existence; he knows not, what it is, but, that it is; in other words,
he does not know its essence, but its existence. Let us now suppose
the possibility of an order of sensations different from ours, and in
nowise resembling those which we experience, to be called in question.
The conception referred to the new sensations would not only be
incomplete, but would have no relation to any real object. The general
idea, then, of affection of a sensitive being, will be all that our
mind will have; but it will know nothing of its existence, and can
form only mere conjectures as to the conditions of its possibility.
This example illustrates our idea. We find in the man blind from his
birth, who hears of what pertains to the sense of sight, an incomplete
conception, but one to which the existence of a series of facts, known
to his mind, corresponds. But in ourselves, if we reflect upon a kind
of sensations different from our own, we find conceptions, having,
indeed, a general object, but of whose realization we know nothing.

98. Thus is it explained how our mind, without having intuition of a
thing, can, nevertheless, know it, and be perfectly certain of its
existence. We have here demonstrated that conceptions may, although
they do not refer to a sensible intuition, have a value, not only in
the order of ideas, but also in that of facts.

99. In order to prove the sterility of all conception beyond sensible
intuition, Kant adduces one reason, which is, that we cannot define the
categories and the principles which flow from them without referring to
the objects of sensibility. This is no proof at all; for, in the first
place, the impossibility of a definition does not always arise from the
fact that the conception to be defined is empty; but it very frequently
results from the conception being simple, and consequently not
susceptible of a division into parts that may be expressed by words.
How will he define the idea of _being_? No matter how he attempts to
define it, the thing to be defined will enter into the definition: the
words, thing, reality, existence, all signify _being_.

It is very natural, since sensible intuition is the basis of our
relations with the external world, and consequently with our
fellow-men, that when we purpose to express any relation whatever, we
should call to our aid sensible applications; but we are not thence
to infer that there is not in our mind, independently of them, a real
truth contained in the conception which we wish to explain.

100. This capacity of knowing objects under general ideas, is a
characteristic property of our mind, and we cannot, in our inability to
penetrate to the essence of things, think without this indispensable
auxiliary. In the ordinary course of human affairs, it often happens
that we need to know the existence of a thing and of some of its
attributes, but do not require a perfect knowledge of it. In such
cases, general ideas, aided by some data of experience, put us in
mediate communication with the object not presented to our intuition.
But why cannot the same thing be verified with respect to non-sensible
beings, which alone are the object of intellectual intuitions? I know
not what exception can be taken to these observations, founded as they
are upon observation of internal phenomena, and confirmed by common
sense.




CHAPTER XVI.

VALUE OF PRINCIPLES, INDEPENDENTLY OF SENSIBLE INTUITION.


101. The principle of contradiction, indispensable condition of all
certainty, of all truth, and without which the external world, and
intelligence itself, would become a chaos, offers us a good example of
the intrinsic value of purely intellectual conceptions independent of
sensible intuition.

No determinate idea is united to the conception of being when we affirm
the impossibility of a thing being and not-being at the same time, or
the exclusion of not-being by being; and so far we absolutely abstract
all sensible intuition. Whatever be its object, whatever its nature
and the relations of its existence; be it corporeal or incorporeal,
composite or simple, accident or substance, contingent or necessary,
finite or infinite, always will it be found true that being excludes
not-being; the absolute incompatibility of these two extremes will
always be verified, so that the affirmation of the one is always, in
all cases, and under all imaginable suppositions, the negation of the
other.

This being so, to limit the value of these conceptions to sensible
intuition, would be to destroy the principle of contradiction. The
limitation of the principle is equivalent to its nullification. Its
absolute universality is closely allied to its absolute necessity;
if it be curtailed, it is made contingent; for, if the principle of
contradiction may fail us in one instance, it fails us in all. To
admit the possibility of what is absurd, is to deny its absurdity.
If the contradiction of being and not-being does not exist in every
supposition, it exists in no supposition.

102. The difficulty is to know how the transition from the principle
of contradiction to real truths, is made; because not affirming any
thing determinate in it, but solely the repugnance of yes to no, and
of no to yes, we assert that it would be impossible to affirm either
one of these extremes without denying the other; and as on the other
hand, it is impossible, if we confine ourselves to the principle of
contradiction, for it to include any thing more than the most general
relation between two general ideas, we conclude that it is of itself
alone, perfectly sterile and unable to conduct us to any positive
result. This is all true; but it contradicts in no point what we have
said concerning the intrinsic value of general conceptions.

We have remarked that truths of the purely ideal order have none but a
hypothetical value, and that in order to produce a positive science,
they require facts to which they may apply. We have also remarked,
that experience furnishes these facts, and that every thinking being
possesses one at least, consciousness of itself. Every thinking being
will therefore, provided it discover in its own consciousness facts
to which it may apply it, make a positive use of the principle of
contradiction.

103. Even were we to admit the supposition that there is in our mind
no intuition but the sensible, it could not therefore be concluded
that general principles, and more particularly that of contradiction,
can have no positive value; because, if we suppose these principles
combined with sensible intuition to produce a cognition of other beings
out of the order of sensibility, it would follow that we really know
them, although they were not given to us in immediate intuition. And
this is verified in the human mind, when it rises by discursion to
the cognition of the non-sensible. On the one hand, the data furnished
by experience, and on the other, general and necessary truths, form
a connection constituting a positive science, which guides us with
perfect security to the cognition of objects not subject to immediate
experience.

This theory is so clear, so evident, so rooted in the consciousness of
our own acts, so perfectly in accordance with all that we observe in
the proceedings of the human mind, that it causes us a strange surprise
to meet philosophers, whose erroneous doctrines oblige us to explain
and defend it.

104. The transition from the known to the unknown is a proceeding
characteristic of our understanding; and this transition is impossible
if the reality of every cognition, not referred to an intuition, be
denied. Whatever is presented to us in this latter way, is given to us,
is present to our sight, and we have no necessity of seeking it. If,
therefore, no object be really known, unless offered in intuition, all
intellectual progress becomes impossible: all the advances of our mind
are reduced to combinations of the forms presented to the sensibility,
and even these lead to nothing whenever they cease to be intuitive;
that is, when they no longer relate to determinate objects immediately
perceived. The _Critic of Pure Reason_ is the destruction of all
reason: for it examines itself with suicidal intent, or in order to
prove that it contains nothing positive.

Science cannot survive the reduction of general principles to one
only value relative to sensible intuitions. What we have demonstrated
concerning the principle of contradiction, is _a fortiori_ applicable
to all other principles. If this be not saved, all must perish in the
wreck. Moreover, the very basis of the necessity involved in these
principles is threatened. We know nothing, save that there is within
us a series of phenomena which _seem_ necessary. But what use can we
make of them beyond the subjective order? None at all. Behold us then
in the most perfect skepticism, condemned to simple appearances, with
no means of knowing any reality.

105. No! the human mind is not condemned to so despairing a sterility:
reason is not an empty word; ratiocination is not a puerile play, only
fit to serve as an amusement. In the midst of the prepossessions,
errors, and extravagance of human misery, towers on high that force,
that admirable activity, by which the mind springs beyond itself,
_knows_ what it does not _see_, and _foresees_ what it will one day
_feel_. Nature is veiled to our eyes; impenetrable secrets surround
us; whichever way we turn deep shadows hide the reality of objects:
but through this darkness we discern from afar some scintillation of
light. Notwithstanding the profound silence which reigns over the sea
of beings, whose surges toss us about like imperceptible atoms in the
immensity of the ocean, we hear at times mysterious voices tell us the
course we must keep to reach unknown shores.




