CHAPTER VII.

FUNDAMENTAL EXPLANATION OF THE ABSTRACT IDEA OF THE INFINITE.


49. Supposing that our idea of the infinite is not intuitive but
abstract, let us see how its true nature may be explained.

We have the ideas of being and of its opposite, not-being; these ideas
considered in themselves are general, indeterminate, and may be
applied to every thing which is subjected to our experience.

We may affirm and deny something of every limited being: we may affirm
what it is: we may deny what it is not: the limit is only conceived as
such when something is denied of it.

50. The activity of our being is unceasing, but it is limited by
the absence or the resistance of objects; the external world is an
assemblage of beings presenting a great variety of limitations.

Therefore both internal and external experience give us the idea of the
finite, that is, of a being which involves some not-being. The brute
has sensible perception, but no understanding: it _is_ sensitive, and
herein it has being; it _is not_ intelligent, and herein it is limited.
Man is sensitive and intelligent; the limit of the brute is not the
limit of man. Among intelligent beings some understand more than
others; therefore the limit of all is not the same.

51. Since we find a limit in both internal and external experience, it
is evident that we can form the general idea of limit, that is, of a
negation applied to an object.

52. The same experience teaches that what is the limit of some
things is not the limit of others, and that the limit applied to one
object must be denied of another. When we compare different beings
together, we frequently find ourselves _denying certain_ limits. As
our understanding has the faculty of generalizing, it is evident that
we may conceive in general the negation of _certain_ limits, and form
an indeterminate conception, including the two ideas of _negation_ and
_limit_.

53. I do not see what objection can be made either to the possibility
or to the existence of this conception; but as this fact is necessary
for the explanation of the idea of infinity, I shall make some further
observations for the purpose of confirming it.

We have an idea of negation in general; this is a primitive fact of our
mind: without it no negative judgments would be possible, nor could
we even know the principle of contradiction. It is impossible for any
thing to be _and not be_ at the same time; when we say _not be_ we
express a negation, we therefore have the conception of negation. This
conception is general, because it involves no determination; we speak
of not-being without applying it to any particular object, nor even to
any determinate species or genus. Therefore the conception of negation
is general and absolutely undetermined.

54. We have the idea of limit; for, as we have seen, it is a negation
applied to a being. We have also the idea of the negation of limit; for
just as we conceive the limit as applied or applicable, we may and do
conceive it as not applied or not applicable. At every moment we deny
certain limits; this idea generalized becomes the negation in general
of limit in general.

55. After these remarks we may establish what is contained in the
idea of the infinite. This idea is a general conception involving the
conception of being in general, and the negation of limit in general.
The union of these two conceptions constitutes the abstract idea of the
infinite.

56. The general conception of the negation of limit gives us an idea
of infinity in the abstract, but not any infinite thing. Without
the intuitive cognition of an infinite object, and with only a very
imperfect idea of it, we may speak of infinity without falling into
contradiction, and determine the cases in which it may be applied to a
being or to an order of beings, whether real or possible. Man has many
ideas of this vague kind, which nevertheless answer his necessities. We
shall make this palpable by examples.

57. Suppose we take an uneducated person and point out to him a number
of learned men, telling him that one of them knows more than all the
rest. The uneducated person has no idea of what the man knows who
knows the most, nor the man who knows the least; he has no idea of the
degrees of science, nor of what science itself is; but he possesses the
general ideas of degree, of more and less, and also of knowledge, and
this enables him to speak, without contradiction or confusion, of the
greater science of the one and the less science of the others, and even
to solve with certainty the questions concerning the science of those
individuals, in so far as these questions are contained in the general
idea that the science of one is greater than that of all the others.

A servant in an establishment where the most beautiful products of
art are collected, may speak of them all without contradiction or
confusion, although he may be incapable of knowing their merit, and
entirely ignorant of the circumstances which constitute the beauty of
the objects. It is sufficient for him to have the idea of perfection
or beauty in general, and to arrange by certain arbitrary signs the
degrees of perfection or beauty of the objects, in order to be able
to point them out to visitors, and talk of the greater skill of one
artist, the poorer success of another; the greater effect and value of
the works of the former, and the inferiority of those of the second,
and to make other remarks of a similar nature, which at first might
make us suppose him a consummate artist, or, at the least, an amateur
of a great intellect and exquisite taste.

58. It would be easy to show by other examples, how fruitful some
general ideas are, and how they may undergo innumerable combinations,
without presenting any thing determinate to the intellect. This is
precisely what happens with the idea of the infinite: in vain we ask
what there is within us which corresponds to it: the conception of
being in general and of the negation of limit present nothing fixed,
except certain abstract conditions to which we continually reduce the
objects which come under our intuition, or are presented to us with
certain characteristic properties which permit us to form a less vague
idea of the negation of limit.




