CHAPTER XII.

CAUSALITY OF PURE FORCE OF THE WILL.


124. In what does creation consist? How can God produce things from
nothing? Such a thing is incomprehensible. This is the language of
many who do not reflect that the same incomprehensibility is found in
the exercise of secondary causality, both in the corporeal and in the
incorporeal world. If we knew God in the intuitive manner in which,
according to the Catholic dogma, the blessed see him in the mansion
of glory, we might know intuitively the manner of the creation. As
it is, we say that in so far as we can form any idea of the action
of the Creator, he produces all things from nothing by the force of
his will; which besides according with the teachings of religion, is
in harmony with what we experience in ourselves. God wills, and the
universe springs up out of nothing: how can this be understood? To him
who asks this, I say: man wills, and his arm rises; he wills, and his
whole body is in motion. How can this be understood? Here is a small,
weak, and incomplete, but true image of the Creator: an intelligent
being which wills, and a fact which appears. Where is the connection?
If you cannot explain it to us in so far as concerns finite beings, how
can you ask us to explain it with respect to the infinite being? The
incomprehensibility of the conception of the motion of the body with
the force of the will does not authorize us to deny the connection;
therefore the incomprehensibility of the connection of a being which
appears for the first time with the force of the infinite will cannot
authorize us to deny the truth of the creation: on the contrary,
the finding a similar thing in ourselves greatly strengthens the
ontological arguments which demonstrate its necessity. In the dogmas of
the Christian religion, besides what they reveal that is supernatural,
we find at every step philosophical truths as profound as they are
important.

125. The causality which relates to purely possible effects can only
be understood by placing it in an intelligence. The cause which does
not produce an effect, but which may produce it, involves a relation
of the existent to the non-existent; the cause exists, the effect does
not exist; the cause does not produce it, but may produce it; what is
the relation of that which exists to that which does not exist? is not
a relation without a term to which it relates, a contradiction? It
is certainly, if abstracted from the intelligence: the intelligence
alone can relate to that which does not exist; for it can _think the
non-existent_. A body can have no relation to a body which does not
exist; but an intelligence may have a relation to that which does not
exist, even knowing that it does not exist; we may ourselves wander at
pleasure through the regions of pure possibility.

126. The will also participates of this character of the intellect.
Desire relates to an enjoyment which is not, but which may be; we will
and will not, we love and hate things that are often purely ideal, and
whose identity we know perfectly well, still this does not prevent
our willing them. Thus we desire things to happen which are not, and
we may even desire things which we know to be impossible. We may wish
to recover that which we know is lost forever; we may wish for the
presence of a friend whom we know to be at so great a distance as to
render his coming impossible; we may wish that time would stop or hurry
on in conformity to our wants or our caprices.

127. Thus we find both the intellect and the will in relation to that
which does not exist;--a relation which is not even conceivable in a
being destitute of intellect. This leads to an important result. The
absolute beginning of any thing is not possible unless we conceive
causality as having its root in the intellect. That which begins
passes from not-being to being, and how is it possible that a being
has produced in _another_ a transition from not-being to being, if the
relation to the _other_ before it existed was intrinsically impossible?
An intelligent being may think another although the other does not
exist; but for an unintelligent being if the other does not exist in
_reality_ it does not exist at all; consequently no relation to it is
possible, any such relation that may be imagined is contradictory, and
therefore it is absurd to suppose that which is not to begin to be.

128. This reasoning proves that in the origin of things there is
an intelligent being, the cause of every thing, and that without
this intelligence nothing could have begun. If something has begun,
something must have existed from all eternity; and that which began was
_known_ by that which existed. Not admitting intelligence, beginning is
absurd. Imagine in the origin of things a being without intelligence,
its relations can only be to that which exists; it can have no relation
to the non-existent; how then is it possible for the non-existent to
begin to exist, through the action of the existent? In order that the
non-existent may begin to be, some reason is necessary; for otherwise
the beginning of one thing or of another, and even its beginning or
not-beginning would be indifferent. Unless we suppose a being which
knows that which does not exist, and may establish, so to speak, a
communication with nothing, the being which does not exist can never
exist.




CHAPTER XIII.

ACTIVITY.


129. To understand more clearly the idea of causality, it will be
useful to reflect on the ideas of activity and action, as also on those
of inertness, or inactivity, and inaction.

130. An absolutely inactive being is a being without intelligence,
without will, without sensibility, without any kind of consciousness,
containing in itself nothing which can change its own state or that of
any thing else.

Thus absolute inactivity or inertness requires the following
conditions: I. The absolute denial of all principle, of intelligence,
of will, of sensibility, and in general of every thing which is
accompanied by consciousness. II. The absolute denial of all principle
of change in itself. III. The absolute denial of all principle of
change in others. The union of these three conditions forms the idea of
absolute inactivity or inertness: the state of such a being is that of
absolute inaction.

131. A being of this nature, regarded in general, presents only the
idea of an existing thing: we may also consider it as a substance,
supposing it not to inhere as a modification in another, or rather,
supposing it as a substratum capable of receiving modifications by the
action of other beings upon it.

The only means by which we can characterize to a certain extent this
general idea, so that it may be presented to our intuition, is to add
to it the idea of extension, by which we make in some manner the idea
of inert matter.

132. After the ideas of inertness and inaction are explained, their
opposites, the ideas of activity and action, are clearly understood.

When we conceive a being which has the reason of its changes within
itself, we conceive an active being.

When we conceive a being which has within itself the reason of the
changes of other beings, we conceive an active being.

When we conceive a being which knows, wills, perceives, or has
consciousness in any way, we conceive an active being.

Hence activity may represent three things to us: the origin of its own
changes; the origin of the changes of others; and consciousness.

133. The first kind of activity can belong only to changeable beings;
the second also to immutable beings, which are causes; the third is
an activity which belongs to mutable or immutable beings, abstracting
absolutely the idea of causality.

134. The general relation of principle of its own or another's changes,
is an indeterminate idea; consequently the only activity of which
we can have an intuitive idea is that of intelligence, of will, and
in general of whatever relates to the phenomena which require the
perception called consciousness.

135. We must consider consciousness as an activity, and include in this
order the idea of intelligence and will abstracted from all relation to
their own or another's changes, unless we mean to say that God was from
all eternity an inactive being, because he had no other action than the
immanent acts of knowing and willing.

136. Therefore not all activity is transient, but there is a true
immanent activity, of which we have an intuitive knowledge in the
phenomena of our consciousness.

137. The activity which we can conceive in bodies is reduced to a
principle of their own changes or those of some other being; it is
therefore something of which we can have no intuitive knowledge. In
fact, we are in relation with bodies only by means of the senses, which
present but two orders of facts with respect to corporeal nature;
subjective facts, or the impressions which we experience and call
sensations, and which we believe to emanate from the action of bodies
upon our organs; and objective facts, that is, extension motion, and
the different modifications which the senses discover in extended
things which move. Neither the first class of facts nor the second give
us an intuitive idea of the activity of corporeal beings.

Subjective facts or sensations are immanent, that is, are in us, not
in the things; and inasmuch as subjective tell us nothing of what is
outside of us, but only what is within us. Even supposing sensations
to be a true effect of the activity of bodies, this activity is not
presented in the effect. When our hand is warmed by the fire we have
the intuitive perception of the sensation of heat, inasmuch as it is
in us; if we suppose that this sensation is really an effect of the
activity of the fire, we know the relation of our sensation to this
activity considered in general, and indeterminately as the origin of
our sensation; but we do not know the activity intuitively in itself,
because as such it is not represented in our sensation.

Neither do objective facts, that is, extension, motion, and whatever
we conceive which is not in our sensation, but in the object itself,
give us any intuitive idea of the activity of corporeal things. The
modifications of extension, or figures, motion with all its accidents,
and in general all that presents the corporeal world to our senses, are
the changes themselves and their relations, but not the principle of
these relations or of these changes. The body A, which is in motion,
strikes upon the body B at rest; B after the impact begins to move:
without considering whether the impact of A is the cause of the motion
of B, that which we are certain of is, that we have no intuition of the
activity producing the motion. What do the senses tell us of the body
A? They only tell us that it has moved with a certain velocity towards
the point M where the body B was situated. What do they tell us of the
body B? Only that it began to move the instant the body A reached the
point M: so far we have only the relations of space and time between
the two extended objects A and B. Where is the intuition of the
activity of A, and of its action on B? We see absolutely nothing of it.
By reasoning, by analogy, by considerations of order, of agreement, and
such like, we may prove with more or less evidence that in the body A
there is an activity which causes the motion of the body B; but this
gives us only an indeterminate idea, not an intuition of activity.

138. These considerations are conclusive as applied to all the
phenomena of corporeal nature. Take any one you please, select that one
which leads us most strongly to imagine a true activity; analyze it
well, and you will find our intuition limited to relations of extension
in space and in time.

That all bodies are heavy is a fact of experience; do we know
intuitively the principle from which the phenomena of weight proceed?
By no means. Let us examine it in the subjective order and in the
objective. What does weight as perceived by us present to us? Only
that affection which we call heaviness, that is, the pressure on
the members of the body. What does it present objectively? Only the
direction of bodies towards a centre with a certain velocity depending
on circumstances. We find in all this only a purely internal fact,
which is the unpleasant sensation of weight or heaviness, or the pure
relations of extended objects in space and time.

139. The fire burns objects and reduces them to ashes; nothing could be
better suited to give us the idea of activity. Still we cannot say that
we know it intuitively. In the subjective order we have the painful
sensation of burning, which thus far is a purely internal fact; in the
objective order we have the disorganization of the bodies burnt, which
presents to the senses only a change in the size, figure, color, and
other qualities relative to our senses--all this may be the effect of
the activity, but it is not the activity itself.

140. The light reflected from an object strikes our eyes, painting
on the retina the object which reflects it. Have we in this case an
intuition of the activity of light. Not at all. In the subjective order
we find the sensation called _seeing_; in the objective order, we find
the size, figure, and other qualities of the object in space. If we
consider the light itself, we find a fluid whose rays have this or that
direction in subjection to determinate laws, but we have no intuitive
knowledge of its activity; and in order to persuade ourselves that the
activity exists, we reason from principles which are not within the
sphere of our intuition.

141. The four intuitions of passive sensibility, active sensibility,
intelligence, and will, may be reduced to two:[89] extension and
consciousness; including in extension all its modifications, and in
consciousness all the internal phenomena of a sensitive or intellectual
being; in so far as they have the common ground of consciousness.
We therefore know intuitively two modes of being: consciousness and
extension; consciousness is within us, it is a subjective fact;
extension is external, its existence is revealed by sensations,
particularly those of sight and touch.

[89] See Book IV., Ch. XXII.

142. The classification of these two intuitions is important
beyond measure for the distinction of the active from the inert. In
consciousness we find a type of true activity; in extension, as such,
we have a type of true inertness. In thinking of consciousness, we
think of something active without adding any other idea; when we think
of extension, it presents to us the image of a thing susceptible of
various modifications, the principle of none of which is contained in
extension; in order to think of a corporeal activity we have to go out
of the pure idea of extension, and consider a principle of change in
general, which is not the object of the intuition of the extended.

143. Thus the only activity which we know intuitively is that of
consciousness; for we have only indeterminate ideas of corporeal
activity. The words action, reaction, force, resistance, impulse,
express only indeterminate relations, and represent something fixed and
determinate, only in their effects. Mechanists express forces by lines
or numbers, that is, by results subject to calculation. Even Newton, in
establishing his system of universal attraction, declares his ignorance
of the immediate cause of the phenomenon, and confines himself to
assigning the laws to which the motions of bodies are subjected.

144. Activity in changeable beings represents a principle of their own
and others' changes, a sort of superabundance of being which constantly
develops itself, and, in proportion as it is developed, perfects
itself. We find an example of this development in our own mind. The
child at its birth receives in a confused manner the impressions of all
that surrounds it. By the repetition of these impressions its activity
is developed; that which was obscure becomes clear, the confusion is
put into order, that which was feeble becomes strong, thought arises,
comparison begins, reflection is unfolded, and the being which was
torpid and almost inert becomes perhaps a genius which astonishes the
world. Materials have come to it from without, but of what use would
they have been without that living fire of activity which transformed
them and deduced from them new and valuable products? The same
phenomena of nature are presented to the eyes of brute animals as to
Kepler or Newton; but what for the first is only a sensible impression
is for the latter a starting-point of sublime and wonderful theories.

145. The active being possesses virtually the perfections which it is
to acquire; it may be compared to the acorn which contains the mighty
oak, whose development depends on circumstances of soil and climate. On
the other hand, the inactive being can give itself nothing; it has a
state, and it preserves it till some other changes it; and it remains
in this new state until another action from without takes it away and
communicates another.

146. Activity is a principle of its own or another's changes; this
activity may operate in two ways: with intelligence and without it.
When the being is intelligent its inclination to that which is known
is called will. The will is inclined to the object necessarily or not
necessarily: in the first case, it is a necessary spontaneity; in the
second, it is a free spontaneity. Liberty, then, does not consist
solely in the absence of coaction; it requires the absence of all, even
spontaneous, necessity; the will must be able to will or not will the
object; if this condition is wanting there is no freewill.

147. It is worthy of remark that our intuition of the external relates
only to the inactive, to extension; and that internal intuition
relates principally to activity, to consciousness. By the first we
know a substratum of changes, since all change seems to take place in
extension; by the second we know no subject intuitively, but only the
changes themselves. We prove the unity of their subject by reasoning,
but we do not see it intuitively.[90] Extension, as such, is presented
to us as simply passive: consciousness, as such, is always active; for,
even in those cases in which it is most passive, as in sensations,
in so far as there is consciousness, it implies activity; for by it
the subject gives itself an account, explicitly or implicitly, of the
affection experienced.

[90] See Bk. IX., Chs. VI., VII., IX., and XI.




