CHAPTER XV.

CONJECTURES AS TO THE EXISTENCE OF CORPOREAL ACTIVITY.


155. Experience, far from authorizing us to infer the absolute
inertness of bodies, on the contrary inclines us to believe that they
are endowed with activity. Although the senses do not give us intuition
of any corporeal activity, they present a continuous series of changes
in a fixed order in the phenomena of the corporeal world; and if the
true activity of some on others can be inferred from the coincidence
of their relations in space and time, from the constant succession in
which we see some follow others, and the invariable experience that the
existence of some suffices for the existence of others; then we must
admit true activity in bodies. Whatever this argument may be worth at
the tribunal of metaphysics, it has always been sufficiently powerful
to convince the majority of mankind, and hence it is that the denial of
the activity of bodies is contrary to common sense.

156. If we consider our relations to the corporeal world, we are
equally led to believe that there is true activity in bodies. Whatever
may be our ignorance of the manner in which sensations are produced
within us, it is certain that we experience them in the presence of
bodies which are connected with us in space and time, and in a fixed
and constant order, which authorizes us to prognosticate with safety
what will follow in our senses if such or such bodies are placed in
relation with our organs. The idea of activity presents to us the idea
of a principle of changes in other beings; bodies are continually
producing real or apparent changes in us. The exercise of the sensitive
faculties implies a communication with corporeal beings; in this
communication the sensitive being receives from bodies a multitude of
impressions causing continual changes.

157. It is said that experience shows bodies to be indifferent to rest
or motion, and some works on physics at the very beginning lay it down
as a thing beyond all doubt, that a body placed at rest would remain in
the same state for all eternity, and if put in motion it would move for
all eternity in a right line, and always with the same velocity which
it at first received. I do not know how they could have learned this
from experience; and I maintain that not only they could not know it,
but experience seems to prove directly the contrary.

158. Where was there ever a body that was indifferent to rest or
motion? In all terrestrial bodies we find a tendency to motion, if no
other, at least that of gravitation towards the centre of the earth.
Celestial bodies, so far as our observation extends, are all in motion;
calculation agrees with experience in showing them to be subject to
universal attraction: where, then, is the indifference to rest or
motion, revealed by experience? We should rather say that experience
reveals a general inclination of bodies to be in motion.

159. It would be objected that this inclination does not flow from
any activity in the bodies, but that it is a simple effect of a law
imposed by the Creator. Let it be so: but at least do not tell us that
experience presents bodies as indifferent to motion or rest; explain
motion, if you will, without activity, maintain that there is no
activity, despite the appearances of experience; but do not tell us
that these appearances show the absence of activity.

160. If I place a body on my table, it remains at rest, I find it there
the next day, and if I return after many years I still find it there.
But this body is not indifferent to motion or rest; here it is at rest,
but it is continually exercising its activity, as is evident from its
pressure on the table which supports it. This exercise is incessant,
it is experienced at every moment; try to raise it and it offers
resistance, take away the table and it falls, place your hand under
it and it will press upon your hand, and it changes the form of soft
bodies on which it rests.

161. To say that the attraction of the centre of the earth acts upon
the body, proves nothing against corporeal activity but rather confirms
it; for this centre is another body, and thus you take activity from
one body to give it to another. Moreover, all observations show that
attraction is mutual, and therefore attractive activity is a property
of all bodies.

162. The corporeal world, far from appearing to us as an inert mass,
presents the appearance of an activity developing its colossal forces.
The mass of bodies which move in space is colossal; the orbit which
they describe is colossal; their velocity is colossal; the influence,
at least apparent, which they exercise upon each other, is colossal;
the distance at which they communicate is colossal. Where is the want
of activity revealed by experience? Rays of light inundate space,
producing in sensitive beings the wonderful phenomena of sight: rays
of heat extend in all directions, and motion and life spring up on
all sides; where is the want of activity revealed by experience? Do
not the vegetation which covers our globe, the phenomena of life
which we experience within us, and in the animals around us, require
a continual motion of matter, an ebb and flow, so to speak, of action
and reaction of bodies on each other, in reality or in appearance? Do
not the phenomena of electricity, of magnetism, of galvanism, appear
to be principles of great activity, the origin of motion wherever they
exist, rather than objects indifferent to motion or rest? The ideas of
activity, of force, of impulse, are not alone suggested to us by our
internal activity, but also by the experience of the corporeal world,
which displays before our eyes, and in obedience to constant laws, a
continual variety of magnificent scenes, whose origin seems to indicate
a fund of activity surpassing all calculations.

163. With how little reason then do you appeal to experience to combat
the existence of causality in bodies, and how much more in accordance
with experience are those philosophers who give a true activity to
bodies, is apparent from what I have said. In assigning the limits of
our intuition in relation to causality and activity in themselves,[94]
I said enough to show that I do not judge it possible to demonstrate
metaphysically the existence of activity in the corporeal world; yet I
cannot but insist that if the constant relation of phenomena in space
and time, and the invariable succession of some things after others,
prove any thing in favor of causality, we must admit the opinion which
holds that there is true activity in bodies; that in a secondary order
the reason of the changes of some is contained in others; and that
consequently there is in the corporeal world a chain of second causes
which reaches back to the first cause, the origin and the reason of all
that is.

[94] See Chs. XI. and XIII.




