CHAPTER XII.

KANT'S OPINION OF THE ARGUMENT PROVING THE SIMPLICITY OF THE SOUL.


79. Kant calls the argument, by which we have just proved the
simplicity of the soul, the second paralogism of psychology. He gives
it in these terms: "Every thing, the action of which can never be
conceived as the concurrence of many agents, is simple: the soul or
thinking substance is of this nature; therefore the soul is simple."
The German philosopher admits that this argument is not a mere sophism,
invented by some dogmatist for the purpose of giving his assertions
a slight appearance of truth; and he confesses that it seems to defy
the most attentive examination and the most profound reflection. Still
he flatters himself that he can expose its fallacy, showing that this
principal support of rational psychology is a false foundation, and
that, consequently, the whole edifice of this science is built in the
air.

80. Kant observes that the _nervus probandi_ of the argument is in
the fact that many representations cannot form a thought, except
inasmuch as they are contained in the absolute unity of the thinking
subject; "but no one," he says, "can prove this proposition _by
conceptions_. Where could he begin? The proposition: 'A thought can
only be the effect of the absolute unity of the thinking subject,'
cannot be analyzed; the unity of thought (and even thought results from
many representations) is collective; and as to simple conceptions,
their unity may just as well be referred to the collective unity of
substances which contribute to produce the thought (just as the motion
of a body is the motion of all its parts) as to the absolute unity of
the subject. The necessity of the supposition of a simple substance
cannot consequently be known by the rule of identity in a composite
thought. No one who understands the reason of the possibility of
synthetic judgments _a priori_, as we have explained them above, will
dare to affirm that this proposition can be known synthetically, and
perfectly _a priori_, or by pure conceptions." This reasoning is pure
sophistry, and will vanish in the light of evidence.

81. In the first place, it is not correct to say that all thoughts
result from many representations; in the perception of a simple idea,
as of being, for example, there are not many representations; therefore
Kant's argument fails at the first step; for if there be even one
thought which requires simplicity, it has already been demonstrated
that, if the soul is simple in one instance it cannot cease to be so in
another.

82. Let us now examine how the diversity of representations enter
into those thoughts which admit of this diversity. When these
representations form what is called a thought, they are united, as
it were, in a point which requires the unity of the perception and
of the subject perceiving. In the thought called judgment various
representations are combined, that of the subject and that of the
object; but these different representations do not constitute the
thought called judgment, except inasmuch as they are presented as
connected with the relation which authorizes us to affirm or deny the
predicate of the subject; therefore at the bottom of the diversity
there is unity, that is to say, the relation; therefore the thought by
which this relation is perceived is one, and the action of perceiving
is essentially one, notwithstanding the variety of the representations.

83. There is no order in our thoughts except as we compare them with
each other: all our intellectual acts are reduced to the perception and
comparison of ideas; in perception there is simplicity, as there must
also be in comparisons, since there can be no comparison of that which
is varied, except by reducing the varied to that which is one, that
is, to the relation which is perceived in the comparison. Therefore
in every thought there is unity; thought can never be conceived as
the concurrence of many agents; therefore the proposition, which Kant
considered indemonstrable, is demonstrated,--that many representations
cannot form a thought except in so far as they are contained in the
absolute unity of a thinking subject.

84. Let us present the same demonstration under a stricter form.
Suppose A, B, C, to be the three agents concurring in the formation of
the thought; each part will yield its contingent; let us suppose _a_
to correspond to the first, _b_ to the second, and _c_ to the third,
the result will be the union composed of _a_, _b_, and _c_; this will
be the thought; it will therefore be triple and can never constitute a
point of comparison; therefore, we must either reject this hypothesis,
or deny thought. Kant's sophism proceeds from his attending solely
to the diversity of the representations, and abstracting the unity
which is always met with in the perception of this diversity; hence
it is nothing strange that he does not find unity in the conception
of thought. He presents this conception incompletely, or rather,
falsely; he presents thought as a collection of representations, and
not as a most simple point in which representations unite, in order
to be perceived in the relation which they have among themselves. The
diversity of the representations does not form a collection after the
manner of sensible objects; the thought, in which the relation of two
different triangles is known, cannot be expressed by the sum of the
figures of the two triangles; it is something different from them;
something which is in the midst of them; which unites them by comparing
them, and which joins their diversity in the unity of their relation.

85. The example brought by Kant manifests the rudeness of his idea of
the character of the union of the representations in the formation of
a whole thought. The unity of the thought is, he says, collective, and
may be referred to the collective unity of many substances, just as the
motion of a body is the motion composed of all the parts of the body.
Here we see clearly wherein Kant's equivocation consists; he takes
the collection of the representations for the thought which relates
to them, and therefore it is no wonder that he cannot see the unity
implied in the diversity, on the supposition that this diversity has to
be thought.

To carry conviction to the farthest point, let us take this example of
motion, and suppose a cube to be moved. Let us call its eight verticles
A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H; they all move, and the collection of their
motions, with those of the points which are between them, forms the
whole motion. What is there common in the result of this concurrence of
agents? Nothing, except juxtaposition in space, and the relation which
they preserve by the equal velocity of the motion. But the motion of
the vertex H is not the motion of the vertex A, as is evident if we
consider that the vertex A may be cut off from the cube, and remain
at rest without discontinuing or altering the motion of the vertex
H; therefore, the two motions are things absolutely distinct. It is
evident that the same holds true with respect to the other points;
therefore the unity of the composite motion is purely factitious; what
there is, in reality, is a multiplicity of substances, and of motions,
without any other than a purely extrinsical connection, the relation of
positions in space.

Let us change the vertices into representations, and see what will
be the result. Do they exist without any other connection than their
co-existence? Then they do not form a thought, but only a collection
of phenomena which may be considered as a _union_ of things, but not
a thought; in that case the sum of all the representations will be
similar to the sum of the motions; but it will produce no result in
relation to the object which we are now examining. If we give these
representations a point of union, that is, the relation under which
they are perceived, we shall have a thought; but what has this act,
which is _one_ and most simple, in common with, the totality of a
number of points in motion?

86. If Kant had wished to present a more seductive example, he ought
to have made use of a theory in mechanics, the application of which
to the present case presents, if not more difficulty, at least a more
deceitful appearance; I mean the resultant of a system of forces and
their point of application.

When several forces act upon a line, a plane, or a solid, they produce
an effect equal to that one force alone, which is called the resultant:
this force has a determinate direction and a point of application, as
though it were simple or had not emanated from others; why cannot this
be applied to thought? Why may not a thing, although it is simple,
be the product of the concurrence of various agents? This example
is more specious, because it presents the result of the composition
concentrated in a point, but if we examine it well, we shall find that
it proves nothing against us.

The disparity is this: thought is a simple act in itself, whilst the
resultant of the forces is so only in its relation to the effect
experienced, which is all that comes under our calculation. If two
forces are applied at the two extremities of an inflexible right line
the effect will be the same as though we applied one force equal to
the sum of them both at one point of the line, at a distance from
either extremity inversely proportioned to the value of the first
forces. But the unity of this effect depends on the cohesion of the
parts, which, not permitting isolated motions, must make the force
act on a single point; but the component forces do not cease to be
distinct and separate, so that at the moment the cohesion should
cease, the respective parts would each feel the action of the force
corresponding to it, and move in the direction and with the velocity
which the force impresses on them. If, while the cohesion lasts, it
were possible to give each of the component forces the consciousness of
its action, there would be two consciousnesses really distinct, which
could never form one common consciousness, and could only be united in
the production of an effect. If the point of their application should
have the consciousness of the action which it experiences, it might
have a consciousness similar to that of the action of one force, equal
to the sum of the components, if it did not know the manner in which
their action is transmitted to it; but from the moment that it becomes
conscious of their respective action, it would know that the result is
owing to the impossibility of each of them producing its effect in an
isolated manner. If, therefore, we compare the thinking subject to this
point of application of the forces, we must attribute to this subject
the consciousness of the origin of the representations which concur in
the production of the whole effect.

Perhaps it may be said that by the very analysis of the example,
we have prepared the way for the triumph of the adversaries of the
simplicity of the soul; because after arbitrary suppositions we
have at last come to a simple effect inherent in a simple thing,
and produced by the concurrence of various agents; but if we look
closer to it, we shall find that this pretended triumph was never
farther from being realized than it is in the last result to which we
are led by the analysis of the forces. For, in order to arrive at a
simple result produced by the concurrence of various forces, we also
require a simple point in which this result is concentrated. Then, and
precisely because we have arrived at this simplicity, we can abstract
the component forces, and consider the result as a simple effect,
produced by a simple force, and inherent in a simple subject, which
is the indivisible point, to which we consider the force as applied.
Therefore, continuing the comparison, we ought to say that, whatever
may be the number of the agents concurring in the production of the
thought, this thought must reside in a simple subject, and in that
case the simplicity of the soul is admitted. It is true that we should
then suppose a certain number of agents acting on the soul in order
to produce the thought; but the thought once produced, the soul alone
would be the thinking subject, just as the indivisible point is the
only one which unites the action of the component forces.

Thus all that our adversaries would have gained would be the burden of
the ridiculous invention of the concurrence of agents, and be forced
notwithstanding, to admit a simple thinking substance, which is all
that we proposed to demonstrate.

87. Kant pretends that it is impossible to deduce from experience
the necessary unity of the thinking subject, as the condition of the
possibility of all thought, because experience reveals no necessity,
and the conception of absolute unity belongs to an order different
from that which we are here considering. It is certain that experience
alone does not reveal any necessity; for it is limited to particular,
contingent facts, and does not reach the universal reason of objects;
but this is not true of experience regarded objectively, or in relation
to the cognition of the general reasons of things; for although
this cognition, considered subjectively as an individual act, is a
contingent fact, still inasmuch as it exists it represents a true
necessity in certain objects; unless we wish to renounce the certainty
of all the sciences, mathematics included.

It is clear that in speaking of thought and the thinking subject, we
cannot forget experience, since it is impossible to abstract the basis
of all psychological investigations,--_I think_,--a proposition which
expresses a fact of consciousness, an act of internal experience; but
with this experience is combined the idea of unity in general, or the
exclusion of distinction and multiplicity from the act of thought and
from the thinking subject. Thus the demonstration of the simplicity
of the soul follows in the same path as all demonstrations which
are confined to the purely ideal order, and which consequently are
formed of one premise which contains a necessary truth, and another
which establishes a fact of experience. In the present instance, the
necessary premise is the very definition of unity and simplicity;
the other expresses the fact experienced, that is, the nature of the
thought, as it is revealed in consciousness.

88. Hence the demonstration of the simplicity of thinking beings is not
limited to the human mind, but extends to all the subjects in which
the fact of consciousness exists. When Kant says we cannot extend this
demonstration, because we then go out of the field of experience, we
reply with this argument: our demonstration is founded on the idea of
unity and the fact of consciousness; the idea of unity is general,
and consequently is valid in all cases; the fact of consciousness
is a thing which is found in every thinking being, since thought is
inconceivable without a subject, which may say, _I think_; therefore,
we proceed legitimately in extending the demonstration of simplicity,
unless you mean to give to the word _think_ a very different meaning
from that which we all give to it, in which case we go out of the arena
of philosophy and enter on a discussion of words.

89. We must have received the idea of a thinking being from internal
experience: we may expand or restrict this idea, increasing or
decreasing its perfection; but at bottom it remains always the same,
and we cannot conceive thought in another being without attributing
to it something similar to what we experience in ourselves. In this
respect Kant is therefore right when he says that if we wish to
represent to ourselves a thinking being we must put ourselves in the
place of the object. According to him, we require for thought the
absolute unity of the subject, only because without this unity it would
be impossible to say, _I think_; since, although the totality of the
thought may be distributed among the various subjects, the subjective
_me_ cannot be divided or separated, and every thought supposes this
_me_. The proposition, I think, is the foundation on which psychology
raises the edifice of its knowledge: Kant admits this, but I cannot
understand why, admitting that this proposition is the form of the
apperception which is joined with and precedes all experience, he still
says that it is not experimental; as though the thought were not just
as subject to a real experience as its form; whereas if we closely
examine it, we should rather say that the form is experienced than the
thought itself, on the supposition that the latter is distinct whilst
the form is identical in every instance; for the form in itself is only
the consciousness of the unity identical in the midst of diversity.

90. In conceiving this absolute unity in the _me_, we do not, as Kant
pretends, conceive a topical unity, but a real unity, if we suppose
it to remain really the same through the variety of thought. When we
enunciate this unity in the proposition, I think, we do not speak of
a form in the abstract, common to all perceptions, but of something
positive which is within us, and the reality of which is indispensable
to the possibility of thought.

91. The German philosopher further says: "This subjective condition
of all knowledge cannot with propriety be converted into a condition
of the possibility of a knowledge of the objects; that is, into a
conception of thinking being in general, since we cannot represent
this being to ourselves without putting ourselves in its place by the
formula of our consciousness." I do not believe that the psychologists
who have pretended that they could demonstrate the simplicity of the
soul, ever flattered themselves with arriving at a perfect idea of
thinking beings, or denied that we obtain the type of this idea from
our own experience; what they have pretended is, that reason leads them
to infer that there is absolute unity of the subject wherever there is
a thinking being; whether its thought may belong to a higher or lower
order than our own.

92. When Kant observes that the subject in which the thought inheres is
only indicated in a transcendental way, without its properties being
discovered, and that, therefore, we do not know the simplicity of the
subject itself, he declares a fact which is in some sense admissible,
but he deduces from it a false consequence. It is true that we only
know the substance of the soul by the presence of the internal sense,
and by its relation to its acts; and consequently that the soul in
itself abstracted from all the phenomena which we experience, is not
given in immediate intuitions, and that when we arrive at this point we
are reduced to the idea of a simple being, but this indeterminateness,
and vagueness, in the knowledge of the substance of the soul, does not
prevent our knowing its simplicity, if this simplicity is revealed by
the internal sense, and also by the nature of the phenomena by which we
know the thinking subject.

93. Some persons may believe that the indeterminateness of the
knowledge of the substance of the soul is a fact recently discovered
by the German philosopher; but it is easy to show that it had
been observed long before, and is laid down in a very special and
interesting manner in the writings of St. Thomas. This eminent
metaphysician proposes the question whether the intellectual soul knows
itself by its essence, _utrum anima intellectiva seipsam cognoscat
per suam essentiam_, and after the various remarks on intelligence,
and the intelligibility of objects, he solves it in these remarkable
words: "Our understanding does not know itself by its essence, but by
its act; and this in two ways: in one way, in particular; inasmuch as
Sortes or Plato perceives that he has an intellectual soul, because
he perceives that he understands: in the second way, in general;
inasmuch as we consider the nature of the human mind in the act of
the understanding. But it is true that we derive the judgment and
efficacy of the knowledge by which we know the nature of the soul, by
the light of the divine truth of which our intellect participates, and
in which are contained the reasons of all things, as was said above.
Hence, Augustine says, in the ninth book on the Trinity: We have
intuition of the inviolable truth by which we perfectly determine,
as far as possible, not what the mind of each man is, but what it
should be according to the eternal reasons. But there is a difference
between these two cognitions, for, to have the first, we only need the
presence of the mind, which is the principle of the act by which the
mind perceives itself, and, therefore, we say that it knows itself
by its presence; but for the second, the presence of the mind is not
sufficient, but a careful and subtile investigation is necessary. Hence
many are ignorant of the nature of the soul, and many also have erred
on the nature of the soul; wherefore in the tenth book on the Trinity,
Augustine, speaking of this investigation, says: The soul should not
try to see itself as something absent, but endeavor to distinguish
itself as something present; that is, to know its difference from other
things, which is to know its quiddity and nature."[49]

[49] Non ergo per essentiam suam, sed per actum suum se cognoscit
intellectus noster, et hoc dupliciter. Uno quidem modo particulariter,
secundum quod Sortes, vel Plato percipit se habere animam intellectivam
ex hoc, quod percipit se intelligere. Alio modo in universali, secundum
quod naturam mentis humanæ ex actu intellectus consideramus. Sed verum
est quod judicium, et efficacia hujus cognitionis per quam naturam
animæ cognoscimus, competit nobis secundum derivationem luminis
intellectus nostri a veritate divina, in qua rationes omnium rerum
continentur, sicut supra dictum est. Unde August. dicit in 9 de Trin.
Intuemur inviolabilem veritatem, ex qua perfecte quantum possumus,
deffinimus, non qualis sit uniuscujusque hominis mens, sed qualis esse
sempiternis rationibus debeat. Est autem differentia inter has duas
cognitiones; nam ad primam cognitionem de mente habendam sufficit
ipsa mentis præsentia, quæ est principium actus, ex quo meus percipit
seipsam: et ideo dicitur se cognoscere per suam præsentiam. Sed ad
secundam cognitionem de mente habendam, non sufficit ejus præsentia:
sed requiritur diligens, et subtilis inquisitio. Unde et multi naturam
animæ ignorant, et multi etiam circa naturam animæ erraverunt. Propter
quod August. dicit 10 de Trin. de tali inquisitione mentis, Non velut
absentem se quærat mens cernere; sed præsentem quærat discernere; id
est cognoscere differentiam suam ab aliis rebus, quod est cognoscere
quidditatem, et naturam suam. S. Thom. _Sum. Theol._ P. I. Q.,
LXXXVII., A. 1.

94. It is to be observed that St. Thomas admits two cognitions of the
soul by itself;--that of its presence, as we perceive it in perceiving
our thought, _percipit se habere animam intellectivam ex hoc quod
percipit se intelligere_; and another which we deduce from the analysis
of the intellectual act reasoning from general considerations, and
reflecting on the light which the eternal reasons shed upon this
fact of experience. This is how St. Thomas explains the knowledge of
presence or consciousness contained in the proposition, _I think_; and
the general knowledge which we deduce from the same intellectual act in
its relations to the unity of the subject exercising it. That this last
contains something abstract and indeterminate no one denies; and when
Kant calls attention to it, he tells us nothing which the holy Doctor
had not already told us when he expressly affirmed that the soul knows
itself not in its essence, but in its acts. These few laconic words
express all the truth which is contained in Kant's diffuse explanation
of the limitation of our cognition to the acts of consciousness, and
the absence of the intuitive knowledge of the substance of the soul,
the transcendental subject of the thought.




