CHAPTER XVIII.

INTELLIGENCE AND THE ABSOLUTELY INFINITE BEING.


142. The infinite being is not a vague object presented in the general
idea of being, but is possessed of true properties which, without
ceasing to be real, are identified with its infinite essence. A being
which is not something, of which some property cannot be affirmed, is
a dead being, which we conceive only under the general idea of thing,
and is presented to us as something which cannot be realized. Such is
not the conception which mankind form of the infinite being; the idea
of activity has always been associated with the idea of God: this is
not a general, but a fixed and determinate activity; internally, it is
the activity of intelligence; externally, the activity which produces
beings.

143. The idea of activity in general does not exclude all imperfection:
activity to do evil is an imperfect activity: the activity by which
some sensible beings act on others, is subject to the conditions
of motion and extension, and is, consequently, not exempt from
imperfection. Pure, internal activity, considered in itself, involves
no imperfection; this is intellectual activity. It is an inoffensive
activity, and of itself does no harm; it is an immaculate faculty, and
of itself is never stained.

144. To know good, is good; to know evil, is also good; to wish
good is good; to wish evil is evil; here is a difference between the
understanding and the will; the will may be defiled by its object, the
understanding never. The moralist considers, examines, and analyzes
the greatest iniquities, and studies the details of the most degrading
corruption; the politician knows the passions, the miseries, and
the crimes of society; the lawyer witnesses injustice under all its
aspects; the naturalist and the physician contemplate the most filthy
and loathsome objects; and in all this no stain attaches to the
intelligence. God himself knows all the evil there is or can be in
the physical or in the moral order, and yet his intelligence remains
immaculate.

145. Created beings abuse liberty as such; for it is essentially a
principle of action, and may be directed to evil; but the intelligence,
as regards itself alone, cannot be abused. It is essentially an
immanent or intransitive act in which are represented real or possible
objects; the abuse does not commence until the free will combines the
acts of the intelligence and directs them to a bad action; there is
no evil knowledge until the act of the will is introduced into the
combinations of the understanding. A collection of stratagems to commit
the most horrible crimes, may be the innocent object of intellectual
contemplation.

146. A wonderful thing is intelligence. With it there is relation,
order, rule, science, art; without intelligence there is nothing.
Conceive, if you can, the world without the pre-existence of
intelligence; all is chaos; imagine the order which now exists, destroy
intelligence, and the universe is a beautiful picture placed before the
extinguished sight of a corpse.

147. We conceive beings as more perfect accordingly as they are higher
in the order of intelligence. Leaving the sphere of the insensible
and entering the order of sensitive representation, a new world
commences. The first degree is the animal in which sensations are
limited to a small number of objects, and the summit is intelligence.
Morality flows from intelligence, or, rather, is one of its laws,
it is the prescription of conformity to an infinitely perfect type.
Morality is explained with intelligence; without intelligence it is an
absurdity. The intelligence has its laws, its duties, but they proceed
from itself, as the sun enlightens itself by its own light. Liberty
is explained with intelligence; without it, liberty is an absurdity.
Without intelligence causality is presented to us as a farce operating
without an object or a direction, without a sufficient reason, and is
consequently the greatest of absurdities. When some theologians said
that the constitutive attribute of the essence of God is intelligence,
they expressed an idea which contains a wonderfully profound
philosophical meaning.

148. By the intellectual act being does not go out of itself:
intelligence is an immanent act which may be extended to infinity,
and exercised with infinite intensity without the intelligent leaving
itself. The more profound its understanding is, the more profound is
its concentration on the abyss of its consciousness. Intelligence is
essentially active: it is activity. See what happens in man: he thinks,
and his will awakes and acts: he thinks, and his body moves: he thinks,
and his strength is multiplied, all his faculties are subject to his
thought. Let us imagine an intelligence infinite in extension and in
intensity, an intelligence in which there is no alternation of action
and rest, of energy and abatement, an infinite intelligence which knows
itself infinitely, and knows infinite, real, or possible objects with
an infinitely perfect knowledge; an intelligence, the source of all
light without any darkness, the origin of all truth without any mixture
of error; we may then form some idea of the absolutely infinite being.
By this infinite intelligence I conceive an infinitely perfect will;
I conceive creation, a pure act of will calling into existence, from
nothing, the types which pre-existed in the infinite intelligence; I
conceive infinite holiness, and all the perfections identified in that
ocean of light. Without intelligence I conceive nothing: the absolute
being, which is in the origin of all things, seems the old chaos, and
I try in vain to induce some order into it. The ideas of being, of
substance, and of necessity are knocked about in the greatest confusion
in my understanding; the infinite is not a focus of light for me, but
an abyss of darkness: I know not whether I am immerged in an infinite
reality, or lost in the imaginary space of a vague and empty conception.




