CHAPTER XVIII.

FINAL CAUSALITY;--MORALITY.


193. Those beings which act by intelligence must have, besides their
efficient activity, a moral principle of their determinations. In
order to will, the faculty of willing is not alone sufficient; it is
necessary to know that which is willed, for nothing is willed without
being known. Hence arises _final causality_, which is essentially
distinct from efficient causality, and can exist only in beings endowed
with intelligence.

194. Recalling what was said in the tenth chapter of this book, we may
observe that final causes form a series distinct from that of efficient
causes; what in the latter is physical action, is in the former, moral
influence. In a painting, the series of efficient causes is the pencil,
the hand, the muscles, the animal spirits, and the command of the will.
This series, which is necessary for the execution of the painting,
may be combined with different series of final causes. The artist may
purpose by the brilliancy of his genius to acquire renown, and by
renown to enjoy the happiness of a great name. Another series may be,
to please a person for whom he is working; and this in order that the
person may pay him a sum of money; and the money in order to gratify
the artist's wants or pleasures. A third series may be, in order to
seek in painting a distraction from a grief; and this in order to
preserve his health. It is evident that many series of a purely moral
or intellectual influence may be imagined, and which concur in the
production of the effect only, in so far as combined with the series of
efficient causes, they influence the artist's determination.

195. This moral influence may be exerted in two ways: either
necessarily bending the will, or leaving it free to will or not will;
in the first case, there is a voluntary, but necessary spontaneousness;
in the second, there is a free spontaneousness. Every free act is
voluntary, but not every voluntary act is free. God freely wills the
conservation of creatures; but he necessarily wills virtue, and cannot
will iniquity.

196. Regarding only efficient causality, we have only the relations
of cause and effect; but considering final causality, a new order of
ideas and facts is presented, which is _morality_. Let us first of all
establish the existence of the fact.

197. Good and evil, moral, immoral, just, unjust, right, duty,
obligation, command, prohibition, lawful, unlawful, virtue, and vice,
are words which we all use continually, and apply to the whole course
of life, to all the relations of man with God, with himself, and
with his fellow-men, without any doubt as to their true meaning, and
perfectly understanding each other, just as when we speak of color,
light, or other sensible objects. When the term lawful or unlawful
is applied to an act, who ever asks what it means? When this man is
called virtuous, that vicious, who does not know the meaning of these
expressions? Is there any one who finds a difficulty in understanding
the expressions which follow: he has a right to perform this act; he
is obliged to comply with that circumstance; this is his duty; he
has neglected his duty; this is commanded; that is prohibited; this
is right; that is wrong: this is a heroic virtue; that is a crime?
No ideas are more common, more ordinarily used, by the ignorant as
by the learned; by barbarous as by civilized nations; in the youth
of societies as in their infancy, and in their old age; in the midst
of pure customs, as of the most revolting corruption; they express
something primitive, innate in the human mind and indispensable to
its existence, something which it cannot throw off while it retains
the exercise of its faculties. There may be more or less error and
extravagance in the application of these ideas to certain particular
cases: but the generative ideas of good and evil, just and unjust,
lawful and unlawful, are the same at all times, and in all countries;
they form, as it were, an atmosphere in which the human mind lives and
breathes.

198. It is remarkable that even those who deny the distinction between
good and evil, are forced to admit it in practice. A philosopher, with
his pen in his hand, laughs at what he calls the prejudices of the
human race concerning the difference between good and evil; but say
to him: "It seems to me, Sir Philosopher, that you are a detestable
wretch, to spend your time in destroying that which is most holy on
earth;" and you will see how soon he will forget his philosophy and all
that he has said of the empty meaning of the words virtue and vice,
become indignant at being thus addressed, warmly defend himself, and
attempt to prove to you that he is the most virtuous man in the world,
giving repeated arguments of _honesty_, _sincerity_, and _honor_. It
matters little that in his lofty theories, honor, sincerity, and
honesty, are unmeaning words, since they can have no sense unless
the word order is admitted; the philosopher is not staggered by an
inconsequence, or rather, he takes no notice of it; moral ideas and
sentiments are awakened in his mind as soon as he hears himself called
immoral, he ceases to be a sophist, and becomes a man again.

199. Can the idea of this moral order be a prejudice, which, without
any thing in reality corresponding to it, or any foundation in human
nature, owes its origin to education, so that it would have been
possible for men to have lived without moral ideas, or with others
directly contrary to those which we now have? If it is a prejudice,
how comes it that it is general to all times and countries? Who
communicated it to the human race? who was strong and powerful enough
to make all men adopt it? How did it happen that the passions, when in
possession of their liberty, renounced it, and suffered a bridle to be
put on them? Who was that extraordinary man who subdued all times and
all countries, the most brutal customs, the most violent passions, the
most obtuse understandings, and diffused the idea of a moral order over
the whole face of the earth, notwithstanding the diversity of climates,
languages, customs, and necessities, and the differences in the social
condition of nations, and gave to this idea of the moral order such
force and consistency that it has been preserved through the most
complete revolutions, amid the ruins of empires, and the fluctuations
and transmigrations of civilization, remaining firm as a rock, unmoved
by the furious waves of the river of ages?

Here is not the hand of man; a phenomenon of this sort does not
spring from human combinations; it is founded on nature, and it is
indestructible because it is natural; thus, and thus only, is it
possible to explain its universality and permanence.

200. To deny all difference between good and evil is to place one's
self in open contradiction with the ideas the most deeply rooted in the
human mind, with all its most profound and most powerful sentiments;
all the sophisms of the world could not persuade any one, not even the
sophist himself, that there is no difference between consoling one who
is afflicted, and adding to his afflictions; between assisting the
unfortunate, and increasing their misfortunes; between being grateful
for a favor, and doing evil to the benefactor; between fulfilling a
promise, and breaking it; between giving alms, and taking what belongs
to another; between being faithful to a friend, and betraying him;
between dying for one's country, and selling it to the enemy; between
respecting the laws of modesty, and violating them without shame;
between sobriety and drunkenness; between temperance and moderation
in all the acts of life, and the disorder of unbridled passions. No
argument, nor genius, nor cavil can destroy the dividing line. The
sophist discusses, imagines, feigns, subtilizes, but in vain; nature is
there; she says to senseless man: So far mayst thou go, but here shall
thy pride be broken.

201. If there is no intrinsic difference between good and evil, and all
that is said of the morality and immorality of actions is a collection
of words which have no meaning, or only such as they have received from
human convention; how is it that whilst the just man sleeps securely
in his bed, the evil-doer is tossed about with a heart struggling with
remorse? Whence come those sentiments of love and respect inspired by
what we call virtue, and the aversion created by what is called vice?
Do not the love of children, the veneration of parents, fidelity to
friends, compassion for suffering, gratitude towards benefactors, the
horror which all men have for a cruel father, a parricide son, an
unfaithful wife, a dishonest friend, a traitor to his country, a hand
red with the blood of its victim, oppression of the weak, desertion of
the orphan, do not all these sentiments show clearer than the light of
day the hand of the Almighty engraving in our souls the ideas of the
moral order, and strengthening us with sentiments which instinctively
show us, even when we have not time to reflect, the path which we
should follow?

202. I do not deny that serious difficulties are encountered in
examining the grounds of morality; I admit that the analysis of
the knowledge of good and evil is one of the most hidden points of
philosophy; but these difficulties prove nothing against the difference
we have established. No one denies the existence of a building because
he cannot see how deep its foundations go: its depth is a proof of its
solidity, a guaranty of its duration. The difference between good and
evil demonstrated _a priori_ by the interior sentiments of the heart,
is strengthened with further evidence if we regard the consequences
of its existence or non-existence. Let us admit the moral order,
and suppose all men to regulate their conduct conformably to this
_prejudice_. What will be the result? The world becomes a paradise;
men live like brothers, using with moderation the gifts of nature,
dividing with each other their happiness, and aiding one another to
bear misfortune; the most lovely harmony reigns in the individual, the
family, and society; if the moral order is a prejudice, let us confess
that never did prejudice have more grand, beneficial, and delightful
consequences; if virtue is a lie, never was there one more useful,
fairer, or more sublime.

203. But let us make the counterproof. Let us suppose this prejudice
to disappear, and all men to be convinced that the moral order is a
vain illusion which they must banish from their understanding, their
will, and their acts; what will be the result this time? The moral
order destroyed, the physical alone remains; every one thinks and acts
according to his views, passions, or caprices; man has no other guide
than the blind instinct of nature or the cold speculations of egotism;
the individual becomes a monster, all the ties of family are broken
asunder; and society, sunk in a frightful chaos, rapidly advances to
complete destruction. These are the necessary consequences of the
rejection of the _prejudice_. Language would be horridly mutilated if
the ideas of the moral order should disappear; good and bad conduct
would be words without meaning; praise and blame would have no object;
even vanity would lose a great part of its food; flattery would be
forced to confine itself to natural qualities, considered in the purely
physical order; to pronounce the word merit, would be forbidden under
pain of falling into absurdity.

204. See, then, if any objection could be sufficient to make such
consequences admissible. Whoever, frightened at the difficulties
accompanying the examination of the first principles of morality,
should undertake to deny morality, would be as foolish as the
husbandman who, seeing the stream which waters his fields, should
insist on denying the existence of its waters because inaccessible
crags prevent his approach to their source.




