CHAPTER I.

TRANSITORY VIEW OF THE ACTUAL STATE OF PHILOSOPHY.


1. In the works on transcendental philosophy which have been published
of late years, we find the words infinite, absolute, indeterminate,
unconditioned, frequently repeated, and made to play a very prominent
part in the explanation of the most recondite secrets which can be
presented to the consideration of man. The words finite, relative,
determinate, conditional, are easily combined with these; and from this
combination they pretend that a ray of light will arise to dissipate
the darkness of philosophical questions.

2. In spite of the bad use many make of such words, we must confess
that the fact indicated is consoling by reason of the great desire
there is to use them. This desire marks an effort in the human mind
to raise itself from the mire in which the impious school of the last
century has sunk it.

3. What was the world in the eyes of the false philosophers who
preceded the French revolution? A mass of matter, subject to simple
mechanical laws of motion, the whole explanation of which was given
in two words, blind necessity. What was the human mind? Nothing but
matter. What was thought? A modification of matter. In what did the
difference between thinking and non-thinking matter consist? In a
little greater or less subtilty, in a more or less happy disposition
of atoms. What was morality? An illusion. What were sentiments? A
material phenomenon. What was the origin of man? That of matter,--a
phenomenon offered by a quantity of molecules, which at one moment
happen to be disposed one way, and a moment after in a very different
way. If you inquired if there were a destiny beyond the grave, We argue
that question! they would answer with a scornful smile. Have you such
a word as religion? The scorn increased and changed into contempt. Do
you recognize the dignity of the human race? O, yes! we admit this
dignity, and we are of opinion that it is of the same nature as that
of the brutes, only it has reached a higher degree of perfection. We
do not deny that your form may be more noble and elegant than that of
the monkey, nor do we dispute the superiority of your intelligence;
but we would have you take good care not to make pretensions to a
nobler origin or a loftier destiny. The course of ages may develop and
perfect the monkey form, and render it equal with yours; it may develop
and perfect his cerebral organs, so that from this very monkey, whose
extravagant motions and ridiculous attitudes now amuse, men will be
born such as were Plato, Saint Augustine, Leibnitz, or Bossuet.

4. With such a system, it was useless to deal in ideas: they retained
only sensations. Whatever could occupy the mind of man, whether
the most imbecile or endowed with the loftiest genius, was nothing
more than a sensation transformed. The very brutes possessed all
the elements of human intelligence; to think was only to feel more
perfectly. Such was the last term of their analysis; such the result of
their most accurate observation; such the solution their profoundest
philosophy gave to the problems of man's understanding. Plato,
Aristotle, Saint Augustine, Saint Thomas, Descartes, Malebranche and
Leibnitz were nothing but sublime dreamers, whose genius strongly
contrasted with their ignorance of the true nature of things. None of
them knew any thing about ideology or metaphysics; these sciences were
an unknown world until Locke and Condillac came and discovered them.

5. This school, as fatal as frivolous, has involved and stifled mind in
matter. The butterfly could not unfold his wings of fair and various
colors; he was forced to lay them off and to change into a stupid
and filthy worm, entangled in a covering as loathsome and unclean as
itself. In this consisted progress. The limit of ideological perfection
was to deny ideas; that of metaphysical studies, to deny spirits; that
of morals, to deny morality; that of society, to deny authority; that
of politics, to establish license; that of religion, to deny God. Thus,
human reason, thinking to advance, marched in a retrograde direction;
and proposed to raise the edifice of its knowledge, when there was
nothing left to demolish: thus they imagined to attain a scientific
result by denying every thing, and by finally denying themselves.

6. At present, there is a reaction against so degrading a philosophy.
We have only to open the writings of the philosophers of this age to
convince ourselves of this consoling truth. We everywhere meet the word
idea in contraposition to that of sensation; that of mind to that of
matter; that of activity of thought to that of bodily motion; those
of cause, order, liberty, of free will, morality, infinity. The ideas
which accompany them are sometimes inexact, sometimes extravagant; but
at the bottom of all this we distinguish an anxious desire to rise from
the abyss down to which an atheistical and material philosophy had
dragged the human mind. Some who have contributed to the reaction do
not admit a free and intelligent God, distinct from the universe. What
we have said above is therefore true, that pantheism is atheism in
disguise; nevertheless, the atheism of the pantheist now-a-days is an
atheism which is ashamed to confess itself such, and which sometimes,
perhaps, deceives itself, being persuaded that it is not.

7. The atheism of modern philosophers unites itself with the infinite:
it does not reject those great ideas which as relics of a primitive
tradition were common in the old world, and were afterwards fixed,
cleared up and elevated by the superior teaching of Christianity. The
philosophy of the last century sat down in the darkness and shadow
of death and declared itself alone in possession of light and life.
Philosophy now still remains in obscurity, but it is not satisfied with
it, and gropes about in the dark, seeking some outlet to the regions
of light. Hence those desperate efforts to resolve itself, not into
matter, but into the focus of intelligence, into the _me_, that is, the
mind: hence the continual use of the words absolute, unconditional,
infinite, words which, notwithstanding they ordinarily lead to
absurdities, do yet indicate a sublime aspiration.

8. These observations show that we do not confound the philosophy
of to-day with that of the past century; that we do not regard the
pantheism of to-day as a pure materialism, and that, notwithstanding
the atheism of which we accuse the doctrine of certain philosophers, we
do not deny that they have, even in the midst of their extravagance,
preserved a kind of horror of it, and that, lost as they are in the
labyrinth of their speculations, they seek the thread which shall
conduct them to the gates of truth.

9. This act of justice we willingly render to modern philosophers, but
it will not prevent us from combating their pretension to a merit they
do not possess. They style themselves restorers of the spirituality of
the soul, and of human liberty; and when they speak of God they almost
exact a tribute of gratitude from him for having replaced him upon
his throne. Before making such proud pretensions they ought to have
considered that they are even yet far from the truth with respect both
to God and to man, not only as Christianity has at all times taught it,
but also as the most illustrious modern philosophers have professed it.
They are ambitious to be called restorers, but their restoration with
its licentious frequency is a new revolution, at times as terrible as
the evil it attempts to combat.

10. Another consideration ought to have moderated their zeal to be
thought inventors, which is that they have said nothing concerning God,
the human mind, thought, ideas, the liberty of freewill, which may not
be read in all the works of the philosophers who flourished before, or
even in the beginning of, the eighteenth century. Open the text-books
of the schools, and you will find many things which they would have us
believe to be important discoveries. The great philosophers gloried in
knowing what they had before learned when children. The philosophical
tradition of sound ideas was not interrupted during the past century.
In many parts of Europe schools existed which taught them with
scrupulous fidelity. And besides human schools, there was that of the
God-Man, the Church of Jesus Christ, which, among its supernatural
dogmas, preserved even natural truths, notwithstanding the senseless
efforts which have been made to obliterate them.

11. To what, then, are the invention and restoration reduced? Invention
there is not, either with respect to God, to the human mind, or to
morality, for nothing true has been said of them which had not already
been said. Restoration, properly so called, there is not; for what does
not perish cannot be restored. The truth exists; and has been known and
revered during the whole six thousand years it has refused to bow the
knee to Baal. Let not deserters say, when they turn and come back to
the truth that they have restored it, but that they have recovered it;
not that they give, but that they receive it; not that they enlighten
the world, but that they are blind, and that it is the goodness of
Providence which opens their eyes to the light.




