CHAPTER III.

DEFINITION OF CORPOREAL SUBSTANCE.


13. What is the permanent subject of transformations in the sensible
order? Is it a pure illusion? Is it a reality? What reality can it be?
Does it not seem rather an abstraction? A thing which is no color,
but lends itself all colors; which is none of the qualities which we
experience, but the subject and cause of them all; which is no form,
but accommodates itself to all forms; which is not pure extension,
because this is an abstraction, and it is something which serves as the
ground of other things; a corporeal object which, in itself, can affect
none of the senses; what is it? Is it what the Aristotelians call an
occult quality, a mysterious, and fantastic being, a mere illusion? Let
us examine it by the light of experience.

14. Let us take a piece of wax and without letting it go out of
our hands paint it different colors successively, subject it to
different degrees of temperature, softening it by warming, and then
cooling it; let us give it different forms, of a globe, a cylinder, a
parallelopipedon, a table, a vase, or a statue; do all these changes
take place in the same thing? Yes. Is this thing not a color, or a
figure, or a degree of temperature? No; because all these qualities
were and ceased to be whilst the thing remained the same. How do I
know that the thing remained the same? Because there was a continuity
of sensation in the eye fixed upon the object; in the touch which,
although it felt the modifications of warm and cold, hard and
soft, experienced also an uninterrupted sensation of an object,
which remained constantly in the hand, and the weight of which was
continuously felt. Therefore there is something there which is not the
modifications, but is that which is modified, something common to them
all, which receives and connects them, outside of me and within me.

15. Examining one conception of this permanent something, we find that,
after abstracting its qualities, we have:

I. The idea of being. We say the thing, the something, the subject,
etc., we therefore speak of a being, of a quality. Without the reality
there is nothing; and nothing cannot be the subject of modifications,
or the link connecting impressions.

II. The idea of being, which we here find, is not pure, it is not being
alone. The qualities exist, are beings, and still we do not confound
them with the subject.

III. That which accompanies the idea of being is the idea of permanence
amidst succession, and the relation of this permanence as the point of
connection, the immovable centre in the midst of succession.

16. If, therefore, we wished to define substance, we could only say
that it is _a permanent being in which occur the changes which are
presented to us in the sensible phenomena_. Our knowledge is all
reduced to this; all that we can add beside, is only hypothesis or
conjecture. In vain you ask me, what is this being? Give me the
intuition of the essence of corporeal things, and I will tell you;
but while I know them only by their effects, that is, the impressions
which they produce in me, I cannot answer you. I know that it is
something; I know its relation to its forms; I know that the forms are
in the subject, and are not the subject; but here is the limit of my
knowledge. The object corresponding to the idea composed of a permanent
being and its relation to various forms is what I call corporeal
substance.

17. Since the substance changes its accidents, remaining the same
itself, it follows that its existence is independent of the accidents.
Abstracting, for the present, whether it can or cannot exist without
any, I only affirm that none in particular is necessary to it. Here
we must take note of the difference between substance in itself, and
in the medium by which it is manifested to us, and placed in active
or passive communication with us. The accidents are this medium; they
are the transitory forms it puts on. How can we know the existence of
bodies, except by sensations? The object of sensation is not substance
in its inner nature, but only its qualities as affecting us.




CHAPTER IV.

RELATION OF CORPOREAL SUBSTANCE TO ITS ACCIDENTS.


18. In the idea of corporeal substance the idea of permanence is
perfectly included, the idea of unity only imperfectly. The unity which
we conceive in every corporeal substance is a factitious unity; since
that which is constant is not one but an aggregate of many, as is
proved by the divisibility of matter; out of every corporeal substance
we may make many which will have the same right as the first to be
called substances. A piece of wood is a substance; but we may slit it
into several pieces which will be equally substances. These pieces,
joined together, formed what are called _one_ substance; but it is
clear that this unity was very imperfect, and was rather a union than a
unity, and that if we consider it as _one_, it was in relation to the
unity of effect which it produced in us, by the connection which it
gave to our sensations and to the phenomena which resulted from it.

19. Hence, every corporeal substance involves multiplicity, or
combination of the elements which compose it. Experience informs us
that this combination is not permanent; there is, consequently, no
corporeal substance which does not imply at least one modification,
namely, the arrangement of its parts. Abstracting the changes which
this modification may undergo, it can never be confounded with the
substance: although the bodies might be presented constantly to our
senses with the same arrangement of the parts, the permanent _being_
would be in the parts, not in their arrangement. The latter is
something external which is added to the thing existing; there can be
no union and combination without parts which are united and combined.

20. A difference which we observe between the substance and
its modifications is, that the substance is independent of the
modifications, but the modifications are not independent of the
substance. The substance, while remaining the same, changes its
accidents, but an accident cannot change its substance and remain the
same. The same block may receive different figures successively; but a
figure, numerically the same, cannot pass from one block to another.
Two blocks may have a similar or a different figure, whether cubic,
spherical, or pyramidal, and one may take the figure of the other; but
in that case, the figures are not identical, but similar, they are
specifically but not numerically the same.

21. If I am asked how I know that there is only similarity and not
numerical identity in the figures which bodies take successively, that
there is no _permanence_ in the figures which change their subject,
and consequently that the same figure cannot pass from one substance
to another, in the same manner that the same substance passes from
one figure to another; I shall not find it difficult to prove what I
assert.

There is no one who does not see what an extravagant thing it would
be for a cubic figure to leave a body and pass to another. What is
this figure separated from the body? How is it preserved during the
transition? Why is it not exactly the same in both, but presented
with slight modifications? Has it undergone a modification in its
passage from one body to another? Then there would be a modification
of a modification, and the figure in itself abstracted from all body,
would be a kind of substance of a secondary order, permanent under
modifications. These are but absurd dreams in which that is applied
to the concrete which belongs to the idea only in the abstract. This
transition of the forms would suppose their separate existence, and
thus we might have all kinds of abstract figures, cubes, spheres,
circles, triangles, etc., subsisting in themselves without application
to any thing figured.

22. A still stricter demonstration of this truth is possible. If we
suppose a figure, numerically the same, to pass from one body to
another; the block A, which loses the cubic form, transmits it to the
body B. Now, this individual form cannot be in both at the same time.
Suppose that after the cubic form has left the block A, we turn it back
before it has touched the body B, evidently it will not be the same
in both: therefore the body B has not acquired the same, but only a
similar form. It is also evident that in order to give the cubic form,
we need not take it from another; therefore, the form of one is not
_individually_ that of the other; otherwise we should have to say that
it is and is not, that it is preserved and ceases to exist at the same
time.

23. The term _transmission_ or _communication_ of motion, which is so
much used in physical science, expresses something real so long as
limited to the phenomenon which is under calculation; but it would be
an absurdity, if it meant that the _same_ motion which was in one
body has _passed_ to another. The sum of the quantities of motion is
the same in elastic bodies after impact as before it; the velocity
being divided between them, and the one gaining what the other loses.
This is proved by calculation, and confirmed by experience. But it is
evident that one body does not impart the _same_ individual velocity
which it contained to the other body; for not only can the velocity
not be separated from the body and pass from one subject to another;
but it cannot even be conceived except as a relation, the idea of
which includes the ideas of a body moved, of space, and of time. It
is true that Q representing the quantity of the motion before impact,
the value of Q remains the same after impact; but this only expresses
the phenomenon in relation to its effects, as subject to calculation;
not that the velocity in the second member of the equation is composed
of the parts of the first. Let A and B represent two bodies, the
individual masses of which are expressed by these two letters; and V,
_v_ their respective velocities before impact. The quantity of motion
will be Q = A × V + B × _v_. After impact there will be a new velocity
which we may call _w_, and the quantity of motion will be Q = A × _w_
+ B × _u_. Mathematically speaking, the value of Q will be the same;
but this only means that if the results of the motion be expressed in
lines or numbers, we shall have the same after impact as before it; it
does not and cannot mean that in the velocity _u_, considered as united
to the subject, there is a portion of velocity which has been detached
from V to be joined to _v_.

24. Hence, we do not conceive the accidents of bodies as possible
without a subject in which they are inherent; and that substances are
not inherent in another being, but are conceived and really exist
without this inherence. A figure cannot exist without a thing figured,
but the thing figured may still exist, through all other things are
destroyed. The analysis of the nature of substance shows that its
existence supposes the existence of another being which produced
it; but relation between them is that of cause and effect, not of
inherence, or that of the subject and its modification.

25. These last observations explain another mark of corporeal
substances. In the third chapter of this book we found the three
characteristics of being, the relation of the permanent to the
variable, and the subject of the variations; we now find a fourth,
which is a negation, non-inherence in another. This negative
characteristic is included in the positive one, _permanent subject of
variations_; for it is clear that in conceiving a subject _permanent
amid variations_ we do not include inherence, but rather deny it, at
least implicitly. Non-inherence supposes something positive, something
on which is founded the denial of the necessity of being inherent.
What is this something? We know not. We know that it exists, but its
explanation is beyond our reach. It is probably inexplicable without
the intuition of the essence of things;--an intuition which we have not.




