CHAPTER VII.

RELATION OF THE PROPOSITION, I THINK, TO THE SUBSTANTIALITY OF THE ME.


35. The proposition, _I think_, can have no sense unless we admit
that the soul is a substance. Philosophy loses its resting-point, and
all that experience within us is a series of unconnected phenomena,
incapable of being observed, or subjected to any rule.

36. My present thought is not individually my thought of yesterday,
as my thought of to-morrow will not be my thought of to-day. These
thoughts, considered in themselves and abstracted from a subject in
which they are found, have no connection with one another: perhaps
their objects are without any relation to each other, or even
contradictory; perhaps the thought of to-day is the denial of the
thought of yesterday.

37. The same is true of all thoughts, all acts of the will, of all
sentiments, imaginary representations, and sensations, and, in general,
of all that I experience within myself. Turning my attention to all
internal affections, whatever they may be, I see in them only a
series of phenomena, a sort of current of existences passing away and
disappearing, some never to return, others to reappear at a different
time, _expressly_ presenting this difference. The reappearance is not
individual, but similar: the affection which is repeated is not the
same, but another resembling it. When the affection returns, I am
conscious of its presence at the time, and conscious of its presence at
a previous time; this double consciousness constitutes recollection,
makes me distinguish between the two affections, and necessarily
implies the judgment that one is not the other. There would be no
recollection, if the affection _recalling_ were identified with the
affection _recalled_. A thing _presents_ itself, but does not _recall_
itself.

38. Therefore every thing passes away within us never to return, the
disappearance is real, the reappearance but apparent; that which ceases
to be can never return to be again; there may be a similar thing, but
not the same; that which was, is passed, and time does not retrace its
steps.

39. Therefore, the series of internal phenomena, considered in
themselves and abstracted from the subject in which they reside, are
necessarily unconnected, and there is no way of subordinating the terms
of the series to any law, or connecting link.

40. Still this law exists in all our intellectual acts; reason, without
laws which govern it, would be the greatest of absurdities; this link
is found in all our affections. That they pass from us with their
distinction and difference and resemblance is a fact of our mind, to
which we are subjected, as to a primitive and inevitable condition of
our existence.

41. The proposition, _I think_, in the sense in which the word _think_
includes all internal affections, does not relate to isolated phenomena
alone, but it necessarily implies a point, which we call the _me_, in
which these phenomena are connected. If this point does not exist,
if it is not one and identical, the thought of to-day can have no
connection with the thought of yesterday: they are two distinct things,
at different times, and perhaps contradictory: when I say to-day, _I
think_, and mean that the _I_ is the same as in the proposition, _I
thought yesterday_, my language would be absurd; if they are mere
phenomena, two thoughts without any connecting link, the _me_ is
nothing, I cannot say, _I thought, I think_; but I must say _there
was_ thought, _there is_ thought. If, then, you ask me, _where? in
whom?_ I must reply, that there is no _where_, no _who_; I must deny
the supposition, and confine myself to repeating, _there was_ thought,
_there is_ thought.

42. To say _me_, it is necessary to suppose a permanent reality; a
reality, because that which is not real is nothing; permanent, because
that which passes away disappears, ceases to be, and cannot serve as
the point to unite other things.




CHAPTER VIII.

REMARKS ON THE SOUL'S INTUITION OF ITSELF.


43. The permanent reality of the _me_, considered in itself and
abstracted from the things which pass within it, is a fact which we
perceive in our intuition, and which we express in all our words.
If this presence, this internal experience, be what is called the
intuition of the soul, then we have intuition of our soul. This
intuition is reproduced in every particular intuition, and in all
internal affections in general; for, although they are isolated
phenomena, they imply the intuition of the _me_, because they imply the
consciousness of themselves.

44. The variety of isolated phenomena instead of proving any thing
against the unity of the intuition of the _me_, on the contrary,
evidently confirms it. If we conceived only one fixed and identical
thought, there would be less necessity of uniting with it the idea of a
subject in which it resides; but when there is a multitude of different
phenomena, which cannot co-exist without contradiction, we must refer
them to something constant, or else the internal world is converted
into an absolute chaos.

45. The soul has, therefore, an intuition of itself; that is to say,
it is conscious of its unity in multiplicity, of its identity in
diversity, of its permanence in succession, of its constant duration
in the appearance and disappearance of phenomena. Either we must
admit this, or we must renounce the legitimacy of all testimony of
consciousness, and embrace the most complete skepticism that ever
existed, extending it both to the internal and to the external world.

46. We find within us the realization of the indeterminate conceptions
of _being_, _unity_, _permanence_, and _subject of modifications_;
this realization is revealed by consciousness, and is confirmed by the
logical analysis of the series of phenomena in their relation to a
point of connection.

47. All that is included in the idea of finite substance is contained
in these four terms: _being_, _one_, _permanent_, and the _subject of
modifications_. All this is in our soul, and we perceive by experience
that we are internally affected by it. If this perception is called
intuition, we have intuition of the substantiality of our soul.

48. The thinking being not only perceives itself but it knows itself
as a real object, to which, by means of reflection, it applies the
ideas of being, unity, permanence, and the subject of modifications.
Therefore the soul may be the true predicate of propositions resting on
logic and consciousness.

49. Have we any other intuition of the soul, besides that which has
just been explained? To this I answer, that we have not while in
this life, and at the same time I ask whether any other than that of
consciousness is possible. Accustomed as we are to sensible intuitions
which imply extension in space, we ask what the soul is in itself, and
we do not seem to be satisfied without seeing its image. Leaving the
order of sensibility and rising to the purely intellectual sphere, who
knows whether we can say that there is no other intuition of the soul
than that which we now have; whether the soul in itself, in the unity
and simplicity of its entity, is the force which we perceive; whether
this force is the subject of the modifications, the substance, without
its being necessary to imagine another support in which this force
might reside? Why may not this force be subsistent? Why must we imagine
another _substratum_ to support it? If it were so, if we must apply to
the substance of the soul what the great Leibnitz thought applicable to
all substances, making the idea of substance to consist in the idea of
force; why may we not say that the pressure of the internal sense, the
consciousness of itself, is all the intuition of itself which the soul
can have?

50. You may ask me, what is the soul separated from the body? What will
it perceive and know of itself, when it exists _alone_? As though it
did not now perceive and know _alone_, or as though the organs, which
it uses, could perceive or think. Does it, perchance, know how it uses
them, or even know otherwise than by experience that it uses them at
all? Is it not alone in the depths of its activity with its thoughts
and the acts of its will, its sentiments, its joy and its sadness,
its pleasures and its pains? Say, then, that perhaps we do not form
sufficiently clear ideas of the _mode_ of consciousness which we shall
have of ourselves after this life; say that perhaps other intuitions
of our self are possible; but do not imagine the soul as inconceivable
alone. Leave me thought, will, sentiment, all that is internally
present to my consciousness, to find myself; I ask no more. Give me
communication with other beings, which affect me or are affected by
me, which transmit to me thoughts and wills, which cause me pleasure
or pain; I need nothing more in order to have a world which I can very
well conceive. I am ignorant of the quality of the things, not of their
possibility: the soul changes its state, not its nature.




