CHAPTER XX.

FUNDAMENTAL EXPLANATION OF THE MORAL ORDER.


221. There must be something absolute in morality. It is not possible
to conceive any thing all relative, without something absolute on which
it is founded. Moreover, every relation implies a term to which it
relates, and, consequently, though we suppose a series of relations, we
must come to a last term. This shows why purely relative explanations
of morality do not satisfy the understanding; reason, and even
sentiment seek an absolute basis.

Besides, this purely ontological argument in favor of the absolute in
morality, there are others not less conclusive, and which are within
the reach of ordinary men.

222. In the infinitely perfect being we conceive infinite holiness,
independently of the existence of creatures; and what is infinite
holiness but _moral_ perfection in an infinite degree? This argument
is decisive for all the world, excepting atheists: whoso admits the
existence of God must admit his holiness; the contrary is repugnant to
reason, to the heart, to common sense. Therefore something absolutely
moral exists; therefore morality in itself cannot be explained by any
relation of creatures to end, since morality in an infinite degree
would exist though there had never been any creature.

223. In conceiving a created intelligent being, we also conceive
morality as an inflexible law to which the actions of this being must
be subjected. It is to be observed that we conceive this morality, even
supposing only one intelligent being; therefore morality cannot be
explained by the relations of creatures to each other. Imagine one man
all alone on the earth, can you conceive him exempt from all morality?
Would he be equally beautiful in the moral order, whether he labored
to perfect his intellect and develop his faculties harmoniously, or
abandoned himself to his coarse instincts, lowering himself to the
level of the beasts by his stupidity and debasement? Imagine the
earth, the whole corporeal universe, and all created beings, except
one intelligence, to disappear; can you conceive this creature wholly
exempt from all moral law? Can you suppose all his thoughts and acts of
the will to be indifferent, and that morality is for him an unmeaning
word? Impossible, unless you place yourself in open struggle with our
primary ideas, with our profoundest sentiments, with the common sense
of mankind. This, then, is another proof that in the moral order there
is something absolute, an intrinsic perfection, independent of the
mutual relations of creatures; that certain acts of an intelligent and
free creature have a beauty of their own.

224. The imputability of actions offers another argument in
confirmation of this truth. Morality is never measured by the result;
its perfection is appreciated by what is _immanent_, that is, by
the motives which have impelled the will, by the greater or less
deliberation which preceded the act of the will, by the greater or less
intensity of the act. If the result is sometimes considered, all its
moral worth arises from the interior of the soul. Whether the result
was foreseen or unforeseen; whether it was possible or not to foresee
it; whether it was willed or not; whether it was proposed as the
principal or secondary object; whether it was desired or accepted with
sorrow; these and other such considerations are present when the merit
or demerit of an action which has had such or such result, is weighed
and appreciated. Hence this result has no weight in the moral order
except in so far as it is the expression of the act of the will.

225. This character of _immanence_, which is essential to all moral
acts, overthrows all the theories which found morality on external
combinations; and shows that the act of a free and intelligent being
is good or bad in itself, absolutely abstracted from its good or bad
consequences, which were not contained in the internal act in one
way or another. A man, who, by an act which he did not and could
not foresee, should seriously injure the whole human race, would
be innocent; and another who with an evil intention should benefit
mankind, would be guilty. It is not a virtuous act to save one's
country through a motive of vanity or ambition; and the unfortunate
man, who with a pure and disinterested intention and with an ardent
desire to save his country, should by an error produce its downfall,
would not cease to be virtuous; the very act whose result is so sad, is
considered an act of virtue.

226. In what, then, does absolute morality consist? Where is the hidden
source of this ray of beauty which we all perceive, which penetrates
every thing, making all things beautiful, and without which the world
of intelligences would wither and fade away?

It seems to me that on this point, as on many others, science has not
paid sufficient regard to the admirable profoundness of the Christian
religion, which answers with one word, as full of tenderness as of
meaning: _Love_.

I particularly call the attention of my readers to the theory which I
am going to unfold. After so many difficulties as we have hitherto
encountered concerning the moral order, we must try to gain some light
on so important a subject. This light will more and more confirm a
truth which science reveals. When we come to the principles or the last
results of science, the ideas of Christianity are not useless; they
throw light on the foundation and on the summit of the edifice of human
knowledge.

Let not the reader imagine that instead of a scientific theory, I am
going to offer him a chapter of mysticism. I am sure that in the end
the reader will be convinced that, even under a purely scientific
aspect, this doctrine is much more exact and profound than that of
those authors who carefully avoid using the word _God_, as though this
august name would be a blot on the pages of science.

227. Absolute morality is the love of God; all moral ideas and
sentiments are applications and participations of this love.

Let us give a proof of this by carrying this principle to all the parts
of the moral world.

What is absolute morality in God? What is the attribute of the infinite
being, which we call holiness? The love of himself, of his infinite
perfection. In God there is no duty, properly so called, there is
an absolute necessity of being holy; for he is under the absolute
necessity of loving his infinite perfection. Thus morality in its most
absolute sense, in its highest degree, is infinite holiness; it is
independent of all freewill. God cannot cease to be holy.

228. But it may be asked, why _must_ God love himself? This question
has no meaning if the matter is rightly understood; for it supposes
that what is entirely absolute can be exactly expressed in relative
terms. The proposition: God _must_ love himself is not exact; strict
exactness is expressed only in this: God loves himself; for it
expresses an absolute fact in an absolute manner. If it is now asked,
why God loves himself; I answer that it might as well be asked, why
God knows himself, why he knows the truth, or why he exists; when we
come to these questions, we have arrived at the primitive origin, at
absolute, unconditioned things; therefore every _why_ is absurd.

229. Morality can, therefore, be expressed in an absolute proposition.
It is in itself, in an infinite degree, an absolute truth; it implies
an identity whose opposite is contradictory: it is not less connected
with the principle of contradiction than all metaphysical and
geometrical truths. Its simplest formula is: the infinite loves itself.

230. God in his intelligence sees from all eternity an infinity
of possible creatures. Containing in himself the ground of their
possibility and of all their relations among themselves or to their
Creator, nothing can exist independent of him; hence it is not possible
for any being to cease to be directed to God. The end which God
proposed in the creation can be no other than himself; since before
the creation only God existed, and after the creation there were no
perfections in creatures which were not contained in God in an infinite
degree, either formally or virtually. Therefore this direction of all
creatures to God as their last end, is a condition inseparable from
them, and seen by God from eternity in all possible worlds. Whatever
is created or may be created is a realization of a divine idea, of
that which was represented in the infinite mind, with the absolute or
relative properties which pre-existed in that representation. Therefore
whatever exists or may exist must be subject to this condition, it must
be directed to God, without whom its existence would be impossible.

231. Among the creatures, in which is realized the representation
pre-existing in the divine mind, there are some endowed with will,
which is an inclination to what is known, and, by means of an act of
the understanding, becomes a principle of its own determinations.
If the creature knew God intuitively, the acts of its will would be
necessarily moral; for it would necessarily be an act of the love
of God. The rectitude of the created will would then be a constant
reflection of the infinite holiness, or of the love which God bears
himself. The moral perfection of the creature would not in that case be
free, though it would still be an eminent degree of moral perfection.
There would be a perpetual conformity of the created will to the will
of God, for the creature loving God by a happy necessity, could will
nothing but what God wills. The morality of the created will would be
this constant conformity to the divine will, which conformity would not
be distinguished from the essentially moral and holy act, by which the
creature would love the infinite being.

But since the knowledge of God is not intuitive, since the idea which
the creature has of God is an incomplete conception involving many
indeterminate notions, the infinite good is not loved by necessity,
because it is not known in its essence. The will has an inclination to
good, but to good indeterminately; and therefore it does not feel a
necessary inclination to any real object. The good is presented under a
general and indeterminate idea, with various applications, and to none
of them is the will inclined necessarily; hence proceeds its freedom
to depart from the order seen by God as conformed to his sovereign
designs; when freedom, far from being a perfection, is a defect arising
from the weakness of the knowledge of the being which possesses it.

232. The rational creature conforming in its acts to the will of God,
realizes the order which God wills; loving this order, it loves what
God loves. If, although realizing this order, the creature in its
freedom does not love the order, but acts from motives independent of
it, its will, performing the act materially, does not love what God
loves; and here is the line which divides morality from immorality. The
proper morality of an act consists in explicit or implicit conformity
of the created will to the divine will; the mysterious perfections of
moral acts, that loveliness in them which charms and attracts us, is
nothing else than conformity to the will of God; the absolute character
which we find in morality is the explicit or implicit love of God, and,
consequently, a reflection of the infinite holiness, or of the love by
which God loves himself.

By applying this doctrine to facts, we shall see more clearly still its
perfect exactness.

233. To love God is a morally good act; to hate God is a morally evil
act, and of the most detestable character. Where is the morality of the
act of loving God? In the act itself, the reflection of the infinite
holiness, which consists in the love which God has for his infinite
perfection; here is a palpable proof of the truth of our theory. The
love of the creature for the Creator has always been regarded as an
essentially moral act, as the purest morality; which shows that in the
secondary and finite order, this act is the purest and most faithful
expression of absolute morality.

234. If we ask why we must love God, we are ordinarily reminded of
the benefits which he has conferred upon us, of the love which he
bears us, and even of the example of the love which we owe to our
friends and benefactors, and especially our parents; these reasons are
certainly very useful in order to make the morality of the act in some
sense palpable, and to move our heart; but they are not completely
satisfactory in the field of science. For, if we could doubt that we
ought to love the infinite Being, the author of all beings, it is
clear that we should also doubt that we ought to love our parents,
our friends, or our benefactors. Therefore our love for them must be
founded on something higher, or else, when asked why we love them, we
must remain without an answer.

235. To wish to perfect the understanding is a moral act in itself.
Whence proceeds the morality of this act? God, in giving us
intelligence, evidently wished us to use it. Its use, therefore, enters
into the order known and willed by God; in willing this order, we will
what God wills; we love this order which God loved from all eternity,
as a realization of his supreme designs; if, on the contrary, the
creature does not perfect his intellectual faculties, and making use
of his freedom leaves these faculties unexercised, he departs from the
order established by God, he does not will what God wills, he does not
love what God loves.

236. A man may perfect these faculties merely for the sake of obtaining
the pleasure of being praised by others; in this case he realizes the
order in the perfection of his understanding, but he does not do so
from love of the order in itself, but from love of something distinct
which does not enter into the order willed by God; for it is evident
that God did not endow us with intellectual faculties for the fruitless
object of obtaining each other's praise. Here, then, is the difference
which we know, which we perceive between two equal actions done with
different ends: the will in one perfects the understanding as a simple
realization of the divine order; perhaps we may not be able to explain
what there is there, but we know for certain that this will is right;
in the other the will is the same, it wills the same thing, but it
suffers something foreign to this order to mingle with it; and the
understanding and the heart both tell us this act which does something
good, is not good, it is not virtue,--it is meanness.

237. There is a person in great want, but who, nevertheless, has every
probability of soon improving his fortunes, Lentulus and Julius each
give him an alms. Lentulus gives his, because he hopes that when the
poor man is better off he will remember his benefactor, and assist
him if necessary. The action of Lentulus can have no moral value; in
judging of it we see a calculation, not a virtuous act. Julius gives
the alms solely in order to succor the unfortunate man, who excites his
pity, without thinking of the return which may be made; the action of
Julius is morally beautiful, it is virtuous. Whence this difference?
Lentulus does good, assisting the needy; but not from love of the
internal order of the act; he bends this order towards himself. God,
willing that men should stand in need of each other, also willed that
they should mutually help one another; to help one, therefore, simply
in order to alleviate his wants is to realize simply the order willed
by God; to help one for a particular end, is to realize this order
not as it is established by God, but as combined by man. There is a
_complication_ of view, the _simplicity_ of intention is wanting,--this
simplicity so recommended by Christianity, and even in philosophy
containing a profound meaning.

238. Regarding the purely natural order, we find that all moral
obligations have in the last result a _useful_ object; as all
prohibitions are directed to prevent an injury; but it does not suffice
for morality, that we will its utility, we must will the order itself
from which the utility results; for the greater the reflection, and
the love with which this order is willed, without any mixture of
heterogeneous views, the more moral is the act.

To help the poor with the _simple_ view of assisting them, out of
love for them, is a virtuous act; to help them, out of this love, and
with the _explicit_ reflection that it is complying with a _duty_ of
humanity, is still more virtuous; to help them, for the thought of God,
because you see in the poor man the image of God, who commands you
to love him, is a still more virtuous act than either of the other
two; to help them, even against the inclination of your own heart,
excited by resentment against them, or moved by other passions, to
subdue yourself with a firm will for the love of God, is an act of
heroic virtue. Observe that the moral perfection of the act increases
in proportion as the thing in itself is willed with greater reflection
and love; and arrives at the highest point when, in the thing loved,
it is God himself that is loved. If the views are selfish the order
is perverted, and morality is banished; when there are no selfish
views, but the act is prompted principally by sentiment, the action is
beautiful, but belongs rather to sensibility than to morality; when
the sacrifice tears the heart, but the will preceded by reflection
commands the sacrifice, and the duty is performed because it is a duty;
or perhaps an act not obligatory is done for the love of its moral
goodness, and because it is agreeable to God, we see in the action
something so fair, so lovely, so deserving of praise, that we should
be confounded if asked the reason of the sentiment of respect which we
feel for the person who for such noble motives sacrifices himself for
his fellow-men.

Conformably to these principles we may clearly and exactly determine
the ideas of morality.

239. Absolute morality, and consequently the origin and type of the
moral order, is the act by which the infinite Being loves his infinite
perfection. This is an absolute fact of which we can give no reason _a
priori_.

In God there is, _strictly_ speaking, no duty; there is the absolute
necessity of being holy.

240. The act essentially moral in creatures is the love of God. It is
impossible to found the morality of this act on the morality of any
other act.

241. The acts of creatures are moral in so far as they participate of
this love, explicitly or implicitly.

242. Creatures which see God intuitively, love him necessarily; and
thus all their acts, stamped with this august mark, are necessarily
moral.

243. Creatures which do not see God intuitively necessarily love good
in general, or under an indeterminate idea; but they do not love
necessarily any object in particular.

244. In this love of good in general, these free acts are moral, when
their will wills the order which God has willed, without mingling with
this order foreign or contrary combinations.

245. In order that an act may be moral, it is not necessary that the
one who performs it should think explicitly of God, nor that his will
should love him explicitly.

246. The act is more moral, in proportion as it is accompanied with
greater reflection on its morality and its conformity to the will of
God.

247. Moral sentiment was given us in order that we might perceive the
beauty of the order willed by God; it is, so to speak, an _instinct_ of
love of God.

248. As this sentiment is innate, indelible, and independent of
reflection, even atheists experience it.

249. The idea of moral obligation or duty results from two ideas: the
order willed by God, and the physical freedom to depart from this
order. God granting us life, wills us to try to preserve it; but man is
free, and sometimes kills himself. He that preserves his life fulfils
a duty; he that destroys himself, infringes it. Thus the idea of duty
contains the idea of physical freedom, which cannot be exercised,
in a certain sense, without departing from the order which God has
established.

250. Punishment is a sanction of the moral order; it serves to supply
the necessity which is impossible in free beings. Creatures that act
without knowledge, fulfil their destiny by an absolute necessity; free
beings do not fulfil their destiny by an absolute necessity, but by
that kind of necessity produced by the sight of a painful result.

251. Here may be seen the difference between physical evil and moral
evil even in the same free being; physical evil is pain; moral evil is
the departure from the order willed by God.

252. Unlawful is what is contrary to a duty.

253. Lawful is what is not opposed to any duty.

254. The eternal law is the order of intelligent beings, willed by God
conformably to his infinite holiness.

255. Intrinsically moral acts are those which form a part of the order
which God (supposing the will to create such or such beings) has willed
necessarily, by force of the love of his infinite perfection. Such
actions are commanded because they are good.

256. The actions which are good because they are commanded are those
which form a part of the order which God has willed freely, and of
which he has given creatures knowledge.

257. The command of God is his will communicated to creatures. If this
will is necessary, the precept is natural, if free, the precept is
positive.

258. Regarding the natural only, the order willed by God is that which
leads to the preservation and perfection of created beings. Actions are
moral when conformed to this order.

259. The natural perfection of beings consists in using their faculties
for the end for which their nature shows them to be destined.

260. Nature has charged each individual to take care of his own
preservation and perfection.

261. The natural impossibility of man's living alone, shows that the
preservation and perfection of individuals must be obtained in society.

262. The first society is the family.

263. Parents must support and educate their children; for without this
the human race could not be preserved.

264. Conjugal duties arise from the order necessary for the
preservation and perfection of the society of the family, which is
indispensable for the preservation of the human race.

265. The more necessary the connection of an act with the preservation
and perfection of the family, the more necessary is its morality, and
consequently the less subject to modifications.

266. The immorality of acts contrary to chastity, and especially
of those against nature, is founded on great reasons of an order
indispensable for the preservation of the individual and the species.

267. Passions, because they are blind, are evidently given us as means,
not as ends.

268. Therefore, when the gratification of the passions is taken, not
as a means, but as the end, the act is immoral. A simple example will
explain this idea. The pleasure of eating has a very useful object in
the preservation of the individual; thus to eat _with_ pleasure is not
evil, but good; to eat _for_ the pleasure of eating is to invert the
order: the act is not good. The same action which in the first case is
very reasonable, in the second, is an act of _gluttony_. Common sense
renders any proof of this superfluous.

269. If a man lived all alone, the use of his physical freedom could
never injure any one but himself; the moral limit of his freedom would
be to satisfy his wants and desires in conformity to the dictates
of reason. But as men live in society, the exercise of the physical
freedom of one necessarily interferes with the freedom of others; to
prevent disorder it is necessary that the physical freedom of each one
should be restricted a little, and that all should be subjected to
an order conformed to reason and conducive to the general good; hence
the necessity of civil legislation. But as the legislation cannot
be established or preserved by itself alone, a public power becomes
necessary. The object of society is the general good, in subjection
to the principles of eternal morality; the same is the object of the
public power.

270. This theory explains satisfactorily the double character presented
by the moral order: the absolute, and the relative. The heart, reason,
and common sense force us to acknowledge in the moral order something
absolute and independent of the consideration of utility; this is
explained by rising to an absolute act of absolute perfection, and
regarding the morality of creatures as a participation of that act.
Reason and experience teach that the morality of actions has _useful_
results; this is explained by observing that the absolute act includes
the love of the order which must rule among created beings in order
that they may fulfil their destinies. This order, then, is at the
same time _willed_ by God, and _conducive_ to the special end of each
creature; therefore it is at the same time both _moral_ and _useful_.

271. But these two characters are always kept essentially distinct;
the first we _perceive_; the second we _calculate_. When the first is
wanting, we are _evil_; when the second fails, we are _unfortunate_.
The painful result is _punishment_ when our will has knowingly violated
the order; otherwise, it is simply _misfortune_.

272. I hope I may flatter myself that this theory is somewhat more
satisfactory than those invented by some modern philosophers for the
purpose of explaining the absolute nature of morality. I had need of
the idea of God, it is true; but I conceive no moral order, if God be
taken from the world. Without God morality is nothing but a blind
sentiment, as absurd in its object as in itself; the philosophy which
does not found it on God, can never explain it scientifically; it must
confine itself to establishing the fact as a necessity whose character
and origin they know nothing of.

273. I shall add one observation which is an epitome of my whole
theory, and will show wherein it differs from others which likewise
acknowledge that the foundation of the moral order is in God, and that
the love of God is the first of all duties. The systems to which I
refer, suppose the idea of morality to be distinct from the idea of
the love of God; but I say that the love of God is the _essence_ of
morality. Thus I assert that the infinite holiness is _essentially_ the
love with which God loves himself; that the first and essentially moral
act of creatures is the love of God; that the morality of all their
actions consists in explicit or implicit conformity to the will of God,
which is the same as the explicit or implicit love of God.

One of the most remarkable results of this theory which places the
essence of morality in the love of God, or of the infinite good, is
that it destroys the difference of form of moral and metaphysical
propositions, showing that the _must_ and _ought_ of the former is
reduced to the absolute _is_ of the latter.[97] The explanation of this
important result is the following. The proposition: to love God is good
morally, is an absolute and identical proposition; for moral goodness
is the same thing as the love of God.

[97] See §§ 210, 211, 212, and 213.

The proposition: to love our neighbor is good, is reduced to the
former, since to love our neighbor is, in a certain sense, to love God.

The proposition: to help our neighbor is good, is reduced to the last,
for to help is to love.

The proposition: man ought to preserve his life, is explained by this
absolute proposition: the preservation of man's life _is_ willed by
God. Thus the word _ought_ expresses the necessity that man should
preserve his life, if he does not mean to oppose the order willed by
God.

These examples are enough to show how easily moral propositions may
be reduced to an absolute form. I cannot see how this is possible, if
instead of saying that the love of God is morality, we distinguish
between morality and love, saying that the love of God is a moral act.

274. Whatever judgment may be formed of this explanation, it cannot
be denied that by it, a profound wisdom, even in the natural and
philosophical order, is recognized in that admirable doctrine of our
divine Master, in which he calls the love of God the first and greatest
of the commandments; and in which, when he wishes to point out the
character of the moral good, he especially designates the fulfilment of
the divine will.

275. If we place the essence of morality in love, that which is moral
must appear beautiful, since nothing is more beautiful than love; it
must be agreeable to the soul, since nothing is more pleasing than
love. We see also why the ideas of disinterestednessss and sacrifice seem
so beautiful in the moral order, and make us instinctively reject the
theory of self-interest; nothing more disinterested than love, nothing
more capable of great sacrifices.

276. Thus egotism is banished from the moral order: God loves himself,
because he is infinitely perfect; outside of him there is nothing to
love which he has not created. The love which he has for creatures is
completely disinterested, since he can receive nothing from them. The
creature loves itself and also others; but what it loves in itself and
in other creatures, is the reflection of the infinite good. It desires
to be united to the supreme good, and in this it places its last
happiness; but this desire is united with the love of the supreme good
in itself, which the creature does not love precisely for the reason
that thence results its own happiness.




