CHAPTER II.

IMPORTANCE AND ANOMALY OF THE QUESTIONS ON THE IDEA OF THE INFINITE.


12. The examination of the idea of the infinite is of the highest
importance, not only because we meet it in various sciences, the
exact sciences among others, but because it is one of the principal
characteristics by which we distinguish God from creatures. A finite
God would be no God; an infinite creature would not be a creature.

In the scale of finite beings we discover a gradation, by which
they are interlinked; the less perfect, as they are perfected, go
on approaching the perfect; and there are, preserving the limits of
each one's nature, points of comparison by which we may measure their
respective distances. Between the finite and the infinite there is no
comparison; all measures are inadequate and as nothing. We pass from
an imperceptible drop to an immense ocean; from the atom which escapes
observation to the abundance of matter diffused through all space;
and much as these transitions express, they are as nothing to the
transition from the finite to the infinite; these oceans, compared with
the infinite truth, become in their turn imperceptible drops, and thus
an interminable scale baffles the efforts of the mind in search of
something to correspond to its idea. The examination of the idea of the
infinite ought to occupy an important place in the study of philosophy,
although it served for no other purpose than the contemplation of
infinite greatness.

13. The disputes on the idea of the infinite, not only in relation
to its nature, but also to its existence, present a strange anomaly.
If it exists in our mind it ought to fill it entirely, so that it
must be impossible to cease to perceive it. Yet it is well known that
philosophers dispute even on the existence of this idea; although it is
an infinite treasure, those who possess it doubt its reality--just as
the heroes in romance, when they find themselves in a castle richly and
splendidly adorned, imagine it the effect of enchantment.

14. The mere dispute as to whether the idea of the infinite be positive
or negative, is equivalent to the question of its existence. If it is
negative, it expresses an absence of being; if positive, the plenitude
of being. What question can be more vital to an idea than the dispute
whether it represents the absence or the plenitude of being?

15. Here again we meet the fact which we have observed in the preceding
discussions. Reason, after digging at its own foundations, is
threatened with death under the ruins of its loftiest edifices.




CHAPTER III.

HAVE WE THE IDEA OF THE INFINITE?


16. If we had no idea of the infinite, the word would have no meaning
to us, and when used it would not be understood.

17. Whatever may be the nature and perfection of our idea of the
infinite, it is certain that it involves something fixed, and common
to all intelligences. We apply the idea to things of very different
orders, and it is always understood in the same sense by all men. Even
the difficulty we find in attempting to explain it, in itself or in its
applications, proceeds from the idea itself; it is a difficulty which
we all meet with, because we all conceive in the same manner what is
understood by the infinite, taken in general.

18. Infinite and indefinite express very different meanings. The
infinite implies the absence of limits; the indefinite implies that
these limits retire continually from us; it abstracts their existence,
and only says that they cannot be assigned.

19. Whatever exists is finite or infinite; for it either has limits or
it has not: in the first case, it is finite; in the second, infinite:
there is no medium between yes and no.

20. Hence, properly speaking, there is in reality nothing indefinite;
this word only expresses a mode of conceiving things, or rather a
vagueness in the conception, or indecision in the judgment. When we do
not know the limits of any thing, and, on the other hand, do not dare
to affirm its infinity, we call it indefinite. Thus, space is called
indefinite by those who see no way of assigning a limit to it, and yet
are unwilling to say that it is infinite. Even in ordinary language we
call a thing indefinite which has no limits assigned to it; thus, we
say "a concession has been made for an indefinite time," although it is
limited to some time which has not been determined.

21. The idea of the infinite does not consist in conceiving that
another quantity may always be added to a given quantity, or that
a perfection may be made more intense; this expresses only the
possibility of a series of conceptions by which we endeavor to approach
the absolute idea of the infinite. It is easy to see that the absolute
idea is something distinct from those conceptions, because we regard it
as a type to which the series of connections is referred, but which it
can never equal, no matter how greatly prolonged.

22. Let us consider the words in which we naturally express what passes
within us when we think of the infinite.

What is an infinite line? A line which has no limits. Is it a million,
or a billion miles in length? There is no number to express its length;
it will always be greater than the number. But do we not approach the
infinite in proportion as we prolong a finite line? Certainly, in so
far as _approaching_ means only placing quantities which are found in
what we approach; but not in so far as it means that this difference
can be assigned. There is no comparison between the finite and the
infinite; and therefore it is not possible to assign the difference
between them. Would an infinite line be formed by the addition of all
finite lines? No; for we can conceive the multiplication of each of the
terms of the addition, and therefore an increase in the infinite, which
would be absurd. Would the infinity of the line consist in our not
knowing its limits, or not thinking of them? No; but in its not having
them.

23. Thus, we see, that the idea of the infinite, is in the reach of the
most common intellects, and expresses only what any person of ordinary
understanding would say, even though he had never occupied himself
with philosophical studies; that the idea of the infinite is in our
understanding, as a constant type, to which all finite representations
are unable to arrive. We know the conditions which must be fulfilled,
but at the same time, we see the impossibility of fulfilling them. When
any one tries to persuade us of the contrary, we reflect on the idea
of the infinite, and say: "No; it is a contradiction of infinity; it
is not infinite, but finite." We distinguish perfectly well between
the absence of the perception of the limit and its non-existence. If
any one tries to make us confound these two ideas, we answer, "No;
they must not be confounded; there is a great difference between our
not perceiving an object and the non-existence of that object, and we
are not now examining whether we conceive the limit, but whether it
exists." Though the limit retire and hide itself, so to speak, from our
eyes, we are not deceived: it exists, or does not exist. If it exists,
the condition involved in the conception of infinity is not fulfilled,
and the object is not infinite, but finite; if it does not exist, there
is true infinity,--the condition is complied with.

24. When the idea of the infinite is considered in general, it can
never be confounded with the idea of the finite. There is a line which
divides them, and which prevents all error; for it is the principle of
contradiction itself; it is the distinction between _yes_ and _no_.
When we say _finite_, we affirm the limit; when we say _infinite_, we
deny it. No ideas can be clearer or more exact.




