CHAPTER XV.

PANTHEISM EXAMINED IN THE ORDER OF IDEAS.


109. The idea of substance and all its applications, as well to the
external as to the internal world, are far from leading us to infer the
existence of a _single_ substance; on the contrary, reason according
with experience forces us to acknowledge a _multitude_ of substances.
Why should we admit only one substance? This is one of the most
important questions of philosophy, and from the most ancient times has
given occasion to the most serious errors; it consequently deserves a
careful investigation.

110. Those who admit only one substance must found their opinion either
on the idea of substance or on experience; our mind can have no other
recourse than to its primitive ideas, or the teachings of experience.
Let us begin with the _a priori_ method or that which is founded on the
idea.

111. What do you understand by substance? we ask. If by substance you
understand a being subsisting by itself, and by this subsistence you
mean that it has no need of another, and never had any need of another
in order to exist, then you are speaking of a being that is _not
caused_, of a necessary being which has in itself the sufficient and
necessary reason of its existence. If you say this being is only one,
or that there is no other of its kind, we agree with you, only we tell
you that you take the name of substance in an improper sense. But at
bottom the difference would be only in the name; and in order to come
to a mutual understanding it is only necessary for us to know that
by substance you understand an absolutely necessary, and consequently
absolutely independent being. But if you assert that this being is the
only one in the sense that there is nothing, and can be nothing beside
it, then your assertion is gratuitous and we ask for joint proof.

Why should the necessary being exclude the possibility of other beings?
Is it not more reasonable to conclude that it contains the reason of
their possibility and existence? The being which has in itself the
necessity of existing, must possess activity, and the external term of
this activity is production. Why may not other beings be the result of
this production? Inasmuch as produced they would be distinct from the
being producing them.

112. Without going beyond our ideas we find contingency and
multiplicity. Experience reveals a continual succession of forms within
us; these appearances are something; they cannot be a pure nothing,
for they must be something, though only appearances. In them we behold
a continual transition from not-being to being, and from being to
not-being; therefore there is a production of something which is not
necessary, since it is, and ceases to be; therefore there is something
besides the being which is supposed the only one. This argument is
founded on the purely internal phenomena, and, therefore, is valid even
against the idealists, against those who take from the external world
all reality, and reduce it to mere appearances, to simple phenomena of
our mind. These appearances exist at least as appearances; they are
then something, they are contingent, they are not therefore necessary
being. Therefore besides this being there is something which is not it;
therefore the system which asserts the existence of only one being is
not sustainable.

The idea of a being absolutely independent by reason of its absolute
necessity does not exclude the existence of contingent beings; it only
shows that the necessary being is the only necessary being, not that it
is the only being.

113. Neither does it follow from the idea of necessary being that
there cannot be contingent beings, _caused_, and yet subsisting by
themselves in the sense that they are not inherent as modifications in
others. Not to be caused and not to be inherent are two very distinct
things; the first implies the second, but the second does not imply
the first. Every being not caused must be free from inherence, because
if it is not caused it is necessary, and contains in itself all that
is necessary in order not to inhere in another. If necessary, it must
be absolutely independent of all others, which it would not be if it
needed them as a modification needs a substance. But not every thing
which is not inherent is necessarily not caused, for its cause may have
made it such that it does not need to be inherent as a modification in
another. It would then depend on another as an effect on its cause, but
not as an accident on its substance; there would be between them the
relation of causality, but not that of substance; things which we have
shown in the last chapter to be very distinct.

114. Never will the pantheists be able to prove that because a thing is
not a modification it must be not caused; and this is precisely what
they must prove in order to carry their system through in triumph. Once
prove that whatever subsists in itself is not caused, and you will
have proved whatever subsists in itself to be necessary. And as the
necessary being must be only one, you will have proved that there is
only one substance.

115. The secret of pantheism is the confounding of non-inherence with
absolute independence; and the means of overthrowing its arguments
is always to distinguish these two things. All that is not caused is
substance, but not all that is substance is uncaused. All that is
not caused is necessary and therefore not inherent, but not every
substance is necessary. Finite substance is not inherent in another
being, but it is caused by another being. It cannot exist without this
other being, it is true; but this dependence is not the dependence of a
modification on its substance, but that of an effect on its cause.

The cause gives being to the effect; the substance sustains the
accident: the cause is not modified by the effect; the substance is
modified by the accident. These ideas are clear and distinct; by them
pantheism is destroyed in all its transformations, and forced, as old
Proteus was by Menelaus, to resume its primitive form. Atheism is its
nature, and should be its name. Many of the erroneous systems which
disturb the ideal world are founded on an equivocation; to oppose
them with success, we must fix ourselves on the point which clears
up their equivocation, and not go out of it. The equivocation will
assume different forms, but we must not suffer ourselves to be deceived
or confounded by it; we must always return to the same distinction
and make that the battle-ground. The passage of the immortal poet
in the place just alluded to, might be taken as a fable giving an
excellent method of defeating sophisms: "Collect all your strength
and courage," says the goddess Idothea to Menelaus, "and, throwing
yourself upon him, hold him tightly despite all his efforts; for he
will metamorphose himself in a thousand ways in order to escape from
you: he will take the semblance of all the most savage animals. He
will also change himself into water; he will become fire: but let none
of these frightful forms terrify you, or force you to let him go; on
the contrary, hold him and strain him the more tightly. But as soon as
he returns to _the first form_ in which, he was, ... then use no more
violence, but let him go.[50]" So it is with pantheism, it will speak
of matter, of mind, of the reality of phenomenal, of the _me_, of the
_not-me_, of subsistence and non-subsistence, of the necessary and the
contingent; but do not allow it to go beyond the fundamental ideas,
lead it to them; it will at last return to its first form, and when it
has returned to this, then let it go, showing it to the world as it
is, saying: "See it in its horrible deformity; it has always been what
it is now; notwithstanding all its transformations, it is nothing but
atheism."

[50] Odyss., Bk. IV.




