CHAPTER XII.

DISTINCTION BETWEEN ESSENCE AND EXISTENCE.


88. It has been much disputed in the schools whether existence is
distinct from essence. At first sight, this seems an indifferent
question; but such it is not, if we attend to the consequences which,
in the opinion of respectable authors, flow from it; for they pretend
to no less than establishing upon the distinction between essence and
existence a characteristic note of the finite, attributing to infinite
being alone, the identity of its essence with its existence.

89. That we distinguish between the essence and the existence of things
is beyond all doubt; for inasmuch as we know an object realized, we
conceive its existence; and inasmuch as we know that this object exists
with this or that determination, constituting it in such or such a
species, we conceive its essence. The idea of existence represents
to us pure reality; the idea of essence offers us the determination
of this reality. The schools, however, not satisfied with this, have
endeavored to transfer to things that distinction which we discover in
our conceptions; but their opinion seems to be subtle rather than solid.

90. The essence of a thing is that which makes it what it is, and
distinguishes it from all else; and existence is the act which gives
being to essence, or that by which essence exists. It would appear,
from these definitions, that there really is no distinction between
essence and existence. To render two things distinct, it is requisite
that one be not the other; but since essence, abstracted from
existence, is nothing, we cannot say that there is a real distinction
between them. To what is the essence of a man, if we abstract his
existence, reduced? To nothing; and therefore, no relation between them
is admissible. We grant that when we abstract the existence of man, we
do yet conceive the essence of man; but the question is not whether
we distinguish between the idea of man and his existence, but whether
there is a real distinction between his own essence and existence.

91. In God are the essences of all things, and in this sense they may
be said to be distinguished from finite existence; this does not,
however, if we consider it well, at all affect the present question.
When things exist in God, they are not any thing distinct from him;
they are represented in the Infinite Intelligence, which is, with
all its representations, the infinite essence itself. To compare,
therefore, the finite existence of things with their essence, as this
is in God, is entirely to change the state of the question, and to seek
the relation of things, not with their particular essences, but with
the representations of the Divine understanding.

92. It may be objected that, if the existence of finite beings is the
same as their essence, it will follow that existence will be essential
to these beings; for, since nothing is more essential than essence
itself, finite beings would exist of necessity, as all that pertains
to essence is necessary. The radii of a circle are all equal, for
equality is contained in the essence of the circle; and in like manner,
if existence belong to the essence of things, they must exist, and
non-existence would be a veritable contradiction.

This difficulty rests upon the ambiguous meaning of the word _essence_,
and the want of exactness in joining the ideas of essential and
necessary. The relation of essential properties is necessary, for we
cannot destroy it without falling into contradiction. The radii of a
circle are equal, because equality is involved in the very idea of
the circle; consequently, if this be denied, it would be affirmed and
denied at one and the same time. There is, however, no contradiction
when some properties are not compared with others; but this comparison
is not made when there is question of essence and existence, for in
this case one thing is not compared with another, but with itself;
if the distinction be introduced, it does not refer to two things,
but to one and the same thing considered under two aspects, or in two
different states, in the ideal order and in the real.

When we consider essence abstracted from existence, the object is the
union of the properties which give to beings such or such a nature;
we abstract their existence or non-existence, and attend only to
what they would be were they to exist. The condition of existence is
either expressly or impliedly involved in all that we affirm or deny
of properties; but when we consider essence realized or existing,
we do not compare property with property but the thing with itself.
In this case, non-existence does not imply contradiction; for when
existence disappears, the essence also disappears, with all that it
included. There would be a contradiction were we to assert that essence
implies existence, and to endeavor, while the former remains, to make
the latter disappear, which is not verified in this supposition. The
equality of the radii of a circle cannot fail, so long as the circle
does not fail; and the contradiction would be to make the radii unequal
while the circle continues to be a circle; but were the circle to cease
to be a circle, there would be no reason why the radii should not be
unequal. Essence is the same as existence; so long as there is essence,
so long will there be existence; if the essence fail the existence
will likewise fail; where, then, is the contradiction? Life is of the
essence of man, and yet man dies; we may then say man is destroyed, and
therefore there is in this no contradiction. If the essence cease to
exist, it also will be destroyed, and existence, which is identified
with it, may fail without any contradiction.

93. The scholastics taught that the being whose essence was the same
as its existence would be infinite and absolutely immutable, because,
since existence is the complement in the line of being or of act, it
could receive nothing more. This difficulty also originates in the
equivocal sense of words. What is meant by _complement_ in the line
of being or act? If it mean that nothing can supervene to essence
identified with existence, here is a begging of the question, since
what was to be proved is asserted. If it mean that existence is the
complement in the line of being or act in the sense that, given it,
nothing more is wanted to make the things, whose existence it is,
really existing, an indubitable truth is advanced, but not one from
which what was to be demonstrated can be inferred.

94. It would seem, therefore, that there is no real distinction in
things corresponding to the distinction between essence and existence
in our conceptions. Essence is not distinguished from existence, but it
does not therefore cease to be finite, nor existence to be contingent.
In God existence is identified with essence; but in such a manner, that
his non-existence implies contradiction, and his essence is infinite.




