CHAPTER VIII.

WHAT IS CO-EXISTENCE?


51. If the succession of time involves exclusion, there must be
co-existence where there is no exclusion: therefore, supposing that
God has created other worlds, they must necessarily be contemporaneous
with the present; for it is evident that they would not be excluded;
and as they have not the mutual relation of cause and effect like the
phenomena of the present world, we cannot apply to them the explanation
which we gave to show that the motion of the plants of Paradise was not
contemporaneous with the motion of the plants in our gardens. We must,
therefore, hold that it would have been impossible for another world
to exist before the present world; and that though God might create as
many beings as he pleased, yet, so long as they do not exclude each
other, they must be contemporaneous.

52. This difficulty is not easy to solve, unless we have perfectly
understood the meaning of the word exclusion. By exclusion is meant,
not only the intrinsical repugnance of one being to another, but that,
for one reason or another, whether intrinsical or extrinsical, the
existence of one implies the negation of the existence of the other.
This explanation solves the difficulty.

53. Two worlds, entirely independent of one another, could have been
subjected to this exclusion by the will of God. God can create one
without creating the other; in this case, we find the existence of the
first and the negation of the existence of the other. God can cease to
preserve the first, and create the second; we then find the existence
of the second and the negation of the first. In both these cases,
there is _before_ and _after_, a succession in existence. God can
create both; we can conceive the existence of both without the negation
of the existence of either; this is co-existence.

54. We shall understand the whole question much better, if we examine
for a moment the meaning of co-existence. Two beings co-exist, or exist
at the same time, when there is no succession of one to the other, when
both exist, when there is not the existence of one and the negation of
the other. In order to conceive co-existence, we need only conceive the
existence of two beings: we form the idea of succession, by combining
with the idea of the existence of one the idea of the negation of
the other. The co-existence of two beings is their existence; their
succession is the being of one, and the not-being of the other. Being
refers only to the present; the past and the future are not being. That
only is which is, not that which was, or which will be. There is a
profound truth, a sound philosophy, and an admirable ontology in those
words of the sacred text: "I AM WHO AM. He who is, hath sent
me to you."

55. Without being and not-being, there is no succession, there is
no time, there is only the present, there is eternity. To a being
immutable in itself, and in all its acts, one in its intelligence, one
in its will, always its own object, unchangeable, in the plenitude
of its being, without any kind of negation,--to such a being there
is neither _before_ nor _after_; there is only _now_. If you give to
it the succession of instants, you apply to it, without any ground,
the work of your imagination. Reflect well on the meaning of _before_
and _after_, in that which can change in nothing, by nothing, and
for nothing, and you will see that succession is in this case a word
without any meaning. We attribute to it succession because we judge the
object by our perceptions, and our perceptions are successive; they
have an alternative of being and not-being, even when applied to an
immutable object.

56. Every one may experience this in his own mind. Conceive two beings
to exist; add to this thought nothing accessory, neither the negation
of being, nor of time, nor of any thing else,--merely conceive the
existence of two beings, and see if any thing is wanting to complete
your idea of their co-existence. If, on the contrary, you wish to
perceive succession, or difference of instants, you must perceive the
existence of one, and the negation of the existence of the other.
Therefore, the idea of co-existence is simple, and implies only the
existence of the beings, but the idea of succession is composed of the
combination of being with not-being.

57. I must here call attention to the fruitfulness of the idea of
being, which, combined with the idea of not-being, furnishes the idea
of time. We have before seen, that the ideas of unity and number
were favored in the same manner, and we shall soon have occasion to
observe, how, from the ideas of being and not-being, spring others,
which, although secondary in respect to these, are the most important
of all the ideas which the human mind possesses. I call attention to
this, from a desire that the reader may become accustomed to refer all
ideas to a few points where they are united, not by a factitious chain
imposed by arbitrary methods, but by the internal nature of things
themselves. What extension is, in relation to sensible intuitions,
the idea of being is, in relation to conceptions. The intuition of
extension, and the idea of being, are the two fundamental points in
all ideological and ontological science; they are two primitive data
possessed by the mind, by means of which it can solve all problems,
either in the sensible order, or in the purely intellectual. Regarded
from this point of view, every thing becomes clear, and is arranged in
the most logical order, because it is the order of nature.

58. I wish to make one observation on the method which I have followed
in this work. I did not think it well to explain separately my opinion
of these general connections of all ideas; for then it would have been
necessary to treat philosophy in a systematic order, placing at the
beginning what ought to be at the end, and trying to establish as a
preliminary doctrine, what ought only to be the result of a collection
of doctrines. To attain my object, it was necessary to go on analyzing
in succession facts and ideas, without reference to system, without
doing violence to them, in order to make them conform to a system,
but only examining them, in order to ascertain their result. This,
undoubtedly, is the best method. We thus obtain the knowledge of truth
as a fruit of our labors on facts, and are not obliged to alter objects
for the sake of forcing them to bend to the author's opinion. After
the application which we have been making of the ideas of being, and
not-being, to one of the most abstruse points of metaphysics, it is not
out of place to call the reader's attention to this for a moment, so
that he may be able to see the connection of doctrines.




