CHAPTER VIII.

THE DEFINITION OF INFINITY CONFIRMED BY APPLICATION TO EXTENSION.


59. We have explained the idea of infinity in general, by the
indeterminate conceptions of being and the negation of limit. In order
to assure ourselves that the explanation is well grounded, and that we
have pointed out the essential marks of the conception, let us examine
whether their application to determinate objects corresponds to what we
have established in general.

If the idea of infinity is what we have defined it to be, we may apply
it to all objects of sensible intuition or of the pure understanding,
and we shall obtain the results which we ought to obtain, including the
anomalies already referred to.[38]

[38] See Chap. V.

60. The anomalies, or, rather, the contradictions which we seem to find
in the applications of the idea of the infinite, when any thing is
presented to us as infinite which we afterwards discover not to be so,
originate in the application of this idea under different conditions.
This variety would not be possible if the idea represented any thing
determinate; but as it only contains the negation of limit in general
joined to being in general, it follows that we subject this negation to
particular conditions in each case, and therefore when we pass to other
conditions, the general idea cannot give us the same result.

61. A line drawn from the point where we are situated in the direction
of the north, and produced infinitely, gives us an infinite and a
not-infinite. This contradiction is only apparent; there is really
only the difference of result caused by the condition under which the
general idea is applied.

When we consider a line infinitely produced towards the north, we do
not apply the idea of the infinite to a lineal value in the abstract,
but to a right line starting from a point and produced only in one
direction. The result is what it should be. The negation of limit is
affirmed under a condition; the infinite which results is subject to
that condition. It may be said that there is no medium between the
infinite and the not-infinite; but it is easy to solve this difficulty,
if we observe that yes and no, to be contradictory, must be referred to
the same thing, which is not the case when the conditions of the object
are changed.

62. If instead of a line produced in one direction only, we had wished
to apply the negation of limit to a right line in general, it is
evident that we should have been obliged to produce the line in the two
opposite directions: which would have given us another infinite under a
new condition.

We have before seen that not even in this case can we have a lineal
value strictly infinite; because this right line only forms a part
of the sum of lines which we can imagine. Is it then infinite, or is
it not? It is both, if we make the proper distinction. It will be
infinite, or we shall have the idea of infinity or negation of limit,
applied to a right line _alone_; but if instead of one _right line
alone_, we take a lineal value, without any condition, the supposed
line will not be infinite; the negation of the limit is not applied
under that condition; the result must therefore be different.

63. We find the same anomaly, if we take two lines alone. Let us
suppose a right line infinitely produced in both directions, and by
its side let us describe a curve with continual undulations extending
infinitely in a direction parallel to the right line. Both lines will
be infinite if we consider only their direction, abstracting their
lineal value; but if we regard this value the curve is greater than
the straight line; for it is evident if we take a part of the curve
corresponding to a part of the straight line, and extend or straighten
this part of the curve, it will be greater than the corresponding part
of the straight line; as this may be done throughout the whole length
of the lines, the lineal value of the curve must be greater than that
of the straight line in proportion to the law of its undulations.

64. This may suffice to show how the idea of infinity may be applied
under different conditions and produce different results, without
any contradiction. What is infinite under one aspect is not so under
another aspect; hence we have the _orders of infinities_ which figure
so largely in mathematics; but I say again that these contradictions
are not susceptible of any explanation if we attribute an absolute
value to the idea of the infinite, instead of considering it as the
abstract representation of the negation of limit.

65. Is it possible to conceive in a right line or curve an absolutely
infinite length or lineal value, to which we may apply the negation
of limit absolutely? I think not: for whatever be the line under
consideration we can always draw others, which, added to the first,
will give a value greater than that of the first above. This is a
case in which there is a contradiction between the negation of limit
and the condition to which it is subjected. You demand a lineal value
to which the negation of limit may be applied absolutely; and on the
other hand you require that this lineal value should be found in a
determinate line, which by the fact of its being determinate, excludes
the absolute negation of limit. The problem supposes contradictory
_data_; therefore the result must be a contradiction.

66. What must we suppose in order to conceive an absolutely infinite
lineal value? We need only suppose no condition which excludes the
absolute negation of limit. We must here distinguish between the pure
conception and the sensible intuition in which it is expressed. The
conception of infinite lineal value exists from the moment that we
unite the two general conceptions of lineal value and negation of
limit. But the sensible intuition, which may represent this conception,
is not so easy to imagine, even in general. To arrive at it we must
imagine a space without any limit; and then considering in general all
the lines whether right lines or curves, which may be drawn in it, in
all directions, and under all possible conditions, we must take the
sum of all these lineal values; and the result will be an absolutely
infinite lineal value; for we shall have applied the negation of limit
without any restriction.

67. We may obtain in the same way an infinite superficial value; for
it is evident that we may apply to it all that we have said of lineal
values.

68. In all these cases we apply the negation of limit to extension
considered only in some of its dimensions. If we wish to obtain
an absolutely infinite extension, we must abstract no dimension;
consequently the absolutely infinite of this order, is extension in
all its dimensions with the absolute negation of limit. But it is also
to be observed that we must presuppose an absolutely infinite value of
extension in order to obtain an absolutely infinite value of lines or
surfaces; because it is equivalent to presupposing an infinite space in
which the lines and surfaces may be drawn in all directions and under
all possible conditions.




