CHAPTER X.

CONCEPTION OF INFINITE EXTENSION.


76. Is infinite extension conceivable? This conception includes
two ideas: the idea of extension, and the idea of the negation of
limit. The idea of extension is a general conception, referring to
the intuition which, whatever may be in itself and in its object,
represents extension and the union of the three dimensions, the pure
form of which is space. It is evident that we can unite, in one
conception, the two ideas of extension in general and the negation of
limit; and if this is what is called the idea of infinite extension, it
is clear that we have this idea. This conception of infinite extension,
abstracts all conditions of the reality; we do not know whether there
be, in the nature of extended things, any thing which prevents the
absolute infinity of their extension; consequently, we are ignorant
whether there is or is not any latent contradiction, which the general
conception does not reveal to us.

77. It must be remembered that I am speaking of the idea and not of
the sensible representation of extension; for although I hold that it
is possible for us to have the conception of an infinite extension, I
do not think the same with respect to its sensible representation. The
latter may be indefinitely expanded, but it cannot become infinite.

Reason demonstrates this impossibility which consciousness makes known
to us. Internal sensible representations are only the repetition of
the external, or at least are formed from the elements which these
latter furnish. Sight and touch are the two senses which produced
the representation of extension, and they both imply a limit. Touch
only reaches that which is immediate to it, and sight cannot see
with a limit which sends the rays of light to it. Internal sensible
representations must always retain this limitation; their object may be
expanded, or the limit removed to a greater distance, but to destroy
this limit would be to destroy themselves. Therefore, the imagination
of an infinite extension is impossible to every sensitive being.

78. I have proposed above (§ 40) an objection against the infinity of
extension, in so far as we may represent it as a size without limits.

The objection was, that as the idea of impenetrability is not
contained in the conception of a solid, we may imagine an infinite
series of infinites placed one inside of another. This difficulty
is only conclusive when speaking of the conception of a solid which
contains something more than the pure idea of extension. The idea of
extension necessarily implies that some parts are _outside_ of others,
and it is not possible to conceive extension otherwise. It is certain
that a body may be situated in a part of space; taking from this body
its impenetrability, we may put another body in the same place, and so
on to infinity; but in that case we conceive something besides pure
extension, we unite something, although in a general and indeterminate
manner, to the idea of things situated in space; otherwise we should
not distinguish the space, representing pure extension, from the solids
placed in it, nor should we distinguish these solids from one another,
if we did not recognize in them some difference, although general and
undetermined.

79. It seems most probable that the pure idea of an infinite extension
is contained in the idea of an infinite size, which is nothing more
than the idea of space. Whatever else is introduced into the idea is
a foreign element, adding to pure extension something which does not
belong to it, such is the difference between extended beings, although
conceived in an indeterminate manner.




CHAPTER XI.

POSSIBILITY OF INFINITE EXTENSION.


80. What are we to think as to the possibility of the infinities which
we conceive? Let us examine the question.

Is an infinite extension possible? There is no incompatibility between
the idea of extension and the negation of limit, at least, according
to our way of conceiving them. It is more difficult for us to conceive
extension absolutely limited, than to conceive it unlimited: beyond all
limit, we imagine space without end.

81. Neither do we discover any impossibility in the existence of
an unlimited extension, if we consider the question in relation to
the divine omnipotence. Beyond all extension God can create another
extension; if we suppose that he has applied his creative power to all
the extension possible, he must have created an infinite extension.

82. Here a difficulty arises. If God had created an infinite extension
he could not create another extension; his power would be exhausted,
and consequently it would not be infinite.

This difficulty proceeds from understanding infinite power in a false
sense. When we say that God can do all things, we do not mean that he
can do things that are contradictory: omnipotence is not an absurd
attribute, as it would be if applied to things that are absurd. An
absolutely infinite extension is contradictory in relation to another
distinct extension; for, being absolutely infinite, it contains all
possible extensions. If we suppose it to exist, no other is possible:
to affirm that God could not produce another, is not to limit his
omnipotence, but only to say that he cannot do a thing which is absurd.

83. We will make this solution clearer. The intelligence of God is
infinite; and he cannot understand more than he now understands; all
progress would suppose imperfection, because it would involve a change
from a less to a greater intelligence. If, then, we say that God will
never understand more than he does now, do we limit his intelligence?
Certainly not. He cannot understand more, because he understands
all that is real and all that is possible, and we cannot, without
contradiction, conceive that he can understand more than he now does:
this is not to limit his intelligence, but to affirm its infinity: it
is not susceptible of perfection, because it is infinite. This will
enable us to understand the expression _cannot_, as applied to God.
What is denied is not a perfection, but an absurdity: wherefore St.
Thomas very opportunely observes, that we should much better say that
the thing cannot be done, than that God cannot do it.




