CHAPTER IX.

PRESENT, PAST, AND FUTURE.


59. After explaining the idea of co-existence, we came to the
definition of the various relations which time presents. They
are principally three: present, past, and future. All others are
combinations of these.

60. The present is the only absolute time: by this I mean, that it
needs no relation, in order to be conceived. The present is conceived
without relation to the past or to the future. Neither the past nor the
future can be conceived without relation to the present.

61. The _past_ is an essentially relative idea. When we speak of
the _past_, we have to take some point to which it refers, and in
respect to which we say it is past. This point is the present, either
in reality, or in the ideal order; that is to say, that by the
understanding, we place ourselves in that point, and make it present to
us, and in reference to it, we speak of the past.

To prove that the idea of past is essentially relative, we may observe,
that by varying the points of reference, the past may cease to be
considered as such, and may be presented as present or future. Speaking
of the events of the time of Alexander, they are presented to us as
past, because we consider them in relation to the present moment; but
if we are speaking of the empire of Sesostris, the epoch of Alexander
ceases to be past, and is converted into future. If we were relating
events contemporary with the deeds of Alexander, this epoch would cease
to be past or future, and would become present.

The past, therefore, is always in reference to a present point, taken
in the course of time, and it is only in respect to this, that any
thing is said to have been, to be past; without this relation, the idea
of past is absurd, and it is impossible to conceive it.

62. What is the relation of past? According to the definition which we
have given of time, when we perceive the being of any thing, and then
its not-being, and the being of something else, we say the first is
past in relation to the second.

63. What would take place, then, if we should perceive the being of
something, and then its not-being, without relation to any other being?
This hypothesis is absurd; for we must always have this other being, if
we perceive being and not-being.

But it may be replied that we may suppose the disappearance of
ourselves, and then the objection would be good. Even though we should
disappear, there would still remain intelligences capable of perceiving
being and not-being. If there were no finite intelligence, there would
still be the infinite intelligence.

64. Here arises a new difficulty; for it may be asked whether the thing
would be passed with relation to the infinite intelligence. If we admit
that it would be, we seem to introduce time with the duration of God,
by which we destroy his eternity, which excludes all succession. If we
say that to the eyes of the infinite intelligence the thing would not
be past, then it would not be past in reality; for things are as God
knows them. Then there would be the idea of being and of not-being, and
still there would not be the idea of past. This difficulty arises from
a confusion of terms.

Let us suppose that God had created only one being, and this being
had ceased to exist; and let us see what would be the result of
this hypothesis. God knows the existence and the non-existence of
the object. This intellectual act is most simple; there can be no
succession in it. There is properly no past with respect to God,
and applied to the object this idea can only mean its non-existence
in relation to its existence which is destroyed. When the ideas are
presented in this light it is easy to understand that there is no past
in God, but that there is the knowledge of past things.

65. On this hypothesis, how can the time of only one creature be
measured? By its changes. But if it has none? On this imaginary
supposition there would be no time.

This conclusion is absolutely necessary, although it may at first sight
seem strange. We must either abandon our definition of time, or else
admit that there is no time where there is no change.

66. Whatever conclusions we form on questions founded on imaginary
suppositions, this, at least, is certain--that the idea of past is
essentially relative, and that on no supposition can we conceive the
past, if we take from it all relation. The expression _has been_
implies both being and not-being,--the succession which constitutes
time. In this relation the order is such that not-being is perceived
after being, and this is why it is called past.

67. The idea of the future is also relative to the present. The future
is inconceivable without this relation. The future is that which is
to come,--that which is to be with respect to a real or hypothetical
_now_; for we may apply to the future what we said of the past, that it
is changed by changing the point of its reference. The future for us
will be past to those who come after us; that which was future to those
past, is present or past to us.

The point of reference of the future is always a present moment; it
cannot be referred to the past as its ultimate term; for it is in
itself referred equally to the present.

68. Therefore all that we find in the idea of time that is absolute is
the present. The present needs no relation. It not only needs none, but
it admits none. We can neither refer it to the past nor to the future,
because these two times both presuppose the idea of the present,
without which they cannot even be conceived.

69. Time is a chain whose links are infinitely divisible. There is no
time which we cannot divide into other times. The indivisible instant
represents something analogous to the indivisible point; a limit which
we approach without ever reaching, an unextended element producing
extension. A geometrical point must be moved in order to generate a
line; but no motion is conceived as possible unless we presuppose
space in which the point moves; or in other words, when we treat of
the generation of extension, we commence by presupposing it. A similar
thing happens in relation to time. We imagine an indivisible instant,
from the fluxion of which results the continuity of duration which we
call time. But this fluxion is impossible, unless we suppose a time
in which it flows. We wish to examine the generation of time, and we
suppose it already existing, prolonged infinitely, as an immense line
on which the fluxion of the instant takes place. What are we to infer
from these apparent contradictions? Nothing but a strong confirmation
of the doctrine which we have established.

Time distinguished from things is nothing. Duration in the abstract,
distinguished from that which endures, is a being of reason,--a work
which our understanding produces from the materials furnished by
reality. All being is present. That which is not present is not-being.
The present instant, the _now_, is the reality of the thing; it is not
sufficient to constitute time, but it is necessary to time. There can
be present without either past or future; but there can be neither past
nor future without the present. When besides being there is not-being,
and this relation is perceived, time begins. To conceive past and
future without the alternation of being and not-being, as a sort of
line infinitely produced in two opposite directions, is to take an
empty play of the phantasy for a philosophical idea, and to apply to
time the illusion of imaginary space.

70. Therefore, if there is only being, there is only absolute, present
duration; therefore no past nor future, and, consequently, no time.
Time is in its essence a successive, _flowing_ quantity; it cannot be
seized in its actuality; for it is always divisible, and every division
in time constitutes past and future. This is a demonstration that time
is a mere relation, and in so far as it is in things, it only expresses
being and not-being.




