CHAPTER X.

KANT'S OPINION OF THE ARGUMENT WHICH HE CALLS PARALOGISM OF PERSONALITY.


62. Kant attacks the argument founded on the testimony of consciousness
in a particular manner in the examination of what he calls _the
Paralogism of Personality_. He gives the argument in this form;
"Whatever has the consciousness of its numerical identity at different
times is, by this fact alone, a person; this is verified of the soul;
therefore soul is a person." Kant uses the word _person_ in a very
incorrect sense: it not only means an intelligent substance, but one
that is the complete principle of its actions, independently of all
connection with any other substance, or a union with a _supposition_.
At any rate, the German philosopher understands here by person an
intelligent substance; and in this sense he proposes to combat the
argument proving the personality of the soul.

63. "If I wish," he says, "to know by experience the numerical
identity of any external object, I apply my attention to that which
is constant in the phenomenon, to which all the rest is referred, as
a determination to its subject; and I observe the identity of the
subject at the time in which the determination changes. I am an object
of the internal sense, and time is only the form of this sense; I
therefore refer all my successive determinations, and each one of
them in particular, to that which is numerically identical, in all
time, that is, in the form of the internal intuition of myself. Hence
the personality of the soul ought only to be deduced or concluded
as a proposition perfectly identical with consciousness in time;
consequently, this proposition is valid _a priori_, because it does not
really announce any thing else than that in all the time in which I am
conscious of myself, I am conscious of this time as a thing, which is
a part of my unity. This is the same as to say: All this time is in me
as individual unity, or rather, I am in all this time with numerical
identity."

It would have been desirable if Kant had shown why the internal sense
of the numerical identity may be expressed by the proposition; all this
time is in me as an individual unity, or in this other; in all the
time in which I am conscious of myself, I am conscious of this time as
a thing, which is a part of my unity. It is true that the numerical
unity is perceived in the diversity of time; but it is not true that we
are conscious of time as a thing which is a part of us. He is treating
of the consciousness of self, as it is found in the greatest part of
mankind, who, far from considering time as a thing which is a part of
themselves, regard it as a sort of vague extension or succession in
which they and all that is variable exist.

It is well known that philosophers themselves dispute on the true
nature of time; and that it is the form of the internal sense is an
opinion of Kant's, which is not accepted by many others, and which, as
I have shown,[47] he explains badly and proves still worse, although he
pretends to have raised his theory to the height of an incontestible
doctrine. Whether time is an internal or an external form, whether,
even, it is an illusion or a reality, we perceive our numerical
identity in its succession; therefore when the German philosopher bases
himself on his theory of time, in order to attack the solidity of the
argument of consciousness, he rests on a supposition which we are not
required to admit, and what is more, he explains this sentiment of
identity in terms which no one ever used before him. If he wishes to
make time enter into the sentiment of numerical identity, he might say:
I find myself in all this time in a numerical identity, or: all this
time has passed over me as over an individual unit; but not that we are
conscious of time as a thing which is a part of ourselves. If we look
to consciousness, we should rather be inclined to believe that time
is a sort of successive extension, in which we live, and by which our
existence is measured.

[47] See Book VIII., Chapters XII. and XIV.

64. "The identity of the person," continues Kant, "must inevitably be
found in my consciousness; but if I regard myself from the point of
view of another (as the object of his external intuition) this other
observer conceives me only in time; for, in the apperception, time
is not strictly represented except within me; therefore he will not
conclude my objective permanence from the _me_, which he admits, and
which accompanies all representations in all time in my consciousness,
and in a perfect identity. The time in which the observer places me
not being the same which is found in my own sensibility, but that
which accompanies his intuition, it follows that the identity which is
necessarily joined to my consciousness, is not joined to his, that is,
to the external intuition of my subject." It is difficult to understand
precisely what Kant means in this passage, and it seems very doubtful
whether he understood it himself; however, let us see what can be
deduced from it against the permanence of the soul.

The German philosopher admits that the identity of the person is
inevitably found in our consciousness; that is, the _me_ finds itself
numerically identical in the diversity of time. It is also true that a
strange observer conceives the _me_ only in time, that is, if one man
reflects on the soul of another man, he conceives it only in time. But
this does not show why Kant says that the observer would not infer from
this the objective permanence of the soul observed. What would happen
would be this. If the man who reflects on the soul of another man
believes that same passes in the soul of this man which he perceives
within himself, he will infer that the other soul is permanent, for the
same reason that he affirms the permanence of his own soul. It is true
that as he cannot enter into the consciousness of the other, he can
only know it by external marks; but if he is convinced that these marks
are sufficient to denote a series of phenomena of consciousness similar
to those which he experiences in himself, he will infer that the soul
which he observes is as permanent as his own. What does Kant mean then,
when he says that the identity which is necessarily connected with
_my_ consciousness, is not connected with that of the observer? Who
ever doubted this truth? Who ever supposed that the perception of the
identity in relation to one's own consciousness is not very different
from that which relates to another's? Our own identity is revealed to
us by immediate consciousness; the identity of another is shown to
us by a series of external phenomena which lead us by reasoning and
analogy to the conviction that outside of us there are beings similar
to ourselves.

65. "The identity of the consciousness of myself at different times,"
Kant goes on to say, "is only a formal condition of my thoughts and
their connection; but it does not prove the numerical identity of
my subject, in which, notwithstanding the logical identity of the
_me_, such a change may take place, as to render it impossible to
preserve the identity of this _me_, which does not prevent our always
attributing to it the identical _me_, which _me_ may still preserve
in another state, and even in the metamorphosis of the subject, the
thought of the previous subject, and transmit to it all that comes
afterwards." This is precisely what Kant ought to have explained;
because the phenomenon of the sentiment of identity in the midst of
continual variety, is what irresistibly inclines us to believe that
the _me_ is something permanent. It is not true that we have only the
topical identity of the _me_, for we are not speaking of the subject
of a proposition, but of a real subject, experienced, perceived in the
depth of our consciousness.

Kant imagines that he can explain this sentiment of identity with
great simplicity. I will try to express his strange opinion in an
intelligible manner. Let A, B, C, D, E, ... be instants of time, and
let _a_, _b_, _c_, _d_, _e_, ... be thoughts or any other internal
phenomena, corresponding to them. At the instant A, the thought _a_
exists. At the instant B, the thought _b_ succeeds. At the instant B,
the soul which existed at the instant A, no longer exists. The soul at
the instant B, is something entirely new; it is not _a_ but _b_. The
same is true of all the rest. But how, you will say, is it possible for
the soul at all these instants to believe itself the same? It is very
simple: the subject _a_ transmits the thought to the subject _b_; _b_
transmits its own and _a_'s to _c_. Nothing remains identical; but the
consciousness of the identity always lasts. Does not such an hypothesis
seem truly wonderful and philosophical? What could be imagined clearer
and more satisfactory?

The reader may perhaps think that I am jesting, and that I present
Kant's opinion under a ridiculous aspect for the sake of combating it
more easily; but it is just the reverse; the exposition which I have
just made of Kant's philosophy is more serious than his own. These
are his words: "One elastic ball striking another in a right line,
communicates to the latter its whole motion, and consequently its
whole state (considering only their positions in space). Admit now, by
analogy with these bodies, certain substances, of which one transmits
representations to another, with the consciousness which accompanies
them; we may then conceive a whole series of such representations,
in which the first communicates its state, and the consciousness of
its state to the second; the second communicates its state, together
with that of the preceding substance, to the third; the third, in like
manner, communicates the states of both of the preceding substances
together with its own, and the consciousness which accompanies them to
the fourth. The last of the series will then have the consciousness
of all the states of the substances which preceded it, as of its own;
because these states, and the consciousness of these states have been
transmitted to it. Still it will not have been the same person in all
these states."

Kant, in trying to refute the psychological argument founded on
consciousness, overthrows and destroys the character of consciousness:
a transmitted consciousness is not a true consciousness; it is only the
cognition of a previous thought.

These substances, existing successively and transmitting their
consciousness from one to another, would be something distinct from the
act of consciousness, or they would not. If distinct, we must admit a
subject of the consciousness, which in itself, and as subject, does
not come under the sensible intuition; and consequently we may argue
_ad hominem_, and retort Kant's objection against himself. If these
transitory substances are only the act of the consciousness, when the
act ceases, nothing remains of the substances, and therefore, there is
nothing transmissible.

Transmission supposes something which may be transmitted; if, then, the
act of consciousness is transmitted, it must be something permanent in
itself, in the midst of the succession of the substances; and this is
a very strange conclusion to which the German philosopher is brought
by his theory of transmission. All psychologists had said that the
substance of the soul is permanent, and its phenomena transitory; now,
on the contrary, we find that the transitory is the substance, and that
which is permanent is the phenomenon, or the act of consciousness which
is transmitted.

66. Perhaps it may be answered that by transmission is not meant the
communication of any thing constant, but merely the succession of
phenomena united by any tie among themselves. Thus, supposing the
instants A, B, C, D, the acts of consciousness, _a_, _b_, _c_, _d_,
corresponding to them, will not be strictly identical in number,
but successive, and connected. But this reply, which avoids the
necessity of admitting the permanence of the act of consciousness,
explains nothing, and makes it incomprehensible, how, at the instant
D, for example, there can be consciousness of the acts _c_, _b_, _a_,
which there is an irresistible inclination to believe have at bottom
something numerically identical. When _d_ exists there is no longer
any thing of _c_ left; there is no substance remaining, because, by
the supposition there either is no such substance, or it is something
transitory; there is no act of consciousness remaining, because _a_
is numerically distinct from _c_, and besides, we have seen that
the permanence of the phenomena cannot be admitted. Therefore it is
absolutely impossible to explain or to comprehend how there can be in
the act _a_ the representation of _c_.

67. To say that the phenomena are united by any tie whatever is to
elude the difficulty by a foolish play upon words. What is the meaning,
in this case, of uniting, of a tie? They are metaphors which if they
mean any thing must express the permanence of some _thing_ amid the
variety of the phenomena; the tie, the bond, must extend to the various
things which it connects and unites: therefore it must be _common_ to
them all; and this something, whatever it be, which remains constant in
variety, we call substance.

68. The mere succession of the phenomena or acts of consciousness is
not sufficient to transmit the belief of the numerical identity; if it
were, all men would be conscious of the previous acts of others. Let
_a_, _b_, be two successive acts of consciousness: if, in order that
the act _b_, which is numerically distinct from _a_, may represent
the numerical identity of consciousness, it is sufficient that _b_
should succeed _a_; since this succession is met with in the acts
of consciousness of different men, it must follow that all men have
consciousness of all the acts of the others. _Risum tematis?_ And yet
this conclusion is absolutely necessary: it cannot be avoided by saying
that there is a form of the internal sense, and that the succession
takes place in each man in his respective internal sense, and that
therefore the succession of the internal phenomena of one is in a
different time, in a different form from what it is in another. The
words, _respective_ internal sense, internal form of _each_ man, have a
meaning, if we admit something permanent in our interior; but if there
is nothing but successive phenomena, the word _respective_ is absurd,
because there can be no respective internal sense if there is nothing
to which it can refer. Suppose the man M, and the man N be merely
a succession of phenomena, and in _each_ one there is only a mere
succession: there is the same reason why the phenomena of N should be
connected with each other as with those of M. Therefore, if there is
a community of consciousness in the phenomena of M, without any other
sufficient reason than the mere succession, this community should be
found in all the phenomena, because they all have the same sufficient
reason.

69. It must be observed that in all this argument, I abstract the
nature of the substance of the soul, and only purpose to demonstrate
that we must admit something constant in the midst of the variety of
the phenomena, and common to them all. Call it a tie, a form, an act
of consciousness, or what you will, it is either something real or it
is not. If it is not something real, whoever expresses it, employs a
word without any meaning: if it is something real, the substantiality
of the soul is acknowledged, because a permanent reality is admitted
in the midst of the variety of the phenomena. We, who admit this
substantiality, do not pretend that the soul can be given in sensible
intuition, nor that we can express in an exact definition its internal
properties abstracted from the phenomena which we experience in it.
What we say is, that we know its real existence, its permanence, and
its numerical identity in the midst of the succession and diversity
of the phenomena. Therefore from the moment that it is admitted
that there is within us something real, permanent, and numerically
identical in the midst of diversity, the substantiality of the soul,
which we defend, is admitted. Disputes may arise on the distinctive
character of its nature; whether it is or is not a force, as Leibnitz
maintained, whether its essence consists in thought, as was the
opinion of Descartes: but these questions are foreign to the matter
now in hand. Is there something real and permanent amid the variety of
internal phenomena? If there is not, the consciousness of numerical
identity is absurd; if there is, then the substantiality of the soul is
demonstrated.

70. "The opinion of some ancient philosophers," says Kant, "that all
is transitory and nothing constant in the world, although it cannot be
maintained if we admit substances, still it cannot be refuted by the
unity of consciousness; because we cannot even judge by consciousness,
whether, as something, we are or are not permanent; for we attribute
to our identical _me_ only that of which we have consciousness, and
thus we must necessarily judge that we are precisely the same in all
the durations of which we are conscious." Kant expressly acknowledges
that the judgment that we are the same is necessary, that is, that
the identity of the _me_ is for us a necessary fact of consciousness.
It would be difficult to imagine a confession more injurious and more
conclusive against the arguments of the German philosopher. If we are
forced to judge ourselves identical, if consciousness tell us so, can
we deny or doubt this identity without destroying the fundamental
fact of all psychological investigations, and consequently falling
into the most complete skepticism? If the testimony of consciousness
is not valid, if the judgment to which it _necessarily_ forces us is
not certain, what shall we catch hold of in order that we may not be
precipitated into the most absolute skepticism? where shall we look for
a solid foundation for the edifice of our knowledge?

71. "But," Kant continues, "from the point of view of another, we
cannot hold this judgment valid, because, finding in the soul no
other constant phenomenon than the representation of the _me_ which
accompanies and unites all the other phenomena, we can never decide
that this _me_ (a simple thought) is not as fleeting as the other
thoughts, which are respectively connected by it." Do not, then, admit
that the representation of the _me_, although essentially representing
an identity, is valid; say that, although transitory it _necessarily_
brings us to the illusion of permanence; but draw also all the
consequences of this doctrine, and maintain that human reason avails
nothing, absolutely nothing; say that recollection is a pure illusion,
that although we are necessarily induced to believe that the thought
which we now have is the recollection of another previous thought,
that all this is pure illusion; that we are not sure that there is
the relation of recollection, and that we only know that at present
we have the consciousness of a thought which _seems_ to us connected
with another previous thought; say too that reasoning has no validity,
for all conviction of ideas is impossible without memory; and that,
although an internal representation necessarily produces an assent,
we must distrust the judgment which necessity demands: say too that
all that we think, all that we perceive, all that we will, all that
we experience within us, cannot enable us to know any thing, that we
are condemned to a complete impotence of acquiring any certainty of
any thing; and that the language of every philosopher should be the
following: "This now seems so; I am conscious of it; I know nothing
further; I experience a necessity of believing it, but perhaps this
belief is a pure illusion; I know nothing of the external world; I know
nothing either of the internal world; all knowledge is denied me; I
myself am only a succession of phenomena which pass away and disappear;
an irresistible necessity impels me to believe that these phenomena
have a common tie, but this tie is nothing; because when a phenomenon
disappears nothing is before it; if I acknowledge any reality, no
matter what, I fall into the substantiality of the soul, which I have
resolved not to admit; all is illusion, all is nothing, because, as I
am not even certain of the facts of consciousness, I am not certain
even of the illusion." Who can encounter such consequences?




