XI

PARLIAMENT AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS


In considering the relation of legislative bodies, and of the public
opinion therein represented, to the conduct of foreign affairs, it will
be useful to glance briefly at the relevant historical facts. When the
United Colonies of America formed a separate political organization
from the mother country, the conduct of foreign affairs was entrusted
to a committee of Congress, a successor to the Committee of Secret
Correspondence. In 1781 a Secretaryship for Foreign Affairs, with a
permanent department, was created and in 1782 the conduct of foreign
affairs was regulated in the following terms:

  “All letters to sovereign powers, letters of credence, plans of
  treaties, conventions, manifestoes, instructions, passports, safe
  conducts, and other acts of Congress relative to the department
  of foreign affairs, when the substance thereof shall have been
  previously agreed to in Congress, shall be reduced to form in
  the office of foreign affairs, and submitted to the opinion of
  Congress, and when passed, signed and attested, sent to the
  office of foreign affairs to be countersigned and forwarded.”

Congress therefore retained a very close control over this matter; a
control which under the Constitution passed to the Senate, though in
a restricted form. In no other country did a legislative committee
participate in the conduct of foreign affairs with similar power and
influence. The policy of the arrangements under the Constitution is
explained by John Jay in the _Federalist_ as follows:

  “It seldom happens in the negotiation of treaties, of whatever
  nature, but that perfect secrecy and immediate despatch are
  sometime requisite. There are cases where the most useful
  intelligency may be obtained, if the persons possessing it can
  be relieved from apprehensions of discovery. Those apprehensions
  will operate on those persons whether they are actuated by
  mercenary or friendly motives; and there doubtless are many
  of both descriptions, who would rely on the secrecy of the
  President, but who would not confide in that of the Senate, and
  still less in that of a large popular assembly.”

Jay’s explanation is dominated by the conception which the eighteenth
century had of the functions of diplomacy and the conditions of its
work. The constitutional system as conceived at that time implied
(1) Full power of negotiation in the President, (2) Taking counsel
with the Senate, (3) Formal ratification of treaties by the Senate,
and publication thereof as parts of the law of the land. The system
has been highly praised by European publicists as reconciling the
maintenance of confidential relations with publicity of the results, in
that treaties are given the character of laws.

In the course of the nineteenth century there occurred many instances
resulting in a growing practice of making special agreements by the
Secretary of State alone, without the advice and consent of the Senate.
When President Roosevelt in 1905 attempted to deal with the Dominican
situation in this manner, the Senate objected and insisted that all
international agreements of any kind must be submitted to its action.
The system of the United States, however, actually permits of the
current conduct of foreign affairs without information to the people or
even without constant and complete information to the Senate which is,
moreover, usually preoccupied with matters of internal legislation.

In England, the mother of Parliaments, we might expect that there
should have been a constant effort at parliamentary control of
foreign affairs, with strong remonstrance when effective control was
denied; yet on account of the specific nature of the system of Cabinet
government, such has not been the case. Under the two-party system as
it exists in England the conduct of foreign affairs is always in the
hands of a minister trusted and supported by the majority in the Lower
House. Even if the minority should attempt to censor the conduct of
foreign affairs as being carried on apart from the knowledge and active
consent of the House, the majority whose leaders form the Cabinet which
is managing things, will always prevent such a vote from succeeding.
Only in case of a cabinet going absolutely and openly counter to the
policy of its own party in Parliament could a real conflict of this
nature arise; and such a contingency is itself impossible, because of
the party control exercised by the cabinet.

According to the theory of the Stuarts, the management of foreign
affairs belonged entirely to the Crown which had not at that time been
put in commission. In 1677 the House of Commons objected to granting
money for alliances and for wars, unless the matter in question had
been previously communicated to it. Charles II, however, declared the
conduct of foreign affairs to be the Crown’s fundamental prerogative
in which it must remain free from direct control of Parliament.
William III was in fact to a very large extent his own Minister for
Foreign Affairs. With the introduction of responsible Government
under the Hanoverians, however, the situation changed. The dominant
party being represented by the ministers was quite ready to submit to
their guidance in matters of foreign affairs. It was the opposition
who occasionally attacked the government on its foreign policy, and
particularly the opposition in the House of Lords. In a Lords’ protest
of March 26, 1734, it was urged that “the interposition of the British
Parliament would be more effectual than the occasional expedients of
fluctuating and variable negotiations.” In 1740 it was moved that a
select committee consisting of peers should be appointed to inquire
into the conduct of the Spanish War. The motion was rejected. Another
Lords’ protest in the same year opposes the argument that absolute
secrecy is essential because this claim is often used in bar of all
inquiries. Such secrecy is “much oftener the refuge of guilt than the
resort of innocence.”

Wyndham, in 1733, on a motion calling for certain letters of
instructions, argued for the necessity of giving such information to
Parliament. He asked how could members of the House of Commons judge
of the estimates to be laid before them as a provision for national
safety if they did not know by what danger the nation was confronted.
The motion, however, was rejected.

When Pelham was criticized in the House for not having informed
Parliament of the preliminaries of the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle he
argued: “If Parliament should encroach upon the prerogative of the
Crown, by assuming a right to make peace or war, and to inquire into
foreign transactions under negotiation, our affairs will be reduced
to a dangerous predicament; for no foreign State will negotiate with
our ministers, or conclude any treaty with them, either political or
commercial.” This is an argument often made in the eighteenth century
to show the unwisdom of Parliamentary control. The change of ministers
following party changes in the House, and the fact that the Foreign
Minister would not by his own word be able to give complete assurances
to foreign governments, were considered to put the British Government
under a disadvantage in negotiations. It was therefore considered
undesirable that negotiations should be submitted to the control and
sanction of Parliament. Walpole had stated the matter in the following
words:

  “Therefore while our happy constitution remains entire, while the
  Parliament meets but once a year, and does not continue assembled
  above three or four months in the twelve, it is impossible for
  either House of Parliament to intermeddle, much less to prescribe
  to the Crown, in any affairs relating to peace or war, without
  exposing the nation to imminent danger.”

Throughout the nineteenth century Parliament interfered very little
with the conduct of foreign affairs. The minister for foreign affairs
or the premier would from time to time give information or make a
systematic discourse on foreign affairs and it was understood that
the House would be kept informed concerning the aims and tendencies
of the Government’s foreign policy. Specific questions were asked by
members but not frequently. The nature of the British system would have
rendered unmeaning any struggle for control between the House and the
Cabinet.

The manner of keeping Parliament and the public informed on foreign
affairs was discussed. The Earl of Clarendon spoke of the practice of
laying before Parliament official information in the _Blue Books_. He
stated:

  “I am perfectly certain there is always laid before Parliament
  a very fair and complete view of the transactions between this
  country and any other to which those papers may relate. I know
  that foreign Governments rather complain of our Blue Books, and
  to a certain extent they may curtail some of the communications
  that are made to our foreign Ministers, but I should be extremely
  sorry to see our system of publication of diplomatic papers in
  any way curtailed, or different from what it is; of course,
  there must always be care taken not to compromise individuals
  for the information they have given, but I believe it is an
  immense advantage to this country that our despatches and
  diplomatic transactions should be known, because if they have the
  approbation of Parliament and of the country, the Government then
  has the whole weight of public opinion in its favor, and it is
  that which gives such strength to our policy and to our opinions
  in foreign countries.”

That is a very statesmanlike presentation of the advantages of constant
public knowledge of foreign policy in giving the government a secure
base of intelligent support.

When dissatisfaction or doubt was felt by large numbers concerning the
foreign policy of the government, as in 1857 and again in 1878 after
the concealment of the Schuvalof agreement, complaint was frequently
made in Parliament and in the press to the effect that Parliament on
the one hand was not given a chance to acquire a complete knowledge
of foreign policy, and on the other it was not sufficiently alert and
active in using its opportunities for control. In 1886 the following
resolution was moved:

  “That in the opinion of this House it is not just or expedient
  to embark in war, contract engagements involving grave
  responsibilities for the nation, and add territories to the
  Empire, without the knowledge and consent of Parliament.”

Like other similar resolutions, it did not pass. Mr. Gladstone opposed
it on the ground that the House of Commons under existing arrangements
actually possessed all necessary power of control and that the passage
of this resolution would mean simply that the House of Lords would
share this power with it.

In 1885 when Earl Granville had objected to public criticism of
negotiations which were still in progress between Russia and Great
Britain regarding Afghanistan, Lord Salisbury made the following
interesting and important statement with respect to the relations of
foreign policies to public opinion, which in temper resembles that of
Lord Clarendon cited above:

  “The noble Earl seemed to me to lay down a doctrine which
  we cannot pass unnoticed, when he says it is the duty of
  an Opposition not to canvas or condemn the conduct of the
  Government, if by so doing it should have the effect of
  discouraging friends and allies in other parts of the world.
  That seems to be a very far-reaching doctrine, and one which it
  is impossible to assent to.... If we are of opinion that the
  course of public affairs is going ill, and that our Government
  has mismanaged, that faults are being committed and dangers are
  being incurred, we have no absolute Sovereign to whom we can
  appeal in order to correct the evil; our absolute Sovereign is
  the people of this country, and it is they, and they alone, who
  can bring a remedy to the mischief which is going on. You have
  a form of Government which in many points is purely democratic,
  and you must take it with the incidents which naturally adhere to
  it, and one of these incidents is publicity of deliberation. The
  Cabinet is the people, and their deliberations are conducted in
  the open field. If they are to be rightly informed, you must deal
  fully and frankly with the subjects which form the basis of their
  determination. It is, no doubt, a drawback so far as it goes, but
  it is a drawback you must face, and you cannot help it if Foreign
  Powers overhear, so to speak, the privileged communications
  between you and those by whose verdict you must stand. You cannot
  suppress the argument because somebody else outside hears it and
  you may be adversely affected by it....”

The concealment of important obligations and the growing secrecy of
diplomatic affairs during the first decade of the Twentieth Century
brought on many expressions of dissatisfaction in the House of Commons.
After the secret agreement concerning Morocco became known, Mr. John
Dillon expressed himself as follows, in a speech in the House of
Commons in September, 1911:

  “I do not believe any representative assembly in the history
  of the world has ever been called upon to discuss a matter so
  vital and so far-reaching as that which the House of Commons has
  before it to-day to consider, and with so absolute a lack of
  information.... The House was summoned for this discussion to-day
  without any papers whatsoever.... We ought at all events to have
  had an account of diplomatic correspondence between the four
  great Powers intimately interested in the question of Morocco,
  as is customary to be given to the House of Commons on such an
  occasion. This would have enabled members of the House before
  the debate commenced, to form a really well-grounded judgment
  upon the whole matter. We have heard a good deal to-night of
  the secrecy of the Foreign policy of this country. It is no use
  attempting to deny it. Those of us who have been a long time in
  this House, and can remember the methods of the Foreign Office
  twenty-five years ago, know as a matter of fact, which cannot be
  successfully denied, that the Foreign Office policy has become
  during the last ten years progressively more secret every year.
  Until this present year this has gone on, when the intense
  pressure of Foreign Affairs and the danger of war has forced
  the hands of the Minister to give some time for the discussion
  of Foreign Office affairs. For ten years the Foreign policy of
  this country has been conducted behind an elaborate screen of
  secrecy. Some of us pointed out years ago that the secrecy of
  Foreign Affairs was the inevitable and logical result of that
  new departure which was heralded about ten years ago, and which
  we heard praised once more on the floor of this House to-night.
  I refer to what is known as the policy of the continuity of the
  Foreign policy of this country; of the withdrawal of the Foreign
  policy of this country from the sphere of party politics.”

At the same session Mr. Swift MacNeill expressed himself very strongly
on the subject of withholding information from Parliament, in the
following terms:

  “From generation to generation, you have allowed treaties
  involving the highest international obligations--involving
  questions of peace and war--to be taken absolutely out of the
  hands of the House. It is no exaggeration to say, so far as
  international policy is concerned, you have rendered the House as
  little effectively powerful as any man walking over Westminster
  Bridge. Over and over again treaties involving matters of life
  and death, involving questions of first-class importance, have
  been ratified behind the back of Parliament.... The people
  themselves must be allowed to know all about this diplomacy and
  what it is. And there should be no secrecy in regard to high
  diplomatic statecraft about it. The House of Commons is sample
  judge of what is discreet and what is indiscreet, and it is a
  complete absurdity for others to treat us as children or for
  us to allow ourselves to be so treated in matters of such high
  international importance as those involving questions of peace
  and war.”

Sir Edward Grey in his reply stated that secrecy up to a certain point
was necessary and that particularly the ratification of treaties could
not be previously discussed. He then made the very significant remark
that not until the House of Commons “was really free to devote itself
to discussions of imperial affairs would it get control.” In other
words as long as the House of Commons remains a body occupied primarily
with domestic and local legislation it cannot spare the attention
necessary for an effective control of foreign policy.

Early in 1914, evidence was taken by a select committee on House
of Commons procedure. Mr. Balfour during these discussions rather
emphasized the need of secrecy in dealing with foreign affairs. He
thinks that such matters should not be aired too frequently in the
House of Commons, because indiscreet speeches, which can be perfectly
appraised in the House, may make bad blood when reported. Diplomatic
conversations must be kept confidential if you are to work the European
system at all. But though the House of Commons does not and cannot
know the current details of international negotiations, it is not
uninformed. This plainly is the language of a statesman to whom the
idiosyncrasies of the European system are so familiar that they seem to
be the only natural state of affairs. The statement is made from the
point of view of the expert who rather resents any sort of interference
on the part of the less well informed.

In March, 1918, it was moved in the House of Commons:

  “That, in the opinion of this House, a Standing Committee of
  Foreign Affairs should be appointed, representative of all
  parties and groups in the House, in order that a regular channel
  of communication may be established between the Foreign Secretary
  and the House of Commons, which will afford him frequent
  opportunities of giving information on questions of Foreign
  policy and which, by allowing Members to acquaint themselves
  more fully with current international problems, will enable this
  House to exercise closer supervision over the general conduct of
  Foreign Affairs....”

Mr. Balfour expressed himself quite in length on this motion and
further elaborated the ideas which he had put forward in 1914. In a
speech delivered March 19th, he gave what is probably the most complete
and persuasive exposition of the value of traditional methods in
diplomacy:

  “... A Foreign Office and a Diplomatic Service are great
  instruments for preventing, as far as can be prevented, and
  diminishing, even when you cannot prevent, friction between
  States which are, or which ought to be, friendly. How is the
  task of peace-maker--because that is largely the task which
  falls to diplomatists and to the Foreign Office, which controls
  diplomatists--to be pursued if you are to shout your grievances
  from the housetop whenever they occur? The only result is that
  you embitter public feeling, that the differences between the
  two States suddenly attain a magnitude they ought never to be
  allowed to approach, that the newspapers of the two countries
  agitate themselves, that the Parliaments of the two countries
  have their passions set on fire, and great crises arise, which
  may end, have ended sometimes, in international catastrophes....
  Office officials, or officials of any Department,--to expend some
  of their energy in getting ready for cross-examination, you will
  really be destroying the public service. There is nothing on
  which I feel more strongly than that. They are not accustomed to
  it, and they ought not to be accustomed to it.... I do not hold
  the view that antique methods are pursued by diplomatists which
  no man of common sense adopts in the ordinary work of every-day
  life. On the contrary, the work of diplomacy is exactly the work
  which is done every day between two great firms, for instance,
  which have business relations, or between two great corporate
  entities which have interests diverging or interests in common.
  If you are a man of sense you do not create difficulties to
  begin with. You try to get over all these things without the
  embitterment which advertisement always brings with it. It is
  when you begin to press your case in public that antagonism
  arises. In private--in conversation which need not go beyond
  the walls of the room in which you are,--you can put your case
  as strongly as you like, and the gentleman with whom you are
  carrying on the discussion may put his case as strongly as he
  likes, and if good manners are observed and nothing but fair
  discussion takes place no soreness remains and no one is driven
  to ignore the strong points of his opponent’s case. Directly a
  controversy becomes public all that fair give-and-take becomes
  either difficult or impossible.... But if all you mean ... is
  that it is wrong for the nations of the world to find themselves
  hampered in their mutual relations by treaties of which those
  countries know nothing, that, I think, is an evil. I do not say
  that there have not been secret treaties which were inevitable;
  but I do say that, if they are necessary, they are a necessary
  evil. Please remember that two nations make a treaty together
  for their mutual advantage. Both are desirous of passing it. One
  nation says, ‘It is against our interest that this treaty should
  be made public at present.’ The other says, ‘We do not like being
  committed to any treaty the terms of which we cannot make public
  at once.’ Which is going to prevail?... It does not rest with
  any single Foreign Office, British or other. It is always an
  arrangement between two--possibly three or four, Foreign Offices.
  You cannot lay down--and I do not think you would be wise to
  lay down, an absolute rule that under no circumstances, and for
  no object, could you so far concede the point as to say that a
  treaty is to be made which is not to become public property. I
  am perfectly ready to admit that that is not a process which, to
  me, is a very agreeable one. To reduce secret treaties to the
  narrowest possible limits should, I think, be the object of every
  responsible statesman who has the control of foreign affairs.
  Beyond that I do not feel inclined to go. I do not see any signs
  of a grasp of the true realities of life in the Motion before
  us. You should have your control over those who manage your
  affairs, but it is not the kind of control which the honorable
  Member wishes to set up with his Committee of forty or fifty. It
  is quite a different control. You must know, broadly speaking,
  what the general lines of policy are, and I maintain that that is
  thoroughly known with regard to foreign affairs at this moment
  by every man in this House who takes the trouble to think. The
  general lines on which we are proceeding are thoroughly known.”

This argument brings out all the strong points of the system of secret
diplomacy under the existing conditions of international politics,
but it contains no hint that these conditions need improvement. They
cannot, as a matter of fact, be improved until some strong nations,
even at the risk of disadvantage to themselves, take the lead in
placing diplomatic affairs on a broader basis.




