V

TRIPLE ALLIANCE DIPLOMACY AND MOROCCO


Toward the end of the nineteenth century the dominating development
in the diplomacy of Europe was the actual formation of the two
great alliances--the Triple Alliance created by Bismarck, and
the Russo-French Alliance which had come into being in 1896 as a
counterpoise to the former. The treaties upon which these alliances
rested were made secretly; they were part of an authoritative policy
based on the theory of balance of power. The texts of the Triple
Alliance Treaty were not published until after the beginning of the
Great War. The so-called Counter-Insurance Treaty with Russia by which
Bismarck attempted to stabilize the situation and isolate France
through a mutual neutrality agreement between Russia, Austria and
Germany, was one of the most characteristic examples of complicated
methods followed by the old diplomacy; it was, of course, also kept
secret. When after Bismarck’s retirement the German Government did
not renew this secret treaty, it made possible a fundamental change in
the grouping of powers with the result that Russia, after a very short
interval, identified herself with France in the Dual Alliance.

While Bismarck had been in control of German diplomacy, the main lines
of German foreign policy were kept quite clear and their general
direction was definite, no matter how complicated and indirect were
the means frequently applied to carry it out. Emperor William II
sought to free himself from the tutelage of the powerful Chancellor,
but from then on the orientation of German diplomacy was far from
definite. No one could be clear where its main objective lay; it seemed
to seek expansion of influence in Asia Minor, the Far East, Morocco,
South Africa, and almost everywhere, even with the inclusion of South
America. Germany appeared to have many irons in the fire, although
meanwhile she did not make much progress in any specific direction.
This uncertainty of her diplomatic aims in an increasing manner aroused
the apprehension of her neighbors; none of them felt any assurance
about what Germany actually wanted. That her actual wants may not have
been unreasonable, that she herself apparently did not know exactly
which of her interests should predominate, did not help matters; all
those who had more possessions than she felt themselves endangered, and
a general suspicion and lack of confidence resulted.

In the years after the Chino-Japanese war the German Government showed
a great desire to play a prominent part in Far Eastern affairs. Thus,
it took the lead in bringing about the joint intervention of Russia,
France and Germany, which obliged Japan to surrender Port Arthur, a
part of the spoils of war just taken from China. The three powers who
had thus come to the rescue, however, forthwith proceeded to exact
from China an enormous commission for their good offices, and forced
her to make to them grants of lease-holds and other concessions, in
which was included the very territory that they had rescued from Japan.
In this keen onset, which amounted to an attempt to divide up the
Chinese Empire, Great Britain in her turn also participated. The Far
Eastern situation was rendered decidedly unstable, and the frantic and
unorganized resistance of the Boxer levies was the result.

After the settlement of these troubles, in 1901, the German Government,
as we now know, tentatively suggested the formation of an alliance
including Great Britain and Japan. This proposal shows how far
German diplomacy at the time had departed from the fundamentals of
policy under Bismarck. Japan proceeded most assiduously to work on
this suggestion, but Germany was left out when the highly important
Anglo-Japanese Alliance was secured by the Japanese Minister in London.
Negotiations between Great Britain and Japan were carried on with the
greatest secrecy. Lord Lansdowne himself seems at one time to have been
very anxious for prompt action; he said to Count Hayashi, as reported
by the latter, that “there was great danger in delay, as the news of
the proposed treaty might leak out and objections might then be raised.”

It is significant that while Lord Lansdowne and Count Hayashi were in
the depth of their negotiations, Marquis Ito, on his return journey
from the United States, proceeded to Russia and, entirely in opposition
to the express judgment of Count Hayashi, “plunged into conversations
on the most delicate of matters” at St. Petersburg. In fact, the
Japanese Government allowed almost identical secret negotiations to
be carried on in London and St. Petersburg at the same time. Count
Hayashi considered this procedure as implying “a lack of faith and a
breach of honor.” When the Anglo-Japanese treaty had been actually
signed it was, through the indiscretion of some official, published in
Japan three days too soon. The Japanese Foreign Office promptly denied
its existence, and Baron Rosen, the Russian Minister at Tokyo, who no
doubt knew of the Ito negotiations at St. Petersburg, very emphatically
denied the very possibility of such a treaty. The effect on Russia of
the truth when it became known there, can be readily imagined. In the
Anglo-Japanese treaty, England, which had recently joined in the solemn
guarantee of the integrity of China and of the independence of Korea,
made engagements scarcely consistent with either.

Lord Rosebery, in a public address, October, 1905, expressed his
sense of the great importance of this treaty. “The treaty,” he
said, “is an engine of tremendous power and tremendous liability.
Whatever else is certain, this at least is sure, that it will lead to
countless animosities, many counter intrigues, and possibly hostile
combinations. But I want to point out to you the enormous importance of
the engagements in which this treaty involves you, the reactions which
it will cause elsewhere, and to bid you to be vigilant and prepared,
and not negligent, as sometimes you are, of the vast bearings of your
foreign policy.”

The German Emperor, having failed to obtain a treaty with England, now
turned to his Russian cousin with the design of inducing him to make
an alliance. The Willy-Nicky correspondence which was published by the
Russian Revolutionary Government in 1917, as well as the memoirs of
Isvolsky, give us a complete insight into the action of William II in
this matter. The correspondence shows that Emperor William neglected no
means of arousing resentment and suspicion of England in the mind of
Nicholas, particularly in attempting to show a complicity of England
with Japan in the war against Russia. In November, 1904, William
proposed the immediate signature by Russia, without the knowledge of
France, of a defensive treaty of alliance, evidently directed against
Great Britain. France was to be invited to join _after_ the signature
by Germany and Russia. The Czar, however, insisted that he could not
entertain this proposal without first submitting it to his ally.
William, in a long telegram, argued insistently upon the danger of
informing France before the signature. He said: “Only the absolute,
undeniable knowledge that we are both bound by the treaty to give
mutual aid to each other, can induce France to exercise pressure upon
England to remain tranquil and in peace, for fear of placing France
in a dangerous situation. Should France know that a German-Russian
agreement is simply in preparation and not yet signed, she would
immediately inform England. England and Japan would then forthwith
attack Germany.” Therefore, William concluded that if the Czar should
persist in refusing to sign the treaty without the previous consent
of France, it would be better not to attempt making an agreement at
all. He stated that he had spoken only to Prince Buelow about it, and
that as undoubtedly the Czar had spoken only to Count Lamsdorff, the
foreign minister, it would be easy to keep it an absolute secret. He
then congratulated the Czar on having concluded a secret agreement of
neutrality with Austria. As a matter of fact, Count Lamsdorff had not
been informed by the Czar of the Emperor’s proposal.

In the summer of 1905, Emperor William returned to the charge, taking
advantage of the discouragement of the Czar due to many external and
internal troubles resulting from the Japanese war. He visited the Czar
at the Island Bjorkoe in July, and used every resource of his personal
influence to prevail on Nicholas. This time he succeeded, and the two
sovereigns signed a secret treaty of alliance, which contained four
articles to the following effect:

(1) If any European state shall attack either of the empires the allied
party engages itself to aid with all its forces on land and sea.

(2) The contracting parties will not conclude a separate peace.

(3) The present agreement comes in force at the moment of conclusion of
peace between Russia and Japan, and may be denounced with one year’s
notice.

(4) When the treaty has come into force Russia will take the necessary
steps to inform France and to propose to her to adhere to it as an ally.

On this occasion the Emperor was accompanied by Von Tschirsky, who
soon after became German Foreign Minister and who countersigned the
agreement. The Russian Foreign Minister was not present but Admiral
Birileff, the Minister of the Navy, was called in to countersign the
Czar’s signature. After his return to St. Petersburg, the Czar allowed
fifteen days to pass before informing Count Lamsdorff. When informed,
the Czar’s advisers took a very strong position against the agreement,
with the result that notwithstanding the insistent arguments of
Emperor William, who in his telegram signed himself “Your friend and
ally,” the treaty was never given full force. William strongly appealed
to the gratefulness of the Czar for having stood by him during the
Japanese war, at a time when, “as afterwards the indiscretions of
Delcassé have shown, although allied to Russia, France had nevertheless
made an agreement with England to attack Germany without warning, in
time of peace.” The latter phrase gives the effect upon William’s mind
of all he knew or believed to know about the arrangements concluded
between France and Great Britain concerning Morocco.

The Moroccan intrigues and secret negotiations, during the first decade
of the twentieth century, contributed in no small measure to rendering
international relations strained and generating a general sense of
insecurity and suspicion. In July, 1901, a protocol was signed between
the Sultan of Morocco and the French Government in which the latter
declared its respect for the integrity of Morocco. At the same time M.
Delcassé began secret negotiations with Spain for a delimitation of
spheres of influence in that country. In September, 1902, the first
Franco-Spanish secret treaty concerning Morocco was given its final
form. It was, however, not ratified because of British opposition at
the time. In 1904, the formation of the Anglo-French Entente agreement,
in which the French Government declared that it had no intention “of
altering the political status of Morocco,” was accompanied by the
conclusion of a secret understanding concerning Morocco which was not
revealed until 1911. According to the terms of that agreement the
British Government was to be informed of any understanding on Morocco
which might be concluded between France and Spain. These two countries,
in fact, on October 3, 1904, consummated a convention for the partition
of Morocco into spheres of influence. A copy of this secret agreement
was given to Lord Lansdowne, the British Foreign Minister, who wrote,
in acknowledging it: “I need not say that the confidential character of
the Convention entered into by the President of the French Republic and
the King of Spain in regard to French and Spanish interests in Morocco
is fully recognized by us, and will be duly respected.”

The German Government, which had been ignored, now suggested the
holding of an international conference. After considerable opposition
the conference met at Algeciras, in February, 1906. The Powers
represented there again solemnly recognized the independence and
integrity of Morocco. Meanwhile, various incidents were brought on
by the actions of French and Spanish commissaries in Morocco. The
French parliament repeatedly reiterated its intention to observe the
act of Algeciras, particularly in the declaration of February, 1909,
regarding Morocco, in which declaration Germany joined. In 1911, events
happened which induced a serious European crisis. The French Government
undertook military operations against Fez, the capital of Morocco, on
the ground that the foreign colony there was in danger. In reply to
questions in the House of Commons, Sir Edward Grey confirmed that such
measures were being undertaken by the French Government “for the succor
of Europeans in Fez.” He added: “The action taken by France is not
intended to alter the political status of Morocco, and His Majesty’s
Government cannot see why any objection should be taken to it.”

The facts of the Fez affair have been thus described by the French
publicist, Francis de Pressensé:

  “At this point the Comité du Maroc and its organs surpassed
  themselves. They organized a campaign of systematic untruth.
  Masters of almost the entire press, they swamped the public with
  false news. Fez was represented as threatened by siege or sack.
  A whole European French Colony was suddenly discovered there,
  living in anguish. The ultimate fate of the women and children
  was described in the most moving terms.... At all costs the
  Europeans--the Sultan, Fez itself must be saved.... As ever from
  the beginning of this enterprise, the Government knew nothing,
  willed nothing of itself.”

While these events were happening, the Foreign Offices both in Paris
and London failed to give any information concerning the aims which
underlay the action taken. On May 23d, Mr. Dillon in the House of
Commons asked to what extent England was committed to this “ill-omened
and cruel expedition.” The Foreign Secretary replied, “We are not
committed at all.” The French Foreign Minister declared at the same
time that he had never heard of any treaty with Spain concerning
Morocco.

When the international crisis came to a head suddenly in July, 1911,
through the disconcerting action of the German Government in sending a
war vessel to Agadir, the public was totally taken by surprise and was
absolutely in the dark as to the issues and interests involved as well
as to the commitments which had been made by the British and French
foreign offices. The text of the secret treaty between France and Spain
had, however, now been secured by the Paris papers _Le Temps_ and
_Le Matin_. This revelation led to party attacks on secret diplomacy
in the British House of Commons and in the French Parliament. Baron
d’Estournelles de Constant, in February, 1912, said:

  ... “Why was the French Parliament told only half the truth
  when it was asked to pass its opinion upon our arrangement with
  England? Why was it allowed to suspect that this arrangement had
  as its complement and corrective some secret clauses and other
  secret treaties? It is this, it is this double game towards
  Parliament and towards the world which becomes morally an abuse
  of trust.... Now the whole effort of the arrangement of 1904
  appears to-day in its truth and in its vanity. It was a treaty of
  friendship with England recognizing the freedom of our political
  action in Morocco and also proclaiming our will to respect the
  integrity of that country; that was what the public knew and
  approved. But the public was ignorant that at the same time, by
  other Treaties and by contradictory clauses hidden from it, the
  partition of Morocco between Spain and France was prepared, of
  that Morocco of which we guaranteed the integrity.”

In the House of Commons, Mr. John Dillon charged that “the Foreign
Office policy has become during the last ten years progressively more
secret every year. For ten years the foreign policy of this country has
been conducted behind an elaborate screen of secrecy.”




