IV

NAPOLEON III, DISRAELI, BISMARCK


We have so far been dealing primarily with the methods of diplomacy.
During the old régime both the methods and the general policy of
diplomatic action were controlled by the secret councils of the monarch
and of a few ministers. With the growth of representative government
public opinion began to concern itself more directly with foreign
affairs. There grew up gradually, although with many relapses and
with many breaks of continuity, a consensus that while the methods
of diplomatic action might be secret, the general trend of policy
should regularly be laid before the representatives of the people
who should also be informed of any individual action involving the
responsibilities of the nation. When, therefore, in contemplating the
history of the last one hundred years, secret diplomacy is spoken
of in condemnatory terms, the attempted secrecy of national foreign
_policy_, rather than of methods, is usually thought of. When important
engagements are undertaken which involve the nation in responsibility
to others, particularly for the use of armed forces; when by a series
of specific acts a tendency is given to foreign policy which is not
avowed to the representatives of the people; then there exists secret
diplomacy in a reprehensible sense. A further method of concealment
works through a false statement of motives. Often narrowly selfish
action has been camouflaged with the avowal of noble aims and high
ideals; or there has been fencing for position in order that at the
beginning of a war the opprobrium of being the assailant could be
thrown on the other party. Undoubtedly sometimes statesmen may persuade
themselves of the presence of high motives in matters in which their
specific action or that of their successors, working with the same
materials, takes on a contrary direction.

At the conclusion of the Crimean war, Lord Palmerston wrote to Lord
Clarendon (March 1, 1867) as follows:

  “... the alliance of England and France has derived its strength
  not merely from the military and naval power of the two states,
  but from the force of the moral principle upon which that union
  has been founded. Our union has for its foundation resistance to
  unjust aggression, the defence of the weak against the strong,
  and the maintenance of the existing balance of power. How, then,
  could we combine to become unprovoked aggressors, to imitate
  in Africa the partition of Poland by the conquest of Morocco
  for France, of Tunis and some other state for Sardinia, and of
  Egypt for England? And, more especially, how could England and
  France, who have guaranteed the integrity of the Turkish Empire,
  turn round and wrest Egypt from the Sultan? A coalition for such
  a purpose would revolt the moral feelings of mankind, and would
  certainly be fatal to any English Government that was a party to
  it. Then, as to the balance of power to be maintained by giving
  us Egypt, but we do not want the burden of governing Egypt, and
  its possession would not, as a political, military, and naval
  question, be considered, in this country, as a set-off against
  the possession of Morocco by France. Let us try to improve all
  these countries by the general influence of our commerce, but let
  us all abstain from a crusade of conquest which would call upon
  us the condemnation of all other civilized nations.”

This program of liberal principles applied to foreign affairs, of
high-toned and high-minded diplomacy, one reads with mixed feelings in
view of the things which have come thereafter.

In the period between the Crimean and the Franco-Prussian war, Napoleon
pursued a policy, or a series of policies, which fitly illustrate the
worst features of secret diplomacy. In 1858 Napoleon III obtained
from Cavour a promise that Savoy and Nice should be ceded to France.
These arrangements, made without the knowledge or the desire of the
French people, involved Napoleon in the war of 1859 and led to a
fatal weakening of his position. In 1864 Napoleon secretly suggested
to Prussia that she might take Schleswig-Holstein, thus greatly
encouraging her to undertake the war of 1864. France at this time was
under treaty obligations to Denmark which made such action doubly
dishonest. When the war between Austria and Prussia broke out in
1866, Napoleon concluded a secret treaty with Austria which contained
a bargain that he would assist Austria to recover Silesia in return
for a cession of Venetia to Italy, to compensate the latter for Savoy
and thus to eradicate the evil effects of the arrangement of 1858.
As this treaty became known, it absolutely alienated Prussia from
France. At the same time Napoleon had secretly demanded from Prussia
the cession of the Rhenish Palatinate which belonged to Bavaria; this
would mean of course that Prussia and France together would first have
to take it from Bavaria. Bismarck secretly informed Bavaria of this
demand and thus turned her decisively against Napoleon; so that he was
enabled to make secret treaties of alliance not only with Bavaria but
with Wurtemberg and Baden for their military support in case of war.
Napoleon had thus managed unwittingly to bring about the coalition of
German states which proved disastrous to him in 1870. Had the French
government known of these three German treaties, it would probably have
avoided war; as it was, France did not know that she would have all
Germany against her. In 1866 Napoleon, through Benedetti, submitted to
Bismarck a draft treaty according to which, in case the French Emperor
should decide to send his troops to enter Belgium, the King of Prussia
would grant armed aid to France and support her with all his forces,
military and naval, in the face of and against every other power which
might in this eventuality declare war. Though this draft treaty, which
became known in Great Britain and caused high excitement there, was
not adopted in this form, a secret compact was made between France and
Prussia in 1867, one article of which stated that Prussia would not
object to the annexation of Belgium by France. The fact that both of
these powers had signed the treaty of 1839, guaranteeing the neutrality
of Belgium, aggravates the noxiousness of this conspiracy. Early in
1870 Napoleon was secretly negotiating with Austria with a view to a
joint war against North Germany. The negotiations were in progress when
the war of 1870 broke out. Probably Bismarck was informed of what
was going on and was therefore the more anxious to face at once what
he considered an inevitable war. As already stated, Napoleon did not
communicate to his responsible minister his decision to require of the
King of Prussia the absolute assurance that no German prince should
ever again be nominated for the throne of Spain. In doing so he put
himself in a position where Bismarck could manœuver him into a dilemma
from which there seemed no exit except war.

This was done by the famous editing of the Ems dispatch through which,
taking advantage of King William’s permission to modify and eliminate,
Bismarck gave to the report sent by the king the appearance that
nothing further could be said between the king and the French envoy
and that therefore the only alternative to the French was retreat
or war. This act illustrates one of the most terrible dangers of
secret diplomacy in that just at the time when inflammable material
is at hand in abundance, one word or phrase may give a decisive turn
to developments and force an issue, in a certain direction, without
allowing a chance for calm consideration of all that is involved.

Bismarck considered that the unification of Germany required a war
because only thus could the feeling of unity among the German people,
until then divided into numerous small states, be molded into political
oneness. But in bringing on the Franco-Prussian war, no matter how
inevitable he might consider such a struggle, he was too confident of
his ability to play the part of a Providence and to cut short the slow
processes of historic development. Therefore, though he attempted to
work in the interest of outstanding national factors, his policy was
not of a nature to develop that public confidence in the aims of his
nation on which alone a statesman can permanently build. His was the
diplomacy of authority, often announcing its aims with great frankness,
indeed, but always retaining the old method so that the public mind
remained often in the dark. His politics directed German development
into a dangerous course. He abhorred German disunion, but tried to
cure it with means too forceful and artificial. The solutions brought
about further problems. The taking of Alsace-Lorraine was the cause of
future war. In 1871, Bismarck offered Mulhouse to Switzerland secretly,
but the gift was declined. In the years after 1871, Bismarck always
threatened Parliament with the danger of war whenever he wanted to put
anything through.

The Russo-Turkish war of 1878, being in its nature a conflict about the
merits of which only vague ideas could be current among the Western
nations, produced a whole nest of secret treaties. The treaty of San
Stefano itself was kept secret by Russia and Turkey. The British
Foreign Secretary in a diplomatic note which was much admired at the
time, demanded that the treaty must be submitted to the European powers.

Meanwhile a second secret treaty had been made between Russia and
Austria wherein, as is customary in such transactions, “compensations”
were distributed out of property belonging to neither of the
contracting parties, at the cost of somebody else; it was agreed that
Austria should have Bosnia and Herzegovina. Meanwhile the British
Foreign Office, though it had just declaimed in indignant tones against
the secret terms of San Stefano, made an agreement, equally secret,
with Russia (May 30, 1878), concerning the points on which Great
Britain would insist in the final adjustment. Through the wrongful
action of an employee of the Foreign Office this agreement leaked out
and a summary of it was published on May 31st. When questioned in
the House of Lords, the Marquis of Salisbury, who at all times had a
well-deserved reputation for sincerity, nevertheless qualified the
statement in the _Globe_ as “wholly unauthenticated and not deserving
of any confidence on the part of the House of Lords.” The full text
of the agreement was published by the _Globe_ on June 14th, and when
challenged by Lord Rosebery concerning his _dementi_, Lord Salisbury
calmly stated: “I described it as unauthentic simply because it was so,
and because no other adjective actually described it, and I shall be
able to state why I so described it.” The explanation which followed
was, however, quite lame, and consisted mainly in stating that the
document as published did not give a complete view of the situation.
The impression produced by these tactics was far from favorable. Lord
Granville, with a great deal of justice, wanted to know “where the
House of Lords would have been had it not been for the immoral action
of the man who gave the secret treaty to the newspaper. They would
have had blue books and copies of instructions, protocols and other
documents, but they would have been perfectly duped as to the way in
which the government had actually proceeded.”

But there followed another, a fourth secret treaty, growing out of
the Turkish situation, an agreement between Great Britain and Turkey
concluded on June 4th, at Constantinople. As a result of erroneous
information having been telegraphed from Constantinople by Mr. Layard,
the British envoy, to the effect that in spite of the armistice
the Russians were moving on Constantinople, a large war credit was
voted in the British House, although against the opposition of the
Liberals under Gladstone and Bright. Orders were also given to the
Indian Government to send troops to Cyprus. A secret treaty was then
concluded in which Great Britain received a protectorate over Cyprus in
return for the engagement on her part to protect the Asiatic domains
of Turkey. Never was the blood of a nation without its own knowledge
and consent risked in a more doubtful adventure than in this famous
transaction of Lord Beaconsfield. Gladstone, on July 20th, analyzed the
treaty as providing for three things: the occupation and annexation of
Cyprus, the defense of Turkey in Asia against any attempt Russia may
make (“to go two thousand miles from your own country, alone and single
handed, in order to prevent Russia making war at any time upon Turkey
in Asia”), and responsibility for the government of Turkish territory
in Asia; and all that was undertaken without the consent and knowledge
of the British people, to be done at their expense by the blood of
their children. Mr. Gladstone concluded: “There is but one epithet
which I think fully describes a covenant of this kind. I think it is an
insane covenant.”

Disraeli had formerly said of Palmerston: “With no domestic policy, he
is obliged to divert the attention of the people from the consideration
of their own affairs to the distraction of foreign politics. His scheme
of conduct is so devoid of all political principle that when forced
to appeal to the people, his only claim to their confidence is his
name.” The same language could with equal justice have been applied to
Beaconsfield himself. His speeches in defense of his foreign policy are
usually a superficial appeal to imperialist passion, and deal in such
phrases as “What is our duty at this critical moment?” “To maintain
the empire of England.” (Loud cheers.) “Empire” is taken for granted
as covering everything desirable, but the actual relationship of these
adventurous foreign policies to the welfare and true development of the
English people is never reasoned out.

While Beaconsfield had opposed the first Afghan war, he readily changed
his views when he came into power and began the second war in 1878
on the avowed ground that the Ameer had refused to receive a British
mission. But with a sudden change of tactics, at a dinner at the
Mansion House on November 9, Lord Beaconsfield solemnly announced that
the war had been made because the frontier of India was “a haphazard
and not a scientific one.” Yet a little before, when condemning the
first Afghan war, he had described the frontiers of India as “a perfect
barrier.” He did not give to any organization of public opinion a
chance to influence him in this matter, or even to be heard. On
December 9, Lord Derby said in the House of Lords: “We are discussing,
and we know we are discussing, an issue upon which we have no real or
practical influence.”




