II

OLD DIPLOMATIC CORRESPONDENCE


The correspondence of diplomats of the eighteenth century is full of
interest because of the particular intimacy which characterized social
life at that time. But we receive from it also direct and invaluable
information on the spirit and methods of diplomacy. The correspondence
from St. Petersburg at the time of Catherine the Great gives a complete
picture of the less noble features of diplomatic life and action. At
that Court, presided over by a woman of great ambition whose every
movement and mood the diplomats felt necessary to take into account
and carefully to calculate, at a time when England and France as well
as other nations were involved in almost constant hostilities, the
sharpest characteristics of eighteenth century diplomacy came to the
surface. Politics is seen as a game of forfeits and favors in which
wars were made for personal and dynastic reasons and territories traded
off in the spirit of the gamester without regard to natural or ethnic
facts, or the welfare of the population.

A letter written near the beginning of Catherine’s reign, addressed
by Sir George Macartney to the Earl of Sandwich, most strikingly
illustrates the character of the period. The British Minister first
reports that M. Panin, the Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs, had
signed a treaty of alliance with Denmark, contemplating war with
Turkey. By a most secret article, Denmark promises “to disengage
herself from all French connections, demanding only a limited time to
endeavor to obtain the arrears due to her by the Court of France. At
all events, she is immediately to enter into all the views of Russia
in Sweden, and to act entirely, though not openly, with her in that
kingdom.” The writer then reports that it is the ardent wish of the
Empress “to make a common cause with England and Denmark, for the
total annihilation of the French interest there (in Sweden). This
certainly cannot be done without a considerable expense; but Russia,
at present, does not seem unreasonable enough to expect that we should
pay the whole.” The amount necessary absolutely to prevent the French
from ever getting at Stockholm again is suggested. As the Swedes are
highly sensitive because of their dependent situation in recent years,
the Russian Court desires “that we and they should act upon separate
bottoms, still preserving between our respective Ministers a confidence
without reserve. That our first care should be, not to establish a
faction under the name of a Russian or of an English faction; but,
as even the wisest men are imposed upon by a mere name, to endeavor
to have our friends distinguished as the friends of liberty and
independence.” The Minister then reports that an alliance with Russia
is not to be thought of unless by some secret article England would
agree to pay a subsidy to Russia in case of a Turkish war (Turkey
happened at the time to be in alliance with England). The Minister
relates that a similar proposal which was put up to the King of Prussia
by a Russian official who was his mortal enemy and who hoped greatly to
embarrass him thereby, was unexpectedly and quite blandly accepted by
Frederick II. The letter closes with the earnest entreaty on no account
to mention to M. Gross, the Russian Minister in London, the secret
article of the treaty which his own Government had just concluded with
Denmark.

The correspondence of James Harris, Lord Malmesbury, is a particularly
full and continuous account of court and diplomatic life in the
eighteenth century. In describing his diplomatic struggles in a
Court in which everything turned round the whims and ambitions of an
unscrupulous woman who had come to the throne through putting out of
the way its rightful occupant, the vicious practices of the day are
presented in all their corruption and deceitfulness. Before going
to Russia, Sir James Harris was Minister at Berlin. He paints the
character of Frederick the Great in the following words: “Thus never
losing sight of his object, he lays aside all feelings the moment that
is concerned; and, although as an individual he often appears, and
really is, humane, benevolent, and friendly, yet the instant he acts
in his Royal capacity, these attributes forsake him, and he carries
with him desolation, misery, and persecution, wherever he goes.” A
German scholar of the period, an admirer of the great monarch, used
the following language: “The art, till then unknown in Europe, of
concluding alliances without committing one’s self, of remaining
unfettered while apparently bound, of seceding when the proper
moment is arrived, can be learnt from him and only from him.” These
descriptions of the political character of Frederick II set forth the
essential _political_ factor as it was understood at the time and
as it has been understood by a continuous line of statesmen from
Machiavelli to the present. As in physical science, every factor has to
be disregarded except those essential to the experiment which is being
conducted, so in the intensive politics of the modern state, in the
mind of such men, abstraction is made from all sentiment, virtue and
quality, to the sole pursuit of a closely calculated political effect.
The same German scholar credits Frederick the Great with a superior
straightforwardness. That quality, however, is manifested by such a man
mostly on occasions where he is so sure of himself and of his plans
that he can challenge the worst attempts of his enemies to upset them
and can confound them utterly by flinging his plans in their faces, as
did Bismarck at a later time. A startling and fearless frankness is one
of the characteristics of political genius.

But to return to the correspondence of Lord Malmesbury. All the devices
and foibles of the profession at that period are there mirrored. When
he (still as Sir James Harris) reports the coming of a new French
Minister to St. Petersburg, he expresses the hope that the new envoy
will not be so difficult to deal with as the present chargé d’affairs,
“who, though he has a very moderate capacity, got access to all the
valets de chambre and inferior agents in the Russian houses, who very
often conjured up evil spirits where I least of all expected them.” A
little later he reports to the British Foreign Minister, Lord Stormont,
as follows: “If, on further inquiry, I should find, as I almost
suspect, that my friend’s (Prince Potemkin) fidelity has been shaken,
or his political faith corrupted, in the late conferences, by any
direct offers or indirect promises of reward, I shall think myself, in
such a case, not only authorized but obliged to lure him with a similar
bait.” He reminds His Lordship of the fact that Prince Potemkin is
immensely rich and that, therefore, perhaps as much may be required as
de Torcy offered to the Duke of Marlborough (two million francs).

In a letter of June 25, 1781, Sir James Harris, writing to the same
Minister, speaks of having obtained information of the conclusion
of a secret treaty between Russia and Austria from the confidential
secretary of a Russian minister. He adds: “I trust I shall keep him to
myself, since I have lost almost all my other informers by being outbid
for them by the French and Prussians.” He adds that it is painful to
him that the secret service expenses come so very high but he explains
that the avid corruption of the court is ever increasing and that
his enemies are favored by the fact that they can join in the expense
against him, their courts moreover supplying them most lavishly. He
adds: “They are also much more adroit at this dirty business than I am,
who cannot help despising the person I corrupt.”

The Foreign Minister of Russia at this time, and for many years before
and after, was Count Panin. It was then suspected and is now known
that he was firmly bought by Frederick II. But there has been some
doubt as to whether he entered upon this corrupt relation behind the
back of Empress Catherine or at her bidding. It is known that she
often encouraged her ministers at foreign courts to accept bribes and
apparently to sell themselves to foreign governments, because through
the relationship of confidence thus established they might gather
information useful to their own government. This is one of the many
ways in which the game of corruption tended to defeat itself.

As far as the letters of this period deal with diplomatic policies
they are no more reassuring than when they relate the details of
diplomatic practice. On August 16, 1782, Sir James Harris made a long
confidential report to Lord Grantham. He observes that Count Panin
is powerfully assisting the King of Prussia, the French Minister is
artful and intriguing, working through Prince Potemkin and the whole
tribe of satellites which surrounded the Empress, whom he calls “barber
apprentices of Paris.” He then unfolds his own policy of winning the
favor of the Empress for England by giving her the island of Minorca
as a present. His idea had been adopted by the British Foreign Office
and he writes, “Nothing could be more perfectly calculated to the
meridian of this Court than the judicious instructions I received on
this occasion.” He decided,--hand in hand with the proposed cession
of Minorca,--to designate the Empress as a friendly mediatrix between
England and Holland; he says: “I knew, indeed, she was unequal to the
task but I knew too how greatly her vanity would be flattered by this
distinction.” Farther on he reports how, gradually, after several
British Ministers had incurred the ill humor of Catherine, Fox and
the present Minister of Foreign Affairs have finally found favor and
smoothed the road for Sir James. He hopes that all these great efforts
and sacrifices may result in “lighting the strong glow of friendship
in Her Imperial Majesty in favor of England.” At this distance a slim
result of so much effort. The characterization of Catherine with which
he closes, few historians would now accept.[A]

    [A] “With very bright parts, an elevated mind, an uncommon
        sagacity, she wants judgment, precision of ideas,
        reflection, and l’esprit de combinaison.”

American diplomats had their first taste of European diplomatic methods
in 1797, when Pinckney, Gerry and Marshall were sent to France on their
special mission. Every attempt at delay and mystification was practised
on them. After various secret agents had tried the patience of the
Americans and had finally come out with the plain demand of Talleyrand
for a million francs as the price for peace and good relations, they
resolutely turned their back on Paris. Meanwhile Pitt was seriously
considering buying peace on similar terms.




