XII

THE PUBLIC AND DIPLOMACY


In consequence of the startling developments in diplomacy which
preceded and accompanied the great war, the relation of democracy to
diplomacy has been earnestly discussed of late, particularly in Great
Britain.

When considering this important matter, the distinction between the
_methods_ of diplomacy and diplomatic _policies_ should be borne in
mind for the sake of clearness of thought. The development of public
opinion, the disappearance of purely dynastic aims of state action, and
the constantly broadening outlook of political life, have led to the
elimination of most of the cruder methods of deception and intrigue.
But two questions still remain: Should diplomatic negotiations
be carried on in the public view, that is with constant and full
information given to the public or parliament, on all important
details? and, Should the diplomatic policy of a democratic government
at all times be kept fully before the representative bodies, and the
public?

Most discussions which favor the use of secret diplomacy, refer to
the presumed necessity of confidential _methods_ of negotiation. But
there are some publicists and statesmen who believe that the policy of
foreign affairs itself can best be handled by responsible statesmen
keeping their own counsel and giving to the public only a general
adumbration of the trend of policy. These two questions are constantly
mixed up in current discussion; and their absolute separation is
indeed difficult. Thus, a strictly secret diplomatic policy will
naturally accentuate the secrecy of the methods employed. Abstractly
considered, it would be quite possible to have the foreign policy of a
country determined by public action, and still to surround diplomatic
negotiations with secrecy. But if the substance of the policy were
definitely known in detail, the secrecy of methods would lose much of
its effectiveness.

The use of such methods is defended from two points of view; from that
of the trader who looks for a better bargain through not having given
away his entire hand at the beginning; and from that of the builder who
desires to work quietly without interruptions from an excitable public,
who desires to avoid difficulties and smooth away contrasts which
publicity would tend to exaggerate.

There is an _ex post facto_ publicity of diplomatic policy. If this is
afforded as soon as a new situation has arisen or a new agreement has
been created, some of the harm of secrecy is avoided. In such a case
the statesmen, cabinet, or conference, practically give assurance that,
if allowed to work quietly on a certain problem, they will produce a
solution which will commend itself in general to the sense of equity
of the nation or nations concerned; although the sum total of the
arrangement may contain details which, considered by themselves, would
be unacceptable and which might have interfered with the making of an
accord, if unduly emphasized or given publicity during the negotiations.

Mr. Balfour in his speech of March 19, 1918, which has already been
referred to, indeed speaks quite convincingly of the advantage of
confidential relations and of secrecy in negotiations, but he goes so
far as strongly to deprecate a demand for information on the part of
Parliament. In that he certainly shows a measure of anti-democratic
bias, as when he says, “Do not suppose that we can do the work better
by having to explain it _to a lot of people who are not responsible_.
That is not the way to get business properly done.” He therefore
rejects the idea of a parliamentary committee of control in the matter
of foreign relations. He agrees, however, that the existence of secret
treaties is an evil, although he thinks that it may be at certain times
necessary, because the associated treaty power may desire it. He is
mildly deprecatory, at best.

Count Czernin, speaking to the Austrian delegations on June 24, 1918,
concerning President Wilson’s fourteen points, stated that he has no
objection to the introduction of the principle of “open covenants,”
although he confesses that he does not know by what means effective
adherence thereto can be assured. Concerning diplomatic negotiations,
which he treats simply as a matter of business, he points out the
advantages of secrecy from the point of view of trading. Moreover, if
there were full publicity, the general public might passionately oppose
every action involving any concession as a defeat. This would not be
conducive to peaceable relations.

There are those who believe that the chief evils of secret diplomacy
would be avoided if ample opportunity were given for discussion in
representative assemblies, if there were a parliamentary committee
keeping constantly in touch with the conduct of foreign relations,
and if treaties and declarations of war could not be made without the
consent of the national legislature. Some advocates of democratic
control go so far as to reason that a decision to make war and thereby
to order the shedding of human blood, should not be made without a
national referendum vote.

On the other hand, those opposed to all publicity of diplomatic
affairs argue that international policies cannot be determined in
the market place. They hark back to DeTocqueville, who holds that as
democracy cannot be expected to regulate the _details_ of an important
undertaking, it is particularly unqualified to deal with international
matters where secrecy, discretion, and patience are required. Followers
of this opinion believe that the conduct of foreign affairs is best
placed quite unreservedly in the hands of responsible statesmen, who
have greater information, larger experience and more self-control than
the average of humanity. They generally have in view the preservation
of national interests, under conditions of peace if possible; they
will not be inflamed by exciting incidents, but will keep these in
proper subordination to the general plan. Such details, if made public,
would easily lead to occurrences that would upset the results of
wise planning. As Lord Cromer has said, it is such untoward chance
incidents which cannot be controlled that are to be feared, rather than
any deliberate plotting on the part of diplomats. Such responsible
statesmen always remain accountable for the general results of their
policy; they are conscious of the importance of their trust, and
therefore are a safer repository of discretionary powers than a general
committee.

Back of these arguments, however, there usually lies the conviction
that the public is superficial, easily swayed, excitable and altogether
delighting more in the hurrah of war than in the humdrum of peace. It
might be remarked that if such had actually been the case, the most
recent experience of the people with war has probably given them a
different idea of the attractiveness of that kind of excitement; unless
indeed the mass of humanity are irremediably and forever fools, when
taken in the aggregate.

The sensational character of the daily press must be considered in
this connection. The news value of normal, peaceable developments is
very small. It is therefore a godsend to the newspapers when something
extraordinary happens, particularly in international affairs. For
this reason, the daily news frequently presents an untrue or warped
picture of the actual situation. Gilbert Murray asks what people are
referred to by those who demand popular control of diplomacy; are
they the people of educational societies, or of the music halls? The
public is not homogeneous, or so organized as to give expression to
convictions on current affairs which have been maturely considered. It
lacks the leisure and training for penetrating superficialities and
going to the bottom of difficult questions. Lord Cromer believes in
general that democracies are not peaceful, and he refers particularly
to the American democracy for proof; Lord Lytton said, “Governments are
generally for diplomacy, the people for war.”

Men of all shades of opinion are agreed that the people are not greatly
interested in foreign affairs, and the opponents of proposals of
democratic control argue that it would be useless to create machinery
for action where there exists no interest, nor purpose to act.

It is quite true that the public during the nineteenth century seemed
less interested in foreign affairs than during the eighteenth. At the
earlier time, diplomacy was a fascinating, personal game, about which
the wiseacres in the coffee houses were eager to make their criticisms
and prognostications. When the middle class came to power in the
nineteenth century, it was primarily interested in economic and other
domestic questions, and was satisfied to leave the conduct of foreign
affairs to statesmen and diplomats. The constantly growing political
consciousness of the public at large was concentrated chiefly on
questions of internal politics and reform. Foreign affairs, as they
reached the public, were thought of still from the point of view of
the onlooker, rather than of him who actually had to bear the brunt of
the burden. Those who had to bleed and die when hostilities had been
brought about, never had any chance, nor determination, to influence
the course of diplomacy leading up to wars.

With such a general apathy of the public, it was not surprising that
diplomacy should cling to its caste privileges, should try to preserve
its discretionary powers, and should often attempt deliberately to keep
people in the dark. “In the public interest” is the curtain beyond
which no one may peer. Even in the American Government, particularly
during and since the war, foreign affairs have been handled with what
would ordinarily seem insufficient information to the public; in fact,
with occasional putting forth of misleading and entirely partial
information, or the refusal to furnish information even when requested
by those having official responsibilities. This is a notable change,
as up to 1914 it was substantially true that the United States had no
diplomatic secrets.

While from the point of view of traditional diplomacy, and of
international relations as they were up to the Great War, it seems
quite natural that democratic control should be thought by many to be
unpractical; and while indeed no one can flatter himself that through a
change of method the conduct of international affairs could suddenly be
rendered more wise and entirely effective towards the public welfare,
yet I cannot avoid the conclusion that there is a wrong orientation
in the emphasis of the need of secrecy and of the unfitness of the
people to deal with problems of foreign affairs. The belief in the
unfitness of the people in this matter appears to be the result of
a preconceived notion as to the overpowering difficulty, complexity
and almost sanctity of foreign affairs. Modern governments are based
on the principle that all legislation must meet the test of public
criticism and rest on public consent; certainly it cannot be argued
that matters of the incidence of taxation, the proper organization
of credit, and the determination of commercial policies, are less
complex and intricate than are foreign affairs. It is indeed true that
it is difficult for one nation thoroughly to appreciate in detail the
conditions of life in another. This truth should have its greatest
value in dissuading a nation from meddling with the internal affairs of
another, even from good motives. Those international questions which
are apt to produce war may indeed relate to intricate matters, but
the essential point is always the contention for power, influence or
commercial advantage, and it is not apparent why the public in general
should be unfit to judge as to whether national treasure and life
are eventually to be spent in huge quantities to bring about, or to
prevent, any such shifting of power or influence.

It is, however, because the motives involved are so largely connected
with class interests, or survivals of pride of race, that those
concerned in them are eager to deny the fitness of the general public,
which if called on to decide would put into the foreground the
question, “How does the control of this or that group of capitalists in
Morocco, for instance, or the greater or smaller influence of Austria
or Russia in Servia, affect the daily life and welfare of our people?”
It is certainly true that questions of peace and war have never
definitely been reasoned out on that basis. There has always been the
assumption that certain things were essential to national prestige and
could not be questioned; it is only when the actually existing broader
base of national political life is organized also for active control of
foreign affairs, that these considerations will have their full weight.
Only the most exceptional statesmen could lift themselves out of the
narrow groove of tradition and precedent; and more exceptional still,
in fact all but impossible, is the capacity of one man to represent in
himself in just proportion, all the interests and feelings of a nation.

Infallibility cannot be expected in the handling of foreign affairs,
whether under a broad discretion of statesmen or under strict
democratic control. There will always be an alternative of wisdom
and rashness, constructive planning and headlong action, carefulness
and negligence. But past experience has certainly established beyond
peradventure of doubt that secret diplomacy is not infallible, and
particularly that diplomacy acting under absolutist traditions,
as in Germany before the war, may make the most fatal mistakes of
judgment and of policy. Balfour said: “I do not think the Government
in June, 1914, had the slightest idea that there was any danger
ahead.” A remarkable statement, when we consider the actions and
reactions of secret diplomacy during the decade preceding the war.
It has been quite truly said that diplomacy is far more eminent in
autopsy than in diagnosis. M. Cheradame somewhat severely observes,
“The typical diplomat lives in a world of his own. His information is
rarely obtained by direct observation of people and facts.” And while
ordinarily men of exceptional talents are selected for the difficulty
position of Minister for Foreign Affairs, yet all considered, it
is hard to believe that were decisions on the essential matters of
international life made on a broader basis, and influenced more by a
direct action of public opinion, the result would be less wise.

Active participation of the people in the making of momentous decisions
regarding foreign affairs, is denied either under the assumption that
the people might not be ready to face the fateful test, or, by the
majority, with the thought that the people are too excitable and rash
to be trusted with such far-reaching decisions. While it is indeed easy
to generate warlike excitement among the masses, it must be remembered,
when such a charge of rashness is made, that the people have never
been currently informed of the development of international dangers,
but usually at a critical time shreds of information have been flashed
on them, designed or at least apt to stir up all their atavistic love
of fight and fear of attack. Even thus, the greatest noise is made
usually by those who do not in the event of hostilities actually have
to risk their blood and bones.

It stands to reason that if honestly kept informed about international
relationships, the people would be far less prone to sudden excitement.
Very few people indeed appear to doubt that had the decision of war
or no war been laid before the peoples of Europe in 1914, with a full
knowledge of the facts, the terrible catastrophe would never have come
about. As Mr. Lowes Dickinson has said, if the people had been allowed
to share the apprehension and precautions of the diplomats before 1914,
there would have been quite a simple and clear question before the
English people, for one. It could have decided whether it would pursue
a policy that might lead at any moment to a general European war, or
to take the alternative which Sir Edward Grey later spoke of, namely,
“to promote some arrangement, to which Germany could be a party by
which she could be assured that no aggressive or hostile policy would
be pursued against her by France, Russia and ourselves, jointly or
separately.” Without the support of the people, kept in line by fear of
hidden dangers, not even the militarists of Germany could have forced
military action.

One of the first acts of the Russian Soviet Government was to announce
its hostility to secret diplomacy. When it first published the secret
treaties and documents of the Czarist Government, its motive was,
as shown by Trotsky’s declaration made at the time, thoroughly to
discredit the management of affairs under the old régime. In the same
connection, it announced its own purpose of conducting foreign affairs
in the open. Such seems indeed to have been its general practice with
respect to the announcement of policies, though its agents continued
to use underground methods. One thing, however, the Soviet Government
is evidently trying to bring about, namely, a broad public interest
in the conduct of foreign affairs. It desires the Russian people, and
more particularly the members of the ruling Communist Party, to be
currently informed about the progress of international affairs and
about arrangements concluded. Observers report that at the meeting of
the provincial soviets the first business ordinarily taken up is the
reading and discussion of a report on international relations sent by
the central government. We have no means to check up the truth of these
reports; but this effort to interest the broad mass of the population
in the outward relations of the state is certainly worth notice. The
expectation is encouraged that the reason for acts relating to foreign
affairs will be explained, particularly when sacrifices are demanded.




