IX

HOPES FOR IMPROVEMENT DEFERRED


The world has not yet recovered from the surprise and disillusionment
which overcame it when the secret treaties of the war became known and
when it became evident that they would be made the basis of the Treaty
of Peace. The secrecy of the procedure of the Peace Conference--which
had been heralded as an assembly of the peoples for carrying out and
making permanent those great principles for which men had grimly and
silently suffered and died and which had been eloquently voiced by
the American President--seemed to be so complete a return to the old
methods of diplomacy that from the day when the muzzle was clamped on,
public faith in the conference and its results was shaken. The motives
of the men who made this decision were probably good. It was their
desire that the work should be rapidly accomplished and should not
be confused by divided counsels. But again the results of the secret
method are hardly apt to increase confidence in its usefulness as a
procedure for dealing with the affairs of the peoples of the world in
such a manner as to place them upon a sound and lasting foundation.

The solemn document which was prepared for the information of the
newspaper men on the decision of the peace conference to enforce
secrecy, did not satisfy any one. To the public there seemed to be
no larger principle at issue than that, on this occasion if ever,
open covenants should be openly arrived at, and it was feared that
if the peace conference did not base its action upon an appeal to
public opinion, no adequate solution could be found at all. When the
treaty itself had been framed, it was sedulously kept secret until
distributed by the French paper _Bonsoir_. The deliberations of the
Council of Five were secret beyond all precedents in public action.
No secretaries were admitted and no official minutes were kept, nor
were there communications to the public through the press. Doctor
Dillon’s description of the Five as “a gang of benevolent conspirators,
ignoring history and expertship, shutting themselves up in a room and
talking disconnectedly,” unfortunately appears not entirely untrue;
particularly as to the ignoring of history and expertship, which was
quite patent, although from the nature of things we cannot exactly
know how disconnectedly the Five talked.

Unfortunately, after the war the use of secret diplomatic policy
has continued without noticeable diminution. The details of certain
situations make one feel as if we are after all only a generation
removed from the eighteenth century. These matters are so recent and
still so controversial that I do not desire to enter upon them in any
detail.

It is, however, surely to be regretted, that it should have been
found necessary to surround the mandates with peculiar secrecy. This
institution was conceived in a desire to create a trusteeship in
behalf of the world in general and for the particular benefit of the
populations comprised in the mandates. Not only has the assignment of
certain mandates given rise to great popular resistance indicating that
the local populations were far from ready to trust their interests
to a foreign mandatory, but the fact that these arrangements are so
carefully guarded with secrecy comes near to destroying all hope
that there is any intention to handle them otherwise than from the
imperialist point of view and for the benefit of the mandatory.

Among the many things that have happened since the armistice, the
Franco-Hungarian intrigues are specially to be noted as emphasizing the
great danger of secret methods, in which a government runs the risk of
being committed by persons, irresponsible or not properly controlled,
into embarrassing and harmful situations. We know of these particular
facts through confidential reports discovered and published, officially
recognized by certain governments, though formally denied by the
Magyar Cabinet. These papers give working details of what was already
known in general terms concerning reactionary Hungarian intrigues
in Czecho-Slovakia and Austria, including preparations for an armed
uprising, and other assistance to monarchists. French interests were at
the same time active in Hungary. They made an agreement for a leasing
of the Hungarian state railways for fifty years. According to this
contract, the Hungarian Government is bound to consult the diplomatic
representative of the French Government concerning every measure
which may have a bearing on any clause of the agreement. A political
compact was simultaneously initialed in which the French Government
withdrew its opposition to universal military service in Hungary, and
that country was to be assisted in boundary rectifications at the
expense of Czecho-Slovakia and Roumania. A third agreement provided
for the sending of a Hungarian army against Soviet Russia under French
command. These agreements were undoubtedly accepted by many people as
fully concluded. The Magyar Premier in open session of the national
assembly boasted of having achieved an alliance with France; the same
understanding was also accepted by certain Paris newspapers. The French
Government, however, did not sanction what secret negotiators had
prepared in Hungary and disavowed the agreements, with the exception
of the lease of the Hungarian railways. This illustrates how in times
of unsettlement and sharp national rivalry, representatives on the
spot or agents of powerful interests in close touch with the home
government may by secret means try to bring about arrangements which
the conscience of their nation does not approve and which serve merely
to generate suspicion and distrust.

There is reason to believe that the draft of a secret treaty between
France and Yugo-Slavia which was published in 1920 by the _Idea
Nazionale_ was at the time actually being considered by the two
governments concerned. One of the points of the proposed treaty was
that upon the declaration of war between France and any Mediterranean
power, Yugo-Slavic troops would be massed along the hostile boundary
according to previously determined plans. In connection with this
provision the representatives of France made the following suggestion:
“In case of a conflict it would be better that the Yugo-Slavic
troops, instead of massing on the hostile frontier, should rather
provoke a ‘Casus Belli’ on the part of the nation at war with France.
Otherwise their intervention might bring on the interference of other
powers.” The proposed arrangements, even though not adopted by the two
governments, nevertheless illustrate the methods acceptable to secret
diplomacy, but which open public opinion would never sanction.

Whatever we may think about the exact share of the blame for having
brought on the great catastrophe which should be attributed to
secret methods and policies, we cannot have any doubts about their
influence since the armistice. Whether or not secret diplomacy brought
on the war, it certainly has not ended it. War still exists, not
only when actual hostilities are going on, but in the whole temper
of international affairs--continuing enmity, continuing armaments,
unending waste of human effort. Thus, for one thing, the entire Near
Eastern situation remains unsettled. As an expert on this troubled
region has said: “The principle of settlement as revealed by these
treaties is fundamentally wrong. The East must be resuscitated, not
exploited.” But be it East or West, there is the same return to the
old game of balancing off gains and changing boundaries, without
consideration of the rights of the respective peoples. The costly
mistakes of the Congresses of Vienna, Paris, and Berlin are being
repeated.




