VIII

THE SECRET TREATIES OF THE WAR


While the war lasted, the demands of self-protection required the
careful concealment of negotiations and policies from enemy knowledge.
But though it is easy to understand the need of secrecy at such a
time, yet the spirit displayed in these negotiations had but little in
common with the ideals professed in the same breath. Moreover, there
was a lack of complete sincerity among the Allies themselves, and
particularly was there a concealment from some of them of important
facts and agreements affecting their interests. However, the most
baneful effect of secret diplomacy during the war is found in the
undermining of public confidence in a moral foundation of public
action. As Lord Loreburn says: “It was not wholesome that while our
people were stimulated to unparalleled exertions by a parade of lofty
motives there should be at the same time in existence agreements of
this kind, of which no public mention could be made, and from which
little has resulted except the right of foreign Powers to demand
their fulfilment on our part.” That at a time when the people in the
vast armies were actually fighting for ideals of freedom and peace,
common to humanity, the chief care of responsible statesmen should have
been the division of prospective spoils, did certainly not lay solid
foundations for peace.

Japan in her action with respect to Shantung and in secretly making the
twenty-one demands on China, was first in the attempt to utilize the
great struggle for narrowly selfish gain, in this case not entirely
at the expense of the enemy but of a neutral and of her allies. Nor
did other governments keep themselves free from the temptations of
prospective conquest, with the risk of making war interminable and
putting the world face to face with revolution, anarchy and famine.
As early as February, 1915, the Russian Foreign Minister informed
the French and British ambassadors of the territorial acquisitions
which Russia desired to make through the war, including a great part
of Turkey in Europe and in Asia. The French and British Governments
expressed their readiness to agree, provided a number of claims made by
France and England were satisfied. Italy entered the war, as is well
known, on condition of her claims for territorial annexations being
satisfied. She agreed to the Russian demands on the same condition.

On March 9, 1916, the Russian Foreign Minister instructed the Russian
Ambassador at Paris to the following effect: “It is above all necessary
to demand that the Polish Question should be excluded from the
subjects of international negotiation, and that all attempts to place
Poland’s future under the guarantee and control of the Powers should
be prevented.” Thus did the Russian Government attempt secretly to
lock the door against any chance of Poland regaining her lost national
rights. The entry of Roumania in 1916 led to additional arrangements.
These agreements were kept strictly secret and the millions who were
laying down their lives in the war had no conception of this intricate
web of bargains.

An effort to settle at a time when the Allies were united in their
main aim in the furnace heat of the war, questions which might divide
them when peace had come in sight, could be understood; and that such
agreements should be kept secret during the war, might have been
considered a necessity. However, the necessity of war in this case was
stretched to cover arrangements which in themselves went diametrically
contrary to the publicly professed principles for which the war was
being fought, and gave rise to the just suspicion that in several cases
at least, very specific advantages had been the controlling incentive
for entering the war. But these agreements have aroused the greatest
resentment because they were in several cases directed against the
interests of third parties, and particularly because when the United
States was making its enormous and unselfish sacrifices, these treaties
were kept from its knowledge. That the American Government should not
have been informed of the secret treaties made at the instance of Japan
in which American interests were most seriously affected, and that just
after these agreements had been concluded the statesmen who had been
closely connected with acceding to these arrangements on the part of
Great Britain, at the price of the British control of the islands of
the South Pacific, came to the United States to stimulate the practical
devotion there to the cause of the Allies, is a fact that will
unfortunately help to give munition to those who are unfavorable to
any real friendly understanding between the two great English-speaking
powers. The secret commercial policy pursued by Great Britain during
the war is also justly subject to severe criticism as giving food and
subsistence to the growth of deep suspicion on the part of even the
most faithful of friends.

The secret treaties relating to the division of territories in Europe
did not come to the knowledge of the public until 1918. At that
time they were republished by one or two British papers, but were
suppressed by the remainder. The treaties were, however, distributed
in innumerable copies by their own governments among the troops of
the Central Powers in order to stimulate them to fight in a spirit of
self-defense. It is reported from various reliable sources that the
Slovenes were the most eager to fight, of any part of the Austrian
army, after the Pact of London had become known to them, with its
various promises to Italy.

The secret assurances which had been given to Italy in the Compact
of London were probably the cause of prolonging the war, with its
enormous slaughter, for more than a year. In the Spring of 1917,
secret negotiations were pursued between the Emperor of Austria, the
President and Premier of France, and the British Prime Minister. The
intermediaries in these negotiations were the Bourbon Princes Sixtus
and Xavier, brothers of the Empress of Austria. The negotiations were
carried on from Switzerland with a confidential envoy of the Emperor
of Austria. Only the Emperor, the Empress and the Duchess of Parma
were in the secret. Count Czernin, the Austro-Hungarian Minister of
Foreign Affairs at this time, at first knew only of the general fact,
not of the details. A note of Count Czernin, with a secret personal
note written by the Emperor, were brought to Prince Xavier and taken
by him to Paris. The proposals in Count Czernin’s note related to the
restoration and indemnification of Belgium, and the German renunciation
of Alsace-Lorraine, which “Austria-Hungary naturally would not
oppose.” Count Czernin stated that Austria-Hungary could not make a
separate peace; that it had no idea of crushing Servia, but needed
guarantees against such affairs as led to the murder at Sarajevo; that
Austria-Hungary had no desire of crushing Roumania, etc. The secret
addenda made by the Emperor, without the knowledge of Count Czernin,
stated: “We will support France and exercise pressure on Germany with
all means [in connection with Alsace-Lorraine]. We are absolutely not
in Germany’s hands; it was against Germany’s will that we did not break
with America.”

When President Poincaré received the Prince’s report he stated
that the secret note afforded a basis for discussion, that he would
communicate the two notes, with arrangements of absolute secrecy, to
the Premier, and inform the Czar by personal letter, as well as the
King of England, and Mr. Lloyd George, “who is a discrete man.” But
the President thought that Italy would be the stumbling block. After
this interview the Princes proceeded to Vienna for a personal interview
with the Emperor, which took place on the night of March 23rd. The
Emperor discussed the whole situation, saying that Servia was naturally
the friend of Austria, and that all that Austria needed was the
suppression of revolutionary propaganda there. He stated that one of
the Entente Powers was secretly conversing with Bulgaria; Bulgaria does
not know that the secret has leaked out. “It has not much importance,
because all these dreams of empire of the East will have to end in the
status quo, or very nearly that.” Count Czernin later joined in the
conversation, which is described as “rather glacial.” He expressed
his belief that peace must be made at any price, and that it might be
necessary for Austria to secure a divorce from Germany because the
latter would never abandon Alsace-Lorraine. After a second visit, the
Emperor gave Prince Xavier an autographed letter, enjoining absolute
secrecy because “an indiscretion would force him to send troops to the
French front.” The autographed letter of Emperor Charles, dated March
24th, contains the following proposals: That he will support the just
French claims to Alsace-Lorraine by all means, using all his personal
influence with his allies; Belgium and Servia are to be restored to
full sovereignty; Belgium is to secure indemnities for her losses; and
Servia is to have access to the Adriatic Sea. On the basis of this
letter, discussions took place among the men concerned in France and in
England. But Italy remained the obstacle.

Another trip was taken by Prince Xavier to Vienna, where he met the
Emperor on May 8th. The question now was, What compensations should
Austria receive for ceding its territory to Italy in accordance
with the Pact of London? Count Czernin joined the meeting and on
the following day prepared a memorandum, which was based upon the
principle, “Austria-Hungary can cede no territory without compensation;
but if the territorial question is arranged, then a separate peace with
the Entente might be concluded.” When the matter was taken up again at
Paris, the Italian difficulty remained. M. Ribot strongly adhered to
the idea that without Italy, no result could be had. Meanwhile, the
unsuccessful Italian offensive of July, 1917, had supervened, and the
war had to go on for another sixteen months, although the acceptance of
the proposals of the Emperor would undoubtedly have brought it to an
early end.

Count Czernin has given in his book, _In the World War_, an
unimpassioned and coldly-balanced view of the diplomacy of the time.
He does not relate the details of the secret negotiations of 1917, but
he evidently did not approve of the manner in which they were carried
out because their effect was to suggest to the Entente a willingness of
Austria-Hungary to separate from her allies, without strengthening her
position in any way. In a letter written to Count Tisza in the summer
of 1917, Czernin said: “It is possible to turn and steer the Entente
course if thought feasible; but then courage would be needed to make
the turn fully. Nothing is more stupid than trifling with treachery
and not carrying it out; we should lose all ground in Berlin and gain
nothing either in London or Paris.”

The policy pursued by Japan throughout the war made use of all the
devices of secret diplomacy for the attainment of ends narrowly
national. After having possessed herself of Tsing-tau, with a marked
cold-shouldering of her British allies, Japan set about an attempt
to arrange things in China so that no effective resistance might be
offered there to Japan’s expansionist desires. In January, 1915, the
Japanese minister in an interview with the President of China, after
enjoining the strictest secrecy on the pain of most disagreeable
consequences, proposed the famous twenty-one demands. That it should
have been attempted to dispose of matters so fundamentally important,
involving the national rights of a population of 350,000,000 people,
through demands secretly forced upon a President, at a time when the
national representative body did not function,--that is one of the
startling facts of modern history. Strange as it may seem, the Japanese
Foreign Office had apparently persuaded itself that secrecy could
be maintained in a matter of such transcendent importance. For when
contrary to that expectation and in accordance with nature and with
the salutary fact that, after all, such tremendous issues can not be
thus secretly disposed of, the facts of the case began to leak out,
categorical denials were made by the Japanese Foreign Office and by
various embassies. In this case, those who had the right to object
to the disposal of important interests in which they themselves had a
share, were not mere neutrals or outsiders but the allies of Japan,
engaged in a life and death struggle at the time. As the twenty-one
demands aimed at the establishment of a predominant position in
China through control of finance and armament, every other nation
there interested would have been adversely affected by the proposed
arrangement. The Chinese, though isolated, would not immediately yield
to the threatening attitude of their neighbor and the negotiations
were strung out over months. Though they were assiduously kept secret,
the nature of the transaction in general and in detail became quite
well known outside, so that the results could not be kept hidden; yet
the whole procedure constituted an affirmation that it was proper to
deal with the destinies of a people in a secret council chamber, where
the demandant backed by strong military forces, confronted the first
official of a vast, peaceful but unmilitant nation, which would never
in the world agree to such procedure and the resultant undertakings.
Japan did indeed get certain concessions, but at the cost of making her
diplomacy and policy universally suspected on account of the methods
which had been used.

The policy of Japan at the time did not look with favor upon China
associating herself with the Allies. Démarches which were made to
bring about the entry of China into the alliance were negatived by
Japan. This in itself might have been based on sound reasons, yet
the real inwardness of this policy was revealed at the time when the
United States had broken off relations with Germany and when the
Chinese Government in the days immediately thereafter was considering
whether to follow the example of the United States. From a report
of the Russian Ambassador at Tokio concerning an interview with the
Foreign Minister of Japan, which took place on February 10, 1917, we
learn that the Minister for Foreign Affairs alluded to a rumor that an
attempt might be made to induce China to join the Allies to the extent
of breaking off relations with Germany. The Foreign Minister said in
effect: “It would be unwise and dangerous to attempt to bring China to
the side of the Allies unless we can be sure that it can be carried
through. This is, however, doubtful. Yet the Japanese Government is
willing to undertake the task of inducing China to take the step. But
before making any such proposal, the Japanese Government desires to be
informed as to the attitude of the Russian Government in the matter of
Shantung and the Pacific Islands. Will the Russian Government support
Japan at the Peace Conference in these matters?” The Russian ambassador
was requested to get the opinion of his government on this point. In
other words, in return for a commission paid largely by China herself,
the Japanese Government was ready to permit that China should join the
Allies in the Great War. It was assumed by the Foreign Minister that
Japan’s persuasion should be necessary to induce China to take this
step; but in fact, at the very time when this conversation between
the minister and ambassador was going on, the Cabinet of China was in
the all-day session from which resulted the decision to follow the
United States in breaking off relations with Germany. This step was
taken without compulsion, urgency or the promise of advantages, upon
a careful consideration of the underlying conditions and equities,
without assurances of gain, merely in the expectation of fair treatment
as an ally and associate.




