XIII

A SURVIVAL OF ABSOLUTISM


Those who view the modern state as a purely predatory
organization,--for exploitation within and without,--point to the
methods, practices and results of diplomacy as one of the plainest
indications of the sinister nature of the political state. Such
criticism cannot be safely brushed aside as utterly unreasonable; it
should rather call forth a searching inquiry as to whether, as a matter
of fact, the conduct of foreign affairs could not and should not be
brought into greater consonance with genuinely democratic principles,
and be placed on the sound basis of well-informed public support.

No matter what opinion one may hold with respect to the necessity of
secret diplomacy, it must be recognized that this practice involves
a very narrow conception of the active scope of democracy. It is in
fact a historical survival from the period of the absolutist state;
or in other words, that aspect of the modern state which deals with
foreign affairs has retained the character of absolutism. It is a
superstition, in the picturesque sense of that word used by Lowell,
when he defines it as “something left standing over from one of the
world’s witenagemotes to the other.” In this case, indeed the most
recent witenagemote approached the question and proposed a step in
advance towards its solution. But the difficulty still persists.

In its relations with other states, the state is considered to be
absolute, not bound by any laws, responsible only for its own security,
welfare and progressing influence. The struggle for political power
still exists among states, in essentially the same keenness and
rigidity with which it appeared to the eyes of Machiavelli. The
importance of world-wide human relationships, and of international
coöperation in scientific and economic life, has indeed been brought
forth and given its place in the public mind; but because of the manner
in which the conduct of international affairs is actually handled, the
feeling thus generated does not have much chance to influence action at
critical times, when the people are startled and excited by the sudden
revelation of dangers, which awaken in them all the bitter feelings
engendered by the past struggles of mankind.

This survival is given strength by class interests, pride of race, and
by the manipulations of plutocratic control. Where affairs are handled
by a narrow circle of men, no matter how high-minded and how thoroughly
conscious of their public responsibility, yet with the necessary
limitations of the human mind, they cannot but be influenced at every
turn by the opinions of others with whom they are actually in contact;
so that in decisions on these momentous matters, the thing which is
concretely present is very often an interest comparatively narrow in
itself, and related to the public welfare only by a series of remote
inferences which are accepted at their face value. The most successful
statesman of the nineteenth century said that the whole Balkan question
was not worth the bones of one Pomeranian grenadier; yet his successors
in power risked the very existence of the nations of Europe for one
phase of that question.

Powerful interests will always have means, formal or informal, to lay
their needs and desires before the men in power. They may indeed be
very important and may deserve special attention, but unfortunately,
many cases have happened in which their point of view has been adopted
without making sure that there existed a general public interest
sufficiently important to warrant taking the risks involved.

A diplomatic caste recruited from a certain class of society, trained
in the traditions of authority, in contact all the time with men of
similar views and principles, cannot in the nature of things free
itself from the limitations of such environment and such training.

From the personal point of view diplomacy has adhered to the belief
in the superior intelligence, ability and foresight in the handling
of foreign affairs, on the part of those who by inherited traditions
and special experience may be said to belong to a caste distinguished
from the mass of humanity. Some one has said, there is a great danger
in that there exists a caste of people who have taken the making of
history as their profession; who still cling to the erroneous idea
that the manipulation of large masses of people, the redistribution of
territories, and the modification of the natural processes of grouping
and settlement, is history. But such people who believe they are making
history are really obstructing it. Even so unusual a man as Bismarck,
working as he did on a great national problem, did not gain lasting
success in action whereby he endeavored to anticipate the developments
of history. The artful contrivance and harsh, ruthless execution
of many of his plans left a heritage of evil to the world; but the
greatest evil lay in the example given by so successful a man in making
it seem that history could actually thus be made. The attitude which
is taken in behalf of such men, in claiming for them a completely free
and full discretion in controlling foreign affairs, recalls a statement
made by H. G. Wells concerning a British leader: “He believes that
he belongs to a particularly gifted and privileged class of beings
to whom the lives and affairs of common men are given over--the raw
material for brilliant careers. It seems to him an act of insolence
that the common man should form judgments on matters of statecraft.”
The diplomats of the old school indeed do require the people, but only
as material with which to work out their grandiose projects. Their view
not too distantly resembles that of the German militarists to whom
ordinary humanity existed only for one purpose, “to do their damn’d
duty.”

We should naturally expect to find the greatest secrecy and the
most callous use of secretive methods, where absolutism remains
most completely established. In the last remaining absolutism,
that of Japan, these expectations are fulfilled, both as regards
carefully-guarded secrecy of all diplomatic action, and the habitual
use of well phrased declarations of a theoretical policy, announced for
public consumption, but bearing only a Platonic relation to the details
of actual doings. But more liberally governed states have not by any
means all freed themselves from this practice, even to the extent of
faithfully keeping the representative bodies, and the public, informed
of the true character and aims of important national policies.

During the discussions of the last few years, a great many remedies
for this state of affairs have been suggested. The Constitutional
practice of the United States has been taken as a model in England
in the suggestion that there should be a representative committee on
foreign affairs in the House of Commons, which should keep in constant
touch with the diplomatic officials and supervise the conduct of
foreign relations; that there should be at least two days given to
the discussion of the Foreign Office Vote; that there should be full
reports made on the progress of all important negotiations; and that
treaties and alliances should not be concluded, nor war made, without
a previous authorization on the part of Parliament. The last formal
proposal of this kind was the motion made in March, 1918, in the
House of Commons, the opposition to which by Mr. Balfour has already
been alluded to. That he should object particularly to the prying
into foreign affairs on the part of persons “not responsible,” and by
“politicians,” that the proposed committee of the House of Commons
should be thus characterized, throws light on the prejudices involved;
but it also reveals the absurdity of the present arrangement from the
point of view of free government. In France there has existed, since
1902, a standing committee on foreign and colonial affairs in the
Chamber of Deputies.

When he was premier, in 1920, Signor Giolliti introduced a bill
carrying the following provision: “Treaties and International
understandings, whatever be their subject and character, are valid only
after they have been approved by Parliament. The Government of the
King can declare war only with the approval of the two Chambers.” The
ministry of Giolliti fell before this sound measure could be passed.

It may be questioned whether many of the arrangements suggested could
be more than palliatives, as long as an intelligent and constant public
interest in foreign affairs has not been aroused, and as long as the
absolutist aspect of foreign policy continues. The suggestion that war
should not be made without a previous national referendum, has indeed
logic on its side from the point of view of the democratic theory of
state, but it has thus far not entered into the state of practical
consideration.

The most important remedy as yet attempted is the provision in the
Covenant of the League of Nations, that all treaties shall be made
public. No greater encouragement, indeed, could be given to the growth
of confidence and the destruction of baneful suspicions and fears,
throughout international life, than if it were possible to assure
the nations of the world that all engagements imposing international
obligations of any kind whatsoever would be made known immediately
upon their conclusion. This provision of the Covenant has already
gone into force, and numerous new treaties have been submitted, even
by governments who are not as yet members of the League. But certain
governments have delayed compliance in cases where treaties are known
to have been made secretly. As there is no specific sanction for this
provision in the Covenant, and as actually binding agreements can be
made without taking the form of a treaty or convention, this remedy
is not in itself powerful enough to remove the evil. If two or three
states are willing to keep an engagement secret at the risk of later
incurring a certain amount of opprobrium when the fact is discovered,
there is no means as yet available for obliging them to abandon such
course. Nevertheless, this provision of the Covenant constitutes
a great advance in the work of placing the public business of the
world on the only sound basis, and cultivating that confidence upon
which depends the future immunity of mankind from constant danger of
suffering and destruction. It will, however, not be a real remedy
until the nations agree actually to outlaw all secret agreements as a
conspiracy against the general welfare and safety.

The other important advance made in the Covenant is found in the
provisions for the investigation of any cause of conflict before
hostilities shall be resorted to. If after the first shock of
excitement, which accompanies the revelation of a serious international
crisis, public opinion can be given a certain space of time to inform
itself, then it may indeed be hoped that a different temper will
control the giving of the fateful doom of war. As Count Czernin has
stated, on the night of August 4, 1914, between the hours of nine and
midnight the decision as to whether England would come into the war,
lay with the German Government. A system under which such tremendous
issues have to be decided in such a manner, is absurd to the verge of
insanity.[E]

    [E] A German writer puts the blame for the outbreak of the
        war on the telegraph. He says that if there had been no
        telegraphic communication between the capitals, the fatal
        crisis would not have arisen; there would have been time
        for reflection and a decision to make war would never have
        been taken in blood.

While the above arrangements, if they could be effectively carried out,
would undoubtedly serve to moderate the evils which now result from
the conduct of international affairs on so narrow a basis, yet it is
difficult to expect from them more than relatively superficial results.
It is only if a new spirit can be developed among the nations, and if
the absolutist conception of the state as far as it still remains, can
be transformed into something more consonant with the complexity and
delicacy of human relationships, that we may hope to hail the dawn of a
new era. It would be as great a transformation as that which separates
the Pagan from the Christian ideal. Mankind is still somewhat blinded
by the glitter and pageantry of the absolutist state; the pride of
power manifests itself now particularly in foreign intercourse. When
Portugal became a republic, it desired at first to abolish the entire
diplomatic establishment, and to allow all international business
to be done by the consuls. That proposal may have resulted from an
instinctive feeling that there was something incompatible between a
really free community, and the sense of absolute power embodied in
diplomacy.

A change can be brought about only when the underlying unity of mankind
is more intensely felt and when the common interests in science,
commerce, industry and the universal language of art are valued at
their true importance to the welfare of the people of all nations.
Joint effort in the constructive work of developing resources,
particularly in the tropics, will make it possible for vastly increased
populations to live in comfort on their present sites, without the need
of crowding each other. A higher valuation of humanity, a more just
proportion in the influence permitted different interests, a keener
scrutiny of traditions and watch-words--all this is necessary. Men
and women to-day feel an intense apprehension, when they think of the
fate of their children in a world in which the unreasoning prejudices
and unenlightened practices that have recently again come to the fore
in international life should prevail, leaving mankind in a dazed
confusion, and pushing the people from time to time into wholesale
slaughter with ever more horrible instruments of destruction. They feel
also that if secret policies, engendering fears and suspicion, are
to continue to be the dominant factor, then all improvement in human
welfare, education and science, will have to be in a large measure
postponed to the preparation of constantly more formidable engines of
death. One cannot but remember the worst imprecations of the Greek
tragic poets and philosophers, on the miserable destiny of man. In
fact, if we should have to believe that no better way could be found
to manage the vital interests of mankind, a great natural catastrophe,
which would extinguish once and for all the miserable breed on this
planet, would almost appear in the light of a redemption.

But we cannot believe that the peoples of the world will be so foolish
as to allow themselves to remain in this condition and not to find
their way to a reorganization of public affairs which will make such a
haphazard and perilous situation impossible. It seems plain that the
idea of the state and of state action will have to be transformed in
accordance with the greater self-consciousness of humanity which has
developed in the last century, or the desire to scrap the political
state and to find some more adequate and natural form of organization
will rapidly gain in strength. Meanwhile, there is a need of the
formation of a great freemasonry of all publicists, political men and
teachers of the people, united in the resolve to know and make known
the essential elements in current international affairs, to arouse the
public to a sense of the importance of these matters to their every-day
life, and to support the men more directly responsible for the conduct
of foreign policy, with an intelligent, searching, reasonable and broad
public opinion.




