X

THE DESTRUCTION OF PUBLIC CONFIDENCE


Our historical survey of diplomatic policy and practice does not hold
much assurance that the evils of secret diplomacy have very appreciably
waned since the eighteenth century. The cruder methods of deception
and corruption which were at that time employed would indeed now be
considered beneath the dignity of diplomats; although it is unhappily
true that some of the most despicable tricks, such as stealing
correspondence and placing informers in houses to be watched, are still
practised occasionally. However, it may be said that while in general
the trade-secrets of diplomacy have lost greatly in prestige, the
spirit of diplomatic action itself has not yet been brought into accord
with democratic ideals.

A secret service attached to the diplomatic establishment is still
considered useful by some governments. It is, however, certainly very
doubtful whether the results thus obtained in the nature of accurate
information, are at all commensurate to the expense and to the constant
danger of being misinformed through secret agents who think that they
must earn their pay. My own observation leads me to believe that people
who use secret service information are frequently confused and worried
by an abundance of unauthenticated reports brought to them; they would
have been far better off without backstairs information, relying on
the fundamental facts and on knowledge which can be obtained only by
seeking the confidence of the men who control public action. Secret
service gossip may often give the key to the aims and desires of an
individual person, and if one is willing to appeal to motives through
corrupt and deceitful means, the information may be actually useful.
However, he whose policy rests upon an essential reasonableness and
mutual benefit, can afford to disregard such gossip.

We might distinguish between a secrecy which is vicious in itself,
and one that pursues beneficent objects. The former seeks to conceal
the presence of harmful motives and projects, to confuse and mislead
people to their disadvantage, and in general, to play on weakness and
ignorance. The other keeps secret its plans and negotiations which in
themselves have honest motives, from a desire to prevent interference
with their prompt and complete realization. Opinions as to the
character of a policy may differ widely and those who secretly advance
a policy generally condemned by many, may perhaps claim credit for
honest purposes. This type of secrecy is common. Unfortunately, though
it may advance a good object, it incidentally has an evil influence
upon public confidence. It must be confessed that the distinction here
pointed out is difficult to apply in practice in a thoroughly objective
manner, because there are probably among diplomats very few indeed who
do not persuade themselves at least that the means applied by them are
designed to achieve useful purposes.

A good example of how stratagem may be used for a laudable purpose
is found in the action of William J. Buchanan, American Minister
to Argentina, in adjusting the Chili-Argentinian boundary dispute.
Buchanan, one of the most original of American diplomats, had nothing
whatever of the suave manipulator of the old school of diplomacy. He
was direct to the verge of bruskness, yet his ability to go straight
to the essential point, and his mastery and bigness, made him highly
successful as a negotiator. In this particular case, Buchanan had been
designated, together with a Chilian and an Argentinian representative,
on a commission to settle boundary questions and requested to make a
preliminary report. He agreed to act only on the following conditions:
That because of the complexity and difficulty of the questions
involved, it would be necessary to report on the suggested boundary
by sections, that each section should be voted upon as reported by
him, and that a majority vote on each section should be decisive. This
proposal was accepted. After a careful investigation, Buchanan made his
report, and it was found that on each section the suggested boundary
was carried by two votes against one; the American always voted in the
affirmative; the Chilian and Argentinian, as in the particular section
the allotments seemed favorable or unfavorable to their respective
country. In accordance with the terms agreed upon, the entire report
had thus to be accepted, and all the thorny problems of long-standing
boundary controversies were settled. Had Buchanan not used this
stratagem it is very unlikely that the report as a whole would have
been accepted, as each of his associates would have felt that he could
not vote for a report containing arrangements for giving up specific
tracts of territory which his country had hitherto always insisted
upon retaining. By this clever arrangement Buchanan made it possible
for them to vote against such relinquishment in each case without
defeating the project as a whole; but if he had revealed to them his
plan at the beginning, the object could not have been achieved.

This incident illustrates that a complete solution will often be
accepted as satisfactory although it may contain details which, by
themselves, would have been resisted to the last. It may be said that
the disadvantage of public discussion lies in the emphasizing of such
points of opposition, and the obscuring of the general reasonableness
of a solution.

Mr. Balfour in his defense of the secrecy of diplomatic intercourse,
says that the work of diplomacy is exactly similar to the work which
is done every day between two great business firms. He then argues
that, in all such relationships, it is unwise to air difficulties in
public. Bismarck used the more homely illustration of a horse trade,
the participants in which should not be expected to tell each other
all they know about the prospective bargain. That view is putting
diplomacy on a rather lowly footing. One might expect a somewhat
different temper among men dealing with momentous public affairs than
the bluff-and-haggle of a petty private transaction. Yet such tactics
have actually been found useful in diplomacy. Mr. Balfour is on
sounder ground when he says, “In private, in conversations which need
not go beyond the walls of the room in which you are, both parties may
put their case as strongly as they like and no soreness remains,” but
“directly a controversy becomes public, all that fair give-and-take
becomes difficult or impossible.” This, of course, implies a somewhat
low estimate of public intelligence and self-control, of which more
later.

The greatest vice of a secret diplomatic policy, working in the dark
and concealing international undertakings, lies in the inevitable
generating of mutual suspicion and the total destruction of public
confidence among the different countries which compose the family of
nations. No nation is so bad as imagination, confused and poisoned
by secrecy and by the suggestion of dire plottings, would paint it.
Agreements and understandings which do not exist at all are imagined,
the nature of those which actually have been made is misjudged, and
animosities are exaggerated; thus the public is quite naturally put in
that mood of suspicion and excitement which renders it incapable of
judging calmly when apparently startling facts suddenly emerge.

Secret diplomacy destroys public confidence, however, in a still more
insidious manner: by the practice of using a language of ideal aims
and humanitarian professions in order to conceal and veil the most
narrowly selfish, unjust and unconscionable actions. The conventional
language of diplomacy still carries in it many of the phrases and
concepts instilled by the false idealism of the eighteenth century, to
which at that time diplomacy gave lip worship. The most disconcerting
performances of this kind are the profuse and reiterated declarations
promising the maintenance of the sovereignty, independence and
integrity of certain countries, when in fact the action really taken
was quite to the contrary effect.

The diplomacy of Japan has manifested peculiar expertship in the use
of phrases that are associated with some wise public dispensation
or arrangement and which have a calming effect--to cover action not
remotely in fact contributing to such beneficent providences. The
sovereignty, integrity and independence of a neighboring country are
guaranteed in solemn terms at the very moment when force, intrigue and
every tricky artifice are secretly employed to destroy them. “Strong
popular demand” is alleged as a reason for harsh action abroad, in a
country where the expressions of public opinions as well as policy
itself are controlled by a narrow group, with absolutist authority.
There is so much talk of “frank discussion” that every one is put on
his guard as soon as the word “frank” is uttered.

The “peace of Asia,” a “Monroe Doctrine for Asia,” the “Open Door,”
“greatest frankness,” “hearty coöperation with other powers,” are
heralded at times when the context of facts makes a strange commentary.
But while such a discrepancy is very strident in a country where
military absolutism wields control over diplomacy, with a grudging
obeisance to representative forms, yet other countries are by no
means free from this hypocrisy. What blasted promise of equity in
all that succession of declarations concerning Korea, China, Persia,
parts of Turkey, and Morocco. What confusion of political ideals in
supporting Denikin, Wrangel, and Horthy as defenders of “representative
government.”

When Russia and Japan, in response to Secretary Knox’ Manchurian
proposal had made their secret arrangements to defeat his policy,
Great Britain, though it had made many reassuring protestations at
Washington, nevertheless had secretly acquiesced (to cite a Russian
diplomatic paper) in the “recognition of our (Russian) sphere of
influence in Northern Manchuria, Mongolia, and Western China, with
the exception of Kashgar, as well as the undertaking not to hinder us
in the execution of our plans in these territories, and herself to
pursue no aims which we should have to regard as incompatible with our
interest.” And it was also stated that Great Britain, in return, was
to receive “recognition of her freedom of action and her privileged
position in Tibet.” This was in 1912.

Thus were the solemn declarations relating to the Open Door and the
integrity of China applied in action.

Subsequent departure from the letter and spirit of such declarations
may indeed sometimes be excused on account of changed circumstances;
but frequently it is quite apparent to those who know what is going on,
that such well-sounding declarations are made for public consumption,
at the very time when the contrary action is taken secretly.

This is indeed nothing less than a crime against the public opinion and
conscience of the world, which cannot be condemned in terms too strong.
It shows a thorough contempt of the people, who are supposed to be
either of so little intelligence or of so short a memory that such vain
professions may succeed in veiling the true inwardness of political
intrigue. This practice tends to engender thorough confusion in the
public mind as to standards of right and justice in international
affairs; it shakes the basis on which alone sound international
relations can grow up; as, indeed, all social relations must rest upon
confidence in an underlying justice and equity.

Closely allied to the practice of making public declarations in
international affairs which do not correspond with the specific action
taken, is the control of the press and the censure of news. This is
indeed a matter which transcends the subject of diplomacy, because
a system of press control and censure is often applied by other
departments of the government than the diplomatic branch. As far as
foreign affairs are concerned, it is used in an effort to support
foreign policy, and it therefore shares the same defects which inhere
in the old diplomacy. Like secret diplomatic control, it is accounted
for on the assumption that the people cannot be trusted with the entire
truth, and that carefully selected portions of the truth have to be
put forth in order to make them ready to support the policy considered
necessary by the leaders. This involves the assumption of an enormous
responsibility by a few leaders in determining by themselves what
the public interest requires and instead of relying on the strength
naturally to be gained from a spontaneous public opinion, to attempt
to fashion that opinion for specific purposes. Press control and
censure, with the incomplete and warped information which it implies,
is one of the evil accompaniments considered necessary in the conduct
of a war, for the safety of the combatant nation. The principle that
strategic information must be kept secret is extended, at such times,
out of all reason. After hostilities have actually been concluded, this
practice tends to subsist and to continue the evils of misinformation
and confusion in the public judgment. The manner in which all news
emanating from the Balkan and Near Eastern countries has been censured
since the war, has made it impossible for the public of the world to
form a just conception as to what is there going on. Control of the
press and censorship likewise resulted in such confusion in the public
mind concerning the problems of Russia, that there remained no reliable
basis for a policy which would facilitate the restoration of more
normal conditions there, in a sympathetic spirit with the struggles and
difficulties of the Russian people.

On account of the natural fact that men are apt to be influenced in
their action unconsciously through persons with whom they have constant
associations, it is a matter of no mean importance that the armament
interests should have been so strongly represented in many capitals by
men of high professional and social standing, always on the ground,
eager to advance the business in military supplies. In many capitals,
very close relationships have grown up between the diplomatic officers
and the representatives of the great armament firms. As a mutual
apprehension of excessive preparation for war greatly stimulates these
industries, it is not surprising that their representatives do not
exert themselves to prevent occasional war scares. In fact, highly
misleading information on war plans has often been given out, as in the
case of a representative of the Coventry Ordnance Works, who in 1909
informed the British Government of excessive shipbuilding by Germany.
The news was later found to be erroneous; but new orders had been
given in Great Britain, and through action and reaction armaments were
stimulated elsewhere. The close connection of the Krupp Iron Works with
the German Government and with associations favoring aggressive foreign
action is well known.

It has often happened that what represents itself to be a national
interest and enlists diplomatic and political support in that way, is
really only the enterprise of individuals to make profits. The men
who support it with their best energies and talents are not villains,
but their method of assuming a great national interest where only
a tradition, a prejudice or a private plan of profit are involved,
renders their doings far from beneficial to the commonweal. Similarly,
those who operate on the principle that the public mind must be
nourished with certain carefully selected facts and kept from the
knowledge of others, may have honest motives, but their ideas of public
action are obsolete or deserve to be so, as they are left over from the
absolutist régime in politics.




