CHAPTER II

LIBERALISM IN ITALY


For the foreigner interested in the political affairs of Italy a study
of the pedigree of the two elements of Fascism is essential in order
to distinguish what is exclusively Italian from what is to become
universal. It is therefore necessary to trace, or at least attempt to
trace, this pedigree in spite of the difficulty of the task.

Fascism presents itself at first as being essentially the expression of
the national consciousness of Italy. So it is; but it must be stated
at once that it is the national consciousness recently acquired by the
people of Italy, which, like an uncontrollable force, has worked itself
out, taking Fascism as its expression. Without this distinction the
student is induced by its nationalist character to see in the present
movement the last act of the long drama of wars and agitations that
led to the independence and unification of the country. The truth is,
that though it is practically the epilogue of that drama, Fascism
cannot be identified with the Risorgimento. The spirit which animated
the men of the days of Cavour and Garibaldi is totally and essentially
different from that which impels the followers of Mussolini to act as
they do. The wars of independence were due to the initiative of an
aristocratic minority; whose aristocratic and intellectual qualities
distinguished them and perhaps ensured their success. The leaders
of the Risorgimento were not hampered by anything like a popular
following; and their eventual agreement as to what was best for their
cause was always made certain by this intellectual selectness. All were
able, like Garibaldi and Mazzini, to see things as they were and to act
accordingly, not only to the extent of sacrificing their lives but of
sacrificing their dearest ideals as well. Republicans, they accepted
monarchy; ministers, of their own free will they relinquished power to
place it in hands they thought more fit than their own to realise their
dream; staunch Catholics, during their life they fought the Church
in its temporal politics, in an age when the best educated priests
would not admit and could not even see the possibility of distinction
between temporal and spiritual power. Only religious and idealistic men
can realise by how much such sacrifices surpassed for them the gift
of money, liberty, or even life. There is one English word that sums
up what these Italian liberators were, whether noblemen, solicitors,
writers, professors, officers, doctors: they were _gentlemen_ of good
classical education and wide reading who had assimilated what was best
in Europe. The common people, one cannot insist too much upon the
fact, remained indifferent at best, and that only as long as their
interests were not affected; the lower middle class were hostile, that
is to say the shop people and all the multitude of small functionaries
who saw their daily bread dependent on the existing state of things,
were openly against any change. How could such people feel the need or
see the possibility of building up a nation, one nation, out of the
harlequin coat presented by the map of Italy?

Thus a free hand was guaranteed to the small number of Italian
gentlemen then endowed with heroic souls. They had nobody to consult,
they were a State in themselves, a State without a lower class.
Perhaps for the last time in the history of the world we see there
realised the classical republic without a political plebs. No wonder
that they worked a miracle; they belonged politically to different
states, and yet by the force of their ideal they attained that oneness
of conscience which gives personality and reality to a nation. The
spirit of the nation existed before its material realisation; there
is no better illustration of the new notion that Fascism is bringing
to the fore in the world of concrete history, that of the nation as
a spiritual reality, independent of geographical and ethnographical
determinations. Never in history has this notion received a more
complete and actual realisation than in this first dawn of the national
life in Italy. The reality of the nation had its first affirmation in
the sacrifice of these men, for it is obvious that no sober man would
give up life, liberty, wealth, for something unreal; and, in fact, the
reality of Italy as a nation ceased to be questioned then and there.

Every advantage, of course, has its disadvantage. As the pioneers of
the Risorgimento did not need the people, they overlooked all the
problems that the necessity of obtaining popular collaboration would
have compelled them to face. All economic and social questions were
overlooked except by a very few; the spiritual education of the lower
class was not even suggested in their programme of action. Their aims
were the independence and the political unity of Italy, and to that
goal they directed their hearts and minds indifferent to the needs of
practical life, and to all the obstacles that seemed to make their
dream a theme for the lyrical effusions of poets. In fact they were
poets, all of them, for they created a reality out of an ideal vision
that was more an intuition than an intellectual conception. The very
manner in which they carried out their revolution was æsthetic more
than practical; they shut their eyes to all that was in contradiction
to their dream, exactly as the artist does who strives to express an
intuition through material realisation, and in order not to let the
objective world crowd his mind deliberately shuts his eyes to it, to
everything that is not his present ideal.

The economic and social questions could not in any case have been
faced, still less dealt with, as long as the nation was not a political
reality. Any attempt would have been sterile and perhaps even harmful.
First, it would have led the people to believe that under the then
present conditions the economic organisation of each little state
might have been so planned as to ensure the material well-being of
the population, that they could receive a greater share of political
importance and therefore of administrative attention from the local
governments and thus be better off in the harlequin coat than under
the flag of a united Italy. It was, moreover, expedient to hold to the
singleness of purpose that was more likely to make action coherent all
through the peninsula; only such singleness of aim made it possible to
men of so different temperament and breeding as professional men and
noblemen, Tuscans and Sicilians, Freemasons and ardent Catholics, to
think and therefore to act in positive harmony.

When a bullet has hit the bull’s-eye it has fulfilled its purpose, and
stays there in helpless immobility or falls to the ground a useless
thing. It was meant for that shot, and is bound to be purposeless when
it has made its mark. The generations of Carlo Alberto and Mazzini, of
Vittorio Emmanuele and Cavour, had certainly hit the mark when Rome had
become the capital of Italy. Was it to be expected that men who had
identified themselves with the goal should be able to take another goal
and fit themselves to a new task? Or could it be that the realisation
of the new State should bring, as its immediate consequence, a
ready-made generation of statesmen? Indeed, if there is one thing that
cannot be produced by a magic wand, it is a body of able and trained
political men.

When the days of heroic deeds were over the makers of Italy turned
to the government of the new realm and found themselves faced by all
the problems of national life. Inspiration and idealism proved out of
place, and although theirs was, what would have been called in England
or in France, a Conservative government, they had to rely on a very
strange electoral body. While they did not extend the vote at once,
they found in the middle class a set of Arrivists with an imperative
egoism that was to prove the curse of political life in Italy. It
is difficult for an English, French, or American citizen to realise
the kind of problems with which these men were beset. Above all it
is difficult to an Englishman; England has had five or six centuries
of political experience, a length of time sufficient to produce
electors and mandatories able to realise what are the duties of the
executive as well as of the legislature. In Italy, on the other hand,
the nineteenth century has seen all stage of political development
succeeding one another in a hurly-burly that has a good deal in common
with the succession of the events of a man’s life on a cinema film.
He passes from childhood to youth, and on to manhood, maturity and old
age in a couple of hours. If he actually could crowd all experience
into a couple of years the proportion would be better; but he would
have no fairer notion of reality and of his own rights and duties at
any stage of his life than the Italians could be expected to have when
they had to pass in less than fifty years through the political stages
successively experienced by the people of other countries in several
centuries.

Now no student of the history of politics, or even of art, ignores the
fact that when a nation has reached a political or artistic form it
is in the process of getting a mastery of that form that criticisms
arise, and that out of criticism comes the idea, confused at first,
then clearer and clearer, of the form that is to supersede it. This is,
in fact, the process of dialectic: it is the dialectic of history; and
in spite of the wish to avoid any special terminology, it is better to
call the process by its own name. At first people struggle to reach a
certain form of government, and that moment of dialectic ends when the
form is reached; they then apply it more and more fully and, during
its application, discover its limitations; this second moment ends in
criticism of the whole theory; finally they set themselves to remedy
its shortcomings. This last moment coincides in the people with the
free consciousness of dissatisfaction, and in the leaders with a clear
understanding of the new tendencies to be satisfied, so that it is
not theoretical to say that the people learn to use a new form whilst
they are using, then discarding, the one that came before it. In Italy
nothing of the sort happened. The international culture of its scholars
put them in contact with all that was best or worst in the politics
of Europe. They would have been ashamed to be behindhand in what was
considered social progress.

Then two uncommon factors came into play after 1870. To make Italy, it
had been necessary to trample upon a good deal of historical tradition.
Not all the local governments were as bad during the eighteenth
century as they were said to be. Moreover, paramount had been the
prestige of the Popes. Against all the Conservative forces the men of
the Risorgimento had appeared as a lot of Jacobins; they had to fight
the Church in its temporal power, and although this power was not
essential to religion it had behind it a tradition of ten centuries.
With the government of the Popes the whole Italian civilisation was
closely connected; indeed, the best brains of Italy have always
realised that, whatever the faults of the Church, Italy is first of
all a Catholic country. Anti-clericals in their political activity,
men like de Sanctis, would not have printed a word against the Church
as historians. Indeed, the greatest thinkers of the time, Gioberti and
Rosmini, tried very hard to be good Catholics and great philosophers at
the same time.

Yet since they could not doubt that Italy must have Rome for its
capital as the seal of its political unity, the Popes had to be
deprived of their temporal sovereignty. The feeling about Rome was one
of historical mysticism, and seldom, if ever, have men found themselves
thrown into an irreligious attitude by a sentiment of that kind. No
contradiction could have been more profound, for it brought these
ardent lovers of their remotest past to make use of forces that were
antagonistic to the one institution that linked their present to this
same past. However, there was no alternative; adopting Illuminism as
one of the chief currents animating modern life, they had as their most
precious support the anti-Catholic movement, to which, as a matter
of fact, a great many of them belonged. Anti-Catholicism had a great
weakness in that it was not a national product, but had been introduced
into political life as a necessary stimulant to rouse the people from
their slumbers, as will be seen later on; now that they were awake it
divided the nation and prevented the welding of the new tradition to
its history of twenty centuries.

The statesmen of this epoch had no experience of the administration and
government of a big State: they were not conscious of the problems of
international relations; they knew nothing of the economic and social
exigencies of a population exceeding thirty millions of souls.

The people had no political education whatsoever. On the other hand,
the leaders would not be retrograde and became more and more liberal,
at a rate that did not allow the people to be prepared by experience
for successive steps in popular government. The sequence of reforms was
not historical, was not dialectical: it did not correspond with the
spiritual and economic development of the people, but was introduced to
make up for lost time and bring Italy up to the Western European level
as fast as possible.

With no tradition to make up ballast, the so-called “Right” could not
be termed Conservative because it originated in a revolution, and
it kept its old ideal as a target after it had been realised, and
therefore had ceased to be a principle of action.

What was to be expected under such conditions? The wonder is that the
nation did not go to pieces, and that the work of two generations of
constructive men was not destroyed by their incapacity to husband what
they had created. In the face of such facts one cannot help thinking of
Vico and his identification of divine Providence with the rationality
of history. This people was politically at the nursery stage; it had
no modern political science of its own, and therefore none of its
legislative acts were based on actual and practical understanding of
what were the national necessities. They were inspired by the example
of foreign governments and, consequently, could not meet Italy’s
peculiar necessities. What did for the others could not do for Italy.
Yet it was impossible to keep back a people so well informed of modern
progress.

The Italian Liberals, it must be said for their immortal fame, had the
clear-sightedness necessary to attain their aims, inasmuch as they
had reduced them to a formula that could be accepted by all the other
patriots. “Italy, one and free,” was their aim, and to this aim nobody
could object. The flaw of such an aim is that it is too simple to
correspond to actual reality. It sounds like an algebraical axiom, and,
indeed, is just as abstract in its basis as any mathematical formula.

For the Liberals the nation was exclusively constituted by its
territorial expansion and by the unification of the people of the
different states therein included. They could not change their aim,
and when they had to administer the new realm their eagerness and
singleness of purpose often blinded them to reality. As the unity
they had reached was formal, if one can term it so, their legislation
purposely ignored the differences between Sicilians and Tuscans; and
in their haste to unify internally what was already externally one,
they imposed what could at best be formal and artificial unity. Every
annexation had been preceded by a local struggle, and success was not
sufficient to cause equanimity in the triumphant party. All that had
existed under the old régime was an object of hatred to the Liberals;
and their ministers, even when they kept above such feelings, were
none the less unable to discriminate between the antiquated local laws
and those that were still useful and even good. They destroyed local
institutions, often created to meet actual requirements, to impose, for
instance, upon the people of Sicily Piedmontese laws, the inspiration
of which was usually imported from France or England. They had the
impression that it would be dangerous to the unity of the country to
keep some of the local laws, or to make new ones to meet the particular
needs of this or that province. In the minds of these passionate
creators of unity, unity was a quite fragile affair, produced by
them _ex tempore_; they did not see that it could only be the result
of a slow elaboration, bound to go on for generations, and that the
final success of their enterprise was more likely to be ensured by an
intelligent interpretation of tradition than by the application of
exotic doctrines that did not fit any of the historical characteristics
of the country.

The same singleness of vision was to prove blinding in regard to
several other points; but it will be enough to state here that the fact
that the men who had sacrificed themselves to the cause of unity had
all been gentlemen, led those in power to consider the higher classes
as exclusively constituting the nation they had brought into being. The
rest were politically non-existent; and in the haste to develop the
commercial and industrial possibilities of the country a good deal too
much was done to enthrone capital and invite thereby the advent of
Socialism.

Finally, another cause of trouble—indeed, another consequence of the
same lack of political tradition and education—was the impossibility
of forming proper party organisations. Who was Left—and who was Right?
Discrimination was impossible. Parties, like all historical organisms,
are called into being and developed according to, and in consequence
of, the political development of the country. In Italy they had to be
produced, planned and organised all at once, by the mere empirical
decisions of men, who, whatever their ability, or the loftiness of
their ideals, could not avoid the arbitrariness and the errors to
which the best individual men are subject, limited as their views are
by their personal feelings or ambitions. Therefore, what happened
was this: some followers of Mazzini who had joined the Liberals in
the struggle for liberty, stood out as republicans; some who had
followed Garibaldi and who had for ten years longed to take Rome from
the Pope, became anti-clerical democrats; the rest were not to be
clearly distinguished from one another because a man who was a staunch
monarchist may have been in the same time anti-Catholic if he was a
Freemason, whilst another might have had strong democratic tendencies
and yet stand for tradition. The best instance of this may have been
Crispi: he belonged to the Left, and certainly often acted and felt
like a man of the Right.

Such confusion was to reach its climax when, after 1866 and 1870, it
was understood that the king and the government, having obtained the
Veneto from Austria, had given up the intention of adding Trento and
Trieste to the kingdom. Then the extreme Left joined irredentism to
its anti-Catholic activity. They went on speaking of the ethnographic
right that such provinces had to claim themselves as Italian, and
they artfully bound their anti-religious campaign to a programme that
sounded highly idealistic. No wonder that the different governments
that succeeded each other should lose their time fighting the ghost
of financial bankruptcy. One thing only can be brought against them,
and it is that though all men of great culture they did not understand
how unhistorical were their actions. They should have known that their
conception of State and citizen, their idea of what is the function
of the government, had been taken ready made from other countries and
lazily accepted without any proper study of its antecedents. Some were
Anglophile, some under their new Germanophilism hid the most perfect
assimilation of French doctrines taken in their easiest and, therefore,
most abstract formulas. None took liberty for what the word had meant
of actual and positive political conquest to the average Englishman
of the seventeenth century; they did not even take it for what it had
meant of practical improvement to the Frenchman of the eighteenth
century; they took it as a rhetorical figure with an abstract concept
behind it, as soon as it ceased to mean independence from foreign rule.

They termed themselves Liberals, however, and when they came to be
ministers of a Liberal government they professed sometime a very
curious notion of what such a government should be; Cairoli put it down
in three words, _reprimere non prevenire_; an excellent motto perhaps,
when the citizens are used to the exercise of their duties and rights,
but soon proved to be dangerous in a country where traditions had been
trampled upon during half a century. In less than a decade Italy was
the prey of anarchy, for in 1878, the same Cairoli, had to defend the
king’s life in Naples at the risk of his own, and in Florence and Pisa
bombs were thrown against the crowds rejoicing over the king’s narrow
escape. The Liberals looked at the way legislation worked in France and
in England, but, like all followers of Illuminism, they took it for
granted that there existed a certain kind of animal which was the same
wherever and whenever you find Man, and they looked at the application
of the system, not at its origin, not at its philosophical and
political antecedents; in short, they did not see that it was brought
about by the whole history of the countries in which it flourished, and
they believed that it would work wherever men lived together in nations.




