CHAPTER IV

THE EUROPEAN WAR AND ITS EFFECTS


In March, 1914, the cabinet of Giolitti retired owing to some
differences with the Radicals. The moment was full of difficulties and
the new ministry was likely to have to deal with strikes and riots at
home and complications out of Italy. Sonnino, leader of the Opposition
and one of the best men that the Right could boast of, refused to form
a new cabinet and managed to have the office entrusted to Salandra.
The German Emperor, passing through Venice on his way to Corfou, had a
long talk with the king and the Marquis of San Giuliano, the fact being
considered a new proof of Italo-German friendship apparently even by
the government, whose endeavours were all directed to secure a majority
in both Houses and to avert the storm that was threatening at home.

The railways were on the verge of a general strike, the state officials
were demanding better wages and tried to enforce their requests by
forming a trade union; workmen and peasants made riots in various
provinces, especially in the Romagne and Marche, where in June the
Red Week gave the spectacle almost of a revolution. There however the
Socialists and Republicans made such a poor show that it is likely to
have done a good deal towards shaking Mussolini’s faith in popular
revolution. Salandra and his ministers were so beset that they let
foreign affairs go unheeded or at least treated them as a matter of
minor urgency. It must have been a great shock to them to realise the
imminence of war.

When the war broke out involving all the great European Powers the
public generally believed Italy to be bound to back the Triple
Alliance. Immediately the Socialists and the extreme Left stirred up
a campaign on the ground that the Italian people were pacifists and
supporters of international Socialism. It is not easy to say whether,
even had it been pledged to do so, the government would have been able
to obtain the support of the nation to enter war immediately. Morally
the people were not ready to accept a war without attack or without
provocation from somebody.[3] On the first of August Italy declared
neutrality and on that day the _Giornale d’Italia_ clearly stated that
such neutrality was not like that of Holland or Switzerland, and above
all should not be considered as definitive.

The tenor of the press showed on which side an eventual intervention
of Italy would take place. Everybody was either neutralist or
interventionist, but nobody was in favour of an intervention on
the side of the Triple Alliance. The most Germanophile never went
farther than neutralism; all that they hoped and prayed for was the
non-intervention of Italy.

The argument of the neutralist papers was based on a statement of
the economic and individual sacrifices that war would involve, and
a plea that Italy could not yet be fit to enter such a conflict.
Anti-idealists or sceptics (as many of the sons of the heroes of the
Risorgimento were) they all agreed to regard life as the supreme value
and material well-being as its natural frame. Of war they only saw the
destructive side. They were certainly logical. A conception of life
so thoroughly materialist could not permit of a higher view of war;
for war certainly does destroy life and if it can and does promote an
improvement in the material conditions of life it is only as a remote
consequence of the class changes, and the industrial and commercial
stimulus carried in its trail. The immediate consequences are certainly
unsettling and paralysing to business.

On the other hand the interventionists had as the basis of their
argument a set of platitudes the abstract ideology of which was nearly
as objectionable as the materialism of their opponents. France,
Belgium and England were identified with right and civilisation,
Germany and Austria with wrong and barbarity. Therefore Italy should
have the honour of being among the righteous avengers of liberty and
civilisation against their traditional foe, barbarity. This opposition
of two abstractions to the materialism of their opponents betrayed
the ideologic heirloom of the eighteenth century, so dear to the
self-admiring minds of the educated mob. For there is such a thing as
an educated mob and it is sure to be on the side that offers a high
sounding rhetoric, a certain number of stock phrases and a fascinating
ideology. It is so much easier to accept ready-made ideas than to work
them out from actual reality.

It was not likely, however, that such claptrap should move the people
to war. Fortunately, there was another side to the question and that
was the chance of getting Trento and Trieste, in whose intellectual
life the old spirit of the Risorgimento had kept two strongholds. All
that was Liberal and traditional in the Italy of the nineteenth century
rose to the bait. The highest form of Italian Liberalism and its
aftermath Nationalism, unfurled their standard with the old zest and
their followers displayed their immortal eagerness to make this last
addition to their forerunners’ building of Italy. Not only were they
splendid in the propaganda days, but they were the first to enlist,
and both young Nationalists and old Liberals made it a point that “no
gentleman should stay at home.” Naturally the echo they aroused was
far from being general. If all the Liberals and the Nationalists were
gentlemen not all the so-called gentlemen belonged to these parties;
there was as much political indifference among the higher classes as
among the lower. But it is only fair to say that the war which gave
rise to the national and political consciousness whose first expression
is Fascism was mainly due to the pressure and the enthusiastic campaign
of Italian Liberalism and its offspring Nationalism.

This much being said in praise of the Nationalists, it may be remarked
from the Italian point of view that the misrepresentation of the time
and of the character of the world conflagration could not have been
carried much farther. It was indeed the last flare of their imported
notions of political reality. For nearly five centuries intellectual
tradition had bestowed upon Italians a mentality which is historical
nearly beyond understanding for foreigners. It will be traced back in
another chapter from Dante’s _De Monarchia_, but it may be here taken
from its first practical assertion. Machiavelli, at the end of the
fifteenth century, acting as Chancellor and Secretary of Florence, was
honoured with the unlimited trust of the _Gonfaloniere a vita_ and in
every respect proved himself worthy of such high consideration. He was
exceedingly grateful to the man who entrusted him with missions, the
official charge of which could not have been legally bestowed upon him.
Yet, whatever his regard for the high-mindedness of his principal, from
a close study and strict observation of political facts he came to the
conclusion that nothing could prevent the Gonfaloniere’s policy from
failure.

Dino was elected _Gonfaloniere a vita_ when the son of Lorenso il
Magnifico had to leave Florence in a hurry after having failed to
avert the transit of Charles the VIII and his troops through Florence.
Cosimo and Lorenzo dei Medici had only ruled for about half a century
but the changes which had taken place during that time in Tuscany and
in the whole of Italy were so great that history shows whole centuries
which have not displayed half of the difference made, for bad or good,
by the civilisation of the time. History was indeed at a turning of
the road so that when Dino came in power there was as much difference
between the political world anterior to the Medicean rule and his own
as there is between the sweet and gentle art of the Beato Angelico,
and that of Signorelli who introduced realism in his own vigorous art.
Good Dino, however, having been chosen Gonfaloniere to bring Florence
back to its former virtuous ways, looked to the old Republican days for
a model of government, and he failed to give his fellow citizens the
political advantage that would have met their needs just as Signorelli
would have shown himself a failure if he had painted exactly as the
Beato had done. Machiavelli was no optimist, but whatever the weakness
of his conception of history due to the philosophical notions of his
time, he did not give himself up entirely to abusing the wickedness of
the people. Sure enough, they were wicked—far more so than they had
been before the Medicean had corrupted them—yet they were above all
different and had, therefore, to be governed according to different
ideas.

It is no wonder, therefore, that the Florentine Secretary should have
spent so many hours of his enforced leisure after the realisation of
the event, the inevitability of which had so long haunted him, to warn
his contemporaries and the posterity of the necessity of governing not
according to a mummified ideal, but in harmony with one’s own time.
_Bisogna riscontrarsi coi propri tempi_ and to do so he recommends the
statesman again and again to get direct information of that which he
calls _la verità effettuale delle cose_, that is effective or actual
truth in matter of politics. It is both the experimental method of
Galileo and Vico’s historical understanding of society that are alluded
to in this constantly recurrent admonition of the man whose shrewdness
was to blind posterity for several centuries and throw the power and
depth of his political genius in the dark.

In 1915 such an excellent jurisconsult as Prof. Salandra and such a
first-rate diplomat as Sonnino seemed to realise but little that such a
principle existed. At best they harped on Trento and Trieste, when they
did not display their rhetoric on the conflict between civilisation and
barbarity. Still this territorial conquest, whatever its importance
as a traditional ideal to realise, was presented above all as a
rectification of the northern frontiers strictly necessary for the
safety of the nation and ethnologically justified. Nobody ever seemed
to realise that this aim should not have been the first objective to
a nation which lacked that which is the very essence of the national
entity, that which entitles a collectivity to have ethnological
frontiers, in short a national conscience and a national will.

Nobody seemed to realise it, but there was one man who did, and there
we have the second flare of genius to be credited to Mussolini. He had
become gradually conscious through constant contact with the working
class, and the middle class as well, that they would never be fit for
political life unless they acquired what they lacked through sacrifice.
The recent Red Week had shown him that they would not fight, that they
might set traps for other people’s lives, but they would not face
either blows or death for anything; and when the war came he saw that
there Italy had the one chance it could have to acquire what the genial
people who called themselves its citizens lacked to lift themselves
into the higher sphere where human beings are prepared to live and to
die for their political ideas.

It is, in fact, this national conscience, this spiritual and,
therefore, unlimited gift that the war has bestowed upon Italy, and
it is only now that Carducci, the most typically civic of all Italian
poets, could write with perfect truth:

  “Ei dipinga il trionfo dell ’Italia
  Assorta novella tra le genti.”

Nevertheless it is not Fascist Italy, it is not the real friends of
Italy, who will ever find fault with the ideas that brought Italy to
join the Allies and face the tragic ordeal of war. For it was the war,
the mystery of death faced by millions of her sons, which has made
Italy a moral value, and a first-rate historical factor in the present
political world. The select minority that was the brain and soul of
the Risorgimento has disappeared; national consciousness now fills
the individual consciences of the majority, and this extension of the
national conscience had nothing to do with the extended vote; it is a
consequence of the war. Personality, national personality means actual
unity of conscience and will just as much as individual personality.
Such personality has effectively been born in Italy out of the ordeal
that meant direct or indirect sacrifice from every man and woman, for
nobody would doubt the reality of the object for which his sacrifice
was made. Italy and her star were, up to 1915, a good theme for popular
or academic literature, but when it had required blood and tears from
every home it became that which could easily be transformed into the
most awful and objective reality. Hence the religiousness of their new
realisation of Italy.

It loomed indeed awful, like an obscure divinity, when it called men
who did not quite know why they had to fight to the supreme sacrifice.
One has to keep in mind how little civilisation and barbarity, pompous
words, meant to the Italian lower class, and how little Sicilians or
Neapolitans cared for Trento and Trieste. After Caporetto it was a
different matter. The traditional foe was on their land, and by then
they had realised what war meant. Therefore, one may say that their
national soul was tempered between Caporetto and the Armistice, and
that only then they became an ethical value, a spiritual entity or
rather personality fit to play a part in the constructive history of
the world. The point cannot be over-stated.

It is only through the war that the spiritual reality of the country
was enabled to strike roots in the souls of the labourers and middle
class men, ceasing thereby to be the monopoly of a small intellectual
and aristocratic minority.

The subjects of the King of Italy all became Italian citizens, and the
people was finally one in its full independence; it was, indeed, the
last act of the Risorgimento.

Few foreigners, no foreigner so to speak, had in 1915 a fair idea of
what was the state of mind of the Italians and still less of what
could be their mentality. It will not be too daring to say that in
this ignorance lay the cause of all the diplomatic difficulties and
of the fallacious appreciations of what that country could give, or
has actually given, with the consequent mutual vexations that were to
strain the relations between the Allies and Italy.

The author had already, in 1915, spent two years in Italy and studied a
good deal; yet youth did not allow at the time more than an intuition
of the fact—the conviction of which was to be acquired by ten years
of experience, observation and study. The Allies expected too much of
a generation whose fathers had fought the Wars of Independence with
sheer heroism and with material means that England or France would
have considered hardly fit for a colonial campaign. On the other hand,
they overlooked the possibilities of a people who had in front of
itself the whole of its national future, an historical mentality which
was likely to keep it from the sterilising conception of positivism,
abstract idealism or materialism, once it should have reached a
clear sense of its own secular reality, a Lacedemonian frugality,
and finally intellectual forces not inferior to those of the Kantian
and Hegelian Germany. The Italians for their part had to overcome a
radical scepticism. They had a very poor opinion of what military
achievement they could get out of their lower class, their traditional
financial deficiency made them fear economic destruction almost more
than the life sacrifice of so many men. Munitions were a nightmare,
renewal of their coal and wheat stocks a puzzling problem. They had to
trust blindly to the Allies. In fact it is a wonder that they should
have overcome the sense of despondency that might have paralysed them
altogether.

Thus it happened that the Italians did actually achieve far more than
they expected, far surpassing their own opinion of their military
efficiency; whilst doing far less than the Allies had expected. Hence
no end of misunderstandings. They thought that they had surprised us
by an unsuspected revelation of force and efficiency and they ascribed
our rather disappointed attitude to envy and fear of their new power.
Before the war they thought too little of themselves, because, as we
have said, they were still nationally unconscious, while the British
and French governments overrated the forces that they might contribute
without acknowledging their ambitions to develop the latent forces of
which they were conscious. Such misunderstanding was to breed all the
difficulties that we knew of at the end of the war. The Italians had
been victorious in war, they had triumphed over their enemies, and
above all over themselves, since they had asserted their reality as an
actual political value. But they were defeated in peace, or at least
were on the very point of being defeated and destroyed by peace.

                   *       *       *       *       *

The several Treaties of peace, the conferences of the Allies, were
a long sequence of disappointments to the people of Italy. The
incomprehension of the real state of things in that country reached
such a degree that had Socialism in Italy been endowed with a more
violent vitality Bolshevism would have flourished. The propaganda of
the Socialist party increased daily on ground most favourably prepared
by the general discontent and received moreover the collaboration
of the so-called _Popolari_—a kind of Social Catholic party that in
theory was to take the place of the clericals. Whether their leader,
Don Sturzo, a man of remarkable power, realised the sacrilegiousness
of using Catholic priests to pervert the minds of the peasants or not,
the Popolari brought their violences to such a pitch in some provinces
that they not only matched, they surpassed the Reds.[4] Naturally,
these parties and the men who were not supposed to belong to them, but
were flattering them in case of an eventual revolution, were wont to
represent the war and the sacrifices that had been made by the country
as the cause of all the social and economic difficulties. To them,
the only consequence of the war was the destruction of what had been
laboriously done between 1870 and 1915.

It was at this juncture that some people banded together their
aspirations, which seemed in the main to be the realisation in the
Adriatic of all the value of what they called “their mutilated
victory.” They had mostly been in the trenches, and they clustered
round Gabriele d’Annunzio who led them to occupy Fiume, which was
still under the control of the Allies. The Allies left the whole
affair to Italy and had the Italian government, or a strong party,
backed d’Annunzio and his friends, the course of events would have
been different. The country wanted Fiume, certainly, but with what
will did they want it? With a will that was national at last, because
it was not moved exclusively by Irredentism, and did not identify
itself with the will of the upper classes, but was a feeling with
the whole people. They had deserved it; they were conscious of a
right acquired through the common trial of the whole nation. It was,
however, more a velleity than a will. The new spiritual life was
quivering, it could express itself in a puerile gesture of the hand
towards the object of its passion, but it could not yet express itself
in action. Will or velleity—it was certainly the first manifestation
of a really national life striving against the paralysing scaffolding
of its political organisation. The professional politicians had been
trained when politics were merely a question of technical detail, when
to be a Deputy meant merely a job as a bargainer, to get the votes
of the people for a party on the understanding that the party would
satisfy the arbitrary and personal requirements of its electors, with
the possibility of coming to power any day in one of the incredible
combinations that came to life almost daily and made the Chamber a
nursery of ministers.

On the 28th of September, 1919, the government appointed General
Badoglio Extraordinary Commissioner of the Venezia Guilia and accepted
a discussion on the matter in the Chamber. Neither the men in power
nor the opposition felt it possible to accept the suggestions of the
Press, of various associations, and even of their friends who were
urging the necessity of Fiume’s annexation. The Ministry gave in its
resignation after dissolving the House and the elections returned 157
Socialists, among whom were moderate men like Turati and Treves and
many new men whose programmes were openly revolutionary, and over a
hundred _Popolari_. These parties had a good deal in common. Their
propaganda had been nearly perfect and had appealed to the people by
that definiteness and practicalness of purpose which is the main string
to pull in order to move Italians to action. They were not dreamers
and even in their worst or best ideals they were for definiteness of
means and purpose. There is in the Italian mind such a strong tendency
to take a realistic view of things that to this characteristic the best
and the worst of their history might be traced for twenty centuries.

The Nationalists had been returned in very small number, but were
mostly young, with considerable intellectual culture, fit and ready to
assume responsibilities. They had all done active service in the war
and were sorry to see its meagre result. They required an audacious and
strong policy without being able, however, to see clearly how this was
to be realised. Liberals held a good many seats but they were so split
up that they should rather be considered as a set of groups than as a
party; they even called themselves different names and had no common
programme.

After these elections one had the impression of watching the systematic
extinction of the flickering flame that had signalised the coming to
light of the new national conscience. One must have spent those years
in Italy, have actually lived the life of the Italians, felt all their
actual experiences and at the same time have had a good historical and
intellectual grounding in all that concerns the country, to understand
fully the tragedy of it. They seemed to precipitate themselves from
the soaring heights of national conscience to the lowest and vilest
egotism. Material well-being was again the order of the day and not
yours or theirs or the children’s, but _mine_. Beyond that nothing.
Reality was again atomistic and the atoms constitutive of it were
absolutely irrelatives. Nobody seemed to reflect; all were acting and
behaving like children. Truly it is the subjectiveness of the period
that must be taken as its characteristic. They seemed to move each
in his own world. Even financially they seemed to have reached an
unbridled licence. The constant principles that regulate economic
relations which form the basis of society were disregarded. Objective
reality was ignored just as it is ignored by children and to a certain
degree by artists. They had the economic deficit constantly on their
lips—but never had such spendthrift way of living been displayed in
their country—and they seemed to overlook the moral deficit betrayed by
such an atomistic subjectiveness.

Consider the factories. It is evidently a high rate of production
that will ensure the interests of both labour and capital. Well, the
workmen, or women, set themselves to get higher wages as they have
done in most countries, but in the north and centre of Italy they
did it with such a childish and, therefore, savage and lawless will
that the works had to be shut in many instances and were not reopened
until the advent of Fascism. So that it can be said that by not taking
into consideration the actual production as a whole, and the owner’s
interest, they reduced their legitimate desire for a better life to the
destructive whims of children and ruined their own interest.

The schools reflected the same destructive state of mind. That which
makes the school is surely not the building; the children are not
pupils if they do not learn, and neither is the master a teacher except
inasmuch as he does actually teach. Discipline having slackened to such
a degree that it bordered on anarchy the pupils had one fixed idea
to do no work, and a great many of the teachers—not all indeed, for
the teaching body has always counted in Italy a number of first-rate
men—had the same purpose. Teaching and learning were reduced to a
ghostly shadow by the reduction of schools to a subjective purpose by
both parties. The professors saw in their function the title it gave
them to their stipend and the pupils attended school just for the
degree or the promotion to which such attendance entitled them.

Such a false vision of life is certainly not natural to the Italian
people, and it had taken a great deal of trouble to introduce it in a
country the mentality of which is above all realistic. It is natural to
think that the Socialist and Popolari leaders were guilty of the most
criminal falsehoods.

On the 15th of June, 1920, when Giolitti was called upon to form a
new ministry, the government of Nitti had wrought such havoc in the
few months he had been in power that the old statesman was hailed
_Salvatore della Patria_ on his coming to power by the very people who
had called him a traitor five years before. Yet the new government
found that the best thing to do was to let things go on as they were,
with the result that factories were taken possession of by workmen, and
a strong reaction took shape under the wings of the new-born Fascism,
which came out with the simple programme of restoring order _even
against the state_ if it was necessary.

Public opinion at the end of the year gave a clear proof of the
depressing influence the government had had on the national conscience
allowing Giolitti, who had truly never been a Nationalist, to compel
d’Annunzio and his men to evacuate Fiume without any protest against
the bombardment inflicted upon them. When, in the next spring, the
elections took place, all the old parties were there again with
the addition of Fascism. The men of the new party were mostly new
to politics altogether, whilst some came from all the old parties
(including the Socialist) and they had all of them taken an active
part in the war. In the districts they had made national blocks with
Nationalists and Liberals and the few seats they obtained were not
lost by the _Popolari_ or Socialists, who were returned in the same
proportion as they had been in the last House.

The first characteristic of the Fascists was that they seemed to have
the same programme as the Nationalists, whilst they were displaying the
power of mass organisation that had been till then the privilege of
Socialists and _Popolari_. (This characteristic holds good up to now.)
They wanted to realise the political programme of the best men of Italy
by lifting the working class up to it. As to their aim it was then
exclusively the political and moral realisation of the practical and
spiritual value they ascribed to the war victory. They had nothing like
an abstract programme. When realisation is not one with conception—and
such has been the case for the last two centuries—the political systems
stated on paper appear all harmony, and their consequences all for the
best; but the trouble begins as soon as their application is sought.

Fascism has no ideologies but a cogent system of ideas able to give
what ideologies will never give, promptitude and coherence of action.
These ideas serve as a criterion of action rather than a theory. If it
draws the attention of foreigners as a beacon light it is because it
does show a way out of the abstraction that in a certain sense seems
to have perverted our modern vision of social and economic reality.
The method it enforces of looking invariably at both the terms of any
one relation is practical, as only can be a method the axle of which
is a highly philosophical conception. For the divorce between thought
and action pronounced by the philosophy of the sixteenth, seventeenth,
and eighteenth centuries might induce us to believe that speculative
thoughts had nothing to do with everyday life, whereas the simplest
and humblest action or relation to be productive has to be the direct
and immediate expression of a thought, scientific or speculative. The
peasant who lifts his axe over his head before striking it into the
wood is not making a choreographic flourish with his tool; its weight
is augmented by the height to which he lifts it and the combination of
the force of gravitation with his own sends his blade to the core of
the wood. He certainly does not think of the force of gravitation, but
he acts upon it. In the first contract, tacit though it may have been,
the man who lacked hands to plough his fields and the men who had no
field to plough, came into a relation that was the typical relation
of the one and the many which has stood as the fundamental problem of
ethics and politics in the philosophy of all ages. When synthesis rules
theory and a synthetic view of reality rules practice then the relation
is kept in consideration as the living bond of the two parties, and the
greater product of the harvest is the common aim. But when analytic
methods, either empirical or rational, prevail in philosophy, practical
life is infected with a ferocious individualism, the necessary
consequence of which is the unjust attribution of the harvest to one of
the two terms, to the ruin of the relation which has to be bilateral if
it is to be at all.

This concrete way of looking upon every economic and social problem
does not indeed present itself as a miraculous way of removing the
class struggles, which are, after all, one of the main forces at play
in the civilising process of mankind. It is merely the way of looking
at it that befits the intellectual level reached by man through the
efforts of genius and through the blood and tears of the many by which
social and economic progress is achieved.

After all that has been said it is surely unnecessary to point out the
absurdity of considering Fascism as a reactionary tendency. It goes
indeed steadily forward and its leader would not have the historical
mind he has, if it meant to reject the labourers’ claim to preserve
the recognition of their interests, which is the one noble conquest
of socialism. The “reaction” was never against the working classes’
rights; it was against all rights that did not spring from duties. It
was against exclusive power—tyrannical as all exclusive powers are
bound to be—that it reacted with the full consent of the population, as
sick of being bossed by a mob minority as the mob had been to be bossed
by the gentry fifty years before. Truly it would be a strange illusion
of the upper classes if they were to believe that Fascism had come to
restore “the good old times”; for that which it has come to restore or
rather to establish is the really Christian equality of men. Christian
because it intends rights to be consonant with spiritual value and
actual recognition of duties.

The revolutions of the past were always justified by the necessity of
enforcing the claims of a single class. Fascism in its synthetic view
of life strives to enforce the rightful claims of all classes, and
considers them rightful as far as they present rights and duties on the
same plane. If it looks to the past it is to understand the present,
but its knowledge and understanding of history do not allow it to
believe that history proceeds backwards.




