Part II

PHILOSOPHICAL ANTECEDENTS OF FASCISM




CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION TO THE PHILOSOPHICAL ANTECEDENTS


Fascism is the concrete way of considering any organisation or relation
in the light of the aim for which it was created. Such a method sweeps
away a good deal of claptrap rhetoric and a great many prejudices.
What matters is the actual working of an organisation towards its aim,
and not at all the exclusive interest of one of the two contracting
parties. Obviously this is the practical application of one of the most
famous propositions of the philosophy of Mind. It is just as obvious
that after a first period of political system exclusively for gentlemen
and by gentlemen, and a second period of a political system exclusively
drawn for the benefit of the lower class, it was natural that any sane
party should have tried a synthetic policy, above all in a country
where the mentality is essentially realist.

The motto of Fascism is order and hierarchy. This is the necessary
consequence of its taking into consideration always the aim and its
actual realisation. If efficiency is to be ensured to any organisation
from the family upward it is evident that every member of it must play
his part in the way which is most likely to ensure efficiency. Yet
this notion of discipline is a trifle more modern than it sounds, at
least in Italy. Nothing can better illustrate it than the example of a
football Captain and his men. The boy who acts as Captain, let us say
John Smith, has no authority over his fellows, except when, ceasing to
be John Smith, he is Captain of the team, and while they are actually
playing, practising or arranging a game. His authority is not personal,
it is actual to the sport interests of the team, or the school they
represent, so that it is not demeaning to any of his team to accept
the dictates of his authority. Indeed the boys’ commonsense is strong
enough, in England at least, to make them realise an idea which they
would comprehend with great difficulty in its speculative form. To them
it is obvious that their Captain’s authority is as absolute as it is
actual and impersonal. He is Captain as long as he is an actual value,
as long as he is a factor of efficiency to the general play of his
side. His authority does not diminish one whit of the players’ liberty,
because the will of every single player is that his side should win,
and such identity is that which makes the actual reality both of the
team as an individual, or rather as a person, in the world of sport and
of the single players as members of that team. The Captain is entrusted
with the co-ordination of a number of wills, and their welding into
one in his own person, so that each boy freely wants what all want.
Divergencies are merely negative—as is constantly shown by the negative
scoring of sides in which first-rate men play without this unification
of their single wills.

Thus football comes to illustrate perfectly the most difficult of all
the Gentilian notions instinctively acted upon by people who will
never be able to read one line of Gentile’s works, the notion of
liberty taken as actual identification of each single will which is
liberty with the common will which is law. Again the boys’ commonsense
would find it as ridiculous to argue over their Captain’s orders when
playing, as to go on considering him as their superior when the game
is over, or when they have detected among themselves a better Captain.
Thereby they teach the world a deep truth, that is to say that no value
can be considered as static, and that its realisation being dynamic and
actual it cannot be achieved once for all, but is a continuous process
of developing one’s own efficiency.

Hence the notion of discipline and liberty acted upon by boys playing
football results in a conception of hierarchy which is also shared by
Fascism, and is pregnant with so much social and political reformation
that one cannot insist too much upon it. Nor can one abstract it from
Gentile’s system, of which it is theoretically and practically the
centre. In their organisation the boys certainly do not consider the
team’s hierarchy as being definitely settled any more than Fascists
would consider any one political constitution or method of governing
as final, that is to say as perfect. To their young minds, full of
freshness and elasticity, it would sound absurd not to be able to alter
their arrangements and to modify their play in the best interests of
the team. If a boy slackens in his practice his unfitness will soon
betray the fact and his contribution to the positive scoring of the
team will be thereby diminished. But with this new view of hierarchy
which Fascism takes as being grounded on actual value, the most
unstable of all living reality thereby destroying every notion of any
permanent class or organisation—the contribution to international
politics of Fascism as the immediate consequence of its national and
political antecedents comes to an end.

Passing now to the exposition of the philosophical genealogy of Fascism
it may be well to remember first that there are no such things as
“national” philosophies, philosophy being the historical process of
infinite Mind; secondly, that as a consequence of the oneness of such
a process, there are no such things as brand new conceptions either
in the most sublime of theoretical systems or in their practical
realisation such as pedagogy or politics. Neither is there any such
thing as an international system, and this ought to be sufficient
to destroy any hope of internationalisation of mankind. Every great
nation is a contributor to the life of Mind, and may be said to
take in international politics a part which is proportioned to its
theoretical contribution. Each school of thought takes the problems in
the solution of which it displays the peculiarities which distinguish
its genius from another school, either when this has given to it all
the development of which its own genius was capable, or when it is
developing it on unilateral lines.

In philosophy good examples of this are the obvious derivation of
Bacon’s and Descartes’ problems from the Italian philosophers of the
Renaissance, and the mutual influence of English empiricism and French
rationalism; in politics the influence of England on France during
the whole of the eighteenth century and of both countries on Italy
during the nineteenth century. Looking at any history of philosophy or
politics serves to illustrate the point. For one follows the living
process through which theoretical notions are born one out of the
other, and one realises the part played by the characteristics of each
nation in the constructive play of historical forces. There could be
no stronger evidence both of the intellectual interdependence of
countries, and the absolute necessity of their political independence.

The relation of theoretical and practical life ought no longer to be
one of exclusive opposition. Pragmatism has done something towards
the simplification of it and the oncoming idealism is achieving it
in a way that may be said radical. In the history of the last three
centuries, however, we see philosophy considering thought and action
as the two terms of an irreducible dualism; yet such dualism must not
be considered a product of the perverseness of modern thought. Ovid
has left us a verse which settles the point even for people unfamiliar
with pagan philosophy. It is only the deliberate application of a given
system which may follow after its conception, but the spontaneous
conformation of political reality to the actual life of the mind is
generally simultaneous with the conception of the theories of which it
is the practical expression. A good illustration of the point can be
had from Germany. Lévy Bruhl has sketched the parallel development of
German philosophy and national consciousness in a work which is not as
famous as it deserves. After Hegel’s death, when his system has given
birth to its two political offsprings, the statolatry of Imperialism
and the myth of Marx’s Communism, the maximum force of expansion is
on the verge of being reached by Germany and the country is not far
from becoming the prey of national fanaticism, which is as blinding as
the religious fanaticism that appears in the history of all churches
when, having exhausted the force of expansion that is dependent on the
immediacy of their faith, they want to go on expanding artificially
through arbitrary force.

Few legacies of the first centuries of modern thought have been
as harmful as the divorce between the two manifestations of human
activity. It was, however, inevitable. Faith in the positive teaching
of the Church was the first snare into which early thinkers fell; for
it is not exact to say that they professed the existence of two truths
merely to escape danger. They firmly believed it. Most of them were
good Catholics, and as sure in their scientific maturity as in the days
of their childhood that the Church was right. On the other hand they
were sure of the result of their observations and experiments. They
were sure in both cases, and so they simply inferred the co-existence
of two truths. Nowadays, it sounds childish and the reciprocal
limitation of the two truths would be obvious to any modern student,
but in those days the problem had not received the light that it has
received since; and they were perfectly in earnest. The philosophers
followed suit for two obvious reasons; science was still for a very
long time identified with philosophy, and the sixteenth century
thinkers, when they were faced by the dilemma of being heretics or of
discarding their passionate researches, took to considering religion as
belonging to the practical manifestation of mind whilst scientific and
philosophic researches were its theoretical activity. One more step and
religion was to be identified as the enemy of science.

                   *       *       *       *       *

When Europe emerged from what has been called the Dark Ages of
obscurantism—in antithesis to the age of light to which belonged the
writers who thus labelled an epoch, which was dark and obscure to them
merely because they knew very little about it—intellectual life was
so full of buoyancy that men fretted at the tethers of a school of
thought which they could disregard after having come to such efficiency
under its discipline that they felt like boys coming intellectually of
age. Scholasticism having patronised Aristotle as “The Philosopher,”
Plato was for the first time opposed to him, then Neo-platonism; then
modern “national” schools of thought arose at the breaking up of
the intellectual world. For a United Intellectual States of Europe
existed during the Middle Ages; and the biographies of St. Anselm and
St. Thomas tell us eloquently how, in their centuries, a man could
pass from country to country to follow his studies with the greatest
simplicity. At the time of St. Anselm, nationality could not be traced
in a man’s works. By the time Roger Bacon wrote the differences had
developed, and it is not impossible to find his character as a sturdy
Briton standing out distinctly in his works. Such national tendencies
expressed themselves only in matters of little moment, and it is a fact
that the wonderful correspondence which passed between scholars kept
the humanism of each country in touch with that of all others; it is
none the less obvious that there were essential differences between the
character it gradually assumed in various countries, a character and
an attitude that may be identified as the initial stage of the various
European mentalities.

The best proof of this is to be had in the essential and irreducible
differences manifest in the conclusions to which Italian, English and
French philosophy came on the very same problem, which they found on
the threshold of modern civilisation. Giordano Bruno, Francis Bacon
and René Descartes treated the same question when their respective
countries emerged from the later Middle Ages with their respective
schools coming to light from scholasticism through humanism. The
problem of knowledge faced them in this dawn of modern intellectual
life; and the same passionate reaction against Aristotelianism and
scholasticism compelled their researches to take the same bent. Yet
they came to widely different conclusions and the differences hold
good even to-day as characteristic of Italian, English and French
mentalities.

Bruno, whose metaphysic is wonderfully synthetic and pregnant with a
lyricism the echo of which runs through the work of Vico, faces the
problem of truth, of scientific truth according to him, in order to
find theoretical ground to reject the authority of antiquity considered
by his forerunners as the well of all worldly wisdom. A conception
known to that same antiquity but very uncommonly acted upon takes hold
of his mind. Truly old age must be wiser than youth, but antiquity is,
compared to his age, the nursery age of mankind, and a fairly good
student of the sixteenth century knows far more than Aristotle, because
he may know, if he chooses, all that Aristotle knew, and all that has
come afterwards to the knowledge of men. Each generation brings its
stone to the constructive activity of man’s experience. Hence the idea
he expressed _veritas filia temporis_. Thus he proclaims that which
will be the motto of every true Italian thinker; reality is essentially
and above all, Historical Reality.

In England, Bacon, starting on the same errand, through his researches,
was induced also to consider more and more that the regard of man for
the authority of tradition is one of the greatest obstacles to the
progress of science, and that servile veneration for Aristotle is,
above all, to be condemned as paralysing the initiative of modern
thinkers. Learning is not to be considered as the work of antiquity,
as a work already done; it is instead an arduous task still to be
accomplished and the first step on the way towards its accomplishment
must be the rejection of the old logic and its syllogism. Man must
trust to his personal experience, the immediate experience of his
senses. Nothing could be more anti-historical in its consequences than
this assertion, the unilateralness of which would be astonishing from
a man who felt the whole of historical and social world as a pulsing
reality, if it was not justified by the intellectual antecedents of the
English national consciousness coming to realise its own personality
just at the time in which Bacon thought and wrote. He could not very
well be expected to see the condition of his own experience in the
experience of his forerunners, in the age in which self-assertion
was the successful motto of every great man flourishing in England.
The abstraction thus made of all the historical past conditioning of
man’s experience was balanced for the time being by his own historical
and political sense and by the love of life as a whole so strong in
Elizabethan days. Yet henceforth reality in the eyes of any true Briton
was to be _Empirical Reality_.

A French thinker faces the same problem. René Descartes at first sight
is everything that Bacon is not; whilst the English philosopher is a
mixture of recklessness and worldly wisdom, anxious to enjoy everything
that power and wealth can beget, and drink to the dregs the cup of
life, the French metaphysician recoils from the cares of power and
the noisy turmoil of society. A longer consideration, specially from
a more philosophic point of view, reveals affinities that were going
to tell on their theories. Both lack the youthful enthusiasm common
to German and Italian thinkers, and both give shape to their theories
with a cautious prudence that marks them as men of the world. Their
conclusions betray their divergencies and affinities much better than
any analysis of their life and character could; for Descartes certitude
is reached by way of induction when in the silence of meditation he
comes to his famous statement _Cogito, ergo sum_. The touchstone of
certitude is identified with the actual consciousness of man in the act
of thinking. If I think surely I am; but of the rest, that is to say of
the knowledge of the exterior world I have no control, and traditional
science is communicated to me and was originally obtained through the
senses just as my actual objective knowledge, therefore it cannot be
accepted as certain. Aristotle and all the traditional fetishism come
to nought. The _tabula rasa_ is implied as definitely in this as in
Bacon’s work; in both cases man must begin his work from the foundation
and put to the test of his own experience, empirical in one case,
rational in the other, the legacies of his predecessors. The difference
however implied in the terms empirical and rational is fundamental
and the pedagogy and politics grounded on English philosophy whilst
laying down rules and formulas inferred from systematic theories, will
always be susceptible of being tempered by a direct call to experience
and commonsense. The rationality of French philosophy does not allow
of such adaptation. To this day the cogency for good or bad which is
characteristic of French theories is the consequence of their perfect
deduction from a first principle; hence the radicalness that mars
some of their practical application. With the exception of men greatly
influenced by foreign philosophy, the French thinkers all took reality
as being Rational Reality; and all their systems were bound to be
radical in their applications.

In their rationalism or empiricism, France and England threw overboard
the past that loomed indeed rather oppressive, and in so doing they
assert man, in his individual determination, as the ground of all
reality. It is perfectly allowable to consider that the two schools
were bound to stimulate and temper each other. The atom, the monad
at the basis of their system is always man, but at the outset the
unilateralism of Bacon’s gnoseology, a method based so to speak
exclusively on sense knowledge, called for the mathematical and
deductive method of Descartes in order to display all that it held
virtually of scientific progress. On the other hand the French
deductive method, although admitting the inference and resorting
to it in its research of first principles, stood in sore need of a
well-balanced recognition of the part played by sense perception in
human knowledge. This will be specially obvious in the political
consequences of the two theories. For both had their political system,
in which their common character prevailed, inasmuch as the seventeenth
century was for France and England the century of metaphysics whilst
the eighteenth drew the conclusions of their premises, seeing to the
application or realisation of all that was fertile as a suggestion of a
renovating process to be undergone by society.

Bruno’s historical reality was left in a corner, for it could not have
been integrated in our system to which it was then contradictory,
and still less in the political conditions that were to be the
outcome of our theories, since it was consonant with them only as far
as the individual was the basis of his reality as well as of ours.
His individual is, however, neither rational, nor empirical; he is
historical, and this implies that he cannot be considered bereft
either of his roots in the past nor of his projection on the future.
Nothing therein tends to diminish man; on the contrary everything
adheres to him, dilating his personality right into infinity. But this
notion of man was far too difficult to be realised even theoretically
in the sixteenth century, and the arduous task of the French and
English schools was to pave the way for the German and modern Italian
thinkers and provide them with a starting-point to reach the heights
from which the relation of the transcendental and empirical selves can
be detected, and the historical notion of man realised in the light
of such a conception. In Bruno it is not, however, a mere intuition
although it is realised only as far as the conception of science and
its historical development are concerned. The practical realisation
of this notion implied a new conception of tradition and authority,
which, far from being shaken to pieces, are in it invested with a new
and nearly sacred character. Antithetic thereby to Protestantism, it
knocked no less against the transcendent reality of God as understood
then by decadent scholasticism and by most Catholics.




