CHAPTER III

NATIONALISM AND SOCIALISM


Under such circumstances what was the government for the political
classes? A coach in a land of brigands; for the most popular elements
a coach to be attacked on the roadside; for the better elements, a
coach they had a right to drive, whip in hand. Every man stood up
against the government either begging or threatening; so that it is no
wonder that the next generation of gentlemen mostly stood aside and
shunned politics, seeing that at best the men who mixed in it were
moved by selfish ambition, or were a vulgar crew of Arrivists and
mischief plotters. Abstention on the one side was, however, a form
of selfishness, as harmful to the state as Arrivism on the other.
Provided they kept clean hands, the abstentionists did not mind that
the national conscience should be either corrupted or lulled to sleep
by the people whose interest it was that it should slumber. Obviously
their withdrawal from public life had the same cause as the ambition
and the unscrupulous opportunism of the others. After fifty years of
heroic life and feelings, they wanted to attend to their own business
and enjoy life privately. Public cares and struggles had been the order
of the day for half a century, and public conscience relaxed; with
a sudden eclipse of national consciousness, Italy lost the pride of
autonomy in foreign affairs and ceased to realise in deeds the part it
had to play in the history of the world.

Its foreign policy is the best index of the spiritual conditions of the
period, and according to the historian, Michele Rosi (who is neither
a Fascist nor a Liberal, nor a Socialist, because he is a man born to
put together facts, historical facts, and live a passionate life among
them instead of living it among men) the line of conduct of Italian
foreign ministers at this stage can be described as the policy of men
who distrusted themselves more then they distrusted others. Rosi does
not say so, but the facts he puts together do say so.

Of this the best proof was the Triple Alliance. In 1873 Marco Minghetti
went with King Vittorio Emmanuele II to Berlin and to Vienna to discuss
a second alliance with Germany and more cordial relations with the
Austrian court. The followers of Garibaldi raised an outcry as they
saw in this a sure proof that the King of Italy was giving up Trento
and Trieste, whereas it had never been thought in the past that Rome
or Venice might have been so abandoned. In Parliament, however, the
Left was quite willing to lean on the shoulder of Germany, and was
submitting even to an alliance with Austria, although some of the
members had dark remembrances of its rule. But at the same time they
flirted with France, who was going more and more to the Left, and whose
anti-clericalism seemed to cheer on their own anti-Catholicism.

In 1877 Francesco Crispi, the best statesman of Italy at the time,
one of those men of the Left whose mentality brought them mostly to
think and often to act as if they had belonged to the Right, made
a diplomatic tour to the capitals of Germany, Austria, France and
England. He had one open aim, and another one not quite so fully
acknowledged, which was to look for support against a possible
aggression that was feared both from Paris and Vienna. The impression
he received was that Berlin might accept an alliance with Italy
against France, on the understanding that Austria would be left free
to do what she liked in the East. Thirty years before, Italy, still
in the making and far from seeing yet her way to unity, had attacked
single-handed the greatest empire of Europe in an offensive war; now,
out of fear of a possible attack from France, which Bismarck himself
declared very unlikely, she entered into an alliance from which she
received only orders and prohibitions. When the Congress of Berlin took
place, all that the representative of Italy could do was of so little
avail, that the Germans declared that the French and the Italians
had to settle the question of Tunis between themselves. This did not
admit of any compensation to Italy for the Austrian occupation of
Bosnia-Herzegovina and expansion in the East. The Italian policy at
that congress betrayed a total incapacity to display the policy of a
great State in foreign affairs. The reasons were threefold, the men in
power had a very poor understanding of the forces and the interests of
the country and, in consequence, could not act according to these; they
were holding on to ideologies, that had served their time and whose
high-sounding rhetoric could only help them to hide the vacuum of their
minds; finally, they had a sense that their home affairs were getting
more and more out of hand and this feeling may have been the most
cramping of all the circumstances in which they stood.

Negative as it was, the attitude of the government was in harmony with
that of Parliament. When, in January, 1879, the Senate disapproved
of its foreign policy, the head of the government, who was Depretis,
shifted all responsibility by saying that, as Prime Minister, he
had in that department followed faithfully the traditions of the
Right, although he belonged to the Left. In February of the same
year, Mussolino strongly advised them to enter into an alliance with
Germany; he knew, said he, that Bismarck would accept it unwillingly,
as he believed the Italians to be unfaithful, but that he would do
so nevertheless, needing Italy against France. Nothing could be less
heroic, than a Senate which had good grounds to feel pride in the newly
achieved national independence, and was yet so low spirited that it
could accept an alliance on such grounds.

The ideal of the Risorgimento had been realised, and as the new
leaders _had no new ideals_ they had nothing further to realise; they
were bodies without souls, with nothing that might give them a chance
to display the gifts with which nature had so largely endowed them.
Materialists in philosophy they strove to make the country more and
more materialist, fighting religion under the names of clericalism and
obscurantism.

Obviously what kept the various governments of Italy from having a
dignified foreign policy was that the country was in a state bordering
on anarchy. One cause of this was lack of experts in all the political
classes, devoid, as the best men were, of personal or traditional
experience to help in the application of their imported legislation;
but the main cause was undoubtedly the amorphous state of the working
classes. If man is to be called a political animal, the labourers of
Italy were not men fifty years ago. They did not care what happened
and did not think they had anything to say in the matter: they were
politically unconscious. Not that they were stupid: their art, their
songs, their traditions attest the contrary.

Their political unconsciousness, far from making things easier,
rendered a good Liberal government very nearly impossible; for apathy
and indifference in the lower class, while it may be very well under an
absolute monarchy of the patriarchal type, under a Liberal constitution
is apt to prove a curse. First, the lower middle class kept drawing men
from the people, and these men, with the natural gift of adaptation the
Italian shows to a greater degree than the slower northern races, rose
too quickly and too quickly became conscious of their plebian force and
of the opportunities offered to them by the difficulties under which
the government was working. Among these men and among the crowds of
half-intellectuals employed by the State in the innumerable offices
created by the centralising administration, in the national schools, in
the railways, post services and so on, the members of Parliament, who
belonged to the Left, recruited their votes. How quickly these electors
realised that their chances of getting all the political importance
in their hands rested on the extension of the franchise need not be
emphasised. The dates are eloquent, Rome became the capital of Italy
in 1870, in 1882 the franchise is extended, and immediately a workman,
Maffi, and a pure Socialist, Andrea Costa, are elected.

Without attempting a sketch of the development of Socialism in Italy,
it must be said that it certainly did a great deal of good to the
country. It aroused the working masses from their slumber and bettered
their material conditions, which badly wanted bettering. To stir the
people out of their amorphous state and make them conscious of their
rights was a very wholesome operation. It would have been better to
have made them realise at the same time that rights never go without
duties, and that to co-operate in public life they had to undertake the
one in order to get the other. But this, however, was more than could
be expected from agitators, who often had, themselves, a very poor
notion of the relation of right and duties. Their incitement to the
people was to make material well-being, the ultimate end of all effort.

Vulgar as it was, yet it was the proper aim for a materialistic age,
and it had the advantage of being concrete, positive, and within range
of the people’s rudimentary political understanding. Therefore it
worked. It had the first quality that an idea must have to move people
to action; it corresponded to the real needs of the workers.

The nobler side of Socialism, that which had made it highly idealistic
and has made its ultimate end a dreamy Messianism, did not strike root
in Italy. It did not appeal to the people, and whenever it fascinated
some stray poet or idealist, like Andrea Costa or Mussolini’s father,
they failed to arouse an echo in the minds of the labourers. This
should have been sufficient to show that it did not suit the Italian
mentality. Mankind, the fraternity of mankind, the lost paradise
reconquered by the mutual love of men, could not mean much to Italian
ears. It sounded abstract, and at best did not show much chance of
being realised by the present generation. The Socialist leaders had
to attract followers with more concrete things, with plans that could
be realised, and to arouse in them a passion for an actual object.
Consequently they harped on the necessity of getting better wages for
less work. They planned Labour organisations which gradually grew
stronger, and they taught the workers to hate their employers.

Yet this was not the worst part of the leaders’ activity; that was
the corrupting consciousness they gave the workers of an unlimited
political power without any corresponding duties. Out of unfairly
treated men they made bullies, most unhappy bullies, the worst kind of
bullies. The torture of Mussolini’s youth was this rapid decadence of
Socialism in Italy, although it had the advantage over other parties
of a stock of general ideas and a definite programme. It was only the
weakness of other parties which made it look strong until the war and
during the years that followed the peace; for as far back as 1910 the
historic ideas it had brought to Italy had yielded their crop. Had it
not been so, Socialism, between 1918 and 1920, would have worked out
in open revolution. As it was, it had built up a class organisation
that was the first regular Party in modern Italy, and this meant
considerable experience for the whole nation; it had besides bettered
the material conditions of life of the lower class and awakened them to
political consciousness, which is a contribution to the development of
the country as a modern State that cannot be overrated.

Liberalism, be it of the Right or of the Left, had had an Italian
form, which had proved its consonance with the historical position of
the country by the efficiency with which it had realised its ideal.
Italy, free from foreign rule and politically one under the House of
Savoy, was doubtless the creation of Italian Liberalism. But as a
home governing party its inefficiency was obvious; one may think that
its failure was due to its non-national stock of ideas, which led to
the application of foreign legislation to a country whose needs were
not the same as those of the nations in which this administrative and
political Liberalism had come out of a long historical evolution.

Socialism, on the other hand, was yeast, and as yeast it was very good
for Italy, for the unleavened masses rose into shape and life under its
action; thereby emerging from their amorphousness they entered into the
political world and brought with them the force and life of numbers.
It brought them also to the level of the European proletariat and
introduced the Party discipline and organisation that the other Italian
parties had not needed, as their singleness of aim and the loftiness
of their ideals had been sufficient to keep their high-minded members
in unity. Yet it proved a curse, as its leaders were unable to realise
that the wretched means they had to resort to, in order to arouse men
into action, were due to the fact that the higher side of Socialism did
not fit the mentality of the people.

Another party must be now considered, and that commands a great deal of
respect from any foreigner that may have watched with loving eyes the
life of Italy: Nationalism. Corradini and Federzoni may be looked upon
as its leaders, and their followers were a mere handful of men. They
had a clear notion of what they wanted, and to a certain extent they
may be considered as the rightful heirs of the Risorgimento. Again they
were all gentlemen, gentlemen being taken as the English equivalent of
_vir_, implying the sterling quality of the individual and not at all
his social position or his æsthetic refinement, which may be merely
the consequence of wealth. Small minorities are always to be found at
the origin of any great political movement as it is the conviction of
the few which carries away the multitude of men. But then the crucial
point is that their convictions must have magnetic attraction for the
general public. And the Nationalists had not this. Their ideas were
too high and, at the same time, they were obsolete, besides being no
more Italian than those of Liberalism or Socialism.

The Nationalists’ idea of a nation was as materialist as their aims
were idealist.[1] Now this would be sufficient to condemn to sterility
the best wills in the world. To state this plainly, the easiest way is
to take man as a simile for nation. There are two ways of looking at
a man: he is _one out of many_, or he is _the one central reality_.
As one out of many he knocks in every sense against the reality of
the many, and is therefore identified by his very limitations. Such a
conception of the man is evidently negative. He is appreciated not so
much by what he actually does, but by what he has done, or possesses;
not so much by what he is, but by the rank he occupies, and which may
often be determined independently of his ACTUAL value. But as the
one central reality a man cannot come into competition with other
objects of appreciation; he can no longer be gauged from outside. Now,
obviously, from the world of objective and natural reality, we are
shifting to the subjective and spiritual world. We have in front of
us no longer an individual belonging to the world of things—we have a
person. Common wisdom has for centuries professed that to understand
a person’s motives it is necessary to put oneself in that person’s
position; and daily experience shows that we understand the people we
love better, because we can make ourselves one with them and judge them
from their own point of view. To appreciate a personality this method
is indispensable; for it is not in the deeds of his past that a man
must be judged—he may have been a hero in the last war and be a coward
in his present family life—they are now extrinsic to him, unless he
goes on living them and making them for ever his spiritual experience.
He must be judged by what he is doing actually. Neither must one
measure him by his property, but by what he is still able to produce;
nor by the regard or contempt of the people who surround him, which is
based on what he has done; nor on what his people were, but by what
he actually is. None of these conditions of appreciation is fulfilled
as long as we look at a man from outside and weigh his manly worth by
comparing his achievement, or his property, to that of other people.
Past deeds should not raise him one whit in our appreciation unless he
continues them with perfect conscience of their value, for their actual
and his personal value depend exclusively of the conscience he has of
such value and of his aptitude to keep it actual.

Of this fact Corradini and his friends had excellent examples in Italy.
Some of the landlords, who owned relatively small estates and quite
insufficient capital, managed to bring their land to the highest rate
of productiveness, so that the actual production was superior to that
of estates of a much bigger acreage. The owners of the _latifondi_,
on the other hand, were not all sufficiently rich to have their lands
ploughed, and those who were did not always do so, although some Roman
princes did cultivate thoroughly, very often as much from patriotism as
from the wish to increase their incomes. Conspicuous among them were
some leading Nationalists. They could see from this that the importance
of a man as a landlord was not altogether dependent on the area of
his estate and on his capital, and that it varied according to the
consciousness he had of what the value of his estate should be and the
capacity he had for realising it. But they did not think of the nation
as of a man whose value, practically as well as spiritually, depends
not so much on the capacity he has for doing things, as on his being
conscious of such capacity. Therefore, they looked at Italy measuring
it by the poor figure it cut in foreign policy, by its colonies, by
its financial weakness, comparing it always in their minds with other
countries; in a word, judging it from outside as if it had belonged
to the field of natural science instead of belonging to the world of
history, which is after all the world of Mind.

Thank God, however, “_le coeur a des raisons que la raison ne connaît
pas_,” and some of these men, Corradini above all, were men with
great hearts and deep souls. Out of faith and love of their country
they realised what their conception of political reality would have
kept them from seeing, namely that the root of all the evil was that
the people of Italy had almost allowed the stifling of their souls.
Religion in some provinces had been, so to speak, extirpated by the
anti-Catholic democrats, republicans and radicals; both religion
and patriotism had been lulled to sleep by the Socialists. The only
political cell still living and strong was the family. The Nationalists
were beset by another cause of sterility, the men these leaders
recruited ... did they share their religious and truly patriotic
motives? All did not, and that was the misery of it. Yet Corradini and
some others were men of faith, just as much as Cavour and Mazzini had
been; they could get men to join them in holding aloft a torch whose
flame flickered in the cold twilight of Garibaldi’s Italy. They kept
the sacred fire of Rome burning, and openly preached self-sacrifice,
whilst great artists and sceptic scholars invited the youth of the
upper class to enjoy life and shut themselves up in selfish existence.

The Nationalists were men of faith, and as everything is possible to
him that believeth, they kept working for their cause a certain number
of followers who had joined them in the hope that better openings
would be obtained for the export of Italian products and for Italian
emigrants if a strong Nationalist foreign policy could be substituted
for the existing weak one. For the Nationalists the nation was a
transcendent reality, objectively considered as to the individual. Such
conception is not peculiar to Italy by any means; yet it was modified
in its Italianisation, but always in a way that made it more and more a
policy for the gentry. A good deal of culture (I don’t mean philosophy,
but a true sense of history and a sound judgment) was at the basis of
it, and this did not tend to make it a popular movement. To sacrifice
oneself to something transcendent, to an historical construction, is
not for the mob: not even for the lower middle classes, absorbed as
they are by the problems of daily life.

There we touch what really distinguishes the Fascists from the
Nationalists, for whom the State belongs to natural reality, is
transcendent in its relation to the individual, and negatively
conceived in its relation to other states, where it appears one amongst
many. It is a great engine that needs the co-operation of all the
citizens to make it work, but it _does_ exist independently of the
citizens. Philosophically this conception belongs to the eighteenth
century. For the Fascists, the State is not transcendent in its
relation to the citizens: it is immanent; it is their own spiritual
and economical life in its political summing up. In its relation to
other states it is not negatively conceived as one amongst many; for
its citizens, it is their national self, whilst the other nations
are constitutive of their national non-self. The positiveness of the
State for its citizens implies therefore, for them, the negativeness
of the other states.[2] Such a conception sounds merely theoretical,
and yet it was not born in words. Its painful birth was the outcome
of Mussolini’s experience as a Socialist and a party leader. Words
have never been given to this newest of all the conceptions that Italy
is contributing to the world of politics except in an answer he gave
to the judges who, in 1911, were condemning him at Forli. Besides
this very curt answer, he never expressed it except in deeds, so that
the form under which it is given here is contributed by the author.
The rest of the doctrine that can be inferred from his four years’
speeches, legislation and administration, can be traced in the whole
of the philosophical works produced by Italian idealism; but this,
although perfectly consonant above all with Gentile’s theories, was
certainly one of Mussolini’s most original ideas.

The task of the government is to raise the level and increase the value
of the citizens, attending not to the organisation of every branch of
life manifestation, but to the regulation or rather systematisation of
such organisation in order to have always the most intimate fusion of
state and citizens. The empirical self requires that the peasant should
plough his field, sow the seed and reap the harvest. All this he is
bound to do to satisfy his material needs and the work thus considered
is certainly not ennobling, since man works as the slave of hunger.
Fascism says to the peasant: “Thou shalt no longer plough, sow, reap
for thyself, that is to say _exclusively for thy material self, but for
the State, which is that same empirical self plus its transcendental
complement_.” Hence ploughing, sowing and reaping are no longer the
work of man, slave of his material needs, but of man transcending them,
_without disregarding them_, however, and lifting thereby his daily
occupation to the dignity of moral realisation of his own economic
value.

The only precedent that this application of Fascism seems to have had
is the Christian sanctification of work, which is undoubtedly one of
the noblest gifts bestowed by our religion upon mankind. The study of
Fascism as a doctrine will offer many such coincidences.

The State must be universally present as a moral factor in every
branch of its citizens’ activity. It is in fact the all-pervading
consciousness that man must have of his citizenship which expresses
itself as the government. Obviously extension of territory should be
immaterial if the people of a country could actually be lifted to this
high state of political realisation.

But even at the stage reached by Fascism it is easy to see how it
affects the policy of foreign states towards Italy. Bring the people
to such a degree of political consciousness that every activity may
be so directed that it ensures at the same time personal and national
increase of value, then you can very nearly cease to trouble about
foreign policy, which must be the projection of the home policy, that
is to be the supreme affair of a government intent on the valorisation
of its country.




