





                                   THE
                               PEDIGREE OF
                                 FASCISM

                     A POPULAR ESSAY ON THE WESTERN
                         PHILOSOPHY OF POLITICS


                                   BY
                               ALINE LION
                       _Lady Margaret Hall, Oxon._


                                 LONDON:
                              SHEED & WARD
                       31, PATERNOSTER ROW, E.C. 4




                                   TO
                           JOHN WALTER, ESQ.,
                        TO WHOSE QUESTIONS I OWE
                      THE FIRST IDEA OF THIS BOOK.

                                             A. L.


                         _First Published_, 1927




                                CONTENTS


                                 Part I

                  THE POLITICAL ANTECEDENTS OF FASCISM

        CHAPTER                                                     PAGE

     I. Is Fascism a Revolution?                                       3

    II. Liberalism in Italy                                           10

   III. Nationalism and Socialism                                     23

    IV. The European War and its Effects                              37


                                Part II

                  PHILOSOPHICAL ANTECEDENTS OF FASCISM

     I. Philosophical Antecedents                                     58

    II. Humanism and Renaissance                                      70

   III. The Seventeenth Century                                       92

    IV. The Seventeenth Century in France                            114

     V. Giambattista Vico                                            125

    VI. Illuminism in England and France                             137

   VII. Nineteenth Century in Italy                                  154

  VIII. Benedetto Croce                                              170

    IX. Giovanni Gentile                                             189

     X. Benito Mussolini                                             211

        Index                                                        235




AUTHOR’S NOTE


I should, perhaps, say from the first that I am neither Italian nor
Fascist. Yet, having lived in Italy from 1913 to 1927, I cannot but be
conscious of the fact that the country has undergone a deep change,
and have come to the conclusion that it is a change for the better.
My purpose in writing this book has been to bring to the knowledge of
people possessed of a fair amount of general knowledge, the conclusions
that might be formed by a specialist with regard to this change and
the value of it. Incidentally I have endeavoured to discourage both
those who would import Fascism, as it flourishes in Italy, into other
countries, and those who would hinder the spread of that philosophy
which, I hold, is its basis.

It is necessary to avoid, when possible, definitely partisan sources of
information; therefore I have turned to the works of Michele Rosi for
the history of politics and to Frederick Windelband for the history of
philosophy wherever general reading has proved inadequate or my memory
failed.

In conclusion I must offer special thanks to Sir Frank Fox for his
careful reading of my manuscript and his invaluable suggestion with
regard to it. I am also most grateful to the following whom I have
consulted as to historical or philosophical accuracy—Professor G. A.
Smith, Professor G. C. Webb, Mrs. Anne MacCormick, Miss Jamison, Miss
Mary Coate and Mr. R. G. Collingwood.

                                                        ALINE LION.

 _Lady Margaret Hall,
   Oxford._




Part I

THE POLITICAL ANTECEDENTS OF FASCISM




CHAPTER I

IS FASCISM A REVOLUTION?


If one may judge of the importance of a political event by the number
of articles and books printed on the subject there is no question but
that Fascism is one of the most important movements of the post-war
world. Strange to say, however, the light thrown by most of these
publications fails to illuminate the points most interesting to
foreigners. This is probably due first of all to the fact that most
of the writers have written either for or against it; moreover, this
movement, being peculiarly Italian, is difficult for a foreign mind to
grasp. In any case, it is a fact that in spite of all the good or bad
will of the journalists this revolution is far from being understood.
The lack of intelligent information regarding it is felt everywhere;
and it would be difficult to say whether the misrepresentation is
greater among those who admire it and, seeing in it a universal remedy
for all modern woes, want to introduce its method in other countries;
or among those who consider it just as a matter of incidental and local
politics. I shall try to put it in its historical setting, and I shall
consider myself fortunate if I can throw light on its relation to the
political past of Italy, and to the present political conceptions of
other countries.

The first question that invariably arises is whether Fascism is or is
not a revolution. This, however, must be answered by another: what is
a revolution? No word stands in greater need of a sound, common-sense
definition, yet a definition of it stands on the very threshold of any
impartial research on Fascism.

Is revolution merely a change of government? This is not sufficient.
If it were, the fall of Louis Philippe from the throne of France would
be a revolution; yet it is obviously by a license that one speaks of
it as the Revolution of ’48. The form of government may change without
any substantial alteration of the régime. Then does revolution imply a
change of régime? Yes, but, again, what is exactly a change of régime?

Without following any further this method of investigation let us
define Fascism as the introduction of a new conception of the relation
between State and Citizen, a new conception of political reality.
It is, therefore, a doctrine, a system, and as such is philosophy
expressing itself in history. This admitted, it is necessary to guard
against the abstract bent. of philosophical researches. The deepest
currents of speculative thought would never bring about a single change
of government by themselves; but then they do not exist by themselves.
It is only in the synthesis of history that we find them at play in the
world of historical reality, which is what it is because thoughts and
deeds are one.

The March on Rome did certainly mark the confluence of two streams
coming to mingle their waters between the banks of the Tiber. One was
torrential, the impulse coming from a fifty years’ accumulation of
economic and political mistakes in Italy. The other was deeper, slower,
the contribution of centuries of Italian philosophy enriched by the
intellectual thought of all Europe. The torrent is represented by the
political antecedents of Fascism: the deep stream by the philosophical
antecedents of Fascism.

To illustrate my figure a period of history presents itself as an
example. It does not correspond exactly to the present movement in
Italy, but it is at any rate familiar to one and all: the French
Revolution. We see there, also, the typical stream of philosophical
life carving a deep bed for the river to come: in the minds of
intellectuals, in the consciousness of the people, abstract theories
or works of artistic vulgarisation, prepare the bed for the river
that will become, under the impulsion of actual circumstances, an
irresistible torrent. So that this revolution whose intellectual
pedigree makes it the offspring of Descartes, and Hobbes, of Grotius,
Locke and the English political writers, besides the Encyclopædists,
Voltaire and Rousseau, has to the highest degree the qualities that
make it an element of universal life, and a fertilising principle
in the politics of all Europe. On the other hand it receives,
undoubtedly from the economic and political conditions of France, the
particular determinations that distinguish it as French, as belonging
to the eighteenth century. The form it took actually between 1790
and 1795 could not be introduced anywhere else; under that form it
was exclusively French, because—we must insist on the point—it had
received it as its actual and concrete determination from its immediate
antecedents.

Actuation, realisation, concrete life, whatever the field we move in,
whether we consider politics, artistic creation, or natural life, it
requires two elements, the one universal, the other particular. Now
history shows that the universal element spreads, notwithstanding
frontiers and the will of men. Its force of expansion is a quality
common to all ideas; but the particular is not to be imported, and
it is as impossible to introduce it in foreign lands as it is to
confine the other to any land. Hence the political applications of
the same theories in different countries differ from each other as
do the countries themselves. These differences, economic, political,
religious, intellectual, in a word the historical differences existing
between two countries determine the differences that the same theory
will undergo when it is adopted by the people of different nations.

The Italian patriots at the end of the eighteenth century were very
few, and all, without exception, intellectuals. Some belonged to
the higher or lower aristocracy, some belonged to the upper middle
class, but all were scholars, men of the widest reading. It would be
difficult to find nowadays a body of men so well informed. For one
thing, production has increased immensely and life has lost the leisure
that allowed intellectual tastes to be satisfied. The fact remains
that at the close of that century Italy could boast of men aware of
its inferior position, of its non-existence as a nation. Such men were
ready to try anything, and did try to imitate the French revolution in
so far as they could by founding the small republics that lasted one
season or two, dying away like plants of distant countries, when they
are planted in our soil. Their zeal, however, was not sterile, they
failed in their immediate purpose, because they wanted to introduce
not only ideas but the actual form in which these were expressed. A
constitution, a battle, the plan of a town, a project of economic
reform, each of these things is an expression endowed with an æsthetic
value varying with the degree of perfection attained by the man
who worked it out, and gave the idea that prompted him a suitable
realisation. But the essential quality of the æsthetic creator is to be
on a particular theme, the voice of his time and of the body of men he
represents in his act of creation. The men of the revolution were by no
means fair representatives of the people of France; but when they drew
up the constitution they certainly realised on the whole the desiderata
of most Frenchmen. Giving expression, giving form to the ideas that had
agitated the whole century, they did it in the only way that could be a
French way in those days.

Now the will of Napoleon, when he wished Italy to be politically a
copy of France, was a very empirical will, and the men who tried
to carry out his wishes because they loved Italy were not any more
transcendental. In this question they took no notice of what were
the spiritual and political conditions of their country, and yet
surely a constitution is an expression of mind. In all this however
their blunder paved the way to a better understanding of the matter.
Everybody realised that in order to have anything like an independent
government the first thing was to be a great and unified country. When
the ideas that had led in France to the Revolution and Republic were
developed in Italy, according to the mentality of the great Italians,
they blended with all that was particular to Italy and expressed
themselves in an Italian movement: the Risorgimento. It cannot be over
emphasised, for the importance of the point is great; the same ideas
that caused the Republic to become for more than a century the form of
French government, gave birth to the Kingdom of Italy.

Roughly, the same can be said of Fascism. Its ideas and doctrine
will spread whether they meet with favour or hostility, because they
are Italian just as Liberalism is English, that is to say they are
Italian in their methods of actuation and perfectly universal in their
philosophical content.

“Equality, fraternity, liberty,” was the eighteenth century cry, and
it might be the cry of the Fascists. Their revolutionary contribution
to the history of politics is the denial of natural rights, natural
rights being understood as something the determination of which is
anterior to the birth of man, as the quality of a cabbage or a rose
tree is anterior to its birth. Right is so narrowly linked to duty that
for this school of thought it cannot be anterior to consciousness.
Therefore man must be considered and rated in the State only according
to spiritual value and actual economic or intellectual interest.

The natural rights of man are denied. The spiritual value, entitling
man to citizenship, cannot be acquired by him once for all and enjoyed
without effort. He must daily and continuously be working for the
vindication of the rights he has won, and for the conquest of those
he seeks. Citizenship is not a chattel lying in a man’s possession:
its only reality is bound to the performing of the duties correlative
of rights. There Fascism meets with all our religious communities;
in all Israelite and Christian Communities or Churches the new-born
child is admitted on the pledge, taken for him by sponsors, that he
will discharge his duties and accept the law of the community of which
he becomes a member. Such a pledge he has to confirm on his coming to
adult state.

Citizenship becomes, finally, with the whole of political reality, a
moral, spiritual and Christian reality, and the only real equality of
men can be attained in a State in which each man is rated according
to actual value. For citizenship, taken as a birthright of man, is a
remains of Pagan times, when it was the lot of some to be born slaves
and of some to be born citizens.




