BOOK X.


[Sidenote: _Republic X._ Socrates, Glaucon.]

*595A* Of the many excellences which I perceive in the order of our State,
there is none which upon reflection pleases me better than the rule about
poetry.

To what do you refer?

To the rejection of imitative poetry, which certainly ought not to be
received; as I see far more clearly now that *595B* the parts of the soul
have been distinguished.

What do you mean?

[Sidenote: Poetical imitations are ruinous to the mind of the hearer.]

Speaking in confidence, for I should not like to have my words repeated to
the tragedians and the rest of the imitative tribe--but I do not mind
saying to you, that all poetical imitations are ruinous to the
understanding of the hearers, and that the knowledge of their true nature
is the only antidote to them.

Explain the purport of your remark.

Well, I will tell you, although I have always from my earliest youth had
an awe and love of Homer, which even now makes the words falter on my
lips, for he is the great *595C* captain and teacher of the whole of that
charming tragic company; but a man is not to be reverenced more than the
truth, and therefore I will speak out.

Very good, he said.

Listen to me then, or rather, answer me.

Put your question.

[Sidenote: The nature of imitation.]

Can you tell me what imitation is? for I really do not know.

A likely thing, then, that I should know.

*596A* Why not? for the duller eye may often see a thing sooner than the
keener.

Very true, he said; but in your presence, even if I had any (308} faint
notion, I could not muster courage to utter it. Will you enquire yourself?

Well then, shall we begin the enquiry in our usual manner: Whenever a
number of individuals have a common name, we assume them to have also a
corresponding idea or form:--do you understand me?

I do.

[Sidenote: The idea is one, but the objects comprehended under it are
many.]

Let us take any common instance; there are beds and *596B* tables in the
world--plenty of them, are there not?

Yes.

But there are only two ideas or forms of them--one the idea of a bed, the
other of a table.

True.

And the maker of either of them makes a bed or he makes a table for our
use, in accordance with the idea--that is our way of speaking in this and
similar instances--but no artificer makes the ideas themselves: how could
he?

Impossible.

And there is another artist,--I should like to know what you would say of
him.

*596C* Who is he?

[Sidenote: The universal creator an extraordinary person. But note also
that everybody is a creator in a sense. For all things may be made by the
reflection of them in a mirror.]

One who is the maker of all the works of all other workmen.

What an extraordinary man!

Wait a little, and there will be more reason for your saying so. For this
is he who is able to make not only vessels of every kind, but plants and
animals, himself and all other things--the earth and heaven, and the
things which are in heaven or under the earth; he makes the gods also.

*596D* He must be a wizard and no mistake.

Oh! you are incredulous, are you? Do you mean that there is no such maker
or creator, or that in one sense there might be a maker of all these
things but in another not? Do you see that there is a way in which you
could make them all yourself?

What way?

An easy way enough; or rather, there are many ways in which the feat might
be quickly and easily accomplished, none quicker than that of turning a
mirror round and round--you *596E* would soon enough make the sun and the
heavens, and the earth and yourself, and other animals and plants, and
{309} all the other things of which we were just now speaking, in the
mirror.

Yes, he said; but they would be appearances only.

[Sidenote: But this is an appearance only: and the painter too is a maker
of appearances.]

Very good, I said, you are coming to the point now. And the painter too
is, as I conceive, just such another--a creator of appearances, is he not?

Of course.

But then I suppose you will say that what he creates is untrue. And yet
there is a sense in which the painter also creates a bed?

Yes, he said, but not a real bed.

*597A* And what of the maker of the bed? were you not saying that he too
makes, not the idea which, according to our view, is the essence of the
bed, but only a particular bed?

Yes, I did.

Then if he does not make that which exists he cannot make true existence,
but only some semblance of existence; and if any one were to say that the
work of the maker of the bed, or of any other workman, has real existence,
he could hardly be supposed to be speaking the truth.

At any rate, he replied, philosophers would say that he was not speaking
the truth.

No wonder, then, that his work too is an indistinct expression of truth.

*597B* No wonder.

Suppose now that by the light of the examples just offered we enquire who
this imitator is?

If you please.

[Sidenote: Three beds and three makers of beds.]

Well then, here are three beds: one existing in nature, which is made by
God, as I think that we may say--for no one else can be the maker?

No.

There is another which is the work of the carpenter?

Yes.

And the work of the painter is a third?

Yes.

Beds, then, are of three kinds, and there are three artists who
superintend them: God, the maker of the bed, and the painter?

Yes, there are three of them. {310}

*597C* God, whether from choice or from necessity, made one bed in nature
and one only; two or more such ideal beds neither ever have been nor ever
will be made by God.

Why is that?

[Sidenote: (1) The creator. God could only make one bed; if he made two, a
third would still appear behind them.]

Because even if He had made but two, a third would still appear behind
them which both of them would have for their idea, and that would be the
ideal bed and not the two others.

Very true, he said.

*597D* God knew this, and He desired to be the real maker of a real bed,
not a particular maker of a particular bed, and therefore He created a bed
which is essentially and by nature one only.

So we believe.

Shall we, then, speak of Him as the natural author or maker of the bed?

Yes, he replied; inasmuch as by the natural process of creation He is the
author of this and of all other things.

[Sidenote: (2) The human maker.]

And what shall we say of the carpenter--is not he also the maker of the
bed?

Yes.

But would you call the painter a creator and maker?

Certainly not.

Yet if he is not the maker, what is he in relation to the bed?

[Sidenote: (3) The imitator, i.e. the painter or poet,]

*597E* I think, he said, that we may fairly designate him as the imitator
of that which the others make.

Good, I said; then you call him who is third in the descent from nature an
imitator?

Certainly, he said.

And the tragic poet is an imitator, and therefore, like all other
imitators, he is thrice removed from the king and from the truth?

That appears to be so.

Then about the imitator we are agreed. And what about *598A* the painter?
--I would like to know whether he may be thought to imitate that which
originally exists in nature, or only the creations of artists?

The latter.

As they are or as they appear? you have still to determine this. {311}

What do you mean?

[Sidenote: whose art is one of imitation or appearance and a long way
removed from the truth.]

I mean, that you may look at a bed from different points of view,
obliquely or directly or from any other point of view, and the bed will
appear different, but there is no difference in reality. And the same of
all things.

Yes, he said, the difference is only apparent.

*598B* Now let me ask you another question: Which is the art of painting
designed to be--an imitation of things as they are, or as they appear--of
appearance or of reality?

Of appearance.

[Sidenote: Any one who does all things does only a very small part of
them.]

Then the imitator, I said, is a long way off the truth, and can do all
things because he lightly touches on a small part of them, and that part
an image. For example: A painter will paint a cobbler, carpenter, or any
other artist, though he *598C* knows nothing of their arts; and, if he is
a good artist, he may deceive children or simple persons, when he shows
them his picture of a carpenter from a distance, and they will fancy that
they are looking at a real carpenter.

Certainly.

[Sidenote: Any one who pretends to know all things is ignorant of the very
nature of knowledge.]

And whenever any one informs us that he has found a man who knows all the
arts, and all things else that anybody knows, and every single thing with
a higher degree of accuracy *598D* than any other man--whoever tells us
this, I think that we can only imagine him to be a simple creature who is
likely to have been deceived by some wizard or actor whom he met, and whom
he thought all-knowing, because he himself was unable to analyse the
nature of knowledge and ignorance and imitation.

Most true.

[Sidenote: And he who attributes such universal knowledge to the poets is
similarly deceived.]

And so, when we hear persons saying that the tragedians, and Homer, who is
at their head, know all the arts and all *598E* things human, virtue as
well as vice, and divine things too, for that the good poet cannot compose
well unless he knows his subject, and that he who has not this knowledge
can never be a poet, we ought to consider whether here also there may not
be a similar illusion. Perhaps they may have come across imitators and
been deceived by them; they may not have remembered when they saw their
works that *599A* these were but imitations thrice removed from the truth,
and could easily be made without any knowledge of the truth, {312} because
they are appearances only and not realities? Or, after all, they may be in
the right, and poets do really know the things about which they seem to
the many to speak so well?

The question, he said, should by all means be considered.

[Sidenote: He who could make the original would not make the image.]

Now do you suppose that if a person were able to make the original as well
as the image, he would seriously devote himself to the image-making
branch? Would he allow imitation to be the ruling principle of his life,
as if he had *599B* nothing higher in him?

I should say not.

The real artist, who knew what he was imitating, would be interested in
realities and not in imitations; and would desire to leave as memorials of
himself works many and fair; and, instead of being the author of
encomiums, he would prefer to be the theme of them.

Yes, he said, that would be to him a source of much greater honour and
profit.

[Sidenote: If Homer had been a legislator, or general, or inventor,]

Then, I said, we must put a question to Homer; not about *599C* medicine,
or any of the arts to which his poems only incidentally refer: we are not
going to ask him, or any other poet, whether he has cured patients like
Asclepius, or left behind him a school of medicine such as the Asclepiads
were, or whether he only talks about medicine and other arts at
second-hand; but we have a right to know respecting military tactics,
politics, education, which are the chiefest *599D* and noblest subjects of
his poems, and we may fairly ask him about them. 'Friend Homer,' then we
say to him, 'if you are only in the second remove from truth in what you
say of virtue, and not in the third--not an image maker or imitator--and
if you are able to discern what pursuits make men better or worse in
private or public life, tell us what State was ever better governed by
your help? The good *599E* order of Lacedaemon is due to Lycurgus, and
many other cities great and small have been similarly benefited by others;
but who says that you have been a good legislator to them and have done
them any good? Italy and Sicily boast of Charondas, and there is Solon who
is renowned among us; but what city has anything to say about you?' Is
there any city which he might name?

I think not, said Glaucon; not even the Homerids themselves pretend that
he was a legislator. {313}

*600A* Well, but is there any war on record which was carried on
successfully by him, or aided by his counsels, when he was alive?

There is not.

Or is there any invention[1] of his, applicable to the arts or to human
life, such as Thales the Milesian or Anacharsis the Scythian, and other
ingenious men have conceived, which is attributed to him?

[Footnote: Omitting [Greek: ei)s].]

There is absolutely nothing of the kind.

But, if Homer never did any public service, was he privately a guide or
teacher of any? Had he in his lifetime friends *600B* who loved to
associate with him, and who handed down to posterity an Homeric way of
life, such as was established by Pythagoras who was so greatly beloved for
his wisdom, and whose followers are to this day quite celebrated for the
order which was named after him?

Nothing of the kind is recorded of him. For surely, Socrates, Creophylus,
the companion of Homer, that child of flesh, whose name always makes us
laugh, might be more justly ridiculed for his stupidity, if, as is said,
Homer was *600C* greatly neglected by him and others in his own day when
he was alive?

[Sidenote: or had done anything else for the improvement of mankind, he
would not have been allowed to starve.]

Yes, I replied, that is the tradition. But can you imagine, Glaucon, that
if Homer had really been able to educate and improve mankind--if he had
possessed knowledge and not been a mere imitator--can you imagine, I say,
that he would not have had many followers, and been honoured and loved by
them? Protagoras of Abdera, and Prodicus of Ceos, and a host of others,
have only to whisper to their contemporaries: *600D* 'You will never be
able to manage either your own house or your own State until you appoint
us to be your ministers of education'--and this ingenious device of theirs
has such an effect in making men love them that their companions all but
carry them about on their shoulders. And is it conceivable that the
contemporaries of Homer, or again of Hesiod, would have allowed either of
them to go about as rhapsodists, if they had really been able to make
mankind virtuous? Would they not have been as unwilling to part with them
as with gold, and have compelled them to stay {314} *600E* at home with
them? Or, if the master would not stay, then the disciples would have
followed him about everywhere, until they had got education enough?

Yes, Socrates, that, I think, is quite true.

[Sidenote: The poets, like the painters, are but imitators;]

Then must we not infer that all these poetical individuals, beginning with
Homer, are only imitators; they copy images *601A* of virtue and the like,
but the truth they never reach? The poet is like a painter who, as we have
already observed, will make a likeness of a cobbler though he understands
nothing of cobbling; and his picture is good enough for those who know no
more than he does, and judge only by colours and figures.

Quite so.

In like manner the poet with his words and phrases[2] may be said to lay
on the colours of the several arts, himself understanding their nature
only enough to imitate them; and other people, who are as ignorant as he
is, and judge only from his words, imagine that if he speaks of cobbling,
or of military tactics, or of anything else, in metre and harmony *601B*
and rhythm, he speaks very well--such is the sweet influence which melody
and rhythm by nature have. And I think that you must have observed again
and again what a poor appearance the tales of poets make when stripped of
the colours which music puts upon them, and recited in simple prose.

[Footnote 2: Or, 'with his nouns and verbs.']

Yes, he said.

They are like faces which were never really beautiful, but only blooming;
and now the bloom of youth has passed away from them?

Exactly.

[Sidenote: they know nothing of true existence.]

Here is another point: The imitator or maker of the image knows nothing of
true existence; he knows appearances only. *601C* Am I not right?

Yes.

Then let us have a clear understanding, and not be satisfied with half an
explanation.

Proceed.

Of the painter we say that he will paint reins, and he will paint a bit?

Yes. {315}

And the worker in leather and brass will make them?

Certainly.

[Sidenote: The maker has more knowledge than the imitator, but less than
the user. Three arts, using, making, imitating.]

But does the painter know the right form of the bit and reins? Nay, hardly
even the workers in brass and leather who make them; only the horseman who
knows how to use them--he knows their right form.

Most true.

And may we not say the same of all things?

What?

*601D* That there are three arts which are concerned with all things: one
which uses, another which makes, a third which imitates them?

Yes.

[Sidenote: Goodness of things relative to use; hence the maker of them is
instructed by the user.]

And the excellence or beauty or truth of every structure, animate or
inanimate, and of every action of man, is relative to the use for which
nature or the artist has intended them.

True.

Then the user of them must have the greatest experience of them, and he
must indicate to the maker the good or bad qualities which develop
themselves in use; for example, the flute-player will tell the flute-maker
which of his flutes is satisfactory to the performer; he will tell him how
he ought *601E* to make them, and the other will attend to his
instructions?

Of course.

The one knows and therefore speaks with authority about the goodness and
badness of flutes, while the other, confiding in him, will do what he is
told by him?

True.

[Sidenote: The maker has belief and not knowledge, the imitator neither.]

The instrument is the same, but about the excellence or badness of it the
maker will only attain to a correct belief; and this he will gain from him
who knows, by talking to him *602A* and being compelled to hear what he
has to say, whereas the user will have knowledge?

True.

But will the imitator have either? Will he know from use whether or no his
drawing is correct or beautiful? or will he have right opinion from being
compelled to associate with another who knows and gives him instructions
about what he should draw? {316}

Neither.

Then he will no more have true opinion than he will have knowledge about
the goodness or badness of his imitations?

I suppose not.

The imitative artist will be in a brilliant state of intelligence about
his own creations?

Nay, very much the reverse.

*602B* And still he will go on imitating without knowing what makes a
thing good or bad, and may be expected therefore to imitate only that
which appears to be good to the ignorant multitude?

Just so.

Thus far then we are pretty well agreed that the imitator has no knowledge
worth mentioning of what he imitates. Imitation is only a kind of play or
sport, and the tragic poets, whether they write in Iambic or in Heroic
verse, are imitators in the highest degree?

Very true.

[Sidenote: Imitation has been proved to be thrice removed from the truth.]

*602C* And now tell me, I conjure you, has not imitation been shown by us
to be concerned with that which is thrice removed from the truth?

Certainly.

And what is the faculty in man to which imitation is addressed?

What do you mean?

I will explain: The body which is large when seen near, appears small when
seen at a distance?

True.

And the same object appears straight when looked at out of the water, and
crooked when in the water; and the concave becomes convex, owing to the
illusion about colours to which the sight is liable. Thus every sort of
confusion is revealed within us; *602D* and this is that weakness of the
human mind on which the art of conjuring and of deceiving by light and
shadow and other ingenious devices imposes, having an effect upon us like
magic.

True.

[Sidenote: The art of measuring given to man that he may correct the
variety of appearances.]

And the arts of measuring and numbering and weighing come to the rescue of
the human understanding--there {317} is the beauty of them--and the
apparent greater or less, or more or heavier, no longer have the mastery
over us, but give way before calculation and measure and weight?

Most true.

*602E* And this, surely, must be the work of the calculating and rational
principle in the soul?

To be sure.

And when this principle measures and certifies that some things are equal,
or that some are greater or less than others, there occurs an apparent
contradiction?

True.

But were we not saying that such a contradiction is impossible--the same
faculty cannot have contrary opinions at the same time about the same
thing?

Very true.

*603A* Then that part of the soul which has an opinion contrary to measure
is not the same with that which has an opinion in accordance with measure?

True.

And the better part of the soul is likely to be that which trusts to
measure and calculation?

Certainly.

And that which is opposed to them is one of the inferior principles of the
soul?

No doubt.

This was the conclusion at which I was seeking to arrive when I said that
painting or drawing, and imitation in general, when doing their own proper
work, are far removed from truth, and the companions and friends and
associates of *603B* a principle within us which is equally removed from
reason, and that they have no true or healthy aim.

Exactly.

[Sidenote: The productions of the imitative arts are bastard and
illegitimate.]

The imitative art is an inferior who marries an inferior, and has inferior
offspring.

Very true.

And is this confined to the sight only, or does it extend to the hearing
also, relating in fact to what we term poetry?

Probably the same would be true of poetry.

Do not rely, I said, on a probability derived from the analogy of
painting; but let us examine further and see {318} *603C* whether the
faculty with which poetical imitation is concerned is good or bad.

By all means.

We may state the question thus:--Imitation imitates the actions of men,
whether voluntary or involuntary, on which, as they imagine, a good or bad
result has ensued, and they rejoice or sorrow accordingly. Is there
anything more?

No, there is nothing else.

[Sidenote: They imitate opposites;]

But in all this variety of circumstances is the man at unity *603D* with
himself--or rather, as in the instance of sight there was confusion and
opposition in his opinions about the same things, so here also is there
not strife and inconsistency in his life? Though I need hardly raise the
question again, for I remember that all this has been already admitted;
and the soul has been acknowledged by us to be full of these and ten
thousand similar oppositions occurring at the same moment?

And we were right, he said.

Yes, I said, thus far we were right; but there was an *603E* omission
which must now be supplied.

What was the omission?

Were we not saying that a good man, who has the misfortune to lose his son
or anything else which is most dear to him, will bear the loss with more
equanimity than another?

Yes.

[Sidenote: they encourage weakness;]

But will he have no sorrow, or shall we say that although he cannot help
sorrowing, he will moderate his sorrow?

The latter, he said, is the truer statement.

*604A* Tell me: will he be more likely to struggle and hold out against
his sorrow when he is seen by his equals, or when he is alone?

It will make a great difference whether he is seen or not.

When he is by himself he will not mind saying or doing many things which
he would be ashamed of any one hearing or seeing him do?

True.

There is a principle of law and reason in him which bids him resist, as
well as a feeling of his misfortune which is *604B* forcing him to indulge
his sorrow? {319}

True.

But when a man is drawn in two opposite directions, to and from the same
object, this, as we affirm, necessarily implies two distinct principles in
him?

Certainly.

One of them is ready to follow the guidance of the law?

How do you mean?

[Sidenote: they are at variance with the exhortations of philosophy;]

The law would say that to be patient under suffering is best, and that we
should not give way to impatience, as there is no knowing whether such
things are good or evil; and nothing is gained by impatience; also,
because no human *604C* thing is of serious importance, and grief stands
in the way of that which at the moment is most required.

What is most required? he asked.

That we should take counsel about what has happened, and when the dice
have been thrown order our affairs in the way which reason deems best;
not, like children who have had a fall, keeping hold of the part struck
and wasting time in setting up a howl, but always accustoming the soul
forthwith *604D* to apply a remedy, raising up that which is sickly and
fallen, banishing the cry of sorrow by the healing art.

Yes, he said, that is the true way of meeting the attacks of fortune.

Yes, I said; and the higher principle is ready to follow this suggestion
of reason?

Clearly.

[Sidenote: they recall trouble and sorrow;]

And the other principle, which inclines us to recollection of our troubles
and to lamentation, and can never have enough of them, we may call
irrational, useless, and cowardly?

Indeed, we may.

*604E* And does not the latter--I mean the rebellious principle--furnish a
great variety of materials for imitation? Whereas the wise and calm
temperament, being always nearly equable, is not easy to imitate or to
appreciate when imitated, especially at a public festival when a
promiscuous crowd is assembled in a theatre. For the feeling represented
is one to which they are strangers.

*605A* Certainly.

Then the imitative poet who aims at being popular is not {320} by nature
made, nor is his art intended, to please or to affect the rational
principle in the soul; but he will prefer the passionate and fitful
temper, which is easily imitated?

Clearly.

[Sidenote: they minister in an inferior manner to an inferior principle in
the soul.]

And now we may fairly take him and place him by the side of the painter,
for he is like him in two ways: first, inasmuch as his creations have an
inferior degree of truth--in this, *605B* I say, he is like him; and he is
also like him in being concerned with an inferior part of the soul; and
therefore we shall be right in refusing to admit him into a well-ordered
State, because he awakens and nourishes and strengthens the feelings and
impairs the reason. As in a city when the evil are permitted to have
authority and the good are put out of the way, so in the soul of man, as
we maintain, the imitative poet implants an evil constitution, for he
indulges the *605C* irrational nature which has no discernment of greater
and less, but thinks the same thing at one time great and at another
small--he is a manufacturer of images and is very far removed from the
truth[3].

[Footnote 3: Reading [Greek: ei)dôlopoiou=nta ... a)phestô=ta].]

Exactly.

But we have not yet brought forward the heaviest count in our
accusation:--the power which poetry has of harming even the good (and
there are very few who are not harmed), is surely an awful thing?

Yes, certainly, if the effect is what you say.

[Sidenote: How can we be right in sympathizing with the sorrows of poetry
when we would fain restrain those of real life?]

Hear and judge: The best of us, as I conceive, when we listen to a passage
of Homer, or one of the tragedians, in *605D* which he represents some
pitiful hero who is drawling out his sorrows in a long oration, or
weeping, and smiting his breast--the best of us, you know, delight in
giving way to sympathy, and are in raptures at the excellence of the poet
who stirs our feelings most.

Yes, of course I know.

But when any sorrow of our own happens to us, then you may observe that we
pride ourselves on the opposite quality--we would fain be quiet and
patient; this is the manly part, *605E* and the other which delighted us
in the recitation is now deemed to be the part of a woman.

Very true, he said. {321}

Now can we be right in praising and admiring another who is doing that
which any one of us would abominate and be ashamed of in his own person?

No, he said, that is certainly not reasonable.

*606A* Nay, I said, quite reasonable from one point of view.

What point of view?

[Sidenote: We fail to observe that a sentimental pity soon creates a real
weakness.]

If you consider, I said, that when in misfortune we feel a natural hunger
and desire to relieve our sorrow by weeping and lamentation, and that this
feeling which is kept under control in our own calamities is satisfied and
delighted by the poets;--the better nature in each of us, not having been
sufficiently trained by reason or habit, allows the sympathetic *606B*
element to break loose because the sorrow is another's; and the spectator
fancies that there can be no disgrace to himself in praising and pitying
any one who comes telling him what a good man he is, and making a fuss
about his troubles; he thinks that the pleasure is a gain, and why should
he be supercilious and lose this and the poem too? Few persons ever
reflect, as I should imagine, that from the evil of other men something of
evil is communicated to themselves. And so the feeling of sorrow which has
gathered strength at the sight of the misfortunes of others is with
difficulty repressed in our own.

*606C* How very true!

[Sidenote: In like manner the love of comedy may turn a man into a
buffoon.]

And does not the same hold also of the ridiculous? There are jests which
you would be ashamed to make yourself, and yet on the comic stage, or
indeed in private, when you hear them, you are greatly amused by them, and
are not at all disgusted at their unseemliness;--the case of pity is
repeated;--there is a principle in human nature which is disposed to raise
a laugh, and this which you once restrained by reason, because you were
afraid of being thought a buffoon, is now let out again; and having
stimulated the risible faculty at the theatre, you are betrayed
unconsciously to yourself into playing the comic poet at home.

Quite true, he said.

*606D* And the same may be said of lust and anger and all the other
affections, of desire and pain and pleasure, which are held to be
inseparable from every action--in all of them {322} poetry feeds and
waters the passions instead of drying them up; she lets them rule,
although they ought to be controlled, if mankind are ever to increase in
happiness and virtue.

I cannot deny it.

[Sidenote: We are lovers of Homer, but we must expel him from our State.]

*606E* Therefore, Glaucon, I said, whenever you meet with any of the
eulogists of Homer declaring that he has been the educator of Hellas, and
that he is profitable for education and for the ordering of human things,
and that you should *607A* take him up again and again and get to know him
and regulate your whole life according to him, we may love and honour
those who say these things--they are excellent people, as far as their
lights extend; and we are ready to acknowledge that Homer is the greatest
of poets and first of tragedy writers; but we must remain firm in our
conviction that hymns to the gods and praises of famous men are the only
poetry which ought to be admitted into our State. For if you go beyond
this and allow the honeyed muse to enter, either in epic or lyric verse,
not law and the reason of mankind, which by common consent have ever been
deemed best, but pleasure and pain will be the rulers in our State.

That is most true, he said.

[Sidenote: Apology to the poets.]

*607B* And now since we have reverted to the subject of poetry, let this
our defence serve to show the reasonableness of our former judgment in
sending away out of our State an art having the tendencies which we have
described; for reason constrained us. But that she may not impute to us
any harshness or want of politeness, let us tell her that there is an
ancient quarrel between philosophy and poetry; of which there are many
proofs, such as the saying of 'the yelping hound howling at her lord,' or
of one 'mighty in *607C* the vain talk of fools,' and 'the mob of sages
circumventing Zeus,' and the 'subtle thinkers who are beggars after all';
and there are innumerable other signs of ancient enmity between them.
Notwithstanding this, let us assure our sweet friend and the sister arts
of imitation, that if she will only prove her title to exist in a
well-ordered State we shall be delighted to receive her--we are very
conscious of her charms; but we may not on that account betray the truth.
{323} I dare say, Glaucon, that you are as much charmed by her *607D* as
I am, especially when she appears in Homer?

Yes, indeed, I am greatly charmed.

Shall I propose, then, that she be allowed to return from exile, but upon
this condition only--that she make a defence of herself in lyrical or some
other metre?

Certainly.

And we may further grant to those of her defenders who are lovers of
poetry and yet not poets the permission to speak in prose on her behalf:
let them show not only that she is pleasant but also useful to States and
to human life, and we will listen in a kindly spirit; for if this can be
proved *607E* we shall surely be the gainers--I mean, if there is a use in
poetry as well as a delight?

Certainly, he said, we shall be the gainers.

[Sidenote: Poetry is attractive but not true.]

If her defence fails, then, my dear friend, like other persons who are
enamoured of something, but put a restraint upon themselves when they
think their desires are opposed to their interests, so too must we after
the manner of lovers give her up, though not without a struggle. We too
are inspired by that love of poetry which the education *608A* of noble
States has implanted in us, and therefore we would have her appear at her
best and truest; but so long as she is unable to make good her defence,
this argument of ours shall be a charm to us, which we will repeat to
ourselves while we listen to her strains; that we may not fall away into
the childish love of her which captivates the many. At all events we are
well aware[4] that poetry being such as we have described is not to be
regarded seriously as attaining to the truth; and he who listens to her,
fearing for the safety of the *608B* city which is within him, should be
on his guard against her seductions and make our words his law.

[Footnote 4: Or, if we accept Madvig's ingenious but unnecessary
emendation [Greek: a)|so/metha], 'At all events we will sing, that' &c.]

Yes, he said, I quite agree with you.

Yes, I said, my dear Glaucon, for great is the issue at stake, greater
than appears, whether a man is to be good or bad. And what will any one be
profited if under the influence of honour or money or power, aye, or under
the excitement of poetry, he neglect justice and virtue? {324}

Yes, he said; I have been convinced by the argument, as I believe that any
one else would have been.

*608C* And yet no mention has been made of the greatest prizes and rewards
which await virtue.

What, are there any greater still? If there are, they must be of an
inconceivable greatness.

[Sidenote: The rewards of virtue extend not only to this little space of
human life but to the whole of existence.]

Why, I said, what was ever great in a short time? The whole period of
three score years and ten is surely but a little thing in comparison with
eternity?

Say rather 'nothing,' he replied.

And should an immortal being seriously think of this little *608D* space
rather than of the whole?

Of the whole, certainly. But why do you ask?

Are you not aware, I said, that the soul of man is immortal and
imperishable?

He looked at me in astonishment, and said: No, by heaven: And are you
really prepared to maintain this?

Yes, I said, I ought to be, and you too--there is no difficulty in proving
it.

I see a great difficulty; but I should like to hear you state this
argument of which you make so light.

Listen then.

I am attending.

There is a thing which you call good and another which you call evil?

Yes, he replied.

*608E* Would you agree with me in thinking that the corrupting and
destroying element is the evil, and the saving and improving element the
good?

Yes.

[Sidenote: Everything has a good and an evil, and if not destroyed by its
own evil, will not be destroyed by that of another.]

And you admit that every thing has a good and also an evil; *609A* as
ophthalmia is the evil of the eyes and disease of the whole body; as
mildew is of corn, and rot of timber, or rust of copper and iron: in
everything, or in almost everything, there is an inherent evil and
disease?

Yes, he said.

And anything which is infected by any of these evils is made evil, and at
last wholly dissolves and dies?

True.

The vice and evil which is inherent in each is the destruction {325} of
each; and if this does not destroy them there is nothing else that will;
*609B* for good certainly will not destroy them, nor again, that which is
neither good nor evil.

Certainly not.

If, then, we find any nature which having this inherent corruption cannot
be dissolved or destroyed, we may be certain that of such a nature there
is no destruction?

That may be assumed.

Well, I said, and is there no evil which corrupts the soul?

Yes, he said, there are all the evils which we were just now *609C*
passing in review: unrighteousness, intemperance, cowardice, ignorance.

[Sidenote: Therefore, if the soul cannot be destroyed by moral evil, she
certainly will not be destroyed by physical evil.]

But does any of these dissolve or destroy her?--and here do not let us
fall into the error of supposing that the unjust and foolish man, when he
is detected, perishes through his own injustice, which is an evil of the
soul. Take the analogy of the body: The evil of the body is a disease
which wastes and reduces and annihilates the body; and all the things of
which we were just now speaking come to annihilation *609D* through their
own corruption attaching to them and inhering in them and so destroying
them. Is not this true?

Yes.

Consider the soul in like manner. Does the injustice or other evil which
exists in the soul waste and consume her? Do they by attaching to the soul
and inhering in her at last bring her to death, and so separate her from
the body?

Certainly not.

And yet, I said, it is unreasonable to suppose that anything can perish
from without through affection of external evil which could not be
destroyed from within by a corruption of its own?

It is, he replied.

*609E* Consider, I said, Glaucon, that even the badness of food, whether
staleness, decomposition, or any other bad quality, when confined to the
actual food, is not supposed to destroy the body; although, if the badness
of food communicates corruption to the body, then we should say that the
body *610A* has been destroyed by a corruption of itself, which is
disease, brought on by this; but that the body, being one thing, can be
destroyed by the badness of food, which {326} is another, and which does
not engender any natural infection--this we shall absolutely deny?

Very true.

[Sidenote: Evil means the contagion of evil, and the evil of the body does
not infect the soul.]

And, on the same principle, unless some bodily evil can produce an evil of
the soul, we must not suppose that the soul, which is one thing, can be
dissolved by any merely external evil which belongs to another?

Yes, he said, there is reason in that.

Either, then, let us refute this conclusion, or, while it *610B* remains
unrefuted, let us never say that fever, or any other disease, or the knife
put to the throat, or even the cutting up of the whole body into the
minutest pieces, can destroy the soul, until she herself is proved to
become more unholy or unrighteous in consequence of these things being
done to the body; but that the soul, or anything else if not destroyed
*610C* by an internal evil, can be destroyed by an external one, is not to
be affirmed by any man.

And surely, he replied, no one will ever prove that the souls of men
become more unjust in consequence of death.

But if some one who would rather not admit the immortality of the soul
boldly denies this, and says that the dying do really become more evil and
unrighteous, then, if the speaker is right, I suppose that injustice, like
disease, must be assumed to be fatal to the unjust, and that those who
take *610D* this disorder die by the natural inherent power of destruction
which evil has, and which kills them sooner or later, but in quite another
way from that in which, at present, the wicked receive death at the hands
of others as the penalty of their deeds?

Nay, he said, in that case injustice, if fatal to the unjust, will not be
so very terrible to him, for he will be delivered from evil. But I rather
suspect the opposite to be the truth, *610E* and that injustice which, if
it have the power, will murder others, keeps the murderer alive--aye, and
well awake too; so far removed is her dwelling-place from being a house of
death.

True, I said; if the inherent natural vice or evil of the soul is unable
to kill or destroy her, hardly will that which is appointed to be the
destruction of some other body, destroy a soul or anything else except
that of which it was appointed to be the destruction. {327}

Yes, that can hardly be.

But the soul which cannot be destroyed by an evil, whether *611A* inherent
or external, must exist for ever, and if existing for ever, must be
immortal?

Certainly.

[Sidenote: If the soul is indestructible, the number of souls can never
increase or diminish.]

That is the conclusion, I said; and, if a true conclusion, then the souls
must always be the same, for if none be destroyed they will not diminish
in number. Neither will they increase, for the increase of the immortal
natures must come from something mortal, and all things would thus end in
immortality.

Very true.

*611B* But this we cannot believe--reason will not allow us--any more than
we can believe the soul, in her truest nature, to be full of variety and
difference and dissimilarity.

What do you mean? he said.

The soul, I said, being, as is now proven, immortal, must be the fairest
of compositions and cannot be compounded of many elements?

Certainly not.

[Sidenote: The soul, if she is to be seen truly, should be stripped of the
accidents of earth.]

Her immortality is demonstrated by the previous argument, and there are
many other proofs; but to see her as she *611C* really is, not as we now
behold her, marred by communion with the body and other miseries, you must
contemplate her with the eye of reason, in her original purity; and then
her beauty will be revealed, and justice and injustice and all the things
which we have described will be manifested more clearly. Thus far, we have
spoken the truth concerning her as she appears at present, but we must
remember also that we have seen her only in a condition which may be
compared *611D* to that of the sea-god Glaucus, whose original image can
hardly be discerned because his natural members are broken off and crushed
and damaged by the waves in all sorts of ways, and incrustations have
grown over them of seaweed and shells and stones, so that he is more like
some monster than he is to his own natural form. And the soul which we
behold is in a similar condition, disfigured by ten thousand ills. But not
there, Glaucon, not there must we look.

Where then?

[Sidenote: Her true conversation is with the eternal.]

*611E* At her love of wisdom. Let us see whom she affects, and {328} what
society and converse she seeks in virtue of her near kindred with the
immortal and eternal and divine; also how different she would become if
wholly following this superior principle, and borne by a divine impulse
out of the ocean in which she now is, and disengaged from the stones and
shells and things of earth and rock which in wild variety spring up *612A*
around her because she feeds upon earth, and is overgrown by the good
things of this life as they are termed: then you would see her as she is,
and know whether she have one shape only or many, or what her nature is.
Of her affections and of the forms which she takes in this present life I
think that we have now said enough.

True, he replied.

[Sidenote: Having put aside for argument's sake the rewards of virtue, we
may now claim to have them restored.]

And thus, I said, we have fulfilled the conditions of the argument[5];
*612B* we have not introduced the rewards and glories of justice, which,
as you were saying, are to be found in Homer and Hesiod; but justice in
her own nature has been shown to be best for the soul in her own nature.
Let a man do what is just, whether he have the ring of Gyges or not, and
even if in addition to the ring of Gyges he put on the helmet of Hades.

[Footnote 5: Reading [Greek: a)pelusa/metha].]

Very true.

And now, Glaucon, there will be no harm in further enumerating how many
and how great are the rewards which *612C* justice and the other virtues
procure to the soul from gods and men, both in life and after death.

Certainly not, he said.

Will you repay me, then, what you borrowed in the argument?

What did I borrow?

The assumption that the just man should appear unjust and the unjust just:
for you were of opinion that even if the true state of the case could not
possibly escape the eyes of gods and men, still this admission ought to be
made for the sake of the argument, in order that pure justice might be
*612D* weighed against pure injustice. Do you remember?

I should be much to blame if I had forgotten.

Then, as the cause is decided, I demand on behalf of justice that the
estimation in which she is held by gods and {329} men and which we
acknowledge to be her due should now be restored to her by us[6]; since
she has been shown to confer reality, and not to deceive those who truly
possess her, let what has been taken from her be given back, that so she
may win that palm of appearance which is hers also, and which she gives to
her own.

[Footnote 6: Reading [Greek: ê(mô=n].]

*612E* The demand, he said, is just.

In the first place, I said--and this is the first thing which you will
have to give back--the nature both of the just and unjust is truly known
to the gods.

Granted.

[Sidenote: The just man is the friend of the gods, and all things work
together for his good.]

And if they are both known to them, one must be the friend and the other
the enemy of the gods, as we admitted from the beginning?

True.

*613A* And the friend of the gods may be supposed to receive from them all
things at their best, excepting only such evil as is the necessary
consequence of former sins?

Certainly.

Then this must be our notion of the just man, that even when he is in
poverty or sickness, or any other seeming misfortune, all things will in
the end work together for good to him in life and death: for the gods have
a care of any one whose desire is to become just and to be like God, as
far as *613B* man can attain the divine likeness, by the pursuit of
virtue?

Yes, he said; if he is like God he will surely not be neglected by him.

[Sidenote: The unjust is the opposite.]

And of the unjust may not the opposite be supposed?

Certainly.

Such, then, are the palms of victory which the gods give the just?

That is my conviction.

[Sidenote: He may be compared to a runner who is only good at the start.]

And what do they receive of men? Look at things as they really are, and
you will see that the clever unjust are in the case of runners, who run
well from the starting-place to the goal but not back again from the goal:
they go off at a great pace, *613C* but in the end only look foolish,
slinking away with their ears draggling on their shoulders, and without a
crown; but the true runner comes to the finish and receives the {330}
prize and is crowned. And this is the way with the just; he who endures to
the end of every action and occasion of his entire life has a good report
and carries off the prize which men have to bestow.

True.

[Sidenote: [Sidenote: Recapitulation of things unfit for ears polite which
had been described by Glaucon in Book II.]]

And now you must allow me to repeat of the just the blessings which you
were attributing to the fortunate unjust. *613D* I shall say of them, what
you were saying of the others, that as they grow older, they become rulers
in their own city if they care to be; they marry whom they like and give
in marriage to whom they will; all that you said of the others I now say
of these. And, on the other hand, of the unjust I say that the greater
number, even though they escape in their youth, are found out at last and
look foolish at the end of their course, and when they come to be old and
miserable are flouted alike by stranger and citizen; they are beaten and
*613E* then come those things unfit for ears polite, as you truly term
them; they will be racked and have their eyes burned out, as you were
saying. And you may suppose that I have repeated the remainder of your
tale of horrors. But will you let me assume, without reciting them, that
these things are true?

Certainly, he said, what you say is true.

*614A* These, then, are the prizes and rewards and gifts which are
bestowed upon the just by gods and men in this present life, in addition
to the other good things which justice of herself provides.

Yes, he said; and they are fair and lasting.

And yet, I said, all these are as nothing either in number or greatness in
comparison with those other recompenses which await both just and unjust
after death. And you ought to hear them, and then both just and unjust
will have received from us a full payment of the debt which the argument
owes to them.

*614B* Speak, he said; there are few things which I would more gladly
hear.

[Sidenote: Socrates.]

[Sidenote: The vision of Er.]

[Sidenote: The judgement.]

[Sidenote: The two openings in heaven and the two in earth through which
passed those who were beginning and those who had completed their
pilgrimage.]

[Sidenote: The meeting in the meadow.]

[Sidenote: The punishment tenfold the sin.]

[Sidenote: 'Unbaptized infants.']

[Sidenote: Ardiaeus the tyrant.]

[Sidenote: Incurable sinners.]

Well, I said, I will tell you a tale; not one of the tales which Odysseus
tells to the hero Alcinous, yet this too is a tale of a hero, Er the son
of Armenius, a Pamphylian by birth. He was slain in battle, and ten days
afterwards, when the bodies of the dead were taken up already in a state
of corruption, his body was found unaffected by decay, and {331} carried
away home to be buried. And on the twelfth day, as he was lying on the
funeral pile, he returned to life and told them what he had seen in the
other world. He said that when his soul left the body he went on a journey
with a great company, *614C* and that they came to a mysterious place at
which there were two openings in the earth; they were near together, and
over against them were two other openings in the heaven above. In the
intermediate space there were judges seated, who commanded the just, after
they had given judgment on them and had bound their sentences in front of
them, to ascend by the heavenly way on the right hand; and in like manner
the unjust were bidden by them to descend by the lower way on the left
hand; these also bore the symbols of their deeds, but fastened on their
backs. He drew near, *614D* and they told him that he was to be the
messenger who would carry the report of the other world to men, and they
bade him hear and see all that was to be heard and seen in that place.
Then he beheld and saw on one side the souls departing at either opening
of heaven and earth when sentence had been given on them; and at the two
other openings other souls, some ascending out of the earth dusty and worn
with travel, some descending out of heaven clean and bright. And *614E*
arriving ever and anon they seemed to have come from a long journey, and
they went forth with gladness into the meadow, where they encamped as at a
festival; and those who knew one another embraced and conversed, the souls
which came from earth curiously enquiring about the things above, and the
souls which came from heaven about the things beneath. And they told one
another of what had happened by the way, those from below weeping and
sorrowing *615A* at the remembrance of the things which they had endured
and seen in their journey beneath the earth (now the journey lasted a
thousand years), while those from above were describing heavenly delights
and visions of inconceivable beauty. The story, Glaucon, would take too
long to tell; but the sum was this:--He said that for every wrong which
they had done to any one they suffered tenfold; or once in a hundred
years--such being reckoned to be the length *615B* of man's life, and the
penalty being thus paid ten times in a thousand years. If, for example,
there were any who had been {332} the cause of many deaths, or had
betrayed or enslaved cities or armies, or been guilty of any other evil
behaviour, for each and all of their offences they received punishment ten
times over, and the rewards of beneficence and justice and *615C* holiness
were in the same proportion. I need hardly repeat what he said concerning
young children dying almost as soon as they were born. Of piety and
impiety to gods and parents, and of murderers[7], there were retributions
other and greater far which he described. He mentioned that he was present
when one of the spirits asked another, 'Where is Ardiaeus the Great?' (Now
this Ardiaeus lived a thousand years before the time of Er: he had been
the tyrant of some city of Pamphylia, and had murdered his aged father and
his elder brother, *615D* and was said to have committed many other
abominable crimes.) The answer of the other spirit was: 'He comes not
hither and will never come. And this,' said he, 'was one of the dreadful
sights which we ourselves witnessed. We were at the mouth of the cavern,
and, having completed all our experiences, were about to reascend, when of
a sudden Ardiaeus appeared and several others, most of whom were tyrants;
and there were also besides the tyrants private individuals *615E* who had
been great criminals: they were just, as they fancied, about to return
into the upper world, but the mouth, instead of admitting them, gave a
roar, whenever any of these incurable sinners or some one who had not been
sufficiently punished tried to ascend; and then wild men of fiery aspect,
who were standing by and heard the sound, *616A* seized and carried them
off; and Ardiaeus and others they bound head and foot and hand, and threw
them down and flayed them with scourges, and dragged them along the road
at the side, carding them on thorns like wool, and declaring to the
passers-by what were their crimes, and that[8] they were being taken away
to be cast into hell.' And of all the many terrors which they had endured,
he said that there was none like the terror which each of them felt at
that moment, lest they should hear the voice; and when there was silence,
one by one they ascended with exceeding joy. These, said Er, were the
penalties and retributions, and there were blessings as great. {333}

[Footnote 7: Reading [Greek: au)to/cheiras].]

[Footnote 8: Reading [Greek: kai\ o(/ti].]

[Sidenote: The whorls representing the spheres of the heavenly bodies.]

*616B* Now when the spirits which were in the meadow had tarried seven
days, on the eighth they were obliged to proceed on their journey, and, on
the fourth day after, he said that they came to a place where they could
see from above a line of light, straight as a column, extending right
through the whole heaven and through the earth, in colour resembling the
rainbow, only brighter and purer; another day's journey brought them to
the place, and there, in the *616C* midst of the light, they saw the ends
of the chains of heaven let down from above: for this light is the belt of
heaven, and holds together the circle of the universe, like the
under-girders of a trireme. From these ends is extended the spindle of
Necessity, on which all the revolutions turn. The shaft and hook of this
spindle are made of steel, and the whorl is made partly of steel and also
partly of other materials. *616D* Now the whorl is in form like the whorl
used on earth; and the description of it implied that there is one large
hollow whorl which is quite scooped out, and into this is fitted another
lesser one, and another, and another, and four others, making eight in
all, like vessels which fit into one another; the whorls show their edges
on the upper side, and on their *616E* lower side all together form one
continuous whorl. This is pierced by the spindle, which is driven home
through the centre of the eighth. The first and outermost whorl has the
rim broadest, and the seven inner whorls are narrower, in the following
proportions--the sixth is next to the first in size, the fourth next to
the sixth; then comes the eighth; the seventh is fifth, the fifth is
sixth, the third is seventh, last and eighth comes the second. The largest
[or fixed stars] is spangled, and the seventh [or sun] is brightest; the
eighth [or moon] *617A* coloured by the reflected light of the seventh;
the second and fifth [Saturn and Mercury] are in colour like one another,
and yellower than the preceding; the third [Venus] has the whitest light;
the fourth [Mars] is reddish; the sixth [Jupiter] is in whiteness second.
Now the whole spindle has the same motion; but, as the whole revolves in
one direction, the seven inner circles move slowly in the other, and of
these the swiftest is the eighth; next in swiftness are the *617B*
seventh, sixth, and fifth, which move together; third in swiftness
appeared to move according to the law of this {334} reversed motion the
fourth; the third appeared fourth and the second fifth. The spindle turns
on the knees of Necessity; and on the upper surface of each circle is a
siren, who goes round with them, hymning a single tone or note. The eight
together form one harmony; and round about, at equal intervals, *617C*
there is another band, three in number, each sitting upon her throne:
these are the Fates, daughters of Necessity, who are clothed in white
robes and have chaplets upon their heads, Lachesis and Clotho and Atropos,
who accompany with their voices the harmony of the sirens--Lachesis
singing of the past, Clotho of the present, Atropos of the future; Clotho
from time to time assisting with a touch of her right hand the revolution
of the outer circle of the whorl or spindle, and Atropos with her left
hand touching and guiding the inner ones, and Lachesis laying *617D* hold
of either in turn, first with one hand and then with the other.

[Sidenote: The proclamation of the free choice.]

[Sidenote: The complexity of circumstances,]

[Sidenote: and their relation to the human soul.]

When Er and the spirits arrived, their duty was to go at once to Lachesis;
but first of all there came a prophet who arranged them in order; then he
took from the knees of Lachesis lots and samples of lives, and having
mounted a high pulpit, spoke as follows: 'Hear the word of Lachesis, the
daughter of Necessity. Mortal souls, behold a new cycle of life and
mortality. Your genius will not be allotted to you, *617E* but you will
choose your genius; and let him who draws the first lot have the first
choice, and the life which he chooses shall be his destiny. Virtue is
free, and as a man honours or dishonours her he will have more or less of
her; the responsibility is with the chooser--God is justified.' When the
Interpreter had thus spoken he scattered lots indifferently among them
all, and each of them took up the lot which fell near him, all but Er
himself (he was not allowed), and each as he took his lot perceived the
number which he had obtained. *618A* Then the Interpreter placed on the
ground before them the samples of lives; and there were many more lives
than the souls present, and they were of all sorts. There were lives of
every animal and of man in every condition. And there were tyrannies among
them, some lasting out the tyrant's life, others which broke off in the
middle and came to an end in poverty and exile and beggary; and there were
{335} lives of famous men, some who were famous for their form and beauty
as well as for their strength and success in games, *618B* or, again, for
their birth and the qualities of their ancestors; and some who were the
reverse of famous for the opposite qualities. And of women likewise; there
was not, however, any definite character in them, because the soul, when
choosing a new life, must of necessity become different. But there was
every other quality, and the all mingled with one another, and also with
elements of wealth and poverty, and disease and health; and there were
mean states also. And here, my dear Glaucon, is the supreme peril of our
human state; and therefore the utmost care should be taken. *618C* Let
each one of us leave every other kind of knowledge and seek and follow one
thing only, if peradventure he may be able to learn and may find some one
who will make him able to learn and discern between good and evil, and so
to choose always and everywhere the better life as he has opportunity. He
should consider the bearing of all these things which have been mentioned
severally and collectively upon virtue; he should know what the effect of
beauty is when combined with poverty or wealth in a *618D* particular
soul, and what are the good and evil consequences of noble and humble
birth, of private and public station, of strength and weakness, of
cleverness and dullness, and of all the natural and acquired gifts of the
soul, and the operation of them when conjoined; he will then look at the
nature of the soul, and from the consideration of all these qualities he
will be able to determine which is the better and which is the worse; and
so he will choose, giving the name *618E* of evil to the life which will
make his soul more unjust, and good to the life which will make his soul
more just; all else he will disregard. For we have seen and know that this
is *619A* the best choice both in life and after death. A man must take
with him into the world below an adamantine faith in truth and right, that
there too he may be undazzled by the desire of wealth or the other
allurements of evil, lest, coming upon tyrannies and similar villainies,
he do irremediable wrongs to others and suffer yet worse himself; but let
him know how to choose the mean and avoid the extremes on either side, as
far as possible, not only in this life but {336} in all *619B* that which
is to come. For this is the way of happiness.

[Sidenote: Habit not enough without philosophy when circumstances change.]

[Sidenote: The spectacle of the election.]

And according to the report of the messenger from the other world this was
what the prophet said at the time: 'Even for the last comer, if he chooses
wisely and will live diligently, there is appointed a happy and not
undesirable existence. Let not him who chooses first be careless, and let
not the last despair.' And when he had spoken, he who had the first choice
came forward and in a moment chose the greatest tyranny; his mind having
been darkened by folly and sensuality, he had not thought out the whole
matter before he chose, and did not at first sight perceive that he *619C*
was fated, among other evils, to devour his own children. But when he had
time to reflect, and saw what was in the lot, he began to beat his breast
and lament over his choice, forgetting the proclamation of the prophet;
for, instead of throwing the blame of his misfortune on himself, he
accused chance and the gods, and everything rather than himself. Now he
was one of those who came from heaven, and in a former life had dwelt in a
well-ordered State, but his virtue *619D* was a matter of habit only, and
he had no philosophy. And it was true of others who were similarly
overtaken, that the greater number of them came from heaven and therefore
they had never been schooled by trial, whereas the pilgrims who came from
earth having themselves suffered and seen others suffer, were not in a
hurry to choose. And owing to this inexperience of theirs, and also
because the lot was a chance, many of the souls exchanged a good destiny
for an evil or an evil for a good. For if a man had always on his arrival
in this world dedicated himself from the first to sound philosophy, *619E*
and had been moderately fortunate in the number of the lot, he might, as
the messenger reported, be happy here, and also his journey to another
life and return to this, instead of being rough and underground, would be
smooth and heavenly. Most curious, he said, was the spectacle--sad and
laughable and strange; for the choice of the souls *620A* was in most
cases based on their experience of a previous life. There he saw the soul
which had once been Orpheus choosing the life of a swan out of enmity to
the race of women, hating to be born of a woman because they had {337}
been his murderers; he beheld also the soul of Thamyras choosing the life
of a nightingale; birds, on the other hand, like the swan and other
musicians, wanting to be men. The *620B* soul which obtained the
twentieth[9] lot chose the life of a lion, and this was the soul of Ajax
the son of Telamon, who would not be a man, remembering the injustice
which was done him in the judgment about the arms. The next was Agamemnon,
who took the life of an eagle, because, like Ajax, he hated human nature
by reason of his sufferings. About the middle came the lot of Atalanta;
she, seeing the great fame of an athlete, was unable to resist the
temptation: and after her *620C* there followed the soul of Epeus the son
of Panopeus passing into the nature of a woman cunning in the arts; and
far away among the last who chose, the soul of the jester Thersites was
putting on the form of a monkey. There came also the soul of Odysseus
having yet to make a choice, and his lot happened to be the last of them
all. Now the recollection of former toils had disenchanted him of
ambition, and he went about for a considerable time in search of the life
of a private man who had no cares; he had some difficulty in finding this,
which was lying about and had been neglected by everybody else; *620D* and
when he saw it, he said that he would have done the same had his lot been
first instead of last, and that he was delighted to have it. And not only
did men pass into animals, but I must also mention that there were animals
tame and wild who changed into one another and into corresponding human
natures--the good into the gentle and the evil into the savage, in all
sorts of combinations.

[Footnote 9: Reading [Greek: ei)kostê/n].]

All the souls had now chosen their lives, and they went in the order of
their choice to Lachesis, who sent with them the genius whom they had
severally chosen, to be the guardian *620E* of their lives and the
fulfiller of the choice: this genius led the souls first to Clotho, and
drew them within the revolution of the spindle impelled by her hand, thus
ratifying the destiny of each; and then, when they were fastened to this,
carried them to Atropos, who spun the threads and made *621A* them
irreversible, whence without turning round they passed beneath the throne
of Necessity; and when they had all passed, they marched on in a scorching
heat to the plain of {338} Forgetfulness, which was a barren waste
destitute of trees and verdure; and then towards evening they encamped by
the river of Unmindfulness, whose water no vessel can hold; of this they
were all obliged to drink a certain quantity, and those who were not saved
by wisdom drank more than was necessary; and each one as he drank forgot
all things. *621B* Now after they had gone to rest, about the middle of
the night there was a thunderstorm and earthquake, and then in an instant
they were driven upwards in all manner of ways to their birth, like stars
shooting. He himself was hindered from drinking the water. But in what
manner or by what means he returned to the body he could not say; only, in
the morning, awaking suddenly, he found himself lying on the pyre.

And thus, Glaucon, the tale has been saved and has not perished, *621C*
and will save us if we are obedient to the word spoken; and we shall pass
safely over the river of Forgetfulness and our soul will not be defiled.
Wherefore my counsel is, that we hold fast ever to the heavenly way and
follow after justice and virtue always, considering that the soul is
immortal and able to endure every sort of good and every sort of evil.
Thus shall we live dear to one another and to the gods, both while
remaining here and when, like *621D* conquerors in the games who go round
to gather gifts, we receive our reward. And it shall be well with us both
in this life and in the pilgrimage of a thousand years which we have been
describing.




INDEX.


A.

ABDERA, Protagoras of, 10. 600 C.

Abortion, allowed in certain cases, 5. 461 C.

Absolute beauty, 5. 476, 479; 6. 494 A, 501 B, 507 B;--absolute good, 6.
507 B; 7. 540 A;--absolute justice, 5. 479; 6. 501 B; 7. 517 E;--absolute
swiftness and slowness, 7. 529 D;--absolute temperance, 6. 501 B;
--absolute unity, 7. 524 E, 525 E;--the absolute and the many, 6. 507.

Abstract ideas, origin of, 7. 523. Cp. Idea.

Achaeans, 3. 389 E, 390 E, 393 A, D, 394 A.

Achilles, the son of Peleus, third in descent from Zeus, 3. 391 C; his
grief, _ib._ 388 A; his avarice, cruelty, and insolence, _ib._ 390 E,
391 A, B; his master Phoenix, _ib._ 390 E.

Active life, age for, 7. 539, 540.

Actors, cannot perform both tragic and comic parts, 3. 395 A.

Adeimantus, son of Ariston, a person in the dialogue, 1. 327 C; his
genius, 2. 368 A; distinguished at the battle of Megara, _ibid._; takes up
the discourse, _ib._ 362 D, 368 E, 376 D; 4. 419 A; 6. 487 A; 8. 548 E;
urges Socrates to speak in detail about the community of women and
children, 5. 449.

Adrasteia, prayed to, 5. 451 A.

Adultery, 5. 461 A.

Aeschylus, quoted:--
S. c. T. 451, 8. 550 C;
"     592, 2. 361 B, E;
"     593 _ib._ 362 A;
Niobe, fr. 146, 3. 391 E;
"    fr. 151, 2. 380 A;
Xanthians, fr. 159, _ib._ 381 D;
Fab. incert. 266, _ib._ 383 B;
"     "     326, 8. 563 C.

Aesculapius, _see_ Asclepius.

Affinity, degrees of, 5. 461.

Agamemnon, his dream, 2. 383 A; his gifts to Achilles, 3. 390 E; his anger
against Chryses, _ib._ 392 E foll.; shown by Palamedes in the play to be a
ridiculous general, 7. 522 D; his soul becomes an eagle, 10. 620 B.

Age, for active life, 7. 539, 540;--for marriage, 5. 460;--for philosophy,
7. 539.

Agent and patient have the same qualities, 4. 437.

Aglaion, father of Leontius, 4. 439 E.

Agriculture, tools required for, 2. 370 C.

Ajax, the son of Telamon, 10. 620 B; the reward of his bravery, 5. 468 D;
his soul turns into a lion, 10. 620 B.

Alcinous, 'tales of,' 10. 614 B.

Allegory, cannot be understood by the young, 2. 378 E.

Ambition, disgraceful, 1. 347 B (_cp._ 7. 520 D); characteristic of the
timocratic state and man, 8. 545, 548, 550 B, 553 E; easily passes into
avarice, _ib._ 553 E; assigned {340} to the passionate element of the
soul, 9. 581 A;--ambitious men, 5. 475 A; 6. 485 B.

Ameles, the river ( = Lethe), 10. 621 A, C.

Amusement, a means of education, 4. 425 A; 7. 537 A.

Anacharsis, the Scythian, his inventions, 10. 600 A.

Analogy of the arts applied to rulers, 1. 341; of the arts and justice,
_ib._ 349; of men and animals, 2. 375; 5. 459.

Anapaestic rhythms, 3. 400 B.

Anarchy, begins in music, 4. 424 E [_cp._ Laws 3. 701 B]; in democracies,
8. 562 D.

Anger, stirred by injustice, 4. 440.

Animals, liberty enjoyed by, in a democracy, 8. 562 E, 563 C; choose their
destiny in the next world, 10. 620 D [_cp._ Phaedr. 249 B].

Anticipations of pleasure and pain, 9. 584 D.

Aphroditè, bound by Hephaestus, 3. 390 C.

Apollo, song of, at the nuptials of Thetis, 2. 383 A; Apollo and Achilles,
3. 391 A; Chryses' prayer to, _ib._ 394 A; lord of the lyre, _ib._ 399 E;
father of Asclepius, _ib._ 408 C; the God of Delphi, 4. 427 A.

Appearance, power of, 2. 365 B, 366 C.

Appetite, good and bad, 5. 475 C.

Appetites, the, 8. 559; 9. 571 (_cp._ 4. 439).

Appetitive element of the soul, 4. 439 [_cp._ Tim. 70 E]; must be
subordinate to reason and passion, 4. 442 A; 9. 571 D; may be described as
the love of gain, 9. 581 A.

Arcadia, temple of Lycaean Zeus in, 8. 565 D.

Archilochus, quoted, 2. 365 C.

Architecture, 4. 438 C; necessity of pure taste in, 3. 401.

Ardiaeus, tyrant of Pamphylia, his eternal punishment, 10. 615 C, E.

Ares and Aphroditè, 3. 390 C.

Argos, Agamemnon, king of, 3. 393 E.

Argument, the longer and the shorter method of, 4. 435; 6. 504; misleading
nature of (Adeimantus), 6. 487; youthful love of, 7. 539 [_cp._ Phil.
15 E]. For the personification of the argument, _see_ Personification.

Arion, 5. 453 E.

Aristocracy (i.e. the ideal state or government of the best), 4. 445 C
(_cp._ 8. 544 E, 545 D, _and see_ State); mode of its decline, 8. 546;
--the aristocratical man, 7. 541 B; 8. 544 E (_see_ Guardians,
Philosopher, Ruler):--(in the ordinary sense of the word), 1. 338 D. Cp.
Constitution.

Ariston, father of Glaucon, 1. 327 A (_cp._ 2. 368 A).

Aristonymus, father of Cleitophon, 1. 328 B.

Arithmetic, must be learnt by the rulers, 7. 522-526; use of, in forming
ideas, _ib._ 524 foll. (_cp._ 10. 602); spirit in which it should be
pursued, 7. 525 D; common notions about, mistaken, _ib._ E; an excellent
instrument of education, _ib._ 526 [_cp._ Laws 5. 747]; employed in order
to express the interval between the king and the tyrant, 9. 587. Cp.
Mathematics.

Armenius, father of Er, the Pamphylian, 10. 614 B.

Arms, throwing away of, disgraceful, 5. 468 A; arms of Hellenes not to be
offered as trophies in the temples, _ib._ 470 A.

Army needed in a state, 2. 374.

Art, influence of, on character, 3. 400 foll.;--art of building, _ib._
401 A; 4. 438 C; carpentry, 4. 428 C; calculation, 7. 524, 526 B; 10. {341}
602; cookery, 1. 332 C; dyeing, 4. 429 D; embroidery, 3. 401 A; exchange,
2. 369 C; measurement, 10. 602; money-making, 1. 330; 8. 556; payment, 1.
346; tactics, 7. 522 E, 525 B; weaving, 3. 401 A; 5. 455 D; weighing, 10.
602 D;--the arts exercised for the good of their subject, 1. 342, 345-347
[_cp._ Euthyph. 13]; interested in their own perfection, 1. 342; differ
according to their functions, _ib._ 346; full of grace, 3. 401 A; must be
subject to a censorship, _ib._ B; causes of the deterioration of, 4. 421;
employment of children in, 5. 467 A; ideals in, _ib._ 472 D; chiefly
useful for practical purposes, 7. 533 A;--the arts and philosophy, 6.
495 E, 496 C (cp. _supra_ 5. 475 D, 476 A);--the handicraft arts a
reproach, 9. 590 C;--the lesser arts ([Greek: technu/dria]), 5. 475 D;
([Greek: te/chnia]), 6. 495 D;--three arts concerned with all things,
10. 601.

Art. [_Art, according to the conception of Plato, is not a collection of
canons of criticism, but a subtle influence which pervades all things
animate as well as inanimate_ (3. 400, 401). _He knows nothing of
'schools' or of the history of art, nor does he select any building or
statue for condemnation or admiration._ [_Cp._ Protag. 311 C, _where
Pheidias is casually mentioned as the typical sculptor, and_ Meno 91 D,
_where Socrates says that Pheidias, 'although he wrought such exceedingly
noble works,' did not make nearly so much money by them as Protagoras did
by his wisdom._] _Plato judges art by one test, 'simplicity,' but under
this he includes moderation, purity, and harmony of proportion; and he
would extend to sculpture and architecture the same rigid censorship which
he has already applied to poetry and music_ (3. 401 A). _He dislikes the
'illusions' of painting_ (10. 602) _and the 'false proportions' given by
sculptors to their subjects_ (Soph. 234 E), _both of which he classes as a
species of magic. With more justice he points out the danger of an
excessive devotion to art;_ (cp. _the ludicrous pictures of the unmanly
musician_ (3. 411), _and of the dilettanti who run about to every chorus_
(5. 475)). _But he hopes to save his guardians from effeminacy by the
severe discipline and training of their early years. Sparta and Athens are
to be combined_ [_cp._ Introduction, p. clxx]: _the citizens will live, as
Adeimantus complains, 'like a garrison of mercenaries'_ (4. 419); _but
they will be surrounded by an atmosphere of grace and beauty, which will
insensibly instil noble and true ideas into their minds._]

Artisans, necessary in the state, 2. 370; have no time to be ill,
3. 406 D.

Artist, the Great, 10. 596 [_cp._ Laws 10. 902 E];--the true artist does
not work for his own benefit, 1. 346, 347;--artists must imitate the good
only, 3. 401 C.

Asclepiadae, 3. 405 D, 408 B; 10. 599 C.

Asclepius, son of Apollo, 3. 408 C; not ignorant of the lingering
treatment, _ib._ 406 D; a statesman, _ib._ 407 E; said by the poets to
have been bribed to restore a rich man to life, _ib._ 408 B; left
disciples, 10. 599 C;--descendants of, 3. 406 A;--his sons at Troy,
_ibid._

Assaults, trials for, will be unknown in the best state, 5. 464 E.

Astronomy, must be studied by the rulers, 7. 527-530; spirit in which it
should be pursued, _ib._ 529, 530. {342}

Atalanta, chose the life of an athlete, 10. 620 B.

Athené, not to be considered author of the strife between Trojans and
Achaeans, 2. 379 E.

Athenian confectionery, 3. 404 E.

Athens, corpses exposed outside the northern wall of, 4. 439 E.

Athlete, Atalanta chooses the soul of an, 10. 620 B; athletes, obliged to
pay excessive attention to diet, 3. 404 A; sleep away their lives,
_ibid._; are apt to become brutalized, _ib._ 410, 411 (cp. 7. 535 D);--the
guardians athletes of war, 3. 403 E, 404 B; 4. 422; 7. 521 E; 8. 543
[_cp._ Laws 8. 830].

Atridae, 3. 393 A.

Atropos (one of the Fates), her song, 10. 617 C; spins the threads of
destiny, and makes them irreversible, _ib._ 620 E.

Attic confections, 3. 404 E.

Audience, _see_ Spectator.

Autolycus, praised by Homer, 1. 334 A.

Auxiliaries, the young warriors of the state, 3. 414; compared to dogs,
2. 376; 4. 440 D; 5. 451 D; have silver mingled in their veins, 3. 415 A.
Cp. Guardians.

Avarice, disgraceful, 1. 347 B; forbidden in the guardians, 3. 390 E;
falsely imputed to Achilles and Asclepius by the poets, _ib._ 391 B,
408 C; characteristic of timocracy and oligarchy, 8. 548 A, 553.


B.


Barbarians, regard nakedness as improper, 5. 452; the natural enemies of
the Hellenes, _ib._ 469 D, 470 C [_cp._ Pol. 262 D]; peculiar forms of
government among, 8. 544 D.

Beast, the great, 6. 493; the many-headed, 9. 588, 589; 'the wild beast
within us,' _ib._ 571, 572.

Beautiful, the, and the good are one, 5. 452;--the many beautiful
contrasted with absolute beauty, 6. 507 B.

Beauty as a means of education, 3. 401 foll.; absolute beauty, 5. 476,
479; 6. 494 A, 501 B, 507 B [_cp._ Laws 2. 655 C].

Becoming, the passage from, to being, 7. 518 D, 521 D, 525 D.

Beds, the figure of the three, 10. 596.

Bee-masters, 8. 564 C.

Being and not being, 5. 477; true being the object of the philosopher's
desire, 6. 484, 485, 486 E, 490, 500 C; 7. 521, 537 D; 9. 581, 582 C (cp.
5. 475 E; 7. 520 B, 525; _and_ Phaedo 82; Phaedr. 249; Theaet. 173 E;
Soph. 249 D, 254); concerned with the invariable, 9. 585 C.

Belief, _see_ Faith.

Bendidea, a feast of Artemis, 1. 354 A (cp. 327 A, B).

Bendis, a title of Artemis, 1. 327 A.

Bias of Priene, 1. 335 E.

Birds, breeding of, at Athens, 5. 459.

Blest, Islands of the, 7. 519 C, 540 B.

Body, the, not self-sufficing, 1. 341 E; excessive care of, inimical to
virtue, 3. 407 (cp. 9. 591 D); has less truth and essence than the soul,
9. 585 D;--harmony of body and soul, 3. 402 D.

Body, the, and the members, comparison of the state to, 5. 462 D, 464 B.

Boxing, 4. 422.

Brass (and iron) mingled by the God in the husbandmen and craftsmen,
3. 415 A (cp. 8. 547 A).

Breeding of animals, 5. 459.

Building, art of, 3. 401 A; 4. 438 C.

Burial of the guardians, 3. 414 A; 5. 465 E, 469 A; 7. 540 B [_cp._ Laws
12. 947]. {343}


C.


Calculation, art of, corrects the illusions of sight, 10. 602 (cp.
7. 524); the talent for, accompanied by general quickness, 7. 526 B.
Cp. Arithmetic.

Captain, parable of the deaf, 6. 488.

Carpentry, 4. 428 C.

Causes, final, argument from, applied to justice, 1. 352: 6. 491 E,
495 B;--of crimes, 8. 552 D; 9. 575 A.

Cave, the image of the, 7. 514 foll., 532 (cp. 539 E).

Censorship of fiction, 2. 377; 3. 386-391, 401 A, 408 C; 10. 595 foll.
[_cp._ Laws 7. 801, 811]; of the arts, 3. 401.

Ceos, Prodicus of, 10. 600 C.

Cephalus, father of Polemarchus, 1. 327 B; offers sacrifice, _ib._ 328 B,
331 D; his views on old age, _ib._ 328 E; his views on wealth, _ib._ 330 A
foll.

Cephalus [of Clazomenae], 1. 330 B.

Cerberus, two natures in one, 9. 588 C.

Chance in war, 5. 467 E; blamed by men for their misfortunes, 10. 619 C.

Change in music, not to be allowed, 4. 424 [_cp._ Laws 7. 799].

Character, differences of, in men, 1. 329 D [_cp._ Pol. 307]; in women,
5. 456;--affected by the imitation of unworthy objects, 3. 395;--national
character, 4. 435 [_cp._ Laws 5. 747]:--great characters may be ruined by
bad education, 6. 491 E, 495 B; 7. 519:--faults of character, 6. 503
[_cp._ Theaet. 144 B].

Charmantides, the Paeanian, present at the dialogue, 1. 328 B.

Charondas, lawgiver of Italy and Sicily, 10. 599 E.

Cheese, 2. 372 C; 3. 405 E.

Cheiron, teacher of Achilles, 3. 391 C.

Children have spirit, but not reason, 4. 441 A; why under authority, 9.
590 E;--in the state, 3. 415; 5. 450 E, 457 foll.; 8. 543; must not hear
improper stories, 2. 377; 3. 391 C; must be reared amid fair sights and
sounds, 3. 401; must receive education even in their plays, 4. 425 A; 7.
537 A [_cp._ Laws 1. 643 B]; must learn to ride, 5. 467 [_cp._ Laws 7.
804 C]; must go with their fathers and mothers into war, 5. 467; 7.
537 A:--transfer of children from one class to another, 3. 415;
4. 423 D:--exposure of children allowed, 5. 460 C, 461 C:--illegitimate
children, _ib._ 461 A.

Chimaera, two natures in one, 9. 588 C.

Chines, presented to the brave warrior, 5. 468 D.

Chryses, the priest of Apollo (Iliad i. 11 foll.), 3. 392 E foll.

Cithara, _see_ Harp.

Citizens, the, of the best state, compared to a garrison of mercenaries
(Adeimantus), 4. 419 (cp. 8. 543); will form one family, 5. 462 foll.
_See_ Guardians.

City, situation of the, 3. 415:--the 'city of pigs,' 2. 372:--the heavenly
city, 9. 592:--Cities, most, divided between rich and poor, 4. 422 E; 8.
551 E [_cp._ Laws 12. 945 E]:--the game of cities, 4. 422 E. Cp.
Constitution, State.

Classes, in the state, should be kept distinct, 2. 374; 3. 397 E, 415 A;
4. 421, 433 A, 434, 441 E, 443; 5. 453 (cp. 8. 552 A, _and_ Laws
8. 846 E).

Cleitophon, the son of Aristonymus, present at the dialogue, 1. 328 B;
interposes on behalf of Thrasymachus, _ib._ 340 A.

Cleverness, no match for honesty, 3. 409 C (cp. 10. 613 C); not often
united with a steady character, 6. {344} 503 [_cp._ Theaet. 144 B]; needs
an ideal direction, 7. 519 [_cp._ Laws 7. 819 A].

Clotho, second of the fates, 10. 617 C, 620 E; sings of the present, _ib._
617 C; the souls brought to her, _ib._ 620 E.

Colours, comparison of, 9. 585 A; contrast of, _ib._ 586 C;--indelible
colours, 4. 429:--'colours' of poetry, 10. 601 A.

Comedy, cannot be allowed in the state, 3. 394 [_cp._ Laws 7. 816 D];
accustoms the mind to vulgarity, 10. 606;--same actors cannot act both
tragedy and comedy, 3. 395.

Common life in the state, 5. 458, 464 foll.;--common meals of the
guardians, 3. 416; common meals for women, 5. 458 D [_cp._ Laws 6. 781; 7.
806 E; 8. 839 D];--common property among the guardians, 3. 416 E;
4. 420 A, 422 D; 5. 464; 8. 543.

Community of women and children, 3. 416; 5. 450 E, 457 foll., 462, 464;
8. 543 A [_cp._ Laws 5. 739 C];--of property, 3. 416 E; 4. 420 A, 422 D;
5. 464; 8. 543;--of feeling, 5. 464.

Community. [_The communism of the Republic seems to have been suggested by
Plato's desire for the unity of the state_ (cp. 5. 462 foll.). _If those
'two small pestilent words, "meum" and "tuum," which have engendered so
much strife among men and created so much mischief in the world,' could be
banished from the lips and thoughts of mankind, the ideal state would soon
be realized. The citizens would have parents, wives, children, and
property in common; they would rejoice in each other's prosperity, and
sorrow at each other's misfortune; they would call their rulers not
'lords' and 'masters,' but 'friends' and 'saviours.' Plato is aware that
such a conception could hardly be carried out in this world; and he evades
or adjourns, rather than solves, the difficulty by the famous assertion
that only when the philosopher rules in the city will the ills of human
life find an end_ [_cp._ Introduction, p. clxxiii]. _In the Critias, where
the ideal state, as Plato himself hints to us_ (110 D), _is to some extent
reproduced in an imaginary description of ancient Attica, property is
common, but there is no mention of a community of wives and children.
Finally in the Laws_ (5. 739), _Plato while still maintaining the
blessings of communism, recognizes the impossibility of its realization,
and sets about the construction of a 'second-best state' in which the
rights of property are conceded; although, according to Aristotle_ (Pol.
ii. 6, § 4), _he gradually reverts to the ideal polity in all except a few
unimportant particulars._]

Conception, the, of truth by the philosopher, 6. 490 A.

Confidence and courage, 4. 430 B.

Confiscation of the property of the rich in democracies, 8. 565.

Constitution, the aristocratic, is the ideal state sketched in bk. iv (cp.
8. 544 E, 545 D);--defective forms of constitution, 4. 445 B; 8. 544
[_cp._ Pol. 291 E foll.]; aristocracy (in the ordinary sense), 1. 338 D;
timocracy or 'Spartan polity,' 8. 545 foll.; oligarchy, _ib._ 550 foll.,
554 E; democracy, _ib._ 555 foll., 557 D; tyranny, _ib._ 544 C, 562. Cp.
Government, State.

Contentiousness, a characteristic of timocracy, 8. 548.

Contracts, in some states not protected by law, 8. 556 A.

Contradiction, nature of, 4. 436; 10. 602 E; power of, 5. 454 A. {345}

Convention, justice a matter of, 2. 359 A.

Conversation, should not be personal, 6. 500 B.

Conversion of the soul, 7. 518, 521, 525 [_cp._ Laws 12. 957 E].

Cookery, art of, employed in the definition of justice, 1. 332 C.

Corinthian courtesans, 3. 404 D.

Corpses, not to be spoiled, 5. 469.

Correlative and relative, qualifications of, 4. 437 foll. [_cp._ Gorg.
476]; how corrected, 7. 524.

_Corruptio optimi pessima_, 6. 491.

Corruption, the, of youth, not to be attributed to the Sophists, but to
public opinion, 6. 492 A.

Courage, required in the guardians, 2. 375; 3. 386, 413 E, 416 E; 4. 429;
6. 503 E; inconsistent with the fear of death, 3. 386; 6. 486 A; = the
preservation of a right opinion about objects of fear, 4. 429, 442 B (cp.
2. 376, _and_ Laches 193, 195); distinguished from fearlessness, 4. 430 B;
one of the philosopher's virtues, 6. 486 A, 490 E, 494 A:--the courageous
temper averse to intellectual toil, _ib._ 503 D [_cp._ Pol. 306, 307].

Courtesans, 3. 404 D.

Covetousness, not found in the philosopher, 6. 485 E; characteristic of
timocracy and oligarchy, 8. 548, 553; = the appetitive element of the
soul, 9. 581 A.

Cowardice in war, to be punished, 5. 468 A; not found in the philosopher,
6. 486 B.

Creophylus, 'the child of flesh,' companion of Homer, 10. 600 B.

Crete, government of, generally applauded, 8. 544 C; a timocracy, _ib._
545 B;--Cretans, naked exercises among, 5. 452 C; call their country
'mother-land,' 9. 575 E;--Cretic rhythm, 3. 400 B.

Crimes, great and small, differently estimated by mankind, 1. 344
(cp. 348 D); causes of, 6. 491 E, 495 B; 8. 552 D; 9. 575 A.

Criminals, are usually men of great character spoiled by bad education,
6. 491 E, 495 B; numerous in oligarchies, 8. 552 D.

Croesus, 2. 359 C; 'as the oracle said to Croesus,' 8. 566 C.

Cronos, ill treated by Zeus, 2. 377 E; his behaviour to Uranus, _ibid._

Cunning man, the, no match for the virtuous, 3. 409 D.

Cycles, recurrence of, in nature, 8. 546 A [_cp._ Tim. 22 C; Crit. 109 D;
Pol. 269 foll.; Laws 3. 677].


D.


Dactylic metre, 3. 400 C.

Daedalus, beauty of his works, 7. 529 E.

Damon, an authority on rhythm, 3. 400 B (cp. 4. 424 C).

Dancing (in education), 3. 412 B.

Day-dreams, 5. 458 A, 476 C.

Dead (in battle) not to be stripped, 5. 469; judgment of the dead,
10. 615.

Death, the approach of, brings no terror to the aged, 1. 330 E; the
guardians must have no fear of, 3. 386, 387 (cp. 6. 486 C); preferable to
slavery, 3. 387 A.

Debts, abolition of, proclaimed by demagogues, 8. 565 E, 566 E.

Delphi, religion left to the god at, 4. 427 A (cp. 5. 461 E, 469 A;
7. 540 B).

Demagogues, 8. 564, 565.

Democracy, 1. 338 D; spoken of under the parable of the captain and the
mutinous crew, 6. 488; democracy and philosophy, _ib._ 494, 500; the third
form of imperfect state, 8. 544 [_cp._ Pol. 291, 292]; detailed account
of, _ib._ 555 foll.; characterised by freedom, _ib._ 557 B, 561-563; a
'bazaar of constitutions,' _ib._ 557 D; the {346} humours of democracy,
_ib._ E, 561; elements contained in, _ib._ 564.--democracy in animals,
_ib._ 563:--the democratical man, _ib._ 558, 559 foll., 561, 562; 9. 572;
his place in regard to pleasure, 9. 587.

Desire, has a relaxing effect on the soul, 4. 430 A; the conflict of
desire and reason, 4. 440 [_cp._ Phaedr. 253 foll.; Tim. 70 A];--the
desires divided into simple and qualified, 4. 437 foll.; into necessary
and unnecessary, 8. 559.

Despots (masters), 5. 463 A. _See_ Tyrant.

Destiny, the, of man in his own power, 10. 617 E.

Dialectic, the most difficult branch of philosophy, 6. 498; objects of,
_ib._ 511; 7. 537 D; proceeds by a double method, 6. 511; compared to
sight, 7. 532 A; capable of attaining to the idea of good, _ibid._; gives
firmness to hypotheses, _ib._ 533; the coping stone of the sciences, _ib._
534 [_cp._ Phil. 57]; must be studied by the rulers, _ib._ 537; dangers of
the study, _ibid._; years to be spent in, _ib._ 539; distinguished from
eristic, _ib._ D (cp. 5. 454 A; 6. 499 A):--the dialectician has a
conception of essence, 7. 534 [_cp._ Phaedo 75 D].

Dialectic. [_Dialectic, the 'coping stone of knowledge,' is everywhere
distinguished by Plato from eristic, i.e., argument for argument's sake_
[_cp._ Euthyd. 275 foll., 293; Meno 75 D; Phaedo 101; Phil. 17; Theaet.
167 E]. _It is that 'gift of heaven'_ (Phil. 16) _which teaches men to
employ the hypotheses of science, not as final results, but as points from
which the mind may rise into the higher heaven of ideas and behold truth
and being. This vague and magnificent conception was probably hardly
clearer to Plato himself when he wrote the Republic than it is to us_
[_cp._ Introduction, p. xcii]; _but in the Sophist and Statesman it
appears in a more definite form as a combination of analysis and synthesis
by which we arrive at a true notion of things._ [_Cp. the_ [Greek:
u(phêgême/nê metho/dos] _of Aristotle_ (Pol. i. 1, § 3; 8, § 1), _which is
an analogous mode of proceeding from the parts to the whole.] In the Laws
dialectic no longer occupies a prominent place; it is the 'old man's
harmless amusement'_ (7. 820 C), _or, regarded more seriously, the method
of discussion by question and answer, which is abused by the natural
philosophers to disprove the existence of the Gods_ (10. 891).]

Dice ([Greek: ku/boi]), 10. 604 C; skill required in dice-playing,
2. 374 C.

Diet, 3. 404; 8. 559 C [_cp._ Tim. 89].

Differences, accidental and essential, 5. 454.

Diomede, his command to the Greeks (Iliad iv. 412), 3. 389 E; 'necessity
of,' (proverb), 6. 493 D.

Dionysiac festival (at Athens), 5. 475 D.

Discord, causes of, 5. 462; 8. 547 A, 556 E; the ruin of states, 5. 462;
distinguished from war, _ib._ 470 [_cp._ Laws 1. 628, 629].

Discourse, love of, 1. 328 A; 5. 450 B; increases in old age, 1. 328 D;
pleasure of, in the other world, 6. 498 D [_cp._ Apol. 41].

Disease, origin of, 3. 404; the right treatment of, _ib._ 405 foll.; the
physician must have experience of, in his own person, _ib._ 408; disease
and vice compared, 4. 444; 10. 609 foll. [_cp._ Soph. 228; Pol. 296; Laws
10. {347} 906]; inherent in everything, 10. 609.

Dishonesty, thought by men to be more profitable than honesty, 2. 364 A.

Dithyrambic poetry, nature of, 3. 394 B.

Diversities of natural gifts, 2. 370; 5. 455; 7. 535 A.

Division of labour, 2. 370, 374 A; 3. 394 E, 395 B, 397 E; 4. 423 E, 433 A,
435 A, 441 E, 443, 453 B; a part of justice, 4. 433, 435 A, 441 E (cp.
_supra_ 1. 332, 349, 350, _and_ Laws 8. 846 C);--of lands, proclaimed by
the would-be tyrant, 8. 565 E, 566 E.

Doctors, flourish when luxury increases in the state, 2. 373 C; 3. 405 A;
two kinds of, 5. 459 C [_cp._ Laws 4. 720; 9. 857 D]. Cp. Physician.

Dog, Socrates' oath by the, 3. 399 E; 8. 567 E; 9. 592;--dogs are
philosophers, 2. 376; the guardians the watch-dogs of the state, _ibid._;
4. 440 D; 5. 451 D; breeding of dogs, 5. 459.

Dolphin, Arion's, 5. 453 E.

Dorian harmony, allowed, with the Phrygian, in the state, 3. 399 A.

Draughts, 1. 333 A; skill required in, 2. 374 C;--comparison of an
argument to a game of draughts, 6. 487 C.

Dreams, an indication of the bestial element in human nature, 9. 571, 572,
574 E.

Drones, the, 8. 552, 554 C, 555 E, 559 C, 564 B, 567 E; 9. 573 A [_cp._
Laws 10. 901 A].

Drunkenness, in heaven, 2. 363 D; forbidden in the guardians, 3. 398 E,
403 E;--the drunken man apt to be tyrannical, 8. 573 C. Cp. Intoxication.

Dyeing, 4. 429 D.


E.


Early society, 2. 359.

Eating, pleasure accompanying, 8. 559.

Education, commonly divided into gymnastic for the body and music for the
soul, 2. 376 E, 403 (_see_ Gymnastic, Music, _and_ _cp._ Laws 7. 795 E);
both music and gymnastic really designed for the soul, 3. 410:--use of
fiction in, 2. 377 foll.; 3. 391; the poets bad educators, 2. 377; 3. 391,
392, 408 B; 10. 600, 606 E, 607 B [_cp._ Laws 10. 886 C, 890 A]; must be
simple, 3. 397, 404 E; melody in, _ib._ 398 foll.; mimetic art in, _ib._
399; importance of good surroundings, _ib._ 401; influence of, on manners,
4. 424, 425; innovation in, dangerous, _ibid._; early, should be given
through amusement, _ib._ 425 A; 7. 536 E [_cp._ Laws 1. 643 B]; ought to
be the same for men and women, 5. 451 foll., 466; dangerous when
ill-directed, 6. 491; not a process of acquisition, but the use of powers
already existing in us, 7. 518; not to be compulsory, _ib._ 537
A;--education of the guardians, 2. 376 foll.; 4. 429, 430; 7. 521 (cp.
Guardians, Ruler);--the higher or philosophic education, 6. 498, 503 E,
504; 7. 514-537; age at which it should commence, 6. 498; 7. 537; 'the
longer way,' 6. 504 (cp. 4. 435); 'the prelude or preamble,' 7. 532 E.

Education. [_Education in the Republic is divided into two parts,_ (i)
_the common education of the citizens;_ (ii) _the special education of the
rulers._ (i) _The first, beginning with childhood in the plays of the
children_ [_cp._ Laws 1. 643 B], _is the old Hellenic education,_ [_the_
[Greek: katabeblême/na paideu/mata] _of Aristotle_, Pol. viii. 2, § 6],
{348}--_'music for the mind and gymnastic for the body'_ [_cp._ Laws 7.
795 E]. _But Plato soon discovers that both are really intended for the
benefit of the soul_ [_cp._ Laws 5. 743 D]; _and under 'music' he includes
literature_ ([Greek: lo/goi]), _i.e. humane culture as distinguished from
scientific knowledge. Music precedes gymnastic; both are not to be learned
together; only the simpler kinds of either are tolerated_ [_cp._ Laws Book
VII, _passim_]. _Boys and girls share equally in both_ [_cp._ Laws 7.
794 D]. _The greatest attention must be paid to good surroundings; nothing
mean or vile must meet the eye or strike the ear of the young scholar. The
fairy tales of childhood and the fictions of the poets are alike placed
under censorship_ [_cp._ Laws Book X, _and see s. v._ Poetry]. _Gentleness
is to be united with manliness; beauty of form and activity of mind are to
mingle in perfect and harmonious accord._--(ii) _The special education
commences at twenty by the selection of the most promising students. These
spend ten years in the acquisition of the higher branches of arithmetic,
geometry, astronomy, harmony_ [_cp._ Laws 7. 817 E], _which are not to be
pursued in a scientific spirit or for utility only, but rather with a view
to their combination by means of dialectic into an ideal of all knowledge_
(_see s. v._ Dialectic). _At thirty a further selection is made: those
selected spend five years in the study of philosophy, are then sent into
active life for fifteen years, and finally after fifty return to
philosophy, which for the remainder of their days is to form their chief
occupation_ (_see s. v._ Rulers).]

Egyptians, characterised by love of money, 4. 435 E.

Elder, the, to bear rule in the state, 3. 412 B [_cp._ Laws 3. 690 A;
4. 714 E]; to be over the younger, 5. 465 A [_cp._ Laws 4. 721 D; 9. 879 C;
11. 917 A].

Embroidery, art of, 3. 401 A.

Enchantments, used by mendicant prophets, 2. 364 B;--enchantments, i.e.
tests to which the guardians are to be subjected, 3. 413 (cp. 6. 503 A;
7. 539 E).

End, the, and use of the soul, 1. 353:--ends and excellencies ([Greek:
a)retai\]) of things, _ibid._; things distinguished by their ends, 5. 478.

Endurance, must be inculcated on the young, 3. 390 C (cp. 10. 605 E).

Enemies, treatment of, 5. 469.

Enquiry, roused by some objects of sense, 7. 523.

Epeus, soul of, turns into a woman, 10. 620 C.

Epic poetry, a combination of imitation and narration, 3. 394 B,
396 E;--epic poets, imitators in the highest degree, 10. 602 C.

Er, myth of, 10. 614 B foll.

Eriphyle, 9. 590 A.

Eristic, distinguished from dialectic, 5. 454 A; 6. 499 A; 7. 539 D.

Error, not possible in the skilled person (Thrasymachus), 1. 340 D.

Essence and the good, 6. 509; essence of the invariable, 9. 585;--essence
of things, 6. 507 B; apprehended by the dialectician, 7. 534 B.

Eternity, contrasted with human life, 10. 608 D.

Eumolpus, son of Musaeus, 2. 363 D.

Eunuch, the riddle of the, 5. 479.

Euripides, a great tragedian, 8. 568 A; his maxims about tyrants,
_ibid._:--quoted, Troades, l. 1169, _ibid._ {349}

Eurypylus, treatment of the wounded, 3. 405 E, 408 A.

Euthydemus, brother of Polemarchus, 1. 328 B.

Evil, God not the author of, 2. 364, 379, 380 A; 3. 391 E [_cp._ Laws 2.
672 B]; the destructive element in the soul, 10. 609 foll. (cp. 4.
444):--justice must exist even among the evil, 1. 351 foll.; their
supposed prosperity, 2. 364 [_cp._ Gorg. 470 foll.; Laws 2. 66 1; 10. 899,
905]; more numerous than the good, 3. 409 D. Cp. Injustice.

Excellence relative to use, 10. 601; excellences ([Greek: a)retai\]) and
ends of things, 1. 353.

Exchange, the art of, necessary in the formation of the state, 2. 369 C.

Exercises, naked, in Greece, 5. 452.

Existence, a participation in essence, 9. 585 [_cp._ Phaedo 101].

Experience, the criterion of true and false pleasures, 9. 582.

Expiation of guilt, 2. 364.

Eye of the soul, 7. 518 D, 527 E, 533 D, 540 A;--the soul like the eye,
6. 508; 7. 518:--Eyes, the, in relation to sight, 6. 507 (cp. Sight).


F.


Fact and ideal, 5. 472, 473.

Faculties, how different, 5. 477;--faculties of the soul, 6. 511 E;
7. 533 E.

Faith [or Persuasion], one of the faculties of the soul, 6. 511 D;
7. 533 E.

Falsehood, alien to the nature of God, 2. 382 [_cp._ Laws 11. 917 A]; a
medicine, only to be used by the state, _ibid._; 3. 389 A, 414 C; 5. 459 D
[_cp._ Laws 2. 663]; hateful to the philosopher, 6. 486, 490.

Family life in the state, 5. 449;--families in the state, _ib._
461;--family and state, _ib._ 463;--cares of family life, _ib._ 465 C.

Fates, the, 10. 617, 620 E.

Fear, a solvent of the soul, 4. 430 A; fear and shame, 5. 465 A.

Fearlessness, distinguished from courage, 4. 430 B [_cp._ Laches 197 B;
Protag. 349 C, 359 foll.].

Feeling, community of, in the state, 5. 464.

Festival of the Bendidea (at the Piraeus), 1. 327 A, 354 A; of Dionysus
(at Athens), 5. 475 D.

Fiction in education, 2. 377 foll.; 3. 391; censorship of, necessary,
2. 377 foll.; 3. 386-391, 401 A, 408 C; 10. 595 foll.; not to represent
sorrow, 3. 387 foll. (cp. 10. 604); representing intemperance to be
discarded, 3. 390;--stories about the gods, not to be received, 2. 378
foll.; 3. 388 foll., 408 C [_cp._ Euthyph. 6, 8; Crit. 109 B; Laws
2. 672 B; 10. 886 C; 12. 941];--stories of the world below, objectionable,
3. 386 foll. (cp. Hades, World below).

Final causes, argument from, applied to justice, 1. 352.

Fire, obtained by friction, 4. 434 E.

Flattery, of the multitude by their leaders, in ill-ordered states, 4. 426
(cp. 9. 590 B).

Flute, the, to be rejected, 3. 399;--flute players and flute makers,
_ib._ D; 10. 601.

Folly, an inanition ([Greek: ke/nôsis]) of the soul, 9. 585 A.

Food, the condition of life and existence, 2. 369 C.

Forgetfulness, a mark of an unphilosophical nature, 6. 486 D, 490 E:--the
plain of Forgetfulness (Lethe), 10. 621 A.

Fox, the emblem of subtlety, 2. 365 C.

Fractions, 7. 525 E.

Freedom, the characteristic of democracy, 8. 557 B, 561-563.

Friend, the, must be as well as seem {350} good, 1. 334, 335;--the friends
of the tyrant, 8. 567 E; 9. 576.

Friendship, implies justice, 1. 351 foll.; in the state, 5. 462, 463.

Funeral of the guardians, 5. 465 E, 468 E; 7. 540 B;--corpses placed on
the pyre on the twelfth day, 10. 614.

Future life, 3. 387; 10. 614 foll.; punishment of the wicked in, 2. 363;
10. 615 [_cp._ Phaedo 108; Gorg. 523 E, 525; Laws 9. 870 E, 881 B;
10. 904 C]. _See_ Hades, World below.


G.


Games, as a means of education, 4. 425 A (cp. 7. 537 A);--dice ([Greek:
ku/boi]), 10. 604 C;--draughts ([Greek: pettei/a]), 1. 333 A; 2. 374 C;
6. 487 C;--city ([Greek: po/lis]), 4. 422 E:--[the Olympic, &c.] glory
gained by success in, 5. 465 D, 466 A; 10. 618 A (cp. 620 B).

General, the, ought to know arithmetic and geometry, 7. 522 D, 525 B,
526 D, 527 C.

Gentleness, characteristic of the philosopher, 2. 375, 376; 3. 410;
6. 486 C; usually inconsistent with spirit, 2. 375.

Geometry, must be learnt by the rulers, 7. 526 foll.; erroneously thought
to serve for practical purposes only, _ib._ 527;--geometry of solids,
_ib._ 528;--geometrical necessity, 5. 458 D;--geometrical notions
apprehended by a faculty of the soul, 6. 511 C.

Giants, battles of the, 2. 378 B.

Gifts, given to victors, 3. 414; 5. 460, 468;--gifts of nature, 2. 370 A;
5. 455; 7. 535 A; may be perverted, 6. 491 E, 495 A; 7. 519 [_cp._ Laws 7.
819 A; 10. 908 C].

Glaucon, son of Ariston, 1. 327 A; 2. 368 A; takes up the discourse, 1.
347 A; 2. 372 C; 3. 398 B; 4. 427 D; 5. 450 A; 6. 506 D; 9. 576 B; anxious
to contribute money for Socrates, 1. 337 E; the boldest of men, 2. 357 A;
his genius, _ib._ 368 A; distinguished at the battle of Megara, _ibid._; a
musician, 3. 398 D; 7. 531 A; desirous that Socrates should discuss the
subject of women and children, 5. 450 A; breeds dogs and birds, _ib._
459 A; a lover, _ib._ 474 D (cp. 3. 402 E; 5. 458 E); not a dialectician,
7. 533; his contentiousness, 8. 548 E; not acquainted with the doctrine
of the immortality of the soul, 10. 608.

Glaucus, the sea-god, 10. 611 C.

Gluttony, 9. 586 A.

God, not the author of evil, 2. 364, 379, 380 A; 3. 391 E [_cp._ Laws 2.
672 B]; never changes, 2. 380; will not lie, _ib._ 382; the maker of all
things, 10. 598:--Gods, the, thought to favour the unjust, 2. 362 B, 364;
supposed to accept the gifts of the wicked, _ib._ 365 [_cp._ Laws 4. 716 E;
10. 905 foll.; 12. 948]; believed to take no heed of human affairs, 2. 365
[_cp._ Laws 10. 889 foll.; 12. 948]; human ignorance of, 2. 365 [_cp._
Crat 400 E; Crit. 107; Parm. 134 E]; disbelief in, 2. 365 [_cp._ Laws 10.
885 foll., 909; 12. 948]; stories of, not to be repeated, 2. 378 foll.;
3. 388 foll., 408 C [_cp._ Euthyph. 6, 8; Crit. 109 B; Laws 2. 672 B; 10.
886 C; 12. 941]; not to be represented grieving or laughing, 3. 388;--'gods
who wander about at night in the disguise of strangers,' 2. 381 D;--the
war of the gods and the giants, _ib._ 378 B.

God. [_The theology of Plato is summed up by himself in the second book of
the Republic under two heads, 'God is perfect and unchangeable,' and 'God
is true and_ {351} _the author of truth.' These canons are also the test
by which he tries poetry and the poets_ (_see s. v._ Poetry):--_Homer and
the tragedians represent the Gods as changing their forms or as deceiving
men by lying dreams, and therefore they must be expelled from the state.
But Plato has not yet acquired the austere temper of his later years. He
does not threaten the impenitent unbeliever with bonds and death_ (Laws
10. 908, 910), _but is content to show by argument the superiority of
justice over injustice. In other respects the theology of the Republic is
repeated and amplified in the Laws; the theses that God is not the author
of evil and will not accept the gifts of the wicked or favour the unjust,
are maintained with equal earnestness in both. The Republic is less
pessimistic in tone than the Laws; but the thought of the insignificance
of man and the briefness of human life is already familiar to Plato's
mind_ [_cp._ 6. 486 A; 10. 604; _and see s. v._ Man]. _The conception of
God as the Demiurgus or Creator of the universe, which is prominent in the
Timaeus, Sophist, and Statesman, hardly appears either in the Republic or
the Laws_ (_cp._ Rep. 10. 596 foll.; Laws 10. 886 foll.).]

Gold, mingled by the God in the auxiliaries, 3. 415 A (cp. 416 E;
8. 547 A);--[and silver] not allowed to the guardians, 3. 416 E; 4. 419,
422 D; 5. 464 D (cp. 8. 543).

Good, the saving element, 10. 609:--the good = the beautiful, 5. 452
[_cp._ Lys. 216; Symp. 201 B, 204 E foll.]; the good and pleasure, 6. 505,
509 A [_cp._ Gorg. 497; Phil. 11, 60 A]; the good superior to essence,
_ib._ 509; the brightest and best of being, 7. 518 D;--absolute good,
6. 507 B; 7. 540 A;--the idea of good, 6. 505, 508; 7. 517, 534; is the
highest knowledge, 6. 505; 7. 526 E; nature of, 6. 505, 506;--the child of
the good, _ib._ 506 E, 508:--good things least liable to change, 2.
381;--goods classified, _ib._ 357, 367 D [_cp._ Protag. 334; Gorg. 451 E;
Phil. 66; Laws 1. 631; 3. 697];--the goods of life often a temptation, 6.
491 E, 495 A.

Good man, the, will disdain to imitate ignoble actions, 3. 396:--Good men,
why they take office, 1. 347; = the wise, _ib._ 350 [_cp._ 1 Alcib. 124,
125]; unfortunate (Adeimantus), 2. 364; self-sufficient, 3. 387 [_cp._
Lys. 215 A]; will not give way to sorrow, _ibid._; 10. 603 E [_cp._ Laws
5. 732; 7. 792 B, 800 D]; appear simple from their inexperience of evil,
3. 409 A; hate the tyrant, 8. 568 A; the friends of God and like Him, 10.
613 [_cp._ Phil. 39 E; Laws 4. 716].

Goods, community of, 3. 416; 5. 464; 8. 543. _See_ Community.

Government, forms of, are they administered in the interest of the rulers?
1. 338 D, 343, 346; are all based on a principle of justice, _ib._ 338 E
[_cp._ Laws 12. 945]; present forms in an evil condition, 6. 492 E, 496;
none of the existing forms adapted to philosophy, _ib._ 497;--the four
imperfect forms, 4. 445 B; 8. 544 [_cp._ Pol. 291 foll., 301 foll.];
succession of changes in states, 8. 545 foll.;--peculiar barbarian forms,
_ib._ 544 D. Cp. Constitution, State.

Government, forms of. [_The classification of forms of government which
Plato adopts in the Republic is not exactly the same with that given in
the Statesman or the Laws. Both in the Republic_ {352} _and the Statesman
the series commences with the perfect state, which may be either monarchy
or aristocracy, accordingly as the 'one best man' bears rule or many who
are all 'perfect in virtue'_ [_cp._ Arist. Pol. iv. 2, § 1]. _But in the
Republic the further succession is somewhat fancifully connected with the
divisions of the soul. The rule of reason_ [_i.e. the perfect state_]
_passes into timocracy, in which the 'spirited element' is predominant_
(8. 548), _timocracy into three governments in turn, which represent the
'appetitive principle,'--first, oligarchy, in which the desire of wealth
is supreme_ (8. 533 D; 9. 581); _secondly, democracy, characterised by an
unbounded lust for freedom_ (9. 561); _thirdly, tyranny, in which all evil
desires grow unchecked, and the tyrant becomes 'the waking reality of what
he once was in his dreams only'_ (9. 574 E). _Each of these inferior forms
is illustrated in the individual who corresponds to the state and 'is set
over against it'_ (8. 550 C). _In the Statesman, after the government of
the one or many good has been separated, the remaining forms are
classified accordingly as the government has or has not regard to law, and
democracy is said to be_ (303 A) _'the worst of lawful and the best of
lawless governments'_ (_an expression criticised by Aristotle,_ Pol. iv.
2, § 3). _In the Laws again the subject is differently treated: monarchy
and democracy are described as 'the two mother forms,' which must be
combined in order to produce a good state_ (3. 693), _and the Spartan and
Cretan constitutions are therefore praised as polities in which every form
of government is represented_ (4. 712). _But the majority of existing
states are mere class governments and have no regard to virtue_ (12.
962 E). _These various ideas are nearly all reproduced or criticised in the
Politics of Aristotle, who, however, does not employ the term 'timocracy,'
and adds one great original conception,--the_ [Greek: mesê\ politei/a],
_or government of the middle class._]

Governments, sometimes bought and sold, 8. 544 D.

Grace ([Greek: eu)schêmosu/nê]), the effect of good rhythm accompanying
good style, 3. 400 D; all life and every art full of grace, _ib._ 401 A.

Greatness and smallness, 4. 438 B; 5. 479 B; 7. 523, 524; 9. 575 C;
10. 602 D, 605 C.

Grief, not to be indulged, 3. 387; 10. 603-606. Cp. Sorrow.

Guard, the tyrant's request for a, 8. 566 B, 567 E.

Guardians of the state, must be philosophers, 2. 376; 6. 484, 498, 501,
503 B; 7. 520, 521, 525 B, 540; 8. 543; must be both spirited and gentle,
2. 375; 3. 410; 6. 503 [_cp._ Laws 5. 731 B]; must be tested by pleasures
and pains, 3. 413 (cp. 6. 503 A; 7. 539 E); have gold and silver mingled
in their veins, 3. 415 A (cp. 416 E; 8. 547 A); their happiness, 4. 419
foll.; 5. 465 E foll.; 6. 498 C; 7. 519 E; will be the class in the state
which possesses wisdom, 4. 428 [_cp._ Laws 12. 965 A]; will form one
family with the citizens, 5. 462-466; must preserve moderation, _ib._
466 B; divided into auxiliaries and guardians proper, 3. 414 (cp. 8. 545 E;
_and see_ Auxiliaries, Rulers):--the guardians [i.e. the auxiliaries] must
be courageous, 2. 375; 3. 386, 413 E, 416 E; 4. 429; 6. 503 E; must have
no fear of death, 3. 386 (cp. {353} 6. 486 C); not to weep, 3. 387 (cp.
10. 603 E); nor to be given to laughter, 3. 388 [_cp._ Laws 5. 732; 11.
935]; must be temperate, _ib._ 389 D; must not be avaricious, _ib._ 390 E;
must only imitate noble characters and actions, _ib._ 395 foll., 402 E;
must only learn the Dorian and Phrygian harmonies, and play on the lyre
and harp, _ib._ 398, 399; must be sober, _ib._ 398 E, 403 E; must be
reared amid fair surroundings, _ib._ 401; athletes of war, _ib._ 403,
404 B; 4. 422; 7. 521 E; 8. 543 [_cp._ Laws 8. 830]; must live according to
rule, 3. 404; will not go to law or have resort to medicine, _ib._ 410 A;
must have common meals and live a soldier's life, _ib._ 416; will not
require gold or silver or property of any kind, _ib._ 417; 4. 419, 420 A,
422 D; 5. 464 C; compared to a garrison of mercenaries (Adeimantus), 4.
419 (cp. 8. 543); must go to war on horseback in their childhood, 5. 467;
7. 537 A; regulations for their conduct in war, 5. 467-471:--female
guardians, _ib._, 456, 458, 468; 7. 540 C (cp. Women).

Gyges, 2. 359 C; 10. 612 B.

Gymnastic, supposed to be intended only for the body, 2. 376 E; 3. 403;
7. 521 [_cp._ Laws 7. 795 E]; really designed for the improvement of the
soul, 3. 410; like music, should be continued throughout life, _ib._ 403 C;
effect of excessive, _ib._ 404, 410; 7. 537 B; should be of a simple
character, 3. 404, 410 A; the ancient forms of, to be retained, 4. 424;
must co-operate with music in creating a harmony of the soul, _ib._ 441 E;
suitable to women, 5. 452-457 [_cp._ Laws 7. 804, 813, 833]; ought to be
combined with intellectual pursuits, 7. 535 D [_cp._ Tim. 88]; time to be
spent in, _ib._ 537.


H.


Habit and virtue, 7. 518 E; 10. 619 D.

Hades, tales about the terrors of, 1. 330 D; 2. 366 A; such tales not to
be heeded, 3. 386 B [_cp._ Crat. 403];--the place of punishment, 2. 363;
10. 614 foll.; Musaeus' account of the good and bad in, 2. 363;--the
journey to, 10. 614 [_cp._ Phaedo 108 A]:--(Pluto) helmet of, 10. 612 B.
Cp. World below.

Half, the, better than the whole, 5. 466 B.

Handicraft arts, a reproach, 9. 590 [_cp._ Gorg. 512].

Happiness of the unjust, 1. 354; 2. 364; 3. 392 B (cp. 8. 545 A, _and_
Gorg. 470 foll.; Laws 2. 661; 10. 899 E, 905 A);--of the guardians, 4. 419
foll.; 5. 465 E foll.; 6. 498 C; 7. 519 E;--of Olympic victors, 5. 465 D,
466 A; 10. 618 A;--of the tyrant, 9. 576 foll., 587;--the greatest
happiness awarded to the most just, _ib._ 580 foll.

Harmonies, the more complex to be rejected, 3. 397 foll.;--the Lydian
harmony, _ib._ 398; the Ionian, _ib._ E; the Dorian and Phrygian alone to
be accepted, _ib._ 399.

Harmony, akin to virtue, 3. 401 A (cp. 7. 522 A);--science of, must be
acquired by the rulers, 7. 531 (cp. Music);--harmony of soul and body, 3.
402 D;--harmony of the soul, effected by temperance, 4. 430, 441 E, 442 D,
443 (cp. 9. 591 D, _and_ Laws 2. 653 B);--harmony in the acquisition of
wealth, 9. 591 E.

Harp, the, ([Greek: kitha/ra]), allowed in the best state, 3. 399. {354}

Hatred, between the despot and his subjects, 8. 567 E; 9. 576 A.

Health and justice compared, 4. 444; pleasure of health, 9. 583 C;
secondary to virtue, _ib._ 591 D.

Hearing, classed among faculties, 5. 477 E; composed of two elements,
speech and hearing, and not requiring, like sight, a third intermediate
nature, 6. 507 C.

Heaven, the starry, the fairest of visible things, 7. 529 D; the motions
of, not eternal, _ib._ 530 A.

Heaviness, 5. 479; 7. 524 A.

Hector, dragged by Achilles round the tomb of Patroclus, 3. 391 B.

Helen, never went to Troy, 9. 586 C.

Hellas, not to be devastated in civil war, 5. 470 A foll., 471 A:
--Hellenes characterised by the love of knowledge, 4. 435 E; did not
originally strip in the gymnasia, 5. 452 D; not to be enslaved by
Hellenes, _ib._ 469 B, C; united by ties of blood, _ib._ 470 C; not to
devastate Hellas, _ib._ 471 A foll.; Hellenes and barbarians are
strangers, _ib._ 469 D, 470 C [_cp._ Pol. 262 D].

Hellespont, 3. 404 C.

Hephaestus, binds Herè, 2. 378 D; thrown from heaven by Zeus, _ibid._;
improperly delineated by Homer, 3. 389 A; chains Ares and Aphroditè, _ib._
390 C.

Heracleitus, the 'sun of,' 6. 498 B.

Herè, bound by Hephaestus, 2. 378 D; Herè and Zeus, _ibid._; 3. 390 B;
begged alms for the daughters of Inachus, 2. 381 D.

Hermes, the star sacred to (Mercury), 10. 617 A.

Hermus, 8. 566 C.

Herodicus of Selymbria, the inventor of valetudinarianism, 3. 406 A foll.

Heroes, not to lament, 3. 387, 388; 10. 603-606; to be rewarded, 5. 468;
after death, _ibid._

Heroic rhythm, 3. 400 C.

Hesiod, his rewards of justice, 2. 363 B; 10. 612 A; his stories improper
for youth, 2. 377 D; his classification of the races, 8. 547 A; a wandering
rhapsode, 10. 600 D:--
Quoted:--
 Theogony,
  l. 154, 459, 2. 377 E.
 Works and Days,
  l. 40, 5. 466 B.
  l. 109, 8. 546 E.
  l. 122, 5. 468 E.
  l. 233, 2. 363 B.
  l. 287, _ib._ 364 D.
 Fragm. 117, 3. 390 E.

Hirelings, required in the state, 2. 371 E.

Holiness of marriage, 5. 458 E, 459 [_cp._ Laws 6. 776]. _See_ Marriage.

Homer, supports the theory that justice is a thief, 1. 334 B; his
rewards of justice, 2. 363 B; 10. 612 A; his stories not approved for
youth, 2. 377 D foll. (cp. 10. 595); his mode of narration, 3. 393 A
foll.; feeds his heroes on campaigners' fare, _ib._ 404 C; Socrates'
feeling of reverence for him, 10. 595 C, 607 (cp. 3. 391 A); the
captain and teacher of the tragic poets, 10. 595 B, 598 D, E; not a
legislator, _ib._ 599 E; or a general, _ib._ 600 A [_cp._ Ion 537
foll.]; or inventor, _ibid._; or teacher, _ibid._; no educator, _ib._
600, 606 E, 607 B; not much esteemed in his lifetime, _ib._ 600 B foll.;
went about as a rhapsode, _ibid._ Passages quoted or referred to:--
 Iliad i.
  l. 11 foll., 3. 392 E foll.
  l. 131, 6. 501 B.
  l. 225, 3. 389 E.
  l. 590 foll., 2. 378 D.
  l. 599 foll., 3. 389 A.
 Iliad ii.
  l. 623, 6. 501 C.
 Iliad iii.
  l. 8, 3. 389 E. {355}
 Iliad iv.
  l. 69 foll., 2. 379 E.
  l. 218, 3. 408 A.
  l. 412, _ib._ 389 E.
  l. 431, _ibid._
 Iliad v.
  l. 845, 10. 612 B.
 Iliad vii.
  l. 321, 5. 468 D.
 Iliad viii.
  l. 162, _ibid._
 Iliad ix.
  l. 497 foll., 2. 364 D.
  l. 513 foll., 3. 390 E.
 Iliad xi.
  l. 576, _ib._ 405 E.
  l. 624, _ibid._
  l. 844, _ib._ 408 A.
 Iliad xii.
  l. 311, 5. 468 E.
 Iliad xiv.
  l. 294 foll., 3. 390 C.
 Iliad xvi.
  l. 433, _ib._ 388 C.
  l. 776, 8. 566 D.
  l. 856 foll., 3. 386 E.
 Iliad xviii.
  l. 23 foll., _ib._ 388 A.
  l. 54, _ib._ B.
 Iliad xix.
  l. 278 foll., _ib._ 390 E.
 Iliad xx.
  l. 4 foll., 2. 379 E.
  l. 64 foll., 3. 386 C.
 Iliad xxi.
  l. 222 foll., _ib._ 391 B.
 Iliad xxii.
  ll. 15, 20, _ib._ A.
  l. 168 foll., _ib._ 388 C.
  l. 362 foll., _ib._ 386 E.
  l. 414, _ib._ 388 B.
 Iliad xxiii.
  l. 100 foll., _ib._ 387 A.
  l. 103 foll., _ib._ 386 D.
  l. 151 _ib._ 391 B.
  l. 175 _ibid._
 Iliad xxiv.
  l. 10 foll., _ib._ 388 A.
  l. 527, 2. 379 D.
 Odyssey i.
  l. 351 foll., 4. 424 D.
 Odyssey viii.
  l. 266 foll., 3. 390 D.
 Odyssey ix.
  l. 9. foll., _ib._ B.
  l. 91 foll., 8. 560 C.
 Odyssey x.
  l. 495, 3. 386 E.
 Odyssey xi.
  l. 489 foll., _ib._ C; 7. 516 D.
 Odyssey xii.
  l. 342, 3. 390 B.
 Odyssey xvii.
  l. 383 foll., _ib._ 389 D.
  l. 485 foll., 2. 381 D.
 Odyssey xix.
  l. 109 foll., _ib._ 363 B.
  l. 395, 1. 334 B.
 Odyssey xx.
  l. 17, 3. 390 D; 4. 441 B.

Homer, allusions to, 1. 328 E; 2. 381 D; 3. 390 E; 8. 544 D.

Homeridae, 10. 599 E.

Honest man, the, a match for the rogue, 3. 409 C (cp. 10. 613 C).

Honesty, fostered by the possession of wealth, 1. 331 A; thought by
mankind to be unprofitable, 2. 364 A; 3. 392 B.

Honour, pleasures enjoyed by the lover of, 9. 581 C, 586 E:--the
'government of honour,' _see_ Timocracy.

Hope, the comfort of the righteous in old age (Pindar), 1. 331 A.

Household cares, 5. 465 C.

Human interests, unimportance of, 10. 604 B (cp. 6. 486 A, _and_ Theaet.
173; Laws 1. 644 E; 7. 803);--life, full of evils, 2. 379 C; shortness of,
10. 608 D;--nature, incapable of doing many things well, 3. 395 B;
--sacrifices, 8. 565 D. {356}

Hunger, 4. 437 E, 439; an inanition ([Greek: ke/nôsis]) of the body,
9. 585 A.

Hymns, to the gods, may be allowed in the State, 10: 607 A [_cp._ Laws
3. 700 A; 7. 801 E];--marriage hymns, 5. 459 E.

Hypothesis, in mathematics and in the intellectual world, 6. 510; in the
sciences, 7. 533.


I.


Iambic measure, 3. 400 C.

Ida, altar of the gods on, 3. 391 E.

Idea of good, the source of truth, 6. 508 (cp. 505); a cause like the sun,
_ib._ 508; 7. 516, 517; must be apprehended by the lover of knowledge,
7. 534;--ideas and phenomena, 5. 476; 6. 507;--ideas and hypotheses,
6. 510;--absolute ideas, 5. 476 [_cp._ Phaedo 65, 74; Parm. 133]; origin of
abstract ideas, 7. 523; nature of, 10. 596; singleness of, _ib._ 597
[_cp._ Tim. 28, 51].

Idea. [_The Idea of Good is an abstraction, which, under that name at
least, does not elsewhere occur in Plato's writings. But it is probably
not essentially different from another abstraction, 'the true being of
things,' which is mentioned in many of his Dialogues_ [_cp. passages cited
s. v. Being_]. _He has nowhere given an explanation of his meaning, not
because he was 'regardless whether we understood him or not,' but rather,
perhaps, because he was himself unable to state in precise terms the ideal
which floated before his mind. He belonged to an age in which men felt too
strongly the first pleasure of metaphysical speculation to be able to
estimate the true value of the ideas which they conceived_ (_cp. his own
picture of the effect of dialectic on the youthful mind,_ 7. 539). _To
him, as to the Schoolmen of the Middle Ages, an abstraction seemed truer
than a fact: he was impatient to shake off the shackles of sense and rise
into the purer atmosphere of ideas. Yet in the allegory of the cave_
(_Book VII_), _whose inhabitants must go up to the light of perfect
knowledge but descend again into the obscurity of opinion, he has shown
that he was not unaware of the necessity of finding a firm starting-point
for these flights of metaphysical imagination_ (_cp._ 6. 510). _A passage
in the Philebus_ (65 A) _gives perhaps the best insight into his meaning:
'If we are not able to hunt the good with one idea only, with three we may
take our prey,--Beauty, Symmetry, Truth.' The three were inseparable to
the Greek mind, and no conception of perfection could be formed in which
they did not unite._ (Cp. Introduction, pp. lxix, xcvii).]

Ideal state, is it possible? 5. 471, 473; 6. 499; 7. 540 (cp. 7. 520,
_and_ Laws 4. 711 E; 5. 739); how to be commenced, 6. 501; 7. 540:
--ideals, value of, 5. 472. For the ideal state, _see_ City,
Constitution, Education, Guardians, Rulers, etc.

Ignorance, nature of, 5. 477, 478; an inanition ([Greek: ke/nôsis]) of the
soul, 9. 585.

Iliad, the style of, illustrated, 3. 392 E foll.; mentioned, _ib._ 393 A.
Cp. Homer, Odyssey.

Ilion, _see_ Troy.

Illegitimate children, 5. 461 A.

Illusions of sight, 7. 523; 10. 602 [_cp._ Phaedo 65 A; Phil. 380, 42 D;
Theaet. 157 E].

Images, (i.e. reflections of visible objects), 6. 510; 10. 596 (_cp._ Tim.
52 D). {357}

Imitation in style, 3. 393, 394; 10. 596 foll., 600 foll.; affects the
character, 3. 395; thrice removed from the truth, 10. 596, 597, 598,
602 B; concerned with the weaker part of the soul, _ib._ 604.

Imitative poetry, 10. 595; arts, inferior, _ib._ 605.

Imitators, ignorant, 10. 602.

Immortality, proof of, 10. 608 foll., (cp. 6. 498 C, _and see_ Soul).

Impatience, uselessness of, 10. 604 C.

Impetuosity, 6. 503 E.

Inachus, Herè asks alms for the daughters of, 2. 381 D.

Inanitions ([Greek: ke/nôseis]) of body and soul, 9. 585 A.

Incantations used by mendicant prophets, 2. 364 B; in medicine, 4. 426 A.

Income Tax, 1. 343 D.

Indifference to money, characteristic of those who inherit a fortune,
1. 330 B.

Individual, inferior types of the, 8. 545; individual and state, 2. 368;
4. 434, 441; 5. 462; 8. 544; 9. 577 B [_cp._ Laws 3. 689; 5. 739; 9. 875,
877 C; 11. 923].

Infants have spirit, but not reason, 4. 441 [_cp._ Laws 12. 963 E].

Informers, 9. 575 B.

Injustice, advantage of, 1. 343; defined by Thrasymachus as discretion,
_ib._ 348 D; injustice and vice, _ibid._; suicidal to states and
individuals, _ib._ 351 E [_cp._ Laws 10. 906 A]; in perfection, 2. 360;
eulogists of, _ib._ 361, 366, 367; 3. 392 B (_cp._ 8. 545 A; 9. 588); only
blamed by those who have not the power to be unjust, 2. 366 C; in the
state, 4. 434; = anarchy in the soul, _ib._ 444 B [_cp._ Soph. 228];
brings no profit, 9. 589, 590; 10. 613.

Innovation in education dangerous, 4. 424 [_cp._ Laws 2. 656, 660 A]. See
Gymnastic, Music.

Intellect, objects of, classified, 7. 534 (cp. 5. 476); relation of the
intellect and the good, 6. 508.

Intellectual world, divisions of, 6. 510 foll.; 7. 517; compared to the
visible, 6. 508, 509; 7. 532 A.

Intercourse between the sexes, 5. 458 foll. [_cp._ Laws 8. 839 foll.]; in
a democracy, 8. 563 B.

Interest, sometimes irrecoverable by law, 8. 556 A [_cp._ Laws 5. 742 C].

Intermediates, 9. 583.

Intimations, the, given by the senses imperfect, 7. 523 foll.; 10. 602.

Intoxication, not allowed in the state, 3. 398 E, 403 E. Cp. Drinking.

Invalids, 3. 406, 407; 4. 425, 426.

Ionian harmony, must be rejected, 3. 399 A.

Iron (and brass) mingled by the God in the husbandmen and craftsmen,
3. 415 A (cp. 8. 547 A).

Ismenias, the Theban, 'a rich and mighty man,' 1. 336 A.

Italy, 'can tell of Charondas as a lawgiver,' 10. 599 E.


J.


Judge, the good, must himself be virtuous, 3. 409 [_cp._ Pol. 305].

Judgement, the final, 10. 614 foll. Cp. Hades.

Juggling, 10. 602 D.

Just man, the, is at a disadvantage compared with the unjust
(Thrasymachus), 1. 343; is happy, _ib._ 354 [_cp._ Laws 1. 660 E]; attains
harmony in his soul, 4. 443 E; proclaimed the happiest, 9. 580
foll.;--just men the friends of the gods, 10. 613 [_cp._ Phil. 39 E; Laws
4. 716 D];--just and unjust are at heart the same (Glaucon), 3. 360.

Justice, = to speak the truth and pay one's debts, 1. 331 foll.; {358} =
the interest of the stronger, _ib._ 338; 2. 367 [_cp._ Gorg. 489; Laws 4.
714 A]; = honour among thieves, 1. 352; = the excellence of the soul,
_ib._ 353:--the art which gives good and evil to friends and enemies,
_ib._ 332 foll., 336; is a thief, _ib._ 334; the proper virtue of man,
_ib._ 335; 'sublime simplicity,' _ib._ 348; does not aim at excess, _ib._
349; identical with wisdom and virtue, _ib._ 351; a principle of harmony,
_ibid._ (cp. 9. 591 D); in the highest class of goods, 2. 357, 367 D
[_cp._ Laws 1. 631 C]; the union of wisdom, temperance, and courage, 4.
433 [_cp._ Laws 1. 631 C]; a division of labour, _ibid._ foll. (cp.
_supra_, 1. 332, 349, 350, _and_ 1 Alcib. 127):--nature and origin of
(Glaucon), 2. 358, 359; conventional, _ib._ 359 A [_cp._ Theaet. 172 A,
177 C; Laws 10. 889, 890]; praised for its consequences only (Adeimantus),
_ib._ 362 E, 366; a matter of appearance, _ib._ 365:--useful alike in war
and peace, 1. 333; can do no harm, _ib._ 335; more precious than gold,
_ib._ 336; toilsome, 2. 364:--compared to health, 4. 444:--the poets on,
2. 363, 364, 365 E:--in perfection, _ib._ 361:--more profitable than
injustice, 4. 445; 9. 589 foll.; superior to injustice, 9. 589; final
triumph of, _ib._ 580; 10. 612, 613:--in the state, 2. 369; 4. 431; the
same in the individual and the state, 4. 435 foll., 441 foll.:--absolute
justice, 5. 479 E; 6. 501 B; 7. 517 E.

Justice. [_The search for justice is the groundwork or foundation of the
Republic, which commences with an enquiry into its nature and ends with a
triumphant demonstration of the superior happiness enjoyed by the just
man. In the First Book several definitions of justice are attempted, all
of which prove inadequate. Glaucon and Adeimantus then intervene:--mankind
regard justice as a necessity, not as a good in itself, or at best as only
to be practised because of the temporal benefits which flow from it: can
Socrates prove that it belongs to a higher class of goods? Socrates in
reply proposes to construct an ideal state in which justice will be more
easily recognised than in the individual. Justice is thus discovered to be
the essential virtue of the state,_ (_a thesis afterwards enlarged upon by
Aristotle_ [Pol. i. 2, § 16; iii. 13, § 3]), _the bond of the social
organization, and, like temperance in the Laws_ [3. 696, 697; 4. 709 E],
_rather the accompaniment or condition of the virtues than a virtue in
itself_ [_cp._ Introduction, p. lxiii]. _Expressed in an outward or
political form it becomes the great principle which has been already
enunciated_ (i. 322), _'that every man shall do his own work;' on this
Plato bases the necessity of the division into classes which underlies the
whole fabric of the ideal state_ (4. 433 foll.; Tim. 17 C). _Thus we are
led to acknowledge the happiness of the just; for he alone reflects in
himself this vital principle of the state_ (4. 445). _The final proof is
supplied by a comparison of the perfect state with actual forms of
government. These, like the individuals who correspond to them, become
more and more miserable as they recede further from the ideal, and the
climax is reached_ (9. 587) _when the tyrant is shown by the aid of
arithmetic to have '729 times less pleasure than the king'_ [_i.e. the
perfectly just ruler_]. _Lastly, the happiness of the just is proved to_
{359} _extend also into the next world, where men appear before the
judgment seat of heaven and receive the due reward of their deeds in this
life._]


K.


King, the Great, 8. 553 D:--pleasure of the king and the tyrant compared,
9. 587 foll.;--kings and philosophers, 5. 473 (cp. 6. 487 E, 498 foll.,
501 E foll.; 7. 540; 8. 543; 9. 592).

Kisses, the reward of the brave warrior, 5. 468 C.

Knowledge ([Greek: e)pistê/mê, gignô/skein]), = knowledge of ideas, 6. 484;
--nature of, 5. 477, 478; classed among faculties, _ib._ 477; 6. 511 E;
7. 533 E;--previous, to birth, 7. 518 C;--how far given by sense, _ib._
529 [_cp._ Phaedo 75];--should not be acquired under compulsion, _ib._
536 E;--the foundation of courage, 4. 429 [_cp._ Laches 193, 197; Protag.
350, 360];--knowledge and opinion, 5. 476-478; 6. 508, 510 A; 7. 534;
knowledge and pleasure, 6. 505; knowledge and wisdom, 4. 428;--the highest
knowledge, 6. 504; 7. 514 foll.;--unity of knowledge, 5. 479 [_cp._ Phaedo
101];--the best knowledge, 10. 618;--knowledge of shadows, 6. 511 D; 7.
534 A:--love of knowledge characteristic of the Hellenes, 4. 435 E;
peculiar to the rational element of the soul, 9. 581 B.


L.


Labour, division of, 2. 370, 374 A; 3. 394 E, 395 B, 397 E; 4. 423 E,
433 A, 435 A, 441 E, 443, 453 B [_cp._ Laws 8. 846, 847].

Lacedaemon, owes its good order to Lycurgus, 10. 599 E;--constitution of,
commonly extolled, 8. 544 D; a timocracy, _ib._ 545 B:--Lacedaemonians
first after the Cretans to strip in the gymnasia, 5. 452 D.

Lachesis, turns the spindle of Necessity together with Clotho and Atropos,
10. 617 C; her speech, _ib._ D; apportions a genius to each soul, _ib._
620 D.

Lamentation over the dead, to be checked, 3. 387.

Lands, partition of, proclaimed by the would-be tyrant, 8. 565 E, 566 E.

Language, pliability of, 9. 588 D [_cp._ Soph. 277 B].

Laughter not to be allowed in the guardians, 3. 388 [_cp._ Laws 5. 732;
11. 935]; nor represented in the gods, _ib._ 389.

Laws, may be given in error, 1. 339 E; supposed to arise from a convention
among mankind, 2. 359 A; cause of, 3. 405; on special subjects of little
use, 4. 425, 426 [_cp._ Laws 7. 788]; treated with contempt in
democracies, 8. 563 E; bring help to all in the state, 9. 590.

Lawyers, increase when wealth abounds, 4. 405 A.

Learning, pleasure of, 6. 486 C (cp. 9. 581, 586).

Legislation, cannot reach the minutiae of life, 4. 425, 426; requires the
help of God, _ib._ 425 E. Cp. Laws.

Leontius, story of, 4. 439 E.

Lethe, 10. 621.

Letters, image of the large and small, 2. 368; 3. 402 A.

Liberality, one of the virtues of the philosopher, 6. 485 E.

Liberty, characteristic of democracy, 8. 557 B, 561-563.

Licence, begins in music, 4. 424 E [_cp._ Laws 3. 701 B]; in democracies,
8. 562 D.

Licentiousness forbidden, 5. 458. {360}

Lie, a, hateful to the philosopher, 6. 490 C (cp. _supra_ 486 E);--the
true lie and the lie in words, 2. 382;--the royal lie ([Greek: gennai/on
pseu=dos]), 3. 414;--rulers of the state may lie, 2. 382; 3. 389 A, 414 C;
5. 459 D;--the Gods not to be represented as lying, 2. 382;--lies of the
poets, _ib._ 377 foll.; 3. 386, 408 B (cp. 10. 597 foll.).

Life in the early state, 2. 372;--loses its zest in old age, 1. 329 A;
full of evils, 2. 379 C; intolerable without virtue, 4. 445; shortness of,
compared to eternity, 10. 608 D;--the life of virtue toilsome, 2. 364 D;
--the just or the unjust, which is the more advantageous? _ib._ 347
foll.;--three kinds of lives among men, 9. 581;--life of women ought to
resemble that of men, 5. 451 foll. [_cp._ Laws 7. 804 E];--the necessities
of life, 2. 369, 373 A;--the prime of life, 5. 460 E.

Light, 6. 507 E. Cp. Sight, Vision.

Light and heavy, 5. 479; 7. 524.

Like to like, 4. 425 C.

Literature ([Greek: lo/goi]), included under 'music' in education,
2. 376 E.

Litigation, the love of, ignoble, 3. 405.

Logic; method of residues, 4. 427;--accidents and essence distinguished,
5. 454;--nature of opposition, 4. 436;--categories, [Greek: pro/s ti], 4.
437; quality and relation, _ibid._;--fallacies, 6. 487. For Plato's method
of definitions, _see_ Knowledge, Temperance; and cp. Dialectic,
Metaphysic.

Lotophagi, 8. 560 C.

Lots, use of, 5. 460 A, 462 E; election by, characteristic of democracy,
8. 557 A.

Love of the beautiful, 3. 402, 403 [_cp._ 1 Alcib. 131]; bodily love and
true love, _ib._ 403; love and the love of knowledge, 5. 474 foll.; is of
the whole, not of the part, _ib._ C, 475 B; 6. 485 B; a tyrant, 9. 573 B,
574 E (cp. 1. 329 B):--familiarities which may be allowed between the
lover and the beloved, 3. 403 B:--lovers' names, 5. 474:--lovers of wine,
_ib._ 475 A:--lovers of beautiful sights and sounds, _ib._ 476 B, 479 A,
480.

Luxury in the state, 2. 372, 373; a cause of disease, 3. 405 E; would not
give happiness to the citizens, 4. 420, 421; makes men cowards, 9. 590 B.

Lycaean Zeus, temple of, 8. 565 D.

Lycurgus, the author of the greatness of Lacedaemon, 10. 599 E.

Lydia, kingdom of, obtained by Gyges, 2. 359 C:--Lydian harmonies, to be
rejected, 3. 398 E foll.

Lying, a privilege of the state, 3. 389 A, 414 C; 5. 459 D.

Lyre, the instrument of Apollo, and allowed in the best state, 3. 399 D.

Lysanias, father of Cephalus, 1. 330 B.

Lysias, the brother of Polemarchus, 1. 328 B.


M.


Madman, arms not to be returned to a, 1. 331; fancies of madmen, 8. 573 C.

Magic, 10. 602 D.

Magistrates, elected by lot in democracy, 8. 557 A.

Magnanimity, ([Greek: megalo/prepeia]), one of the philosopher's virtues,
6. 486 A, 490 E, 494 A.

Maker, the, not so good a judge as the user, 10. 601 C [_cp._ Crat. 390].

Man, 'the master of himself,' 4. 430 E [_cp._ Laws 1. 626 E foll.]; 'the
form and likeness of God,' 6. 501 B [_cp._ Phaedr. 248 A; Theaet. 176 C;
Laws 4. 716 D]; his unimportance, 10. 604 B (cp. 6. 486 A, {361} _and_
Laws 1. 644 E; 7. 803); has the power to choose his own destiny, 10. 617 E;
--the one best man, 6. 502 [_cp._ Pol. 301]:--Men are not just of their
own will, 2. 366 C; unite in the state in order to supply each other's
wants, _ib._ 369;--the nature of men and women, 5. 453-455;--analogy of
men and animals, _ib._ 459;--three classes of, 9. 581.

Manners, influenced by education, 4. 424, 425; cannot be made the subject
of legislation, _ibid._; freedom of, in democracies, 8. 563 A.

'Many,' the term, as applied to the beautiful, the good, &c., 6. 507.

Many, the, flatter their leaders into thinking themselves statesmen, 4.
426; wrong in their notions about the honourable and the good, 6. 493 E;
would lose their harsh feeling towards philosophy if they could see the
true philosopher, _ib._ 500; their pleasures and pains, 9. 586;--'the
great beast,' 6. 493. Cp. Multitude.

Marionette players, 7. 514 B.

Marriage, holiness of, 5. 458 E, 459; age for, _ib._ 460; prayers and
sacrifices at, _ibid._;--marriage festivals, _ib._ 459, 460.

Marsyas, Apollo to be preferred to, 3. 399 E.

Mathematics, 7. 522-532; use of hypotheses in, 6. 510;--mathematical
notions perceived by a faculty of the soul, 6. 511 C:--the mathematician
not usually a dialectician, 7. 531 E.

Mean, happiness of the, 10. 619 A [_cp._ Laws 3. 679 A; 5. 728 E;
7. 792 D].

Meanness, unknown to the philosopher, 6. 486 A; characteristic of the
oligarchs, 8. 554.

Measurement, art of, corrects the illusions of sight, 10. 602 D.

Meat, roast, the best diet for soldiers, 3. 404 D.

Medicine, cause of, 3. 405; not intended to preserve unhealthy and
intemperate subjects, _ib._ 406 foll., 408 A; 4. 426 A [_cp._ Tim. 89 B];
the two kinds of, 5. 459 [_cp._ Laws 4. 720]; use of incantations in, 4.
426 A;--analogy of, employed in the definition of justice, 1. 332 C.

Megara, battle of, 2. 368 A.

Melody, in education, 3. 398 foll.; its influence, 10. 601 B.

Memory, the philosopher should have a good, 6. 486 D, 490 E, 494 A;
7. 535 B.

Mendicant prophets, 2. 364 C.

Menelaus, treatment of, when wounded, 3. 408 A.

Menoetius, father of Patroclus, 3. 388 C.

Mental blindness, causes of, 7. 518.

Merchants, necessary in the state, 2. 371.

Metaphysics; absolute ideas, 5. 476;--abstract and relative ideas,
7. 524;--analysis of knowledge, 6. 510;--qualifications of relative and
correlative, 4. 437 foll.; 7. 524. Cp. Idea, Logic.

Metempsychosis, 10. 617. Cp. Soul.

Midas, wealth of, 3. 408 B.

Might and right, 1. 338 foll. [_cp._ Gorg. 483, 489; Laws 1. 627; 3. 690;
10. 890].

Miletus, Thales of, 10. 600 A.

Military profession, the, 2. 374.

Mimetic art, in education, 3. 394 foll.; the same person cannot succeed in
tragedy and comedy, _ib._ 395 A; imitations lead to habit, ib. D; men
acting women's part, _ib._ E; influence on character, _ibid._ foll. Cp.
Imitation.

'Mine and thine,' a common cause of dispute, 5. 462.

Ministers of the state must be educated, 7. 519. See Ruler. {362}

Miser, the, typical of the oligarchical state, 8. 555 A (cp. 559 D).

Misfortune, to be borne with patience, 3. 387; 10. 603-606.

Models (or types), by which the poets are to be guided in their
compositions, 2. 379 A.

Moderation, necessity of, 5. 466 B [_cp._ Laws 3. 690 E; 5. 732, 736 E].

Momus (god of jealousy), 6. 487 A.

Monarchy, distinguished from aristocracy as that form of the perfect state
in which one rules, 4. 445 C (cp. 9. 576 D, _and_ Pol. 301); the happiest
form of government, 9. 576 E (cp. 580 C, 587 B).

Money, needed in the state, 2. 371 B [_cp._ Laws 11. 918]; not necessary
in order to carry on war, 4. 423;--love of, among the Egyptians and
Phoenicians, _ib._ 435 E; characteristic of timocracy and oligarchy, 8.
548 A, 553, 562 A; referred to the appetitive element of the soul,
9. 580 E; despicable, _ib._ 589 E, 590 C (cp. 3. 390 E).

Money-lending, in oligarchies, 8. 555, 556.

Money-making, art of, in Cephalus' family, 1. 330 B; evil of, 8. 556;
pleasure of, 9. 581 C, 586 E.

Money-qualifications in oligarchies, 8. 550, 551.

Moon, reputed mother of Orpheus, 2. 364 E.

Motherland, a Cretan word, 9. 575 E [_cp._ Menex. 237].

Mothers in the state, 5. 460.

Motion and rest, 4. 436;--motion of the stars, 7. 529, 530; 10. 616 E.

Multitude, the, the great Sophist, 6. 492; their madness, _ib._ 496 C. Cp.
Many.

Musaeus, his pictures of a future life, 2. 363 D, E, 364 E.

Muses, the, Musaeus and Orpheus the children of, 2. 364 E.

Music, to be taught before gymnastic, 2. 376 E (cp. 3. 403 C); includes
literature ([Greek: lo/goi]), 2. 376 E;--in education, _ib._ 377 foll.; 3.
398 foll.; 7. 522 A (_see_ Poetry, Poets, _and cp._ Protag. 326; Laws 2.
654, 660); complexity in, to be rejected, 3. 397 [_cp._ Laws 7. 812]; the
severe and the vulgar kind, _ibid._ [_cp._ Laws 7. 802]; the end of, the
love of beauty, _ib._ 403 C; like gymnastic, should be studied throughout
life, _ibid._; the simpler kinds of, foster temperance in the soul, _ib._
404 A, 410 A; effect of excessive, _ib._ 410, 411; ancient forms of, not
to be altered, 4. 424 [_cp._ Laws 2. 657; 7. 799, 801]; must be taught to
women, 5. 452.

Music. [_Music to the ancients had a far wider significance than to us. It
was opposed to gymnastic as 'mental' to 'bodily' training, and included
equally reading and writing, mathematics, harmony, poetry, and music
strictly speaking: drawing, as Aristotle tells us_ (Pol. viii. 3, § 1),
_was sometimes made a separate division._ I. _Music_ (_in this wider
sense_), _Plato says, should precede gymnastic; and, according to a
remarkable passage in the Protagoras_ (325 C), _the pupils in a Greek
school were actually instructed in reading and writing, made to learn
poetry by heart, and taught to play on the lyre, before they went to the
gymnasium. The ages at which children should commence these various studies
are not stated in the Republic; but in the VIIth Book of the Laws, where
the subject is treated more in detail, the children begin going to school
at ten, and spend three years in learning to read and write, and another
three years in music_ (Laws 7. 810). _This agrees very fairly with the
selection of the_ {363} _most promising youth at the age of twenty_ (Rep.
7. 537), _as it would allow a corresponding period of three years for
gymnastic training._ II. _Music, strictly so called, plays a great part in
Plato's scheme of education. He hopes by its aid to make the lives of his
youthful scholars harmonious and gracious, and to implant in their souls
true conceptions of good and evil. Music is a gift of the Gods to men, and
was never intended, 'as the many foolishly and blasphemously suppose,'
merely to give us an idle pleasure_ (Tim. 47 E; Laws 2. 654, 658 E; 7.
802 D). _Neither should a freeman aim at attaining perfect execution_
[_cp._ Arist. Pol. viii. 6, §§ 7, 15]: _in the Laws_ (7. 810) _we are told
that every one must go through the three years course of music, 'neither
more nor less, whether he like or whether he dislike the study.' Both
instruments and music are to be of a simple character: in the Republic
only the lyre, the pipe, and the flute are tolerated, and the Dorian and
Phrygian harmonies. No change in the fashions of music is permitted; for
where there is licence in music there will be anarchy in the state. In
this desire for simplicity and fixity in music Plato was probably opposed
to the tendencies of his own age. The severe harmony which had once
characterized Hellenic art was passing out of favour: alike in
architecture, sculpture, painting, literature, and music, richer and more
ornate styles prevailed. We regard the change as inevitable, and not
perhaps wholly to be regretted: to Plato it was a cause rather than a sign
of the decline of Hellas._]

Musical amateurs, 5. 475;--education, 2. 377; 3. 398 foll.; 7. 522 A;
--instruments, the more complex kinds of, rejected, 3. 399 [_cp._ Laws
7. 812 D];--modes, _ib._ 397-399; changes in, involve changes in the laws,
4. 424 C.

Mysteries, 2. 365 A, 366 A, 378 A; 8. 560 E.

Mythology, misrepresentations of the gods in, 2. 378 foll.; 3. 388 foll.,
408 C (cp. Gods); like poetry, has an imitative character, 3. 392 D foll.


N.


Narration, styles of, 3. 392, 393, 396.

National qualities, 4. 435.

Natural gifts, 2. 370 A; 5. 455; 6. 491 E, 495 A; 7. 519, 535.

Nature, recurrent cycles in, 8. 546 A (cp. Cycles); divisions of, 9. 584
[_cp._ Phil. 23].

Necessities, the, of life, 2. 368, 373 A.

Necessity, the mother of the Fates, 10. 616, 617, 621 A.

Necessity, the, 'which lovers know,' 5. 458 E;--the 'necessity of
Diomede,' 6. 493 D.

Nemesis, 5. 451 A.

Niceratus, son of Nicias, 1. 327 C.

Nicias, 1. 327 C.

Nightingale, Thamyras changed into a, 10. 620.

Niobe, sufferings of, in tragic poetry, 2. 380 A.

[Greek: no/mos], strain and law, 7. 532 E [_cp._ Laws 7. 800 A].

Not-being, 5. 477.

Novelties in music and gymnastic to be discouraged, 4. 424.

Number, said to have been invented by Palamedes, 7. 522 D;--the number of
the State, 8. 546.


O.


Objects and ideas to be distinguished, 5. 476; 6. 507. {364}

Odysseus and Alcinous, 10. 614 B; chooses the lot of a private man, _ib._
620 D.

Odyssey, 3. 393 A. Cp. Iliad.

Office, not desired by the good ruler, 7. 520 A.

Old age, complaints against, 1. 329; Sophocles quoted in regard to,
_ibid._; wealth a comforter of age, _ibid._;--old men think more of the
future life, _ib._ 330; not students, 7. 536 [_cp._ Laches 189];--the
older to bear rule in the state, 3. 412 [_cp._ Laws 3. 690 A; 4. 714 E];
to be over the younger, 5. 465 A [_cp._ Laws 4. 721 D; 9. 879 C;
11. 917 A].

Oligarchy, a form of government which has many evils, 8. 544, 551, 552;
origin of, _ib._ 550; nature of, _ibid._; always divided against itself,
_ib._ 551 D, 554 E--the oligarchical man, 8. 553; a miser, _ib._ 555; his
place in regard to pleasure, 9. 587.

Olympian Zeus, the Saviour, 9. 583 B.

Olympic victors, happiness and glory of, 5. 465 D, 466 A (_cp._
10. 618 A).

One, the, study of, draws the mind to the contemplation of true being,
7. 525 A.

Opinion and knowledge, 5. 476-478; 6. 508 D, 510 A; 7. 534; the lovers of
opinion, 5. 479, 480; a blind guide, 6. 506; objects of opinion and
intellect classified, 7. 534 (cp. 5. 476);--true opinion and courage,
4. 429, 430 (cp. Courage).

Opposites, qualification of, 4. 436; in nature, 5. 454, 475 E. Cp.
Contradiction.

Oppositions in the soul, 10. 603 D.

Orpheus, child of the Moon and the Muses, 2. 364 E; soul of, chooses a
swan's life, 10. 620 A;--quoted, 2. 364 E.


P.


Paeanian, Charmantides the, 1. 328 B.

Pain, cessation of, causes pleasure, 9. 583 D [_cp._ Phaedo 60 A;
Phil. 51 A]; a motion of the soul, _ib._ E.

Painters, 10. 596, 597; are imitators, ib. 597 [_cp._ Soph. 234]; painters
and poets, _ib._ 597, 603, 605:--'the painter of constitutions,' 6. 501.

Painting, in light and shade, 10. 602 C.

Palamedes and Agamemnon in the play, 7. 522 D.

Pamphylia, Ardiaeus a tyrant of some city in, 10. 615 C.

Pandarus, author of the violation of the oaths, 2. 379 E; wounded
Menelaus, 3. 408 A.

Panharmonic scale, the, 3. 399.

Panopeus, father of Epeus, 10. 620 B.

Pantomimic representations, not to be allowed, 3. 397.

Paradox about justice and injustice, the, 1. 348.

Parental anxieties, 5. 465 C [_cp._ Euthyd. 306 E].

Parents, the oldest and most indispensable of friends, 8. 574 C; parents
and children in the state, 5. 461.

Part and whole, in regard to the happiness of the state, 4. 420 D; 5. 466;
7. 519 E; in love, 5. 474 C, 475 B; 6. 485 B.

Passionate element of the soul, 4. 440; 6. 504 A; 8. 548 D; 9. 571 E,
580 A. _See_ Spirit.

Passions, the, tyranny of, 1. 329 C; fostered by poetry, 10. 606.

Patient and agent equally qualified, 4. 436 [_cp._ Gorg. 476; Phil. 27 A].

Patroclus, cruel vengeance taken by Achilles for, 3. 391 B; his treatment
of the wounded Eurypylus, _ib._ 406 A. {365}

Pattern, the heavenly, 6. 500 E; 7. 540 A; 9. 592 [_cp._ Laws 5. 739 D].

Paupers. _See_ Poor.

Payment, art of, 1. 346.

Peirithous, son of Zeus, the tale of, not to be repeated, 3. 391 D.

Peleus, the gentlest of men, 3. 391 C.

Perception, in the eye and in the soul, 6. 508 foll.

Perdiccas [King of Macedonia], 1. 336 A.

Perfect state, difficulty of, 5. 472; 6. 502 E [_cp._ Laws 4. 711];
possible, 5. 471, 473; 6. 499; 7. 540 [_cp._ Laws 5. 739]; manner of its
decline, 8. 546 [_cp._ Crit. 120].

Periander, the tyrant, 1. 336 A.

Personalities, avoided by the philosopher, 6. 500 B [_cp._ Theaet. 174 C].

Personification; the argument compared to a search or chase, 2. 368 C; 4.
427 C, 432; to a stormy sea, 4. 441 B; to an ocean, 5. 453 D; to a game of
draughts, 6. 487 B; to a journey, 7. 532 E; to a charm, 10. 608 A;--'has
travelled a long way,' 6. 484 A;--'veils her face,' _ib._ 503 A;
--'following in the footsteps of the argument,' 2. 365 C;--'whither the
argument may blow, thither we go,' 3. 394 D;--'a swarm of words,'
5. 450 B;--the three waves, _ib._ 457 C, 472 A, 473 C.

Persuasion [or Faith], one of the faculties of the soul, 6. 511 D;
7. 533 E.

Philosopher, the, has the quality of gentleness, 2. 375, 376; 3. 410; 6.
486 C; 'the spectator of all time and all existence,' 6. 486 A [_cp._
Theaet. 173 E]; should have a good memory, _ib._ D, 490 E, 494 A; 7. 535;
has his mind fixed upon true being, 6. 484, 485, 486 E, 490, 500 C, 501 D;
7. 521, 537 D; 9. 581, 582 C (cp. 5. 475 E; 7. 520 B, 525, _and_ Phaedo
82; Phaedr. 249; Theaet. 173 E; Soph. 249 D, 254); his qualifications and
excellences, 6. 485 foll., 490 D, 491 B, 494 B [_cp._ Phaedo 68];
corruption of the philosopher, _ib._ 491 foll.; is apt to retire from the
world, _ib._ 496 [_cp._ Theaet. 173]; does not delight in personal
conversation, _ib._ 500 B [_cp._ Theaet. 174 C]; must be an arithmetician,
7. 525 B; pleasures of the philosopher, 9. 581 E:--Philosophers are to be
kings, 5. 473 (cp. 6. 487 E, 498 foll., 501 E foll.; 7. 540; 8. 543; 9.
592); are lovers of all knowledge, 5. 475; 6. 486 A, 490; true and false,
5. 475 foll.; 6. 484, 491, 494, 496 A, 500; 7. 535; to be guardians, 2.
375 (_see_ Guardians); why they are useless, 6. 487 foll.; few in number,
_ib._ E, 496, 499 B, 503 B [_cp._ Phaedo 69 C]; will frame the state after
the heavenly pattern, _ib._ 501; 7. 540 A; 9. 592; education of, 6. 503;
philosophers and poets, 10. 607 [_cp._ Laws 12. 967].

Philosophic nature, the, rarity of, 6. 491; causes of the ruin of, _ibid._

Philosophy, every headache ascribed to, 3. 407 C; = love of real
knowledge, 6. 485 (cp. _supra_ 5. 475 E); the corruption of, 6. 491;
philosophy and the world, _ib._ 494; the desolation of, _ib._ 495;
philosophy and the arts, _ib._ E, 496 C (cp. _supra_ 5. 475 D, 476 A);
true and false philosophy, 6. 496 E, 498 E; philosophy and governments,
_ib._ 497; time set apart for, _ib._ 498; 7. 539; commonly neglected in
after life, 6. 498; prejudice against, _ib._ 500, 501; why it is useless,
7. 517, 535, 539; the guardian and saviour of virtue, 8. 549 B; philosophy
and poetry, 10. 607; aids a man to make a wise choice in the next world,
_ib._ 618. {366}

Phocylides, his saying, 'that as soon as a man has a livelihood he should
practise virtue,' 3. 407 B.

Phoenician tale, the, 3. 414 C foll.

Phoenicians, their love of money, 4. 436 A.

Phoenix, tutor of Achilles, 3. 390 E.

Phrygian harmony, the, 3. 399.

Physician, the, not a mere money maker, 1. 341 C, 342 D; the good
physician, 3. 408; physicians find employment when luxury increases, 2.
373 C; 3. 405 A. Cp. Medicine.

Pigs, sacrificed at the Mysteries, 2. 378 A.

Pilot, the, and the just man, 1. 332 (cp. 341); the true pilot, 6. 488 E.

Pindar, on the hope of the righteous, 1. 331 A; on Asclepius, 3. 408 B;
--quoted, 2. 365 B.

Pipe, the, ([Greek: su/rigx]), one of the musical instruments permitted to
be used, 3. 399 D.

Piraeus, 1. 327 A; 4. 439 E; Socrates seldom goes there, 1. 328 C.

Pittacus of Mitylene, a sage, 1. 335 E.

Plays of children should be made a means of instruction, 4. 425 A;
7. 537 A [_cp._ Laws 1. 643 B].

Pleasure, not akin to virtue, 3. 402, 403; pleasure and love, _ibid._;
defined as knowledge or good, 6. 505 B, 509 B; the highest, 9. 583; caused
by the cessation of pain, _ib._ D [_cp._ Phaedo 60 A; Phil. 51]; a motion
of the soul, _ib._ E;--real pleasure unknown to the tyrant, _ib._ 587;
--pleasure of learning, 6. 486 C (cp. 9. 581, 586, _and_ Laws 2. 667);
--sensual pleasure, 7. 519; 9. 586; a solvent of the soul, 4. 430 A
[_cp._ Laws 1. 633 E]; not desired by the philosopher, 6. 485
E:--Pleasures, division of, into necessary and unnecessary, 8. 558, 559,
561 A; 9. 572, 581 E; honourable and dishonourable, 8. 561 C; three
classes of, 9. 581; criterion of, _ib._ 582; classification of, _ib._
583;--pleasures of smell, _ib._ 584 B;--pleasures of the many, 585; of the
passionate, _ib._ 586; of the philosopher, _ib._ 586, 587.

Pluto, 8. 554 B.

Poetry, styles of, 3. 392-394, 398; in the state, _ib._ 392-394, 398; 8.
568 B; 10. 595 foll., 605 A, 607 A [_cp._ Laws 7. 817]; effect of, 10.
605; feeds the passions, _ib._ 606; poetry and philosophy, _ib._ 607
[_cp._ Laws 12. 967]:--'colours' of poetry, _ib._ 601 A.

Poetry. [_The Republic is the first of Plato's works in which he seriously
examines the value of poetry in education, and the place of the poets in
the state. The question could hardly be neglected by the philosopher who
proposed to construct an ideal polity or government of the best. For
poetry played a great part in Hellenic life: the children learned whole
poems by heart in their schools_ (Protag. 326 A; Laws 7. 810 C); _the
rhapsode delighted the crowds at the festivals_ (Ion 535); _the theatres
were free, or almost free, to all, 'costing but a drachma at the most'_
(Apol. 26 D); _the intervals of a banquet were filled up by conversation
about the poets_ (Protag. 347 C). _The quarrel between philosophy and
poetry was an ancient one, which had found its first expression in the
attacks of Xenophanes_ (538 B.C.) _and Heracleitus_ (508 B.C.) _upon the
popular mythology. In the earlier dialogues of Plato the poets are treated
with an ironical courtesy, through which an antagonistic spirit is allowed
here and there to appear: they are 'winged and holy beings'_ (Ion 534)
_who sing by inspiration,_ {367} _but at the same time are the worst
possible critics of their own writings and the most self-conceited of
mortals_ (Apol. 22 D). _In the Republic_ (_II and III_), _Plato begins the
trial of poetry by the enquiry whether the tales and legends related by
the epic and tragic poets are true in themselves or likely to furnish good
examples to his future citizens. They cannot be true, for they are
contrary to the nature of God_ (_see s. v._ God), _and they are certainly
not proper lessons for youth. There must be a censorship of poetry, and
all objectionable passages expunged; suitable rules and regulations will
be laid down, and to these the poets must conform. In the Xth Book the
argument takes a deeper tone. The Poet is proved to be an impostor thrice
removed from the truth, a wizard who steals the hearts of the unwary by
his spells and enchantments. Men easily fall into the habit of imitating
what they admire; and the lamentations and woes of the tragic hero and the
unseemly buffoonery of the comedian are equally bad models for the
citizens of a free and noble state. The poets must therefore be banished,
unless, Plato adds, the lovers of poetry can persuade us of her innocence
of the charges laid against her. In the Laws a similar conclusion is
reached:--'The state is an imitation of the best life, and the noblest
form of tragedy. The legislator and the poet are rivals, and the latter
can only be tolerated if his words are in harmony with the laws of the
state'_ (vii. 817)].

Poets, the, love their poems as their own creation, 1. 330 C [_cp._ Symp.
209]; speak in parables, _ib._ 332 B (cp. 3. 413 B); on justice, 2. 363,
364, 365 E; bad teachers of youth, _ib._ 377; 3. 391, 392, 408 C [_cp._
Laws 10. 866 C, 890 A]; must be restrained by certain rules, 2. 379 foll.;
3. 398 A [_cp._ Laws 2. 656, 660 A; 4. 719]; banished from the state, 3.
398 A; 8. 568 B; 10. 595 foll., 605 A, 607 A [_cp._ Laws 7. 817]; poets
and tyrants, 8. 568; thrice removed from the truth, 10. 596, 597, 598 E,
602 B, 605 C; imitators only, _ib._ 600, 601 (cp. 3. 393, _and_ Laws 4.
719 C); poets and painters, 10. 601, 603, 605;--'the poets who were
children and prophets of the gods' (? Orpheus and Musaeus; cp. _supra_
364 E), 2. 366 A.

Polemarchus, the son of Cephalus, 1. 327 B; 'the heir of the argument,'
_ib._ 331; intervenes in the discussion, _ib._ 340; wishes Socrates to
speak in detail about the community of women and children, 5. 449.

Politicians, in democracies, 8. 564.

Polydamas, the pancratiast, 1. 338 C.

Poor, the, have no time to be ill, 3. 406 E; everywhere hostile to the
rich, 4. 423 A; 8. 551 E [_cp._ Laws 5. 736 A]; very numerous in
oligarchies, 8. 552 D; not despised by the rich in time of danger, _ib._
556 C.

Population, to be regulated, 5. 460.

Poverty, prejudicial to the arts, 4. 421; poverty and crime, 8. 552.

Power, the struggle for, 7. 520 C [_cp._ Laws 4. 715 A].

Pramnian wine, 3. 405 E, 408 A.

Priam, Homer's delineation of, condemned, 3. 388 B.

Prisoners in war, 5. 468-470.

Private property, not allowed to the guardians, 3. 416 E; 4. 420 A, 422 D;
5. 464 C; 8. 543.

Prizes of valour, 5. 468.

Prodicus, a popular teacher, 10. 600 C. {368}

Property, to be common, 3. 416 E; 4. 420 A, 422 D; 5. 464 C; 8. 543;
restrictions on the disposition of, 8. 556 A [_cp._ Laws 11. 923]:
--property qualifications in oligarchies, _ib._ 550, 551.

Prophets, mendicant, 2. 364 C.

Proportion, akin to truth, 6. 486 E.

Prose writers on justice, 2. 364 A.

Protagoras, his popularity as a teacher, 10. 600 C.

Proteus, not to be slandered, 2. 381 D.

Proverbs: 'birds of a feather,' 1. 329 A; 'shave a lion,' _ib._ 341 C;
'let brother help brother,' 2. 362 D; 'wolf and flock,' 3. 415 D; 'one
great thing,'4. 423 E; 'hard is the good,' _ib._ 435 C; 'friends have all
things in common,' 5. 449 C; 'the useful is the noble,' _ib._ 457 B; 'the
wise must go to the doors of the rich,' 6. 489 B (cp. 2. 364 B); 'what is
more than human,' 6. 492 E; 'the necessity of Diomede,' _ib._ 493 D; 'the
she-dog as good as her mistress,' 8. 563 D; 'out of the smoke into the
fire,' _ib._ 569 B; 'does not come within a thousand miles' ([Greek: ou)d'
i)/ktar ba/llei]), 9. 575 D.

Public, the, the great Sophist, 6. 492; compared to a many-headed beast,
_ib._ 493; cannot be philosophic, _ib._ 494 A [_cp._ Pol. 292 D]. _See_
Many, Multitude.

Punishment, of the wicked, in the world below, 2. 363; 10. 614. Cp. Hades,
World below.

Purgation of the luxurious state, 3. 399 E;--of the city by the tyrant,
8. 567 D;--of the soul, by the tyrannical man, _ib._ 573 A.

Pythagoreans, the, authorities on the science of harmony, 7. 529, 530,
531; never reach the natural harmonies of number, _ib._ 531 C;--the
Pythagorean way of life, 10. 600 A.

Pythian Oracle, the, 5. 461 E; 7. 540 C.


Q.


Quacks, 5. 459.

Quarrels, dishonourable, 2. 378; 3. 395 E; will be unknown in the best
state, 2. 378 B; 5. 464 E [_cp._ Laws 5. 739];--quarrels of the Gods and
heroes, 2. 378.


R.


Rational element of the soul, 4. 435-442; 6. 504 A; 8. 550 A; 9. 571,
580 E, 581 [_cp._ Tim. 69 E-72]; ought to bear rule, and be assisted by the
spirited element against the passions, 4. 441 E, 442; characterized by the
love of knowledge, 9. 581 B; the pleasures of, the truest, _ib._ 582;
preserves the mind from the illusions of sense, 10. 602.

Rationalism among youth, 7. 538 [_cp._ Laws 10. 886].

Reaction, 8. 564 A.

Read, learning to, 3. 402 A.

Reason, a faculty of the soul, 6. 511 D (cp. 7. 533 E); reason and
appetite, 9. 571 (cp. 4. 439-442, _and_ Tim. 69 E foll.); reason should be
the guide of pleasure, 9. 585-587.

Reflections, 6. 510 A.

Relations, slights inflicted by, in old age, 1. 329.

Relative and correlative, qualifications of, 4. 437 foll. [_cp._ Gorg.
476]; how corrected, 7. 524.

Relativity of things and individuals, 5. 479; fallacies caused by, 9. 584,
585; 10. 602, 605 C.

Religion, matters of, left to the god at Delphi, 4. 427 A (cp. 5. 461 E,
469 A; 7. 540 B).

Residues, method of, 4. 427 E.

Rest and motion, 4. 436.

Retail traders, necessary in the state, 2. 371 [_cp._ Laws 11. 918].

Reverence in the young, 5. 465 A {369} [_cp._ Laws 5, 729; 9. 879;
11. 917 A].

Rhetoric, professors of, 2. 365 D.

Rhythm, 3. 400; goes with the subject, _ib._ 398 D, 400 B; its persuasive
influence, _ib._ 401 E; 10. 601 B.

Riches. _See_ Wealth.

Riddle, the, of the eunuch and the bat, 5. 479 C.

Ridicule, only to be directed against folly and vice, 5. 452 E; danger of
unrestrained ridicule, 10. 606 C [_cp._ Laws 11. 935 A].

Riding, the children of the guardians to be taught, 5. 467; 7. 537 A
[_cp._ Laws 7. 794 D].

Right and might, 1. 338 foll.

Ruler, the, in the strict and in the popular sense, 1. 341 B; the true
ruler does not ask, but claim obedience, 6. 489 C [_cp._ Pol. 300, 301];
the ideal ruler, _ib._ 502:--Rulers of states; do they study their own
interests? 1. 338 D, 343, 346 (cp. 7. 520 C); are not infallible, 1. 339;
how they are paid, _ib._ 347; good men do not desire office, _ibid._; 7.
520 D; why they become rulers, 1. 347; present rulers dishonest, 6. 496 D:
--[in the best state] must be tested by pleasures and pains, 3. 413 (cp.
6. 503 A; 7. 539 E); have the sole privilege of lying, 2. 382; 3. 389 A,
414 C; 5. 459 D [_cp._ Laws 2. 663]; must be taken from the older
citizens, 3. 412 (cp. 6. 498 C); will be called friends and saviours, 5.
463; 6. 502 E; must be philosophers, 2. 376; 5. 473; 6. 484, 497 foll.,
501, 503 B; 7. 520, 521, 525 B, 540; 8. 543; the qualities which must be
found in them, 6. 503 A; 7. 535; must attain to the knowledge of the good,
6, 506; 7. 519; will accept office as a necessity, 7. 520 E, 540 A; will
be selected at twenty, and again at thirty, from the guardians, _ib._ 537;
must learn arithmetic, _ib._ 522-526; geometry, _ib._ 526, 527; astronomy,
_ib._ 527-530; harmony, _ib._ 531; at thirty must be initiated into
philosophy, _ib._ 537-539; at thirty-five must enter on active life, _ib._
539 E; after fifty may return to philosophy, _ib._ 540; when they die,
will be buried by the state and paid divine honours, 3. 414 A; 5. 465 E,
469 A; 7. 540 B. Cp. Guardians.


S.


Sacrifices, private, 1. 328 B, 331 D;--in atonement, 2. 364;--human, in
Arcadia, 8. 565 D.

Sailors, necessary in the state, 2. 371 B.

Sarpedon, 3. 388 C.

Sauces, not mentioned in Homer, 3. 404 D.

Scamander, beleaguered by Achilles, 3. 391 B.

Scepticism, danger of, 7. 538, 539.

Science ([Greek: e)pistê/mê]), a division of the intellectual world, 7.
533 E (cp. 6. 511);--the sciences distinguished by their object, 4. 438
[_cp._ Charm. 171]; not to be studied with a view to utility only, 7.
527 A, 529, 530; their unity, _ib._ 531; use hypotheses, _ib._ 533;
correlation of, _ib._ 537.

Sculpture, must only express the image of the good, 3. 401 B; painting of,
4. 420 D [_cp._ Laws 2. 668 E].

Scylla, 9. 588 C.

Scythian, Anacharsis the, 10. 600 A;--Scythians, the, characterized by
spirit or passion, 4. 435 E.

Self-indulgence in men and states, 4. 425 E, 426;--self-interest the
natural guide of men, 2. 359 B;--self-made men bad company, 1. 330 C;
--self-mastery, 4. 430, 431. {370}

Sense, objects of, twofold, 7. 523; knowledge given by, imperfect,
_ibid._; 10. 602; sense and intellect, 7. 524:--Senses, the, classed among
faculties, 5. 477 C.

Seriphian, story of Themistocles and the, 1. 329 E.

Servants, old family, 8. 549 E.

Sex in the world below, 10. 618 B;--sexes to follow the same training, 5.
451, 466 [_cp._ Laws 7. 805]; equality of, advantageous, _ib._ 456, 457;
relation between, _ib._ 458 foll. [_cp._ Laws 8. 835 E]; freedom of
intercourse between, in a democracy, 8. 563 B. Cp. Women.

Sexual desires, 5. 458 E [_cp._ Laws 6. 783 A; 8. 835 E].

Shadows, 6. 510 A;--knowledge of shadows ([Greek: ei)kasi/a]), one of the
faculties of the soul, 6. 511 E; 7. 533 E.

Shepherd, the analogy of, with the ruler, 1. 343, 345 [_cp._ Pol. 275].

Shopkeepers, necessary in the state, 2. 371 [_cp._ Laws 11. 918].

Short sight, 2. 368 D.

Sicily, 'can tell of Charondas,' 10. 599 E;--Sicilian cookery, 3. 404 D.

Sight, placed in the class of faculties, 5. 477 C; requires in addition to
vision and colour, a third element, light, 6. 507; the most wonderful of
the senses, _ibid._; compared to mind, _ib._ 508; 7. 532 A; illusions of,
7. 523; 10. 602, 603 D:--the world of sight, 7. 517.

Sign, the, of Socrates, 6. 496 C.

Silver, mingled by the God in the auxiliaries, 3. 415 A (cp. 416 E;
8. 547 A);--[and gold] not allowed to the guardians, 3. 416 E; 4. 419,
422 D; 5. 464 D (cp. 8. 543).

Simonides, his definition of justice discussed, 1. 331 D--335 E; a sage,
_ib._ 335 E.

Simplicity, the first principle of education, 3. 397 foll., 400 E, 404;
the two kinds of, _ib._ 400 E; of the good man, _ib._ 409 A; in diet,
8. 559 C (cp. 3. 404 D).

Sin, punishment of, 2. 363; 10. 614 foll. Cp. Hades, World below.

Sirens, harmony of the, 10. 617 B.

Skilled person, the, cannot err (Thrasymachus), 1. 340 D.

Slavery, more to be feared than death, 3. 387 A; of Hellenes condemned,
5. 469 B.

Slaves, the uneducated man harsh towards, 8. 549 A; enjoy great freedom in
a democracy, _ib._ 563 B; always inclined to rise against their masters,
9. 578 [_cp._ Laws 6. 776, 777].

Smallness and greatness, 4. 438 B; 5. 479 B; 7. 523, 524; 9. 575 C;
10. 602 D, 605 C.

Smell, pleasures of, 9. 584 B.

Snake-charming, 1. 358 B.

Socrates, goes down to the Peiraeus to see the feast of Bendis, 1. 327;
detained by Polemarchus and Glaucon, _ibid._; converses with Cephalus,
_ib._ 328-332; trembles before Thrasymachus, _ib._ 336 D; his irony, _ib._
337 A; his poverty, _ib._ D; a sharper in argument, _ib._ 340 D; ignorant
of what justice is, _ib._ 354 C; his powers of fascination, 2. 358 A;
requested by Glaucon and Adeimantus to praise justice _per se_, _ib._
367 B; cannot refuse to help justice, _ib._ 368 C; 4. 427 D; his oath 'by
the dog,' 3. 399 E; 8. 567 E; 9. 592 A; hoped to have evaded discussing the
subject of women and children, 5. 449, 472, 473 (cp. 6. 502 E); his love
of truth, 5. 451 A; 6. 504; his power in argument, 6. 487 B; not
unaccustomed to speak in parables, _ib._ E; his sign, _ib._ 496 C; his
earnestness in behalf of philosophy, 7. 536 B; his reverence for Homer,
10. 595 C, 607 (cp. 3. 391 A). {371}

Soldiers, must form a separate class, 2. 374; the diet suited for, 3. 404 D
(cp. Guardians);--women to be soldiers, 5. 452, 466, 471 E;--punishment
of soldiers for cowardice, _ib._ 468 A. Cp. Warrior.

Solon, famous at Athens, 10. 599 E;--quoted, 7. 536 D.

Son, the supposititious, parable of, 7. 537 E.

Song, parts of, 3. 398 D.

Sophists, the, their view of justice, 1. 338 foll.; verbal quibbles of,
_ib._ 340; the public the great Sophist, 6. 492; the Sophists compared to
feeders of a beast, _ib._ 493.

Sophocles, a remark of, quoted, 1. 329 B.

Sorrow, not to be indulged, 3. 387; 10. 603-606; has a relaxing effect on
the soul, 4. 430 A; 10. 606.

Soul, the, has ends and excellences, 1. 353 D; beauty in the soul, 3. 401;
the fair soul in the fair body, _ib._ 402 D; sympathy of soul and body, 5.
462 D, 464 B; conversion of the soul from darkness to light, 7. 518, 521,
525 [_cp._ Laws 12. 957 E]; requires the aid of calculation and
intelligence in order to interpret the intimations of sense, _ib._ 523,
524; 10. 602; has more truth and essence than the body, 9. 585 D;--better
and worse principles in the soul, 4. 431; the soul divided into reason,
spirit, appetite, _ib._ 435-442; 6. 504 A; 8. 550 A; 9. 571, 580 E, 581
[_cp._ Tim. 69 E-72, 89 E; Laws 9. 863]; faculties of the soul, 6. 511 E;
7. 533 E; oppositions in the soul, 10. 603 D [_cp._ Soph. 228 A; Laws 10.
896 D];--the lame soul, 3. 401; 7. 535 [_cp._ Tim. 44; Soph. 228];--the
soul marred by meanness, 6. 495 E [_cp._ Gorg. 524 E];--immortality of the
soul, 10. 608 foll., (cp. 6. 498 C);--number of souls does not increase,
10. 611 A;--the soul after death, _ib._ 614 foll.;--transmigration of
souls, _ib._ 617 [_cp._ Phaedr. 249; Tim. 90 E foll.];--the soul impure
and disfigured while in the body, _ib._ 611 [_cp._ Phaedo 81];--compared
to a many-headed monster, 9. 588; to the images of the sea-god Glaucus,
10. 611;--like the eye, 6. 508; 7. 518;--harmony of the soul, produced by
temperance, 4. 430, 442, 443 (cp. 9. 591 D, _and_ Laws 2. 653 B);--eye of
the soul, 7. 518 D, 527 E, 533 D, 540 A;--five forms of the state and
soul, 4. 445; 5. 449; 9. 577.

Soul. [_The psychology of the Republic, while agreeing generally with that
of the other Dialogues, is in some respects a modification or developement
of their conclusions.--The division of the soul into three elements,
reason, spirit, appetite, here first assumes a precise form, and
henceforward has a permanent place in the language of philosophy_ (_cp._
Introd. p. lxvii). _On this division the distinction between forms of
government is based_ (_see s. v._ Government). _Virtue, again, is the
harmony or accord of the different elements, when the dictates of reason
are enforced by passion against the appetites, while vice is the anarchy
or discord of the soul when passion and appetite join in rebellion against
reason_ (_cp._ 4. 444; 10. 609 foll.; Soph. 228; Pol. 296 D; Laws 10. 906
C].--_Regarded from the intellectual side the soul is analysed into four
faculties, reason, understanding, faith, knowledge of shadows. These
severally correspond to the four divisions of knowledge_ (6. 511 E), _two
for intellect and two for opinion; and thus arises the Platonic
'proportion,'_--_being_ : _becoming_ :: _intellect_ : _opinion, and
science_ : _belief_ {372} :: _understanding_ : _knowledge of shadows.
These divisions are partly real, partly formed by a logical process,
which, as in so many distinctions of ancient philosophers, has outrun
fact, and are further illustrated and explained by the allegory of the
cave in Book VII_ (_see_ Introduction, p. xciv).--_The pre-existence and
the immortality of the soul are assumed. The doctrine of [Greek:
a)na/mnêsis] or 'remembrance of a previous birth' is not so much dwelt
upon as in the Meno, Phaedo, or Phaedrus, neither is it made a proof of
immortality_ (Meno 86; Phaedo 73). _It is apparently alluded to in the
story of Er, where we are told that 'the pilgrims drank the waters of
Unmindfulness; the foolish took too deep a draught, but the wise were more
moderate'_ (10. 621 A). _In the Xth Book Glaucon is supposed to receive
with amazement Socrates' confident assertion of immortality, although a
previous allusion to another state of existence has passed unheeded_ (6.
498 D); _and in earlier parts of the discussion_ (_e.g._ 2. 362; 3. 386),
_the censure which is passed on the common representations of Hades
implies in itself some belief in a future life_ [_cp._ Introduction to
Phaedo, Vol. I]. _The argument for the immortality of the soul is not
drawn out at great length or with the emphasis of the Phaedo. It is
chiefly of a verbal character:--All things which perish are destroyed by
some inherent evil; but the soul is not destroyed by sin, which is the
evil proper to her, and must therefore be immortal_ (_cp._ Introd. p.
clxvi).--_The condition of the soul after death is represented by Plato in
his favourite form of a myth_ [_cp._ Meno 81; Phaedo 88; Gorg. 522]. _The
Pamphylian warrior Er, who is supposed to have died in battle, revives
when placed on the funeral pyre and relates his experiences in the other
world. He tells how the just are rewarded and the wicked punished, and is
privileged to describe the spectacle which he had witnessed of the choice
of a new life by the pilgrim souls. The reward of release from bodily
existence is not held out to the philosopher_ (Phaedo 114 C), _but his
wisdom, which has a deeper root than habit_ (10. 619), _preserves him from
overhaste in his choice and ensures him a happy destiny.--The
transmigration of souls is represented in the myth much as in the Phaedrus
and Timaeus. Plato in all likelihood derived the doctrine from an Oriental
source, but through Pythagorean channels. It probably had a real hold on
his mind, as it agreed, or could be made to agree, with the conviction,
which he elsewhere expresses, of the remedial nature of punishment_ [_cp._
Protag. 323; Gorg. 523-525].

Sounds in music, 7. 531 A.

Sparta. _See_ Lacedaemon.

Spectator, the, unconsciously influenced by what he sees and hears, 10.
605, 606 [_cp._ Laws 2. 656 A, 659 C];--the philosopher the spectator of
all time and all existence, 6. 486 A [_cp._ Theaet. 173 E].

Spendthrifts, in Greek states, 8. 564.

Spercheius, the river-god, 3. 391 B.

Spirit, must be combined with gentleness in the guardians, 2. 375; 3. 410;
6. 503 [_cp._ Laws 5. 731 B]; characteristic of northern nations, 4. 435
E; found in quite young children, _ib._ 441 A [_cp._ Laws; 12. {373}
963]:--the spirited (or passionate) element in the soul, _ib._ 440 foll.;
6. 504 A; 8. 550 A; 9. 572 A, 580 E; must be subject to the rational part,
4. 441 E [_cp._ Tim. 30 C, 70, 89 D]; predominant in the timocratic state
and man, 8. 548, 550 B; characterised by ambition, 9. 581 B; its
pleasures, _ib._ 586 D; the favourite object of the poet's imitation, 10.
604, 605.

Stars, motion of the, 7. 529, 530; 10. 616 E.

State, relation of, to the individual, 2. 368; 4. 434, 441; 5. 462; 8.
544; 9. 577 B [_cp._ Laws 3. 689; 5. 739; 9. 875, 877 C; 11. 923]; origin
of, 2. 369 foll. [_cp._ Laws 3. 678 foll.]; should be in unity, 4. 422; 5.
463 [_cp._ Laws 5. 739]; place of the virtues in, 4. 428 foll.; virtue of
state and individual, _ib._ 441; 6. 498 E; family life in, 5. 449 [_cp._
Laws 5. 740]:--the luxurious state, 2. 372 D foll.:--[the best state];
classes must be kept distinct, _ib._ 374; 3. 379 E, 415 A; 4. 421, 433 A,
434, 441 E, 443; 5. 453 (cp. 8. 552 A, _and_ Laws 8. 846 E); the rulers
must be philosophers, 2. 376; 5. 473; 6. 484, 497 foll., 501, 503 B; 7.
520, 521, 525 B, 540; 8. 543 (cp. Rulers); the government must have the
monopoly of lying, 2. 382; 3. 389 A, 414 C; 5. 459 D [_cp._ Laws 2. 663 E];
the poets to be banished, 3. 398 A; 8. 568 B; 10. 595 foll., 605 A,
607 A [_cp._ Laws 7. 817]; the older must bear rule, the younger obey,
3. 412 [_cp._ Laws 3. 690 A; 4. 714 E]; women, children, and goods to be
common, _ib._ 416; 5. 450 E, 457 foll., 462, 464; 8. 543 A [_cp._ Laws 5.
739; 7. 807 B]; must be happy as a whole, 4. 420 D; 5. 466 A; 7. 519 E;
will easily master other states in war, 4. 422; must be of a size which is
not inconsistent with unity, _ib._ 423 [_cp._ Laws 5. 737]; composed of
three classes, traders, auxiliaries, counsellors, _ib._ 441 A; may be
either a monarchy or an aristocracy, _ib._ 445 C (cp. 9. 576 D); will form
one family, 5. 463 [_cp._ Pol. 259]; will be free from quarrels and
law-suits, 2. 378; 5. 464, 465;--is it possible? 5. 471, 473; 6. 499; 7.
540 [_cp._ 7. 520 _and_ Laws 4. 711 E; 5. 739]; framed after the heavenly
pattern, 6. 500 E; 7. 540 A; 9. 592; how to be commenced, 6. 501; 7. 540;
manner of its decline, 8. 546 [_cp._ Crit. 120];--the best state that in
which the rulers least desire office, 7. 520, 521:--the four imperfect
forms of states, 4. 445 B; 8. 544 [_cp._ Pol. 291 foll., 391 foll.];
succession of states, 8. 545 foll. (cp. Government, forms of):--existing
states not one but many, 4. 423 A; nearly all corrupt, 6. 496; 7. 519,
520; 9. 592.

State. [_The polity of which Plato 'sketches the outline' in the Republic
may be analysed into two principal elements,_ I, _an Hellenic state of the
older or Spartan type, with some traits borrowed from Athens,_ II, _an
ideal city in which the citizens have all things in common, and the
government is carried on by a class of philosopher rulers who are selected
by merit. These two elements are not perfectly combined; and, as Aristotle
complains_ (Pol. ii. 5, § 18), _very much is left ill-defined and
uncertain._--I. _Like Hellenic cities in general, the number of the
citizens is not to be great. The size of the state is limited by the
requirement that 'it shall not be larger or smaller than is consistent
with unity.'_ [_The 'convenient number' 5040, which is_ {374} _suggested
in the Laws_ (v. 737), _is regarded by Aristotle_ (Pol. ii. 6, § 6) _as an
'enormous multitude.'_] _Again, the individual is subordinate to the
state. When Adeimantus complains of the hard life which the citizens will
lead, 'like mercenaries in a garrison'_ (4. 419), _he is answered by
Socrates that if the happiness of the whole is secured, the happiness of
the parts will inevitably follow. Once more, war is supposed to be the
normal condition of the state, and military service is imposed upon all.
The profession of arms is the only one in which the citizen may properly
engage. Trade is regarded as dishonourable:--'those who are good for
nothing else sit in the Agora buying and selling'_ (2. 371 D); _the
warrior can spare no time for such an employment_ (_ib._ 374 C). [_In the
Laws Plato's ideas enlarge; he thinks that peace is to be preferred to
war_ (1. 628); _and he speculates on the possibility of redeeming trade
from reproach by compelling some of the best citizens to open a shop or
keep a tavern_ (11. 918).]--_In these respects, as well as in the
introduction of common meals, Plato was probably influenced by the
traditional ideal of Sparta_ [_cp._ Introd. p. clxx]. _The Athenian
element appears in the intellectual training of the citizens, and
generally in the atmosphere of grace and refinement which they are to
breathe_ (_see s. v._ Art). _The restless energy of the Athenian character
is perhaps reflected in the discipline imposed upon the ruling class_
(7. 540), _who when they have reached fifty are dispensed from continuous
public service, but must then devote themselves to abstract study, and
also be willing to take their turn when necessary at the helm of state_
[_cp._ Laws 7. 807; Thucyd. i. 70; ii. 40].--II. _The most peculiar
features of Plato's state are_ (1) _the community of property,_ (2) _the
position of women,_ (3) _the government of philosophers._ (1) _The first_
(_see s. v._), _though suggested in some measure by the example of Sparta
or Crete_ [_cp._ Arist. Pol. ii. 5, § 6], _is not known to have been
actually practised anywhere in Hellas, unless possibly among such a body
as the Pythagorean brotherhood._ (2) _Nothing in all the Republic was
probably stranger to his contemporaries than the place which Plato assigns
to women in the state. The community of wives and children, though
carefully guarded by him from the charge of licentiousness_ (5. 458 E),
_would appear worse in Athenian eyes than the traditional 'licence' of the
Spartan women_ [Arist. Pol. ii. 9, § 5), _which, so far as it really
existed, no doubt arose out of an excessive regard to physical
considerations in marriage. Again, the equal share in education, in war,
and in administration which the women are supposed to enjoy in Plato's
state, was, if not so revolting, quite as contrary to common Hellenic
sentiment_ [_cp._ Thucyd. ii. 45]. _The Spartan women exercised a great
influence on public affairs, but this was mainly indirect_ [_cp._ Laws 7.
806; Arist. Pol. ii. 9, § 8]; _they did not hold office or learn the use
of arms. At Athens, as is well known, the women, of the upper classes at
least, lived in an almost Oriental seclusion, and were wholly absorbed in
household duties_ (Laws 7. 805 E). (3) _Finally, the government of
philosophers had no analogy in the Hellenic world of_ {375} _Plato's time.
He may have taken the suggestion from the stories of the Pythagorean rule
in Magna Graecia. But it is also possible that these accounts of the
brotherhood of Pythagoras, some of which have reached us on very doubtful
authority, may be themselves to a considerable extent coloured and
distorted by features adapted from the Republic. Whether this is the case
or not, we can hardly doubt that Plato was chiefly indebted to his own
imagination for his kingdom of philosophers, or that it remained to
himself an ideal, rather than a state which would ever 'play her part in
actual life'_ (Tim. 19, 20). _It is at least significant that he never
finished the Critias, as though he were unable to embody, even in a
mythical form, the 'city of which the pattern is laid up in heaven.'_]

Statesmen in their own imagination, 4. 426.

Statues, polished for a decision, 2. 361 D; painted, 4. 420 D.

Steadiness of character, apt to be accompanied by stupidity, 6. 503 [_cp._
Theaet. 144 B].

Stesichorus, says that Helen was never at Troy, 9. 586 C.

Stories, improper, not to be told to children, 2. 377; 3. 391. Cp.
Children, Education.

Strength, rule of, 1. 338.

Style of poetry, 3. 392;--styles, various, _ib._ 397.

Styx, 3. 387 B.

Suits, will be unknown in the best state, 5. 464 E.

Sumptuary laws, 4. 423, 425.

Sun, the, compared with the idea of good, 6. 508; not sight, but the
author of sight, _ib._ 509;--'the sun of Heracleitus,' _ib._ 498 A.

Supposititious son, parable of the, 7. 538.

Sympathy, of soul and body, 5. 462 D, 464 B; aroused by poetry, 10. 605 B.

Syracusan dinners, 3. 404 D.


T.


Tactics, use of arithmetic in, 7. 522 E, 525 B.

Tartarus (= hell), 10. 616 A.

Taste, good, importance of, 3. 401, 402.

Taxes, heavy, imposed by the tyrant, 8. 567 A, 568 E.

Teiresias, alone has understanding among the dead, 3. 386 E.

Telamon, 10. 620 B.

Temperance ([Greek: sôphrosu/nê]), in the state, 3. 389; 4. 430 foll.
[_cp._ Laws 3. 696]; temperance and love, 3. 403 A; fostered in the soul
by the simple kind of music, _ib._ 404 E, 410 A; a harmony of the soul,
4. 430, 441 E, 442 D, 443 (cp. 9. 591 D, _and_ Laws 2. 653 B); one of the
philosopher's virtues, 6. 485 E, 490 E, 491 B, 494 B [_cp._ Phaedo 68].

Temple-robbing, 9. 574 D, 575 B.

Territory, devastation of Hellenic, not to be allowed, 5. 470;--unlimited,
not required by the good state, 4. 423 [_cp._ Laws 5. 737].

Thales, inventions of, 10. 600 A.

Thamyras, soul of, chooses the life of a nightingale, 10. 620 A.

Theages, the bridle of, 6. 496 B.

Themis, did not instigate the strife with the gods, 2. 379 E.

Themistocles, answer of, to the Seriphian, 1. 330 A.

Theology of Plato, 2. 379 foll. Cp. God.

Thersites, puts on the form of a monkey, 10. 620 C.

Theseus, the tale of, and Peirithous not permitted, 3. 391 C.

Thetis, not to be slandered, 2. 381 D; {376} her accusation of Apollo,
_ib._ 383 A.

Thirst, 4. 437 E, 439; an inanition ([Greek: ke/nôsis]) of the body, 9.
585 A.

Thracians, procession of, in honour of Bendis, 1. 327 A; characterised by
spirit or passion, 4. 435 E.

Thrasymachus, the Chalcedonian, a person in the dialogue, 1. 328 B;
described, _ib._ 336 B; will be paid, _ib._ 337 D; defines justice, _ib._
338 C foll.; his rudeness, _ib._ 343 A; his views of government, _ibid._
(cp. 9. 590 D); his encomium on injustice, 1. 343 A; his manner of speech,
_ib._ 345 B; his paradox about justice and injustice, _ib._ 348 B foll.;
he blushes, _ib._ 350 D; is pacified, and retires from the argument, _ib._
354 (cp. 6. 498 C); would have Socrates discuss the subject of women and
children, 5. 450.

Timocracy, 8. 545 foll.; origin of, ib. 547:--the timocratical man,
described, 8. 549; his origin, _ibid._

Tinker, the prosperous, 6. 495, 496.

Tops, 4. 436.

Torch race, an equestrian, 1. 328 A.

Touch, 7. 523 E.

Traders, necessary in the state, 2. 371.

Traditions of ancient times, their truth not certainly known to us, 2. 382
C (cp. 3. 414 C, _and_ Tim. 40 D; Crit. 107; Pol. 271 A; Laws 4. 713 E;
6. 782 D).

Tragedy and comedy in the state, 3. 394 [_cp._ Laws 7. 817].

Tragic poets, the, eulogizers of tyranny, 8. 568 A; imitators, 10. 597,
598.

Training, dangers of, 3. 404 A; severity of, 6. 504 A (cp. 7. 535 B).

Transfer of children from one class to another, 3. 415; 4. 423 D.

Transmigration of souls, 10. 617. See Soul.

Trochaic rhythms, 3. 400 B.

Troy, 3. 393 E; Helen never at, 9. 586 C:--Trojan War, 2. 380 A: treatment
of the wounded in, 3. 405 E, 408 A; the army numbered by Palamedes,
7. 522 D.

Truth, is not lost by men of their own will, 3. 413 A; the aim of the
philosopher, 6. 484, 485, 486 E, 490, 500 C, 501 D; 7. 521, 537 D; 9. 581,
582 C (cp. _supra_ 5. 475 E; 7. 520, 525; _and_ Phaedo 82; Phaedr. 249;
Theaet. 173 E; Soph. 249 D, 254 A); akin to wisdom, 6. 485 D; to
proportion, _ib._ 486 E; no partial measure of, sufficient, _ib._ 504;
love of, essential in this world and the next, 10. 618;--truth and
essence, 9. 585 D.

Tyranny, 1. 338 D; = injustice on the grand scale, _ib._ 344 [_cp._ Gorg.
469]; the wretchedest form of government, 8. 544 C; 9. 576 [_cp._ Pol.
302 E]; origin of, 8. 562, 564:--the tyrannical man, 9. 571 foll.; life
of, _ib._ 573; his treatment of his parents, _ib._ 574; most miserable,
_ib._ 576, 578; has the soul of a slave, _ib._ 577.

Tyrant, the, origin of, 8. 565; happiness of, _ib._ 566 foll.; 9. 576
foll. [_cp._ Laws 2. 661 B]; his rise to power, 8. 566; his taxes, _ib._
567 A, 568 E; his army, _ib._ 567 A, 569; his purgation of the city, _ib._
567 B; misery of, 9. 579; has no real pleasure, _ib._ 587; how far distant
from pleasure, _ibid._:--Tyrants and poets, 8. 568; have no friends,
_ibid._; 9. 576 [_cp._ Gorg. 510 C]; punishment of, in the world below,
10. 615 [_cp._ Gorg. 525].


U.


Understanding, a faculty of the soul, 6. 511 D; = science, 7. 533 E.

Union impossible among the bad, 1. 352 A [_cp._ Lysis 214]. {377}

Unity of the state, 4. 422, 423; 5. 462, 463 [_cp._ Laws 5. 739];
--absolute unity, 7. 524 E, 525 E; unity and plurality, _ibid._

Unjust man, the, happy (Thrasymachus), 1. 343, 344 [_cp._ Gorg. 470
foll.]; his unhappiness finally proved, 9. 580; 10. 613:--injustice =
private profit, 1. 344 (_see_ Injustice).

Uranus, immoral stories about, 2. 377 E.

User, the, a better judge than the maker, 10. 601 C [_cp._ Crat. 390].

Usury, sometimes not protected by law, 8. 556 A [_cp._ Laws 5. 742 C].


V.


Valetudinarianism, 3. 406; 4. 426 A.

Valour, prizes of, 5. 468.

Vice, the disease of the soul, 4. 444; 10. 609 foll. [_cp._ Soph. 228;
Pol. 296 D; Laws 10. 906 C]; is many, 4. 445; the proper object of
ridicule, 5. 452 E;--fine names for the vices, 8. 560 E. Cp. Injustice.

Virtue and justice, 1. 350 [_cp._ Meno 73 E, 79]; thought by mankind to be
toilsome, 2. 364 A [_cp._ Laws 807 D]; virtue and harmony, 3. 401 A (_cp._
7. 522 A); virtue and pleasure, 3. 402 E (cp. Pleasure); not promoted by
excessive care of the body, _ib._ 407 (_cp._ 9. 591 D); makes men wise, 3.
409 E; divided into parts, 4. 428 foll., 433; in the individual and the
state, _ib._ 435 foll., 441 (cp. Justice); the health of the soul, _ib._
444 (cp. 10. 609 foll., _and_ Soph. 228; Pol. 296 D); is one, _ib._ 445;
may be a matter of habit, 7. 518 E; 10. 619 D; impeded by wealth, 8. 550 E
[_cp._ Laws 5. 728 A, 742; 8. 831, 836 A];--virtues of the philosopher, 6.
485 foll., 490 D, 491 B, 494 B (cp. Philosopher); place of the several
virtues in the state, 4. 427 foll.

Visible world, divisions of, 6. 510 foll.; 7. 517; compared to the
intellectual, 6. 508, 509; 7. 532 A.

Vision, 5. 477; 6. 508; 7. 517. _See_ Sight.


W.


War, causes of, 2. 373; 4. 422 foll.; 8. 547 A; an art, 2. 374 A (cp.
4. 422, _and_ Laws 11. 921 E); men, women, and children to go to, 5. 452
foll., 467, 471 E; 7. 537 A; regulations concerning, 5. 467-471; a matter
of chance, _ib._ 467 E [_cp._ Laws 1. 638 A]; distinction between internal
and external, _ib._ 470 A [_cp._ Laws 1. 628, 629]; the guilt of, always
confined to a few persons, _ib._ 471 B; love of, especially characteristic
of timocracy, 8. 547 E; cannot be easily waged by an oligarchy, _ib._ 551
E; the rich and the poor in war, _ib._ 556 C; a favourite resource of the
tyrant, _ib._ 567 A.

Warrior, the brave, rewards of, 5. 468; his burial, _ib._ E; the warrior
must know how to count, 7. 522 E, 525; must be a geometrician, _ib._ 526.

Waves, the three, 5. 457 C, 472 A, 473 C.

Weak, the, by nature subject to the strong, 1. 338 [_cp._ Gorg. 489; Laws
3. 690 B]; not capable of much, either for good or evil, 6. 491 E, 495 B.

Wealth, the advantage of, in old age, 1. 329, 330; the greatest blessing
of, _ib._ 330, 331; the destruction of the arts, 4. 421; influence of, on
the state, _ib._ 422 A [_cp._ Laws 4. 705; 5. 729 A]; the 'sinews of war,'
_ibid._; all-powerful in oligarchies and timocracies, 8. 548 A, 551 B, 553,
562 A; an impediment to virtue, {378} _ib._ 550 E [_cp._ Laws 5. 728 A;
742 E; 8. 831, 836 A]; should only be acquired to a moderate amount, 9.
591 E [_cp._ Laws 7. 801 B]:--the blind god of wealth (Pluto), 8. 554 B:
--Wealthy, the, everywhere hostile to the poor, 4. 423 A; 8. 551 E
[_cp._ Laws 5. 736 A]; flattered by them, 5. 465 C; the wealthy and the
wise, 6. 489 B; plundered by the multitude in democracies, 8. 564, 565.

Weaving, the art of, 3. 401 A; 5. 455 D.

Weep, the guardians not to, 3. 387 C (cp. 10. 603 E).

Weighing, art of, corrects the illusions of sight, 10. 602 D.

Whole, the, in regard to the happiness of the state, 4. 420 D; 5. 466 A;
7. 519 E; in love, 5. 474 C, 475 B; 6. 485 B.

Whorl, the great, 10. 616.

Wicked, the, punishment of, in the world below, 2. 363; 10. 614; thought
by men to be happy, 1. 354; 2. 364 A; 3. 392 B (cp. 8. 545 A, _and_ Gorg.
470 foll.; Laws 2. 66 1; 10. 899 E, 905 A).

Wine, lovers of, 5. 475 A.

Wisdom ([Greek: sophi/a, phro/nêsis]) and injustice, 1. 349, 350; in the
state, 4. 428; akin to truth, 6. 485 D; the power of, 7. 518, 519; the
only virtue which is innate in us, _ib._ 518 E.

Wise man, the, = the good, 1. 350 [_cp._ 1 Alcib. 124, 125]; definition
of, 4. 442 C; alone has true pleasure, 9. 583 B; life of, _ib._ 591;--'the
wise to go to the doors of the rich,' 6. 489 B;--wise men said to be the
friends of the tyrant, 8. 568.

Wives to be common in the state, 5. 457 foll.; 8. 543.

Wolves, men changed into, 8. 565 D; 'wolf and flock' (proverb), 3. 415 D.

Women, employments of, 5. 455; differences of taste in, _ib._ 456; fond of
complaining, 8. 549 D; supposed to differ in nature from men, 5. 453;
inferior to men, _ib._ 455 [_cp._ Tim. 42; Laws 6. 781]; ought to be
trained like men, _ib._ 451, 466 [_cp._ Laws 7. 805; 8. 829 E]; in the
gymnasia, _ib._ 452, 457 [_cp._ Laws 7. 813, 814; 8. 833]; in war, _ib._
453 foll., 466 E, 471 E [_cp._ Laws 6. 785; 7. 806, 814 A]; to be
guardians, _ib._ 456, 458, 468; 7. 540 C; (and children) to be common, 5.
450 E, 457 foll., 462, 464; 8. 543 [_cp._ Laws 5. 739]. _See supra s. v._
State, p. 374.

World, the, cannot be a philosopher, 6. 494 A.

World below, the, seems very near to the aged, 1. 330 E; not to be
reviled, 3. 386 foll. [_cp._ Crat. 403; Laws 5. 727 E; 8. 828 D]; pleasure
of discourse in, 6. 498 D [_cp._ Apol. 41]; punishment of the wicked in,
2. 363; 10. 614 foll.; sex in, 10. 618 B;--[heroes] who have ascended from
the world below to the gods, 7. 521 C.


X.


Xerxes, perhaps author of the maxim that justice = paying one's debts,
1. 336 A.


Y.


Young, the, how affected by the common praises of injustice, 2. 365;
cannot understand allegory, _ib._ 378 E; must be subject in the state,
3. 412 B [_cp._ Laws 3. 690 A; 4. 714 E]; must submit to their elders,
5. 465 A [_cp._ Laws 4. 721 D; 9. 879 C; 11. 917 A]. Cp. Children,
Education.

Youth, the corruption of, not to be attributed to the Sophists, but to
{379} public opinion, 6. 492 A;--youthful enthusiasm for metaphysics, 7.
539 B [_cp._ Phil. 15 E];--youthful scepticism, not of long continuance,
_ib._ D [_cp._ Soph. 234 E; Laws 10. 888 B].


Z.


Zeus, his treatment of his father, 2. 377 E; throws Hephaestus from
heaven, _ib._ 378 D;--Achilles descended from, 3. 391 C;--did not cause
the violation of the treaty in the Trojan War, or the strife of the gods,
2. 379 E; or send the lying dream to Agamemnon, _ib._ 383 A; or lust for
Herè, 3. 390 B; ought not to have been described by Homer as lamenting for
Achilles and Sarpedon, _ib._ 388 C;--Lycaean Zeus, 8. 565 D;--Olympian
Zeus, 9. 583 B.




THE END.


Oxford

PRINTED AT THE CLARENDON PRESS

BY HORACE HART

PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY




       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Note


The reference text was kindly provided by the Internet Archive,
https://archive.org/download/a604578400platuoft/a604578400platuoft.pdf.


Corrections and Emendations

In the Introduction page xxv, a final quotation mark has been restored that
dropped out after the first edition. On page l, Shakespere has been changed
to Shakespeare.

In section 414 C, the third edition closes a parenthesis with a comma, thus
,); the comma has been deleted as in earlier editions.

In the Index, s.v. Aglaion, the name has been made consistent with the
text; it reads Aglaon in the 3rd edition. S.v. Athené, Acheans has been
changed to Achaeans to maintain consistency, s.v. Festival, Bendidaea
has been changed to Bendidea, and s.v. Luxury, Lycean has been changed to
Lycaean, for the same reason. Various other inconsistencies have been left
untouched (e.g. [Arist. Pol. ii. 9, § 5) in the Index in the article on
State; italicising of supra, etc.).

In the Index also, a reference, s.v. Intoxication, to Drinking fails to
refer; it should be to Drunkenness.


Conventions in this text

Sidenotes in the Introduction and material in the left margin of the
translated part of the book have been labelled [Sidenote: and placed above
the paragraph beside which they are placed.

Page numbers have been placed in the body of the text within {}.

Material in the right margin, the Stephanus numbering, has been placed in
the body of the text within ** - in the translated text the section
letters (A-E) have been taken from a two-volume edition published in 1908
and all Stephanus numbers in the translation have been given in full (so
565A instead of 565, and note that the space between number and letter has
been omitted). Page numbers and the Stephanus numbering have been given a
space on either side, even when this goes against Project Gutenberg
conventions.

Footnotes have been labelled [Footnote and have been placed below the
paragraph in which they occur. They are numbered consecutively within the
Introduction and each Book of the translation.

Greek has been transliterated in full: ) is used for smooth breathing; (
for hard; + for diaeresis; / for acute accent; \ for grave; = for
circumflex; | for iota subscript; ch is used for chi, ph for phi, ps for
psi, th for theta; ê for eta and ô for omega; u is used for upsilon in all
cases.
