I


NECESSITY AND LIBERTY OF THE VOLITIONAL ACT


The relations of the practical form with the other forms of the spirit
having been examined, it is now necessary to re-enter, so to speak, the
interior of the volitional activity, and enclose ourselves within it,
that we may study its mode of development, its rhythm, its dialectic.
We shall no longer ask, therefore, whether the practical activity
precede or follow knowledge, or exactly what knowledge it follows and
what it precedes, what the volition is in relation to events, what the
practical concept or judgment, and the like. But we shall ask what are
good and evil, the passions and the forces that dominate them, desires
and aspirations; and in the first place (this being the problem that
opens the series and gives the key for the solution of the others) what
are the _freedom and necessity_ of the volitional act.


[Sidenote: _The problem of freedom._]

This problem of freedom and necessity (that is to say, whether the will
be free or determined) has seemed to be and is, from a certain point of
view, most weighty and complicated, and we shall soon see why this is
so. But at this point, owing to the premises that we have already laid
down in our preceding treatises, and also in the part of the present
treatise that has already been developed, it will be convenient to
solve it with relative expedition.

[Sidenote: _Freedom of willing and freedom of action: criticism of such
distinction._]

First of all, we have been able to eliminate the distinction that is
wont to be made between freedom of willing and freedom of action,
with the duplicity of the problem thus entailed. Indeed we know that
volition and action coincide, and that it is impossible to conceive
either a volition which is not at the same time action, or an action
which is not at the same time volition, and that in consequence there
cannot be freedom of willing on the one hand and freedom of action
on the other. All the instances of the one that are brought forward
can be reduced to the other, provided that the word "freedom" be not
used in an improper and metaphorical manner. For example, a paralytic
(they say) wills to get up and run; his spirit is free, but his
action is restrained; he has freedom of willing, but not of action.
But in reality the paralytic does not seriously will to get up and
run; that is, he does not really will anything at all. Were he really
and seriously to will, that might happen to him which happened to a
paralytic gentleman in the Neapolitan revolt of 1547. This gentleman
had himself carried into the square on the arms of his servants, but he
was found, after the tumult, to the great astonishment of all, on the
top of the campanile of San Lorenzo, whither he had climbed with his
own legs; such had been his terror and such his will to be saved.[1]
As a rule, on the other hand, the paralytic does not will, because he
knows that he cannot; at the most, he _would wish_ or desire to find
himself in different conditions to those in which he finds himself, in
order that he may be able to will otherwise than he does now, which is
to remain quiet. This confirms the identity of volition and action,
and proves that the two supposed freedoms are one only. Thus, he who
is threatened and yields to the threat declares that he is deprived of
freedom of action, but that this is not exact is already affirmed in
the formula: _coacti tamen volunt._ Enforced actions not only do not
exist, but are not even conceivable. The demand for greater freedom of
action, such as new political liberties, is nothing but the demand for
certain _new conditions of fact_ for future volitions and actions. But
it is a question of more or less, since, as we know, no countenance of
imminent tyrant can extinguish the freedom of the soul; no ruler, be he
ever so strong and violent, can prevent a rebellion, or, when all else
fails, a fine death that affirms externally the freedom within. "The
will that wills not cannot be subdued."[2]

[Sidenote: _The volitional act: both free and necessary._]

The question that we have here to treat is, then, single, and concerns
only the will, which, as such, includes in itself action. In replying,
however, we cannot accept the dilemma, that the volitional act must
be free or determined, and cling to one of the two horns: we must on
the contrary deny the form of the question itself and say that the
volitional act is _at once free and determined._

Volition, in fact, as has been seen, does not arise in the void, but
in a definite situation, in unchangeable historical conditions, in
relation to an event, which, if it be, is necessary. The volition
corresponds to that situation and it is impossible to separate it: when
the situation changes, the volition changes; as the situation, so the
volition. This amounts to saying, that it is _necessitated_ or always
conditioned by a situation, and precisely by that situation in which it
arises.

But this also means that the volition is free. Because if the actual
situation be its condition, the volition is not the condition, but the
conditioned, for it does not remain fixed in the actual situation,
nor repeats and makes a duplicate of it, which would be superfluous
and therefore impossible in the effective development of the real,
which does not allow of superfluity. The volition produces something
different, that is, something new, something that did not exist
previously and that now comes into existence: it is initiative,
creation, and therefore act of _freedom._ Were this not so, volition
would not be volition, and reality would not change, would not become,
would not grow upon itself.

And since without necessity there cannot be liberty, because without
an actual situation there cannot be volition, so without liberty there
cannot be necessity, the actual situations are not formed, which are
always new and always necessary in respect to the new volitions. Actual
situations are events, and events are the result of the concourse of
individual volitions. The two terms cannot be separated, for if one
be removed, so is the other; but neither can they be looked upon as
identical or synonymous. They are the two moments of the volitional
act, distinct and united, which act is the _unity_ of both, and
therefore, as was said, is at once free and determined.

This consciousness of necessity and liberty inseparably united is found
in all men of action, in all political geniuses, who are never inert or
reckless: they feel themselves at once bound and unbound; they always
conform to facts, but always to surpass them. The fatuous, on the other
hand, oscillate between the passivity of the given situation and the
sterile attempt to overleap it, that is, to leap over their own shadow.
They are consequently now inert, now forward. They do not therefore fix
or conclude anything, they do not act; or, if they do, it is always
according to what of the actual situation they have understood, and
what of initiative they have displayed.

[Sidenote: _Comparison with the æsthetic activity._]

The best comparison is afforded on this occasion also by the æsthetic
activity. No poet creates his poem outside definite conditions of
space and time, and even when he appears to be and is proclaimed "a
soul of other times," he belongs to his own time. The historical
situation is given to him. The world of his perceptions is such, with
those men, those customs, those thoughts, those works of art. But
when the new poem has appeared, there is in the world of reality (in
the contemplation of reality) something that was not there before,
which, although connected with the previous situation, yet is not
identical with it, is indeed a new form, and therefore a new content,
and so the revelation of a truth previously unknown. So true is this,
that in its turn the new poem conditions a spiritual and practical
movement, becomes part of the situation given for future actions and
for future poems. He is a true poet who feels himself at once bound
to his predecessors and free, conservative and revolutionary, like
Homer, Dante, and Shakespeare, who receive into themselves centuries of
history, of thought and of poetry, and add to those centuries something
that is the present and will be the future: _chargés du passé, gros de
l'avenir._ The false poet, on the other hand, is now a blind follower
of tradition and imitator, now a charlatanesque innovator, and if in
the vacuity in which he labours he sometimes does produce a fragment of
poetry, this happens only when he is made to look into himself and to
have a vision, be it great or small, of a world that arises.--But the
comparison instituted is rather an analogy than a comparison, for that
which happens in the practical sphere happens in that of poetry and in
all the other spheres of the spiritual activity. The Spirit is freedom,
and in order to be so, not in the abstract, but in the concrete, it
must also be necessity.

[Sidenote: _Critique of determinism and of arbitrarism._]

This indissoluble connection of necessity and liberty confutes both the
partial theories which dispute the field in the problem of freedom:
the _deterministic_ theory and that of _free will._ The determinists
do not see in the volitional act anything but the actual situation;
the followers of the theory of free will see nothing but the moment of
freedom. These conceive a volition that is as it were a duplication,
triplication, quadruplication of the given fact, and so on to the
infinite; those a volition that bursts forth from nothing, or rains
down from above and then inserts itself, no one knows how, into the
course of the real. Both exaggerate, and since exaggerations are called
in science errors in sense, both err, and being one-sided are proved
false. But since, on the other hand, it is a quality of errors opposed
to one another, to become identified and to pass, the one into the
other, it is given to us to assist at a like spectacle in this case
also, and to see the determinists change into arbitrarists and the
believers in free will into determinists. The first, in fact, passing
from cause to cause, abandon the concept of cause at the end of the
chain, as though (to use the expression of Schopenhauer), they were
dismissing the hired carriage, made use of during the day for their own
affairs, and return to free will. The others, being unable to justify
freedom in the world of reality and of experience, justify it in a
transcendental way, as the effect of a divine cause, which excludes
free will, and excludes it also when it concedes it; for by the very
fact of conceding, it determines, limits, and produces it.

[Sidenote: _General form of this antithesis: materialism and
mysticism._]

But with this explanation of our thesis, and of the two theses opposing
it, we are transported into the heart of one of the greatest problems
of Gnoseology, so great in fact as to appear to contain in it the whole
problem of philosophy. In fact, that which is called determinism and
free will in the Philosophy of the practical is the same antithesis
that in Gnoseology is called _materialism and mysticism._ And that
which we here oppose to the two one-sided theses, as theory of that
liberty which is also necessity, is called in Gnoseology, _idealism._
The thesis and antithesis are therefore to be found in all the
particular problems of philosophy, since they concern the logical form
in universal. This, then, is the reason why the question of freedom of
willing has become so grave and complicated as to appear insoluble. To
obtain a solution, it was necessary to construct a Logic of philosophy,
and intrinsically necessary to renew the whole system of philosophy.
Herbart wisely counselled never to discuss the freedom of the will with
the laity, in order not to be misunderstood.[3]

Had this advice been followed, we should not have seen both determinism
and free will torn asunder by advocates in the law courts, dragging
in the one or the other to suit their purposes, and thus insulting
good sense, which should alone rule in those places. The freedom of
the will is doubted and discussed among philosophers, as the reality
of the external world is doubted and discussed, but this is not done
because it is wished to set in doubt the existence of the boots of
this gentleman or of that gentleman's overcoat. If a confirmation be
sought that the question of the freedom of willing is, as was said, the
universal gnoseological or metaphysical question, let it be observed
how the determinists and the advocates of free will affirm or deny the
freedom of willing, not only in that field, but in all fields. Indeed,
whoever, for instance, should admit spiritual activity to knowledge and
deny it to the will, would not, properly speaking, be a determinist,
but an intellectualist or an æsthetician. That is to say, he would be
a theoretician, who, in denying the freedom of the will, would simply
mean to deny the existence of a practical activity side by side with
the theoretic; for freedom is the very essence of every spiritual form,
and with the denial of the freedom of that form is denied the form
itself. Determinism, arbitrarism, libertarianism reflect, then, the
universal gnoseological thesis of naturalism and mechanicism in the
special practical field.

[Sidenote: _The materialistic sophisms of determinism._]

Determinism of the will, like materialism and mechanicism in general,
consists in nothing but the transference to philosophical speculation
of the form proper to the physical disciplines. By dint of classifying
practical facts and presenting them as empirical concepts, and thus
as merely related by cause and effect, they end by forgetting that
those formulæ are not thoughts and that their content is not real
reality; and causes or motives (abstractive transformation of the
actual situation) are given as agents of the will, and thus the agent
is destroyed for the cause, the form for the abstract material. Hence
these timid phrases that on close inspection turn out to be tautologies
or mistakes: "Freedom is an illusion; what prevails is always the
strongest motive." But if we ask what is the strongest motive, we are
told (and no other reply is possible) it is _that which prevails._
This, translated into our language, amounts to saying that the actual
situation is the actual situation, and conditions the will, which is
what it is and can be no other than it is.--Virtue is a mere product,
like vitriol. Certainly, vitriol is also in its way a creation, a
manifestation of the spirit, as is virtue, and if it be permitted to
falsify vitriol by changing it into something material and mechanical,
nothing forbids doing the same for virtue. Virtue, too, can be produced
just like vitriol, that is to say, by setting in motion the spontaneous
forces of the spirit and of so-called nature, which itself is also
spirit, and nothing forbids endowing educators with the title of
chemists and apothecaries of virtue.

But metaphors are not arguments--Statistics prove the determinism of
human actions, which always reappear in the same way and in the same
quantity whenever certain actual circumstances appear.--But Statistics,
if they collect and simplify facts and construct views and tables
that are more or less useful, do not thus prove anything; for neither
are the instances that they give as equivalent, really so, nor the
relation that they declare between certain facts a real relation.
If we turn from artificial formulæ to the immediate observation of
the real, we find ourselves confronted with nothing but individuated
volitional acts, resulting from necessity and liberty.--The individual
has a constant character, of which action is the consequence: _operari
sequitur esse._--But the constant character is nothing but the
abstraction of the single acts done by the individual. It is therefore
natural that the actions should appear to be referable to the character
which is derived from them; but it is not correct to say that there
is equivalence, for abstraction is not equivalent to concretion.--The
individual, even if he can be conceived as free in respect to his
external environment, would be always subject to the law of his own
nature.--But the law of his own nature is not a contingent thing, but
the law itself of the Spirit, or, precisely, freedom, and it is quite
clear that freedom is not free not to be free.--The social organism
has its natural laws, which govern the action of the individual.--The
social organism is also an abstraction, which is turned into a being
only by the false interpretation of a metaphor. In all these examples,
and in the many others that could be brought forward, the error is
always the same as has been said: the substitution of the naturalistic
for the speculative construction, Physic for Metaphysic. And since
physical or naturalistic construction has no material other than given
historical facts, the doctrines above mentioned, when they are not
false, are always tautological and lead to the affirmation that the
volitional fact is a fact, or that in it is the moment of necessity.

[Sidenote: _The mysticism of arbitrarism._]

Arbitrarism, on the other hand, arises in the same way as mysticism,
from distrust of thought; being unable to dominate the fact that should
be explained, recourse is had to the inconceivable, to the absurd, to
miracle; subjective and individual ignorance is hypostasized and of
it is made a metaphysical reality. Arbitrarism, like mysticism, has
its element of truth, in the negation of determinism, that is, in the
recognition of the impotence of the naturalistic method and in the
affirmation that the truth lies beyond that method, in the concept of
creation and of freedom. But freedom separated from its logical and
necessary moment becomes transformed into will, just as in mysticism
in general God is transformed into the mystery, ready to receive all
individual caprices into himself, and to confer upon them an appearance
of truth.

[Sidenote: _The doctrine of necessity-liberty, and idealism._]

The concept of freedom (necessity-liberty), which is at once scientific
and not mechanical, and if it surpass the categories of Physic, does
not surpass those of Metaphysic, is opposed to both these views. As
idealist philosophy, it tends in general to conciliate the ideal with
the actual, thought with complete reality, philosophy with the whole of
experience. With the concept of freedom is eliminated the inertia of
determinism, and the unstable springing about of arbitrarism. The gross
material conception of the real disappears, because that which seems to
be matter is revealed as spirit, the fact as creation, necessity as the
product of liberty. But miracle disappears with them. For if the spirit
be the eternal, omnipresent, continuous miracle, unattainable by the
physical method,-a continual miracle, omnipresent and eternal, is no
longer a miracle, but the same simple and ordinary reality, which each
one of us contributes to create and each one of us can and does think.

[Sidenote: _The doctrine of double causality; dualism and agnosticism._]

Strict determinism and strict arbitrarism are not, however, the
sole adversaries of the concept of liberty-necessity, as rigorous
materialism and mysticism are not the only adversaries of idealism.
There exists another which must be called more dangerous (if
misunderstanding be more dangerous than error). This doctrine, since
it goes by the name of dualism, spiritualism, and neocriticism in
general philosophy, could be called the doctrine _of double practical
causality,_ in the field of the practical problem. The supporters
of this line of thought, despite many individual differences, are
all agreed in positing two distinct series of facts: one which obeys
mechanical causality, another which is initiative and creation, or (as
they say) obeys causality through freedom. There are thus two series
that interpenetrate one another or alternate at every instant and
are mutually blended, the one in the other. Hence there is something
of each in the volitional act, something of the strongest motive and
something of free choice. Such a solution has some external resemblance
with that which we maintain, but is intrinsically most different.
Our solution is _fusion_ of liberty and necessity, while this is
_juxtaposition;_ our solution is _conciliation,_ this _transaction._
Like every juxtaposition and transaction it displeases both the
contending parties, and falls into the power, now of the one, now of
the other. Thus, if, according to the theories of that tendency, it
be maintained that freedom exists, but that there are also causes
tending to diminish it, or that there exist volitional acts, but that
involuntary acts also exist, one does not understand how a series of
facts that has its own law in itself (freedom, the will) can ever be
subordinated to facts that obey a different law (diminution of freedom,
involuntariness of acts). If this happen sometimes or many times, we
must suspect that it happens always, and that the surviving freedom is
a mask of freedom, illusion. Thus, if it be affirmed that side by side
with causality, with equivalence of causes and effects, or with the
possibility of foreseeing the effect by means of the cause, there is
another causality, in which the effect is not equivalent to the cause,
and that not only is it not to be foreseen, but is such that only after
it has happened does it allow its cause to be discovered; then the
doubt arises that one of the two causalities does not exist, because
either the effect is equivalent to the cause, and so it must always be,
or it is not equivalent to it, and so it will never be; or it can be
foreseen by means of the cause, and so it will always be, or it cannot
be foreseen, and never will be foreseen. The strict determinists and
arbitrarists have the loyalty of error, and they are rare, because
energetic spirits are rare, but the doctrine of double causality is
tinged with some of the rouge of truth, and thus seduces the many,
and is proper to weak and irresolute spirits, as indeed are dualism,
spiritualism, agnosticism, neocriticism, of which this doctrine forms a
particular case. When the absurdity of determinism and of arbitrarism
has been recognized (and their very presence is an autocriticism), it
is necessary to satisfy with a new and single concept the claim that
they represent, certainly not with _the sum of two errors,_ and the new
single concept is that of true freedom.

[Sidenote: _Its character of transaction and transition._]

The doctrine of double causality has had its historical importance, not
because it is a _transaction,_ but rather because it is a _transition;_
that is, a gradual approximation to the true concept, with the
introduction into the naturalistic concept of an element of ferment and
dissolution: the concept of a causality by means of freedom, that is,
of a causality that is so only in name. The concept of freedom cannot
tolerate that of causality at its side, and of the two series posited,
one of the two is not real in itself, but simply a particular product
of the other: mechanical causality is not a fact, nor a conception, but
an instrument created for its own ends by spiritual freedom itself.
And only in this sense can it be admitted that freedom avails itself
of causality for its effectuation, and the truth of the observation be
realized, that the classifying of the perceptions in series of cause
and effect becomes itself also a presupposition of will and action.
The historical knowledge as to the actual situation that precedes the
volition, since it includes of necessity philosophical universal in
itself, so it can also include empirical universals, concepts, and
pseudo--concepts: the consciousness of the productivity of the spirit
and the mnemonic formulæ in which this productivity is fixed, and
for which it certainly appears to be mechanical, but only to him who
forgets that the formulæ themselves are mechanical.



[1] Summonte, _Historia di Napoli,_ ed. 1675, iv. 205, "Miracle caused
by fear."

[2] Dante, _Parad._ iv. 76.

[3] _Einleit. in die Phil._ § 128, trad. Vidossich, p. 169.




