II


THE ETHICAL FORM AS ACTUATION OF THE SPIRIT IN UNIVERSAL


[Sidenote: _Tautological Ethic and its connection with Philosophy,
either partial or discontinuous._]

If the strange idea of an ethical principle that should be formal,
in the sense of its not being known exactly what it is and how it is
justified, has ever been able to arise, this is due to two erroneous
philosophical conceptions, of which one can be called _partial,_ the
other _discontinuous_ philosophy. According to the first conception,
man is capable of knowing something of reality, certainly, but not
all: he perceives and arranges the data of experience by means of the
categories, but he is aware of the limitation of his thought and of the
impossibility of attaining to the heart of the real, which he does, it
is true, end by attaining in a certain way, but only with the heart,
not with thought. This being stated, and coming to the case of Ethic,
man hears the voice of conscience in himself, the command of the moral
law; he cannot think of any sophism to escape it: but precisely what
that law is, he is unable to say; the idea of a divine ordinance of
the world which presents itself to his spirit, may also be affirmed by
the heart, but never by thought. The second conception is confounded
by some thinkers with the first and becomes partial philosophy or
agnosticism; but if we observe closely, it is distinct from the other.
For here it is not actually asserted that the foundation of morality
is unknowable, but it is said to be unknowable in the circle of Ethic,
or that such knowledge goes beyond that circle. Ethic establishes the
moral law, deduces or arranges beneath it ethical precepts and by means
of them judges single actions. Ethic is ignorant as to whether that
law really exists, or what may be its precise universal content. It
hands this problem over to Metaphysic, or to general Philosophy, which
solves it in its own way, or is presumed to be capable of solving it.
In this conception, then, there arises a question as to competence
and hierarchy between thought and thought, between particular and
general philosophy; whereas, in the former, is affirmed the absolute
incompetence of thought.

[Sidenote: _Rejection of both these conceptions._]

But we do not run the risk of colliding with the obstacle placed
before us with these philosophical views, because we have constantly
rejected them both throughout the whole of our exposition of the
Philosophy of the spirit and have demonstrated their falsity. Partial
Philosophy is a contradictory concept: thought either thinks all
or nothing; and if it had a limit it would have it as thought and
therefore as surpassed. Whoso admits something unknowable, declares
everything unknowable, and inevitably falls into total scepticism. Nor
is the idea of a discontinuous philosophy divided into a whole and
its parts, with the whole outside the parts and the parts outside the
whole less inconceivable; so that, while Ethic is being studied, the
whole (complete Philosophy) seems problematical; and a part (Ethic)
can be known to some extent without knowing the whole (the whole
of Philosophy). This is a false view, ultimately derived from the
empirical sciences, in which it is possible to apprehend one order
of phenomena independently of the others; and to apprehend phenomena
without explicitly posing or by dismissing to another occasion the
philosophical problem as to their truth. Philosophy is a circle and a
unity and every point of it is intelligible only in relation to all the
others. The didascalic convenience of exposing a group of philosophical
problems separately from others--or also (if it please others, as
it has not pleased us) of dividing the exposition into particular
philosophical sciences, and into general Philosophy (also called
Metaphysic)--should not lead to the misconception that the indivisible
is really being divided. The whole of Philosophy is at once enunciated
with the first philosophical proposition; and the others that come
after will all be nothing but explanations of the first.

[Sidenote: _The ethical form as volition of the universal._]

Therefore, since we have never denied faith to thought, nor broken in
pieces the unity of Philosophy, we have no secret to reveal at this
point; not even a poor secret, like the exponents of discontinuous
Philosophy, who solemnly make known at the end what they have assumed
from the beginning. Our formal ethical principle is never empty form
that must only now be filled with a content. It is full form, form
in the philosophical and universal sense, which is also content and
therefore universal content. We have not restricted ourselves to
defining the ethical form as universal form, which would have resulted
in tautologism; but we have defined it _volition of the universal,_
thus distinguishing it from the economic form, which is simply volition
of the individual. And if we now ask ourselves what is the universal,
we must reply that the answer has already been given, and that whoever
has not yet understood, whoever indeed has not understood it for some
time, will never understand it. The universal has been the object of
all our Philosophy of the Spirit, and we have always had to keep it
before our eyes, in studying, not only the practical function, but
any other function of the spirit; just as we cannot have the idea
of the branch of a tree without the idea of the trunk from which it
springs and without which there would not be the branch of a tree. That
concept, then, is not a _deus ex machina_ to appear unexpectedly at the
end of the play and hastily bring it to a conclusion, but the force
that has animated it from the first to the last scene.

[Sidenote: _The universal as the Spirit (Reality, Liberty, etc.)._]

What is the universal? It is the Spirit, it is Reality, in so far as
it is truly real, that is, in so far as it is unity of thought and
willing; it is Life, in so far as realized in its profundity as this
unity itself; it is Freedom, if a reality so conceived be perpetual
development, creation, progress. Outside the Spirit nothing is
thinkable in a truly universal form. Æsthetic, Logic, Historic, this
very Philosophy of the practical, have demonstrated and confirmed
this truth in every way. Every other concept brought forward reveals
itself (and has revealed itself beneath our analysis), either as a
feigned universal, or as something contingent that has been abstracted
and generalized, or as the hypostasis of certain of our particular
spiritual products, such as mathematical formulæ, or as the negation of
the Spirit, on which is conferred positive value (first with metaphor
and then with metaphysic).

And the moral individual who wills the universal, or that which
transcends him as an individual, turns precisely to the Spirit, to
real Reality, to true Life, to Liberty. The universal is in concrete
the universal individualized, and the individual is real in so far as
he is also universal. He is not able to assert one part of himself
without asserting the other (under the penalty of stopping half-way,
_dimidiatus vir,_ and so of again becoming nothing). But in order to
assert them both, he must first posit the one as explicit and the other
as implicit, and then make the other also explicit. Man as economic
individual, at the first moment (so to speak) of his revealing himself
to life and to existence, cannot will, save individually: will his
own individual existence. There is no man, however moral he be, who
does not begin in this way. How could he ever surpass and finally
deny his own individual life, if he had not first affirmed it and
did not reaffirm it at every instant? But he who should stop at that
affirmation of the individual, regarding the first stage of development
as the resting-place, would enter into profound contradiction with
himself. He should will, not only his own self individualized, but also
that self, which, being in all selves, is their common Father. Thus he
promotes the realization of the Real, lives a full life and makes his
heart beat in harmony with the universe: _cor cordium._

The moral individual has this consciousness of working for the Whole.
Every action, however diverse, which conforms to ethical duty, conforms
to Life; and if, instead of promoting Life, it should depress and
mortify it, for that very reason it would be immoral. Where facts seem
to demonstrate the contrary, the interpretation of facts is erroneous,
since it affirms as a criterion of judgment a life which is not that
true life, which, as we know, we serve even by dying--dying as an
individual, as a collectivity, as a social class, or as a people. The
most humble moral act can be resolved into this volition of the Spirit
in universal. Thus it happens that the soul of a simple and ignorant
man, altogether devoted to his rude duty, vibrates in unison with that
of the philosopher, whose mind receives into it the universal Spirit:
what the one thinks at that moment, the other does, thus attaining
by his own path to that full satisfaction, that act of life, that
fruitful conjunction with the Real, which the other has attained to by
a different path. It may be said that the moral man is a _practical
philosopher_ and the philosopher a _theoretic actor._

[Sidenote: _Moral acts as volitions of the Spirit._]

This criterion of the Spirit, of Progress, of Reality, is the intimate
measure of our acts in the moral conscience, as it is the foundation,
more or less clearly expressed, of our moral judgments. Why do we exalt
Giordano Bruno, who allowed himself to be condemned to the stake for
asserting his philosophy? Perhaps for the calmness with which he faced
the torture? But many fanatics, even malefactors, are capable of this,
and it may sometimes even be a simple sensual desire, of which we
have seen examples in history and of which a modern Italian poet has
lately sung, exalting the beauty of the flame and the voluptuousness of
the pyre. By facing death and refusing to deny his philosophy, Bruno
contributed to the creation of a larger form of civilization, and
for this reason he is not only a victim, but also a _martyr,_ in the
etymological sense of the word: witness and realizer of a demand of
the Spirit in universal.--Why do we praise the charitable man? Perhaps
because he yields to the emotion caused by the spectacle of suffering.
But emotion in itself is neither moral nor immoral, and thus to yield
to it materially is weakness, that is, immorality. The charitable man,
when he removes or mitigates suffering, relights a life and reconquers
a force for the common work, which both he and the person whom he has
benefited, must serve.

[Sidenote: _Critique of antimoralism._]

There is indeed nothing more foolish than antimoralism, so much the
fashion in our day; it is an ugly echo of unhealthy social conditions,
of one-sided theories ill understood (Marxism, Nietzscheianism).
Antimoralism is justified, in so far as it combats moral hypocrisy
in favour of effective morality instead of that of mere words, but
it loses all meaning when it inflates empty phrases or combines
contradictory propositions and preaches against morality itself. By so
doing, it thinks to celebrate strength, health and freedom, but on the
contrary exalts servitude to unbridled passions, the apparent health of
the invalid and the apparent strength of the maniac. Morality (begging
pardon of literary immoralists), far from being a pedantic fiction or
the consolation of the impotent, is _good blood against bad blood._

[Sidenote: _Confused tendencies of tautological, material, religious
formulæ, etc., toward the Ethic of the Spirit._]

We must also declare that this truth concerning the ethical principle
understood as will that has for its end the universal or the Spirit,
is to some extent confirmed by several of the formulæ that we have
criticized, which have erred only in defining it, either confusing
altogether the universal and the contingent, or have fallen into
tautologism. Those who posit Life, or the interest of the Species,
Society or the State, as the end of morality, have in view that Life,
that Species, that Society, or that ideal State, which is the Spirit
in universal, although they are not able to define it clearly. The
same may be said of other formulæ, which often have a better intention
at starting than that realized in the development of the relative
doctrines, or, on the contrary, a development superior to their bad
initial intention.

[Sidenote: _The Ethic of the Spirit and religious Ethic._]

This function of symbol possessed by idealist Ethic, this
affirmation that the moral act is love and volition of the Spirit
in universal, is to be found above all in religious and Christian
Ethic, in the Ethic of love and of the anxious search for the divine
presence. This is the fundamental characteristic of religious Ethic,
which remains unknown to vulgar rationalists and intellectualists, to
so-called free-thinkers, and to frequenters of masonic lodges, owing to
their narrow party passion or lack of mental subtlety. There is hardly
an ethical truth (and we have already had occasion to refer to this
matter) that cannot be expressed with the words that we have learned
as children from traditional religion, and which rise spontaneously
to the lips, as the most elevated, the most appropriate and the most
beautiful; words which are certainly impregnated with mythology, but
are also weighty with profound philosophical content. There is without
doubt an exceedingly strong antithesis between the idealist philosopher
and the religious individual, but it is not greater than that within
ourselves, when, in the imminence of a crisis, we are divided in
soul and yet very near to unity and to interior conciliation. If the
religious man cannot but see in the philosopher his adversary, his
mortal foe, the philosopher, on the other hand, sees in him his younger
brother, his very self of a moment past. Hence he will feel himself
more nearly allied to an austere, emotional, religious Ethic, troubled
with phantoms, than to an Ethic that is superficially rationalistic:
for this latter is only in appearance more philosophical than the
other, since if it possess the merit of recognizing (verbally only, or
with _psittacism,_ as Leibnitz would have said) the supreme rights of
reason, yet in plucking thought from the soil in which it has grown and
depriving it of vital sap, it exercises them very ill.




