V

IDENTITY OF VOLITION AND ACTION AND DISTINCTION BETWEEN VOLITION AND
EVENT


[Sidenote: _Volition and action: intuition and expression._]

Such are the relations between the practical activity and the
theoretical, which precedes and conditions it.

Asking ourselves now, what are the relations of this same activity with
that which seems to follow it and to be outside the spirit, in company
with corporeality, naturality, physic and matter (or however else it
may be called)? we find ourselves face to face with a problem which
we have already treated and solved in another part of the system of
the spirit, and which we shall solve here in an analogous manner. What
we may now designate as the problem of the relation between _volition
and action,_ formerly appeared in the theoretical philosophy as the
problem of the relation between _intuition_ and _expression._--Are then
volitions and actions two distinct terms that may appear now together,
now separate? Can volition remain for its part isolated from action,
whereas action is not able to separate itself from volition, or is the
opposite true?--We reply, as we did on the former occasion, by denying
the problem itself and by identifying intuition with expression,
in such a manner that effective intuition became at the same time
expression, and it was declared that a so-called expression, which was
not at the same time intuition, was declared to be non-existent.--We
reply in like manner on this occasion, that _volition and action_ are
_one,_ and that volition without action or action without volition is
inconceivable.

[Sidenote: _Spirit and nature._]

Indeed, the relation between spirit and nature (which is a general
relation, including the other particulars between intuition and
expression, or between volition and action), understood in the way
that it is here, is a relation, not between two entities, but only
between two different methods of elaborating one unique reality,
which is spiritual reality: thus it is not truly a relation. Nor are
the two modes of elaboration two co-ordinated modes of knowledge,
for that would lead back to a duplicity of objects, but the first is
cognoscitive elaboration and true science, or philosophy, in which
reality is revealed as activity and spirituality, while the other is an
abstract elaboration for practical convenience, without cognoscitive
character. When this has been posited, the spiritual act of volition
has not another reality face to face with it, with which it must join
or combine, in order to become concrete, but is itself full reality.
That which is called matter, movement, and material modification from
the naturalistic point of view, is already included in the volitional
spiritual act, of which it might be said without difficulty (as was
once said amid much scandal of the Ego) that it is heavy, round,
square, white, red, sonorous, and, therefore, physically determinable.
The volition is not followed by a movement of the legs or arms; it
is those movements themselves that are material for the physical,
spiritual for the philosopher, extrinsic for the former, at once
intrinsic and extrinsic for the latter, or better, neither extrinsic
nor intrinsic (an arbitrary division). As poetry lives in speech and
painting in colours, so the will lives in actions, not because the one
is in the other as in an envelope, but because the one is the other and
without the other would be mutilated and indeed inconceivable.

[Sidenote: _Inexistence of volitions without actions and vice versa._]

We cannot affirm the distinction between volition and action, save in
force and as a proof of a dualistic metaphysical view, of an abstract
spiritualism, with matter as being and substance for correlative
term. But this point of view is eliminated by the idealist view,
which recognizes only one unique substance, and that as spirituality
and subjectivity. Without, however, now basing ourselves upon such
considerations, and according to the order that we follow, applying
ourselves to the examination of the facts of consciousness, we affirm
that it would be impossible to adduce one volitional fact that should
not be also a movement called physical. Those volitional acts, which
according to some philosophers are consumed within the will and are
in that way distinguished from external facts, are a phantasm. Every
volition, be it never so small, sets the organism in motion and
produces what are called external facts. The purpose is already an
effectuation, a beginning of combat; indeed, simple desire is not
without effects, if it be possible to destroy oneself with desires,
as is in effect maintained On the other hand, it is not possible to
indicate actions without volitions. Instinctive or habitual acts that
have become instinctive are adduced; but these too are not set in
motion, save by the will, not one by one, in their particulars, but
as a whole, in the same way as a single hand sets in motion a most
complicated machine which a thousand hands have previously constructed.
There cannot then be volition without action, nor action without
volition, as there cannot be intuition without expression or expression
without intuition.

[Sidenote: _Illusions as to the distinction between these terms._]

It is well, however, to indicate one among the many sources from which
is derived the illusion of this distinction and separation, effectively
inexistent. A volitional act, which is a process of some duration,
may be interrupted and substituted for other volitional acts; it may
declare itself again and again begin its work (although this will
always be more or less modified), and this may give occasion to new
interruptions and new beginnings. It seems that in this way the will
stands on one side, as something formed and definite, and that on the
other execution pursues its way and is subject to the most varied
accidents. But volition and execution proceed with equal and indeed
with one single step. What we will we execute; the volition changes as
the execution changes. In the same way, when we are engaged upon a work
of art, on a long poem for instance, the illusion arises of an abstract
conception or plan, which the poet carries out as he versifies. But
every poet knows that a poem is not created from an abstract plan, that
the initial poetical image is not without rhythm and verse, and that
it does not need rhythm and verse applied to it afterwards. He knows
that it is in reality a primitive intuition-expression, in which all
is determined and nothing is determined, and what has been already
intuified is already expressed, and what will afterwards be expressed
will only afterwards be intuified. The initial intuition is certainly
not an abstract plan, but a living and vital germ; and so is the
volitional act.

[Sidenote: _Distinction between action and succession or event._]

When, therefore, it is affirmed that a volition is truly such, only
when it produces effects, or that a volition is to be judged by
its results, it is impossible not to assent, as we assent that an
unexpressed expression or an unversified verse is neither an expression
nor a verse. But in this signification only, because those propositions
have sometimes assumed another, which on the contrary it is needful
resolutely to reject. This is that in them action (will-action) has
been confused with _succession or event._ Now, if volition coincide
with action, it does not and cannot coincide with _event._

[Sidenote: _Volition and event._]

It cannot coincide, because what is action and what is event? Action
is the act of the one; event, is the act of the whole: will is of man,
event of God. Or, to put this proposition in a less imaginary form,
the volition of the individual is as it were the contribution that he
brings to the volitions of all the other beings in the universe, event
the aggregate of all the wills and the answer to all the questions. In
this answer is included and absorbed the will itself of the individual,
which we have taken and contemplated alone. If, then, we wished to make
the volition depend upon event, action upon succession, we should be
undertaking to make one fact depend upon another fact, of which the
first is a constituent part, placing among the antecedents of action
what is its consequence, among things given those to be created, the
unknown with the known, the future in the past.

[Sidenote: _Successful and unsuccessful actions: criticism._]

The concepts of actions that are successful and of those that are
unsuccessful, of actions that become fully concrete in the fact, and of
those that become concrete only in part or not at all, are therefore
inexact. No action (not even those that are empirically said to be most
successful, not even the most obvious and ordinary) succeeds fully, in
the sense that it alone constitutes the fact: every action diverges by
necessity and by definition from succession or happening. If I return
home every day by the usual road, my return home is every day new and
different from that which might have been, imagined. This often amounts
to a diversity of particulars which we may call of least importance,
but which yet are not for that reason the less real. On the other hand,
no action, however vain it be held (if it be action and not velleity of
action and intrinsic contradiction, or by as much as it is action and
not imagination and contradiction), passes without trace and without
result.

If any action could be rendered altogether vain, this same rendering
vain would invade all other actions and no fact would happen.

[Sidenote: _Action and foresight: critique._]

The current proposition that we cannot act without _foreseeing_ is
also incorrect. Since the conception of foreseeing is contradictory,
and since we cannot know a fact if it be not first a fact, that is, if
it have not happened; if the contradictory hypothesis held, it would
be impossible to act. But the truth is that what is called foreseeing
is nothing but seeing; it is to know the given facts and to reason
upon them with the universals. That is to say, it is the invariable
theoretical base of action, already illustrated. When we will and act,
what we will and do is _our own action_ itself, not that of others or
of all the others, and so is the resulting event. _Voluntas fertur in
incognitum,_ but the all intent upon itself does not take count of the
unknown, which is in this case relatively unknowable and, therefore,
relatively non-existent. The individual is aware that when he acts, he
does not aim at anything but the placing of new elements in universal
reality. He takes care that they shall be energetic and vital, without
nourishing the foolish illusion that they must be the only ones, or
that they alone produce reality. A popular little tale tells how
God, who had at first granted to men to know their future lives and
the day of their death, afterwards withdrew this knowledge from them
altogether, because He perceived from experience that such knowledge
made them lazy and inert. The new ignorance, on the other hand, revived
and impelled them to vie with one another in activity, as though it
had been granted them to obtain and to enjoy everything.[1] How can we
doubt that our good and energetic work can ever be rendered nugatory
in the event? That is unthinkable, and the saying _fiat justitia et
pereat mundus_ is rectified by that other saying: _fiat justitia ne
pereat mundus._ Bad is not born from good, nor inaction from action.
Every volitional man, every man active in goodness, is a contradiction
to that one-sided attitude in which the will is suppressed to give
place to happening, a world unmade is believed to be already made,
arms are crossed or the field deserted. But it also contradicts the
fatuous security that the future world will conform to the ends of our
individual actions taken in isolation; saying with the good sense of
the Florentine statesman, that we ourselves control one half of our
actions, or little less, Fortune the other half. Hence our trust in our
own strength; hence, too, our apprehension of the pitfalls of Fortune,
continually arising and continually to be conquered. This constitutes
the interior drama of true men of action, of the political geniuses
who have guided the destinies of man. While the unfit is all anxiety,
or bewilderment and depression, the fatuous is all over-confidence or
expectation of the impossible, also losing himself in bewilderment when
he finally discovers that the reality is not what he imagined. Hence
also the serenity of the sage, who knows that whatever happen there
will always be opportunity for good conduct. _Si fractus illabatur
orbis,_ there will always be a better world to construct. Hope and fear
are related to action itself in its becoming, not to its result and
succession.

[Sidenote: _Confirmation of the inderivability of the value of action
from its success._]

We can illustrate the fact that no one seriously thinks of valuing
an action according to its success, but that all value it at its
intrinsic value as action, from the circumstance that no one recognizes
any merit to the action of a marks-man who hits the bull's-eye, when
shooting at the target with closed eyes; whereas no little merit is
recognized to him who, after having taken careful aim, does not hit
the mark but goes very near it. We are certainly often deceived in our
practical judgments, and fortunate men are continually praised to the
skies as men of great practical capacity, while the unfortunate are
hurled into the mire as incompetent; for we do not distinguish exactly
between action and success. This is not only so as to judgments of the
present life: it is also true of the life of the past, of the pages of
history, where imbeciles are made heroes and heroes calumniated; to
the worst of leaders is attributed the honour of victories, ridiculous
statesmen credited with ability. On the other hand, the sins of madmen
are attributed to the wise, or they are accused of faults that are
nobody's fault, but the result of circumstances. In vain will the
Pericleses of all time ask, as did the ancient Pericles of the people
of Athens, that the unforeseen misfortunes of the Peloponnesian war
should be attributed to him, provided that by way of compensation he
might have praise for all the fortunate things that should also happen
παρὰ λόγον.[2] All this depends upon an imperfect knowledge of facts
more than upon anything else: hence the necessity of criticism. Just as
the work of the poet and of the painter is not materially to be laid
hold of in the poem or in the picture, but requires a re-evocation that
is often very difficult, so the work of the man of action, which is in
part fused in events and partly contained in them, as a bud that will
open in the future, asks a keen eye and the greatest care in valuation.
The history of men of action and of their deeds is easily changed
into _legend,_ and legends are never altogether eliminable, because
misunderstanding or error is never altogether eliminable.

[Sidenote: _Explanation of apparently conflicting facts._]

On the other hand, certain commonplaces seem to be in opposition to
the criterion itself: for example, that men are judged by success and
that it matters little what we have willed and done, when the result
is not satisfactory. There are also certain popular customs that make
individuals responsible for what happens outside their own spheres
of action, not to mention the well-known historical examples of
unfortunate leaders crucified at Carthage and guillotined at Paris, for
no other cause in reality than that of not having won the victory. And
there is also the insistence of certain thinkers upon the necessity of
never distinguishing the judgment of the act from that of the fact. But
such insistence is nothing but a new aspect of the implacable struggle
that it has been necessary to conduct against the morality of the mere
intention and against the sophisms and the subterfuges that arise from
it; an insistence that has expressed itself in paradoxical formulæ,
as are also paradoxical the trivial remarks of ordinary life that
have been mentioned. As to the customs and condemnations narrated by
history, these were without doubt extraordinary expedients in desperate
cases, in which people had placed themselves in such a position that it
was impossible or most difficult to verify intentions and actions, and
to distinguish misfortunes from betrayals; and as all expedients born
of like situations sometimes hit the mark, that is to say, punish bad
faith, so will others increase with irrationality the evil that they
would have wished to diminish, since in those cases there has not been
any bad faith to punish and to correct.


[1] _Arch. p. lo st. d. trad, pop.,_ of Pitré (1882), pp. 70-72.

[2] Thuc. ii. 64.




