III


UNREALITY OF THE LAW AND REALITY OF ITS EXECUTION. FUNCTION OF LAW IN
THE PRACTICAL SPIRIT


[Sidenote: _Law as abstract and unreal volition._]

Since law is the volition of a class of actions, it is the volition
of an _abstract._ But as we already know, to will an abstract is
tantamount to willing abstractly. And to will abstractly is not truly
to will, for we will only in concrete, that is, in a determined
situation and with a volitional synthesis corresponding to that
situation, such that it is immediately translated into action, or
better, is at the same time effective action. Consequently it seems
that we should declare the volition that is law to be a pretended
volition: contradictory, because lacking a single, unique and
determined situation; ineffectual, because springing from the insecure
ground of an abstract concept; a volition, in fact, that is not willed;
a volitional act, not real, but _unreal._

[Sidenote: _Ineffectuality of laws and effectuality of practical
principles._]

Such indeed it is. What is really wanted is not the law, but the
single act, done _under_ the law, as it is called, that is to say,
the _execution_ of the law. The single volition is the only one that
is carried out: the execution of the law is the only thing really
and truly willed and done. When the law has been formulated, life
continues ceaselessly to propound its problems, and these either do not
enter into the provisions of the law and are solved simply and solely
with universal practical principles (economic and ethic), or they do
enter into them and then it is necessary _to apply_ the law, unless
it be held to be more convenient to change it, or (this would be a
pathological case) action be not taken against it, although there be
consciousness that this is ill done.

But even when we are in the situations foreseen by the law and act in
accordance with it, or, as is said, _apply or carry out_ the law, we
must not allow ourselves to be misled by all these metaphors; for we
must consider that the single situations in which we will and act can
never be foreseen by the law, nor is it possible to act in accordance
with it, to follow it out and to apply it. Situations are not foreseen,
because nothing is foreseen, and the real fact is always a surprise,
something that happens once only and we can only know it as it is
after it has happened. For the new fact a new measure is necessary;
for the new body a new suit of clothes. The measure of the law, on the
other hand, since it is abstract, hesitates between the universal and
the individual and is without the strength of either. To carry out the
law? But it is only the pedant of life who proposes to do such a thing,
as it is only the pedant of art who attempts to apply the rules of art.
The true artist follows the impulse of his æsthetic conscience, the
practical man the initiative of his practical genius. What is called
the single act, observance and execution of the law, obeys, not the
law, but the ethical or practical principle, and obeys it individually.
The man who has his head full of laws that he has made for himself or
has accepted from others, makes a deep reverence to the Ladies' Law
when the time comes for action, and proceeds on his own initiative.

[Sidenote: _Exemplificatory clarification._]


It is the law that at the age of twenty we must present ourselves in
our district and do military service for a certain time. Let us for
the moment set aside the case in which those called upon to serve
rebel and, having seized the power of the government, abolish the law
of conscription, and re-establish that of voluntary enlistment. And
let us likewise set aside the other case, in which the conscripts
violate the law by deserting and going abroad, or hide in a cave, like
a hero of Padre Bresciani, or (like a good Tolstoian who applies the
principle of non-resistance to evil) allow themselves to be put in
prison rather than touch arms. Let us select the case of the peaceful
burgess who becomes a warrior that he may not go to prison; or of the
good citizen who recognizes his duty of serving his country and for
that reason obeys the law. In presenting himself in his district and
in the regiment, he has obeyed, not the voice of the law (which is a
voice), but his moral conscience, or simply his economic conscience.
This has already been demonstrated and we need not insist upon it.
But how can he ever obey the law, which directs him to do military
service of precisely this or that nature? Each individual has his own
temperament, his own talent, his own particular physical strength, and
each one will lend his services entirely in his own way, different from
that of another. And (be it noted) he will not do so only more or less
well or observing the law more or less, but really in a different way,
even when all observe the law with equal diligence and scrupulosity.
It may seem as if all carry out a military exercise at the same
moment, but the fact is that each man moves in a different way to the
others; or that in a parade march all walk in the same way, but, as a
matter of fact, all (even in the Prussian army) walk in a different
way. If we look at it as a whole and from a distance, there seems to
be uniformity; if we look at it from near at hand we discover the
difference. If we could make the experiment of comparing a regiment
of fifty years before with one of fifty years after, leaving military
regulations, arms, accoutrements, and everything else unaltered in
the interval, the lack of uniformity of the apparent uniformity would
leap to the eyes, a lack of uniformity that would have been rendered
possible by the changes that had taken place in the surrounding life,
in the culture, the moral education, the political conscience, the
mode of nourishment, the dwellings, and so on. But the experiment is
possible, if not in time, then in space, that is to say, by observing
the application of the same military regulations upon two different
populations. Thus one seems to have in hand one book written in two
different languages; which is literally no longer the same book,
but two different books. Giusti translated into Milanese and Porta
translated into Florentine are no longer Porta or Giusti, but two new
poets.

[Sidenote: _Doctrines against the utility of laws. Their
unmaintainability._]

This indubitable truth, as to the impossibility of applying the law and
of incorporating it in facts, and as to the necessity of acting in each
case, according to historical exigencies, is the true reason for the
turning of so many people's heads at different times and in different
places, causing them to proclaim nothing less than the inutility
of laws and to ask for their abolition. If it be necessary to come
eventually to the individual action, and if deliberation and execution
must be remitted to the action of the individual, what is the object of
binding ourselves with bonds, which it is afterwards necessary to tear
off and to break, that we may act? What is the object of laboriously
constructing instruments, which we are obliged to throw away when we
come to practical action, that we may use our naked hands? Owing to
such ingenuous reasonings as these, people have come to long for a
society without laws, in which each will do his own share of work, on
account of its attractiveness alone, as we find among the Harmonicists
of Fourier and in many other anarchical Utopias. Or they have sighed
for the absolute paternal government of the good old days, for the
geniality of a good-hearted tyrant, untrammelled with laws, who will
be able to follow the best dictates of his heart. Or, to descend to
less strange and more actual examples, it has been proposed that the
judge should on each occasion create the law, according to the case
before him; that is to say, that he should cease to be a judge (not
having a law to apply, and properly speaking not being able to give
judgment) and be a free decider of litigation and corrector of customs;
or at least that he should free himself from _legal fictions_ and judge
according to the individual reality of each individual case.

[Sidenote: _Unsustainability of such confutations._]

These theories are without doubt unsustainable, not excluding the last,
which has the appearance of being moderate; because the so-called
judicial fiction is intrinsic to the law and exists even when we
think that it is not present, for it is always a fiction to place a
concrete case in an abstract category. But defenders of the utility of
law have met these erroneous doctrines with the bad argument that law
does not admit of individual solutions, and demands strict obedience,
because the moment of individuality, of inobservance, and of violation
that may be called legitimate, does actually exist in the law and is
intrinsic to its very nature. Both adversaries and defenders of law
are therefore philosophically wrong, those who assert its inutility and
those who claim for it an impossible utility.

[Sidenote: _Empirical meanings of those controversies._]

And we say "philosophically," for it is well known that in this case,
as in so many other disputes of philosophic appearance, are often
concealed disputes of a practical and political nature, in which right
and wrong are divided and connected in an altogether different manner.
The adversaries of laws are often nothing but adversaries of too many
laws, or legitimately demand a less pedantic and mechanical office
for the judge than that which he often has at present; whereas the
maintainers of laws are opposed to revolutionaries, who would wish
to abrogate the definite laws, on which civil progress rests, or to
discredit all laws, and cause society to enter upon a terrible crisis
that would not promise good results. But all this is extraneous to the
philosophic problem.

[Sidenote: _Necessity of laws._]

If the defenders of the utility of laws had wished to make use of an
argument of good sense against their adversaries, of the sort that
imposes, even when it does not rigorously demonstrate their contention,
they might have simply noted the demand for laws, for ordinances,
for justice, for the State, which appears at all points of human
history.--Better a bad government than no government at all; better
laws that are mediocre, but stable, than the frantic pursuit for
better and better laws, with the instability that is the inevitable
consequence! And on the other hand, may God save us from genial
despots, from inspired judges, from tribunals that dive into treasures
of equity!--These are the utterances that we hear in history. Battles
have been fought for _legality,_ and rivers of blood have been shed for
it; for legality are faced the troubles of litigation, and energetic
action is displayed, which only superficial intellects can consider
a waste of time and trouble; for no trouble is superfluous when we
are protecting our own rights, and none is more sacred, since it also
guards the offended majesty of the law, the rights of all. Those who
declaim against laws can well do so with a light heart, for the law
surrounds, protects, and preserves their life for them. No sooner had
all laws disappeared than they would lose the wish to declaim:

    In such wise as when sometimes in the wood
    The shepherd spies the wolf, and straight has lost
    Spirit and sense, and words die on his tongue;

and he would be obliged to have speedy recourse to the remedy and make
laws of some sort again, whatever they be, that he may again resume
his calm, his work and his gossip.

[Sidenote: _Laws as preparation for action._]

Passing from consideration _ad oculos_ to the philosophical, it is to
be said, on the other hand, that the utility of law does not at all
reside in its effectuality, which is something impossible, since the
single act of the individual is alone effectual; but in this, that in
order to will and to carry out the single act, it is usually necessary
to address oneself to the general, of which that individual is a single
case; that is, to address oneself to the group, of which the individual
is a component part, just as in aiming we generally begin by aiming at
the region where is the point upon which the aim will be fixed. Law is
not a real and effectual volition; it is without doubt an imperfect and
contradictory volition, but for that very reason a preparation for the
synthetic and perfect volition. Law, in short, since it is the volition
of an abstract, is not a real volition, but an _aid_ to real volition;
as (to employ the usual comparison) wooden bridges and scaffoldings are
aids to the construction of a house and have not been useless, because
they must be pulled down when the house has been built.

[Sidenote: _Analogy between the practical and the theoretical spirit:
practical laws and empirical concepts._]

Here the analogy between the constitution of the practical and of the
theoretical spirit is again shown to be most exact. We meet with
theoretical forms in the latter also, which are not really so and are
contradictory in themselves, positing representations that function as
universals and universals that are representative: arbitrary forms,
in which the will undertakes to command what it is not possible to
command, that is to say, representations and concepts, things which
precede and do not follow the volitional and practical form. But we
know that those fictitious concepts, those formulæ, those laws that
are not laws, those admitted falsities, which, therefore, are not
falsities, serve as a help to memory, and assist thought in finding
its way amid the multiform spectacle of the world, which it must
penetrate for itself. We do not think them, but they help us to
think; we do not imagine them, but they help us to imagine. Thus the
philosopher generally fixes his mind upon the pseudo-concepts, that he
may afterwards rise to the universals; and the artist also turns his
attention to them that he may find beneath them the individual, the
lively and ingenuous intuition that he seeks. The same pseudo-concepts,
made the object of volition and changed from formulæ to laws, fulfil
an analogous office in the practical spirit, making it possible for
the will to will in a certain direction, where it afterwards meets the
useful action, which is always individuated.

[Sidenote: _The promotion of order in reality and representation._]

Another aspect of the analogy is not less important. The
pseudo-concepts would not be possible, if reality did not offer the
like side by side with the unlike; which is not the universal and
necessary, but the general, a contingent (so to speak) less contingent
than others, a relatively constant variable. Pseudo-concepts are
arbitrary, not because they posit the like where is the unlike, but
because they make that variable rigid, which is only relatively
constant, making of it something absolutely constant and changing
the like into the identical. Now the practical spirit, which creates
reality, has need to create not only the unlike, but also the like; not
only that which lasts an instant, but also that which endures almost
unchanged for a year, a century, a millennium, or a millennium of
millenniums; not only the individual, but also the species, not only
the great man, but also the people, not only the actions that do not
occur again, but also those that return periodically, similar, though
not identical. Laws fulfil this function, for they constitute what
is called the _social,_ or _cosmic order._ This order, however, is
always relative and includes instability in itself; it is a rectilinear
figure, which, on being closely examined, reveals itself as also
curvilinear. For this reason it is necessary to make laws, and it is
necessary to violate, though obeying them in their execution.

[Sidenote: _Origin of the concept of plan or design._]

This function of law as an unreal volition, aiding nevertheless and
preparing the real, throws light upon a concept that we have had to
reject when exposing the nature and method of functioning of the
volitional act; that is to say, on the concept of _plan or design or
model,_ as proper to the practical activity, which is said to act by
carrying out a pre-established _design._ We have already demonstrated
that design and the execution of the design are in reality all one, and
that man acts by changing his design at every instant, because reality,
which is the basis of his action, changes. And as in the Philosophy
of the practical in general, so in particular in Ethic, the concept
of pre-established design has no place; because, if it be true than
in ethicity the universal is distinguished from the merely individual
action, it is also true that the universal does not exist in concrete,
save incorporated and individualized as this or that good action. The
universal of ethicity is not a design and cannot be willed for itself
outside all individuation, in the same way as to fall in love is to
fall in love with an individual and not with love. But that concept
of design, proposed for action and carried out by its means, though
erroneously adopted in Economy and in Ethic, must nevertheless have its
legitimate meaning in some special order of facts; otherwise it would
not be possible to make even erroneous use of it. This meaning is to be
found, as has been seen, in the fact of laws.




