VI


CRITIQUE OF THE CONFUSIONS BETWEEN ECONOMIC SCIENCE AND PHILOSOPHY OF
ECONOMY


[Sidenote: _Adoption of the method and of definition of Economy by
Philosophy._]

There is no disagreement, then, between the Philosophy of Economy
described by us and economic Science or Calculus, of which we have just
defined the nature, since there cannot be any between two altogether
heterogeneous forms, the one moving within the categories of truth, the
other outside them, with objects of a practical order. This reciprocal
tolerance can be disturbed only by Philosophy, when it compels itself,
either to invade the field of economic Science, or to receive within
itself, to a greater or less extent, the method and the formulæ
proper to the latter. We have already referred to the first, when we
noted the inadmissibility of the economic attempts of philosophism
and historicism, and we will say no more on the subject. But it is
opportune to draw attention to the fact that we must distinguish
among these attempts those that we are accustomed to meet with in
many treatises on economy, pure or political, and in the Science of
finance (especially in the prologues), which labour to discover what
economic action may be, and in what way it differs from morality, what
are pleasure and pain, utility and value; whether the State be rational
will that levies a portion of the riches of the citizens for the ends
of civilization, or a simple fact resulting from general economic laws
and the like. In all these efforts of the writers of treatises, we have
an example of the gradual passage from empiria to philosophy, which is
to be observed in all the other fields of knowledge, and if it be only
possible to say in general that the Philosophy of Economy is derived
from economic Science, it is certain, on the other hand, that it finds
no small incentive in the philosophical doubts and discussions which
economic Science supports. On the other hand, the claim to resolve
philosophically and historically the economic Science or Calculus
is, as we have seen, altogether sterile, or contradicts itself in
development.

[Sidenote: _Errors that derive from it._]

From the second of the cases stated above, that is to say, from the
mixture of economic with philosophic methods, arises a series of errors
that are very common and very grave, and of which it is opportune to
take some notice here.

These errors can be divided into three groups, according as they
consist of _(a)_ considering economic Science or Calculus as a method
exclusive of every other, and alone capable of bestowing upon man all
the truth that can ever be attained in the field of human actions;
_(b)_ in attributing the value of universal thought to the empirical
thoughts upon which economic calculation is based; _(c)_ in changing
into reality the fictions excogitated for the establishment of the
Calculus.

[Sidenote: _1st. Negation of philosophy for economy._]

Of the three groups, the first, which represents the most extended
and radical form of the error, is, as usual, the least harmful, for
the reason previously given, that the precise and loyal positions are
those that are the most completely surpassed. Several cultivators
of economic Science, among the most strict and mathematical, enter
upon this desperate struggle against philosophy, which they ridicule
as empty chatter and do not merely wish to subdue but altogether to
destroy, substituting for it the methods of empirical observation and
of mathematical construction, thus favouring a particular empirical and
mathematical philosophy of their own, however much they may protest
to the contrary. That the pretension is unsustainable, is to be seen,
both from the contradictions in which they become entangled and from
the very fury that animates them, which is, at bottom, vexation at not
being able to free themselves from the contradictions in which they
have become involved. For our part, we should like to say to those
excellent economists, alike pure and mathematical, did this not appear
to be pouring oil upon the flames:--Spare yourselves the trouble of
philosophizing. Calculate, and do not think!

[Sidenote: _2nd. Universal value attributed to empirical concepts.
Example: protection and free trade._]

The other group is represented by a particular case of the empiristical
error that we have already several times criticized, and many
propositions of the kind that one hears in ordinary conversation,
against which simple good sense has often rebelled, are to be reduced
to it. Thus the empirical consideration of certain human actions as
constituting richness and happiness, causes those individuals and
peoples who possess property of that sort to be called rich and happy;
but to this is opposed, with evident truth, that every one is happy
in his own way and that external conditions are not proof of internal
satisfaction, which is alone real and effective. The great dispute on
free trade is also to be reduced to the same misunderstanding, for when
we undertake to demonstrate that wealth is destroyed by protection, the
demonstration is efficacious only if the wealth, said to be destroyed,
is precisely that of which it was desired to assure the increase by
protection; but nothing has been proved if it be a different quality
of wealth that it may be desirable to acquire, even with the loss
and the destruction of the other. For example, a people may find it
advantageous from a political and military point of view to maintain in
its territories the cultivation of grain or the construction of ships,
even if that were to cost more than to provide itself with grain and
ships from abroad; in this case, we should, strictly speaking, talk,
not of the destruction of wealth, but rather of the acquisition of
wealth (presumed national security), paid for with dear grain and dear
naval construction. When the empirical ideas of free trade were raised
to the dignity of _laws of nature_ (reason), there was a rebellion
against the economists, by which it was made clear that those laws
of nature were laws, not absolute, but empirical, that is to say,
historical and contingent facts, and that the economists who propounded
them as absolute, were not at all men of science, but politicians,
and represented (if not seriously, at least by unconscious suggestion,
or, if it be preferred, by mere chance) the interests of certain
definite classes or of certain definite peoples. And the rebellion was
right, although it afterwards degenerated into the inconclusiveness
of historicism, and absolutely denied to those false practical
applications the formulæ and laws of Economy, which are _natural_ in
quite another sense, as nominal and therefore irrefutable definitions.
Abstract principles, which are always inadequate to grasp the richness
of reality, supply with a simple instrument him who passes from them
to historical and sociological observation, which requires altogether
different methods. Hence, for instance, the meaning of the school of
Le Play, which in studying concrete economic conditions took note of
religion, of family and political feelings, and of all the other things
connected with the first; hence the admitted necessity of completing
the analytic method (as it is called) with the synthetic, or (as it
would be preferable to say) of neglecting abstractions when dealing
with the problems of life and of directly intuiting life itself.

[Sidenote: _3rd. Transformation of the functions of the calculus into
reality._]

But what is particular to a philosophy that enters into hybrid wedlock
with economic Science, is the transformation of those quantitative
principles, of which we have seen the artificial origin, into effective
reality. As a result, when this origin has not been observed, or has
been forgotten, we may chance to hear the theories of Gossen on the
decline of pleasures, as though they were "fundamental laws of human
sensibility"; or that some _homo economicus_ has appeared, constructor
of diagrams and calculator of degrees of utility and of curves of
satisfaction, as though these were real things. Some false conceptions
derive from economic principles transported into the philosophy of the
practical, which we have already had occasion to refute, such as that
of a _scale of values,_ which the volitional man is supposed to have
before him whenever he deliberates, and that other of the embarrassment
he experiences in choosing between _two equal goods;_ and finally the
belief that man _wills things,_ whereas what he wills in reality is not
things but actions.

The comparisons, metaphors and symbols, taken from Economy and used
in ordinary conversation, lead to the false belief that mathematical
constructions and those of the economic calculus are the real processes
of the psyche or of the Spirit.

[Sidenote: _The pretended calculus of pleasures and pains, and the
doctrines of optimism and pessimism._]

The quantification of volitional acts, taken as a real fact and
introduced into philosophy, has given origin to the idea of a _calculus
of pleasures and pains and of a balance of life,_ to be established
with the pleasures on the profit side of the account and the sorrows
on the side of loss. And there have even been ravings about a double
mensuration of pleasures, to be based upon their _intensity_ and
_duration._ But the real man, at the moment he enjoys, has before him
only his own enjoyment, and at the moment that he suffers, only his
own sorrow: the past is past and life is not to be described like the
profit and loss account of a business. The true economic man says to
himself what Fra Jacopone sang in one of his lauds:

    So much is mine
    As enjoyed and bestowed for the love divine!

The sophisms that assume consistency owing to this false conception,
are most strange. Let the little dialogue of Leopardi with the seller
of almanacs suffice for all. No one would wish to live his life again,
not because the sorrows always exceed the pleasures, as that dialogue
suggests, but rather because man is not, as he believes, a consumer
of pleasures. He is a creator of life, and for this reason the idea
of doing again what has already been done, of retreading the same
path, of reliving the already past, is repugnant to him, even were it
all made up of pleasures as suggested, because he aspires only and
always to the future. _Optimism and pessimism,_ being each of them
respectively unable altogether to deny pleasure and pain, are obliged
to have recourse to these calculations and balances, in order to defend
their preconceived conclusions: but in so doing they fall from Scylla
into Charybdis and each reveals its own sophistical nature.

Indeed, a philosophy that calculates is a philosophy that toys
or dotes, and if we have certainly advised the economists and
mathematicians to calculate and not to think, we must, on the contrary,
cry to the philosopher:--Think, and do not calculate! _Qui incipit
numerare, incipit errare!_




