II


NEGATION OF THE SPIRITUAL FORM OF FEELING

[_Sidenote: The practical activity and the so-called third spiritual
form: feeling._]

In affirming the existence of the practical form of activity, we have
had in view only the theoretical form and have demonstrated that
the one cannot be absorbed and confused in the other, and we have
referred only to the theoretic form, when announcing our intention of
determining the relations of the practical with the other forms of the
spirit. This seems but little correct, and in any case not exhaustive,
because there are or may be other non-theoretical forms of the spirit,
into which the practical form could be resolved. Of these it would be
necessary to take account. And not to beat too long about the bush,
that of which in this case it is question, is the form of _feeling,_
the last or intermediary of the three forms into which it is customary
to divide the spiritual activity: representation, feeling, tendency;
thought, feeling, will. Attempts have not been wanting to reduce
tendency or will to feeling, or, as is said, to a sentimental reaction
from perceptions and thoughts. In fact there is hardly a treatise
of philosophy of the practical without a preliminary study of the
relations between the will and feeling. We cannot, then, escape from
the dilemma; either we must recognize the omission into which we have
fallen and hasten to correct it, or else make explicit the supposition
that may be contained in that omission (which would thus be intentional
and conscious), that _a third general form of the spirit, or a form of
feeling, does not exist._ We have adopted precisely this last position,
and it therefore becomes incumbent upon us briefly to expose the
reasons for which we hold that the concept of feeling must disappear
from the system of the spiritual forms or activities.

[Sidenote: _Various meanings of the word feeling, as a psychological
class._]

Feeling may and has been understood in various ways, some of which do
not at all concern our thesis. In the first place, the word "feeling"
has been used to designate a class of psychical facts constructed
according to the psychological and naturalistic method. Thus it
has happened that, with various times and authors, all the most
rudimentary, tenuous, and evanescent manifestations of the spirit have
been called "feelings," slight intuitions (or sensations as they are
called), not yet transformed into perceptions, slight perceptions,
slight tendencies and appetites, in fact all that forms, as it were,
the base of the life of the spirit. The name has thus, on the other
hand, also been given to psychical processes and conditions, in which
various forms follow one another or alternate in relation to a material
empirically limited. Such are what are called feelings of "fatherland,"
"love," "nature," "the divine." Nothing forbids the formation of such
classes and the use of that denomination, but as has already been
declared in relation to the psychological method, they are of no use
to philosophy, which not only does not receive them within its limits,
but does not occupy itself with them at all, save to reject them when
they present themselves, as philosophical psychology or psychological
philosophy. To classify is not to think philosophically, and philosophy
on the one hand does not recognize criteria of small and great, of
weak and strong, of more and of less, and a small or smallest thought,
a small or smallest tendency, is for it thought and tendency and not
feeling at all; on the other, it does not admit complicated processes
without resolving these into their simple components. Thus the feeling
of love or of patriotism, and the others made use of in the example,
are revealed to philosophy as series of acts of thought and of will,
variously interlaced. Let the psychologists, then, keep their classes
and sub-classes of feeling. We, for our part, not only do not dream of
di-possessing them of such a treasure, but shall continue to draw from
it, when necessary, the small change of ordinary conversation.

[Sidenote: _Feeling as a state of the spirit._]

There also exists another meaning of the word "feeling," of which,
at present at any rate, we do not take account. This appears when
the word is used to designate _the state_ of the spirit or of one of
the special forms of the spirit; we should indeed term these more
correctly the _states,_ since the spirit in this case, as is known,
is polarized in two opposite terms, usually denominated _pleasure and
pain._ Indubitably these two terms can also be taken as psychological
(and are thus included in the preceding case). Hence it results that
pleasure and pain are represented by psychologists as the two extremes
of a continuous series, in which there is a passage from the one to
the other term by insensible increases and gradations. But we must
also recognize that this psychological representation is not the only
one possible, and indeed is not truly the real one, and that the two
terms have their place and their proper meaning in the philosophy
of the spirit. They are, as has been said, _opposites;_ and are
differentiated, not only by a more and a less, by a greatest and a
least, but also by the special character of distinction that opposites
possess. The doctrine of opposites and of opposites in the practical
activity of the spirit does not, however, appertain to this part of our
exposition. In denying feeling, we do not here deny the doctrine of
opposites, and that psychology of the _states_ of the spirit which is
founded upon it, but the doctrine of feeling considered as a particular
_form_ of _activity._

[Sidenote: _Function of the concept of feeling in the History of
philosophy; the indeterminate._]

The conception of feeling as a spiritual activity has answered to a
want of research, which may be described as _provisional excogitation._
Whenever thought has found itself face to face with a form or subform
of spiritual activity, which it was not possible either to eliminate
or to absorb in forms already recognized, the problem to be solved
has been endorsed with that word "feeling." With many this has passed
for a solution. Feeling, in fact, has been the indeterminate in the
history of philosophy, or rather the not yet fully determined, the
_half-determined._

Hence its great importance as an expedient for the indication of
new territories to conquer, and as a stimulus against remaining
obstinately shut up in old and insufficient formulæ. But hence also
its fate: the problem must not be exchanged for its solution, the
indeterminate or semi-determinate must be determined. Whenever the
determination of the forms and sub-forms of the spirit has not been
given in a complete manner, the category of feeling will reappear (and
it will be beneficial); but at the same time will reappear the duty of
exploring it and of understanding what is concealed beneath it, or at
least what unsolved difficulty has caused it to reappear afresh.

Now we have already met with the concept of feeling on more than one
occasion, when investigating the philosophy of the theoretic spirit,
as something supplying a theoretical need outside the theoretic forms
generally admitted, or as a special form of theoretic activity. Every
time that we have done this, an attentive examination has caused it
to disappear before our eyes, and has generally helped us, either to
discover something previously unknown, or to confirm the necessity of
contested categories.

[Sidenote: _Feeling as herald of the æsthetic form;_]

Thus it happened that when a special _æsthetic_ function was
not recognized and it was attempted to explain it, either
intellectualistically, as nothing but an inferior form of philosophy,
or historically, as a reproduction of the historical and natural datum,
or almost as the satisfaction of certain volitional wants (hedonistic
theory), the view of art as neither a form of the intellect nor of
perception nor of will, but of _feeling,_ was an advance, as also
was the appeal to men of _feeling_ to recognize and to judge it.
As a result of this insistence, it was eventually discovered that
art possessed an absolutely simple and ingenuous theoretic form,
without either intellectual or historical contents, the form of the
pure intuition which is that of the æsthetic and artistic activity.
Whoever returns to treat of art as a product of feeling, after this
discovery of the pure intuition, falls back from the determinate to the
semi-determinate, and is at the mercy of all the dangers which arise
from it.

[Sidenote: _As herald of the intuitive element in Historiography._]

The theory of historiography owes its progress in like manner to the
demonstration that it is impossible to deduce the historical statement
from concepts, but that we must deduce it in final analysis from an
immediate _feeling_ of the real, that is to say, from the _intuitive_
element, which inevitably exists in every historical reconstruction,
as in every perception. On the other hand, and in altogether another
sense, reacting against the false idea of an extra--subjective
historical objectivity, to be found in the mere reproduction of the
datum, it was made evident that no historical narration is possible
without the _reaction of feeling_ in respect to the datum. Thus was
discovered the indispensability of the _intellective_ element in the
historical affirmation. Whoever has recourse to feeling as a factor
in historiography, after this complete constitution of the historical
judgment, returns from the clear to the confused, from light, if not to
darkness, then to twilight.

[Sidenote: _Feeling as herald of the pure concept in philosophical
Logic._]

The concept of feeling has also been of capital importance in the
progress of the Logic of philosophy. For how could we begin to explain
that philosophy is constructed with a method altogether different from
that of the exact disciplines (natural sciences and mathematics),
without denying to those sciences the capacity of conquering the
supreme truth, the true truth, full reality, and recognizing such
capacity on the other hand to a special function called _feeling_
or _immediate_ knowledge? That function was void, that is to say,
undetermined, because defined in a negative and not in a positive
manner: feeling was something different from the abstract and arbitrary
procedure of the exact sciences, from the abstract intellect, but its
true nature was unknown. When this was at last known it was discovered
that it was not a question of "feeling" or of "immediate knowledge,"
but of the intellect itself, in its genuine and uncontaminated nature,
its pure and free activity, of intellect as _reason,_ of thought as
_speculative_ thought, of that "immediate knowledge," which is true,
intrinsic, perpetual _mediation._ Whoever henceforth returns to
feeling, after the discovery of the pure or speculative concept, and
believes it to be the creator of philosophy and of religion, fighting
with it against the natural and mathematical sciences, behaves as he
who should wish to return to-day to the flint-lock, for the excellent
reason that it was an advance upon the bow and the catapult. Thus those
who invoke feeling in philosophy are henceforth a little ridiculous.
This does not imply that they were not at one time to be taken
seriously, for this concept has been of great provisional assistance
and has been as it were the compass of the new idea of philosophy.

[Sidenote: _Analogous function in the Philosophy of the practical._]

The same will be the case in the investigation that we have begun of
the practical form of the spirit and of the problems to which it gives
rise. This concept of feeling has been mingled with them all, and
propositions have been formed, of which we shall indicate the true
significance in the proper places. Beginning at once and limiting
ourselves solely to the question of the existence of a peculiar
practical form, it is easy to understand why it has so often been
maintained against the intellectual and theoretical exclusivists, that
the will consists, not of knowledge, but of feeling; that the principle
of action, far from being an intellectual principle, is sentimental
emotion; that in order to produce a volition, reason, ideas, and facts
perceived do not suffice, but that it is necessary that all these
things be transformed into feelings, which must take possession of the
soul; that the base of life lived, that is, of practical life, is not
thought, but feeling, and so on. With these formulæ was recognized
the peculiarity of the practical activity. The theory of feeling in
respect of the practical represents progress as compared with the
intellectualistic theory, because the appearance of indeterminateness
is progress as compared with bad determinateness, and contains in
itself the new and more complete determinateness.

[Sidenote: _Negation of feeling._]

But in this very way of ours of understanding the value of these
formulæ, is implied their resolute negation, when they tend to
persist, after having accomplished their function, and to maintain
side by side with the theory of the practical a third general form
of the spirit, namely feeling. No spiritual fact or manifestation of
activity can be adduced, which, examined without superficiality, is
not reducible to an act of fancy, intellect and perception, that is,
of theory (when it is not at once revealed as an abstraction or as a
merely psychological class of these acts); or to an act of utilitarian
or ethical volition (when it is not here too a psychological class,
variously designated as aspirations, passions, affections, and the
like). Let him who will search his spirit and attempt to indicate one
single act, differing from the above, as something new and original and
deserving of the special denomination of feeling.

[Sidenote: _Its deductive exclusion._]

This constatation of fact (we repeat the warning) is but the first
step in the complete philosophical demonstration, which demands that
we show not only that a third form does not exist, but that _it cannot
exist._ This demonstration will be given further on, and will coincide
with that of the demonstration of the necessity of the two forms,
theoretical and practical; a duality that is unity and a unity that is
duality. Recognizing the legitimacy of the demand for a philosophical
deduction of the forms of the spirit, and therefore of a deductive
exclusion of those that are spurious and wrongly adopted, it seems that
if it be somewhat delayed, such a mode of exclusion will also yield
clearer results.




