VII


HISTORICAL ANNOTATIONS


[Sidenote: _The problem of freedom._]

I. For the reasons stated in their place, a history of the concept of
freedom would end by becoming almost a general history of philosophy.
Denied in different ways in the mechanistic and deterministic
conceptions (from the Stoics to Spinoza), and in the theological and
arbitraristic (from Epicurus to St. Augustine and the mystics), that
concept afterwards continually assumed a more and more conciliatory
form; an indication that the question must be put in an altogether
different way. This movement culminated in the Kantian theory, in
which freedom, defended against the psychologists, is withdrawn from
natural causality and affirmed _a priori,_ as causality by means
of freedom; but, at the same time, Kant did not succeed in fully
justifying it, owing to his failure in the solution of the antitheses,
the defect of the Kantian philosophy, which never really became a
system. The embarrassments and absurdities to which the unsolved
antithesis between liberty and causality gives rise, are sufficiently
exemplified in a proposition to be found in the _Critique of Practical
Reason_: "It would be possible to foresee what man will do in the
future, if we possessed all the facts; yet he would be perfectly
free."[1] But notwithstanding these contradictions and embarrassments,
the energetic affirmation of the principle of freedom by Kant (which
had an altogether special certitude in Kant, in respect to the other
two postulates of the practical reason, God and immortality, from
which in this respect it was distinguished) helped to make prevalent
the conviction of the impossibility of eliminating that concept or
of escaping from it, and made of it the field of battle, where the
fortunes of philosophy were decided. The problem of the freedom of
willing is really solved or near to a solution, in those philosophies
which do not fatigue themselves with it as a particular problem, but
treat of it as something to be understood of itself, provided there
be a non-mechanistic conception of reality, such as would not need
special defence. This happens, not only with sentimentalists and
mystics such as Jacobi and Schleiermacher, but also and above all in
the Hegelian philosophy. Perhaps no philosopher has been less occupied
with the problem of liberty than Hegel, just because he was always
occupied with it. The will is free (he contents himself with saying);
freedom is the fundamental determination of the will, as gravity is
of matter; thus as gravity is matter itself, so is freedom the will.
Hegel consequently saw true in the contest between arbitrarism and
determinism, recognizing in determinism the merit of having given
its value to the content, the datum, in opposition to the certainty
of abstract auto-determination, so that freedom understood as free
will is considered to be illusion. Free will is both determined and
indetermined.[2] But how Hegel could conciliate this theory of freedom
with the mechanistic concept of nature that persists in him is another
question. His failure to attain to this conciliation was perhaps among
the reasons that made his profound solution of the antithesis between
determinism and indeterminism seem a vain playing with words.

After Hegel, a return was made to the Kantian doctrine, variously
modified, in which is posited, now a double causality, now a
composition of diverging forces, now a double point of view, now two
worlds, the one included in the other and dominated, the one by the
principle of the conservation of energy, the other by that of increase.
Such contradictory doctrines are to be found for example in Lotze
and Wundt, to the latter of whom belongs the formula that the causal
explanation is certainly to be applied to spiritual facts, but _a parte
post,_ not _a parte ante_[3] The philosophy of Bergson represents in a
certain way a return to the sound idealistic view, which declares that
the dilemma of determinism and indeterminism is surpassed.[4]

[Sidenote: _The doctrine of evil._]

II. The conception of the relation between bad and good, as reality
opposed to reality, is mythological and religious (Parseeism,
Manichæism, Jewish-Christian doctrine of the devil, etc.). But evil had
already begun to reveal itself to the philosophical reflection of the
ancients as the unreal, the not being; and this is explicitly affirmed
in Neoplatonism. It was not, however, possible to understand this
function of unreality, real in its way, without a general dialectical
conception, which became very slowly mature. Without a dialectic
conception, evil, conceived as unreality, becomes mere illusion, not
so much a moment of the real as an equivocation of man philosophizing.
This is clearly to be seen in Spinoza, who opposes the full laws of
reality to the narrow laws of human nature, saying: _Quidquid nobis
in natura ridiculum, absurdum aut malum videtur, id inde venit quod
res tantum ex parte novimus, totiusque naturae ordinem et cohaerentium
maxima ex parte ignoramus, et quod omnia ex usu nostrae rationis
dirigi volumus, cum tamen id, quod malum esse dictat, non malum sit
respectu ordinis et legum universae naturae; sed tantum solius nostrae
naturae legum respectu._ For indeed, if evil, error and wickedness
were something that had essence, God, who is the cause of all that
has essence (continues Spinoza), would also be the cause of evil, of
error, and of wickedness. But this is not so, because evil is nothing
real. _Neronis matricidium_ (he observes) _quatenus aliquid positivum
comprehendebat, scelus non erat: nam facinus externum fecit, simulque
intentionem ad trucidendam matrem Orestes habuit, et tamen, saltem ita
uti Nero, non accusatur. Quodnam ergo Neronis scelus? Non aliud quam
quod hoc facinore ostendit se ingratum, immisericordem ac inobedientem
esse. Certum autem est, nihil horum aliquid essentiae exprimere, et
idcirco Deum eorum non fuisse catisam, licet causa actus et intentionis
Neronis fuerit_[5] But Spinoza was not able to determine in what sense
Nero was really ungrateful, implacable, and disobedient, nor in what
way such a judgment could be justified, owing to his idea of Substance,
not as subject, spirit, activity, but as cause.

Kant did not succeed in understanding the nature of evil; for him good
and evil were "the categories of freedom,"[6] and the view of Fichte
who makes the radical evil to be _vis inertiae,_ laziness (_Trägheit,_)
which is in nature and in man as nature,[7] represents progress in
respect to the Kantian position. But only with the Hegelian dialectical
view of evil, understood as negation, is evil at the same time given
its right place; and its unreality, contradiction, which is no longer
the product of illusion of thought, but of things themselves, in
intimate contradiction with one another, if it be a blemish, is shown
to be the blemish, not of human thought, but of reality.[8]

[Sidenote: _Decision and freedom._]

III. Free will, too, is not considered as a quality and character of
complete liberty, but as its negation, will as contradiction, in the
Hegelian philosophy. It was preceded in this respect, not only by Kant,
but also by Descartes. Descartes wrote of the decision of indifference:
_Cette indifférence que je sens lorsque je ne suis point porté vers
un côté plutôt que vers un autre par le poids d'aucune raison est
le plus bas degré de ma liberté, et fait plutôt paraître un défaut
dans la connaissance qu'une perfection dans la volonté: car si je
connaissais toujours clairement ce qui est vrai et ce qui est bon, je
ne serais jamais en peine de délibérer quel jugement et quel choix je
devrais faire; et ainsi je serais entièrement libre, sans jamais être
indifférent._[9]

Among the false formulæ of the _freedom of choice_ can be mentioned
that of Rosmini, who calls it _bilateral_ freedom, or that of
performing or not performing a given action.[10] But since the spirit
cannot be reduced to complete passivity, not to perform a given action
is equivalent to performing a different one; and if this other action
that presents itself before us be also not willed by us, then it will
be another, and so on. Thus it is not a question of bilaterality, but
of multiplicity of tendencies: not of the choice between two volitions,
but of the synthesis of many appetites in one, which is the will or
freedom.

[Sidenote: _Conscience and responsibility_]

We may mention the disputes that have been preserved in the
_Memorabilia_ as to the greater responsibility of him who knows more
(or wills more), as compared with him who knows less (or wills less),
as to whether he that acts voluntarily be more unjust than he who
acts involuntarily (ὁ ἑκὼν ἤ ὁ ἄκων). In this connection it is to
be observed that he who voluntarily does not write or read well is
certainly more grammatical than he who reads and writes ill through
ignorance; and therefore that he who commits injustice while knowing
what is just, is more just than he who commits it because he does not
know what is just; and that he is better, who says what is false when
he knows what is true, than he who says what is false, not knowing what
is true. The dispute leads to the celebration of knowledge of self, or,
as we should say, of knowing and possessing oneself.[11]

These thoughts are discussed anew in the _Hippias minor,_ where
the multiple difficulties are placed in relief and a conclusion
reached that does not even satisfy those who propose it.[12] It is
henceforward clear that the question must be solved in the sense that
he who is conscious of sinning is certainly a sinner, whereas he who
is not conscious of so doing, does not sin at all; but this being even
incapable of sinning is in itself a sin, and places the man who is in
such a condition yet a degree lower. In the polemic of Pascal with the
Jesuits--who maintained that in order to sin it was necessary to be
conscious of one's own infirmity and of the suitable remedy, the wish
to be healed and to ask it of God--the Jesuits were theoretically on
the side of reason. _Croira-t-on, sur votre parole_ (wrote Pascal),
_que ceux qui sont plongés dans l'avarice, dans l'impudicité, dans
les blasphèmes, dans le duel, dans la vengeance, dans les vols, dans
les sacrilèges, aient véritablement le désir d'embrasser la chasteté,
l'humilité et les autres vertus chrétiennes?_ Nevertheless, it is
inevitably so, if those acts of theirs are to be judged to be vices
(and if they really are so). Hegel places himself on the side of
Pascal, who accepts and refers to the following argument and reduction
to the absurd: _Ils seront tous damnés ces demi-pécheurs qui ont
quelque amour pour la vertu. Mais pour ces francs-pécheurs, sans
mélange, pleins et achevés, l'enfer ne les tient pas: ils ont trompé le
diable à force de s'y abandonner._[13]

A reduction to the absurd which is not such: because the formula given
as absurd expresses at bottom a very simple truth, which Hegel too
stated in his own way, when he said that it was necessary to prefer
self-will, evil, the erring Spirit, to the innocence of plants and
animals, or of Nature.[14]

[Sidenote: _The concept of duty._]

IV. A classical example of the disputes as to the principle of the
Philosophy of the practical, arising from the consideration of this
principle in its empirical formulations, can be furnished from the
polemic of Herbart against Kant on the subject of _duty._ Herbart
demonstrated that duty is not an original but a derived concept,
and that it appears only when there is disagreement between the
practical _ideas_ and the _will_.[15] But it would be possible to
demonstrate with the same method that the practical ideas are derived
concepts, because they do indeed presuppose the moral will, from the
manifestations of which they are constituted by means of abstraction.
Herbart was in the right against Kant, but he afterwards let the axe
fall on his own feet. The hard formula of the imperative preferred by
Kant had already been combated by Frederick Schiller, who accentuated
the moment of pleasure, sympathy and enthusiasm in the good action.

[Sidenote: _Repentance and remorse._]

As to the other concepts and to the disputes to which they gave rise,
it will be opportune to mention repentance and remorse. Spinoza does
not see that it has value as a necessary negative moment, for he
declared: _Poenitentia virtus non est, sive ex ratione non oritur; sed
is qui facti poenitet bis miser, seu impotens est. Nam primo prava
cupiditate, dein tristitia vinci se patitur;_ and he concludes by
assigning to it value for altogether empirical motives. Men rarely
live (he says) _ex dictamine rationis_; and yet repentance and other
similar affections do more good than harm, and if it be necessary to
sin _in istam partem potius peccandum. Terret vulgus, nisi metuat._[16]
But it was Hegel who instituted a regular persecution of the concept
of repentance and remorse. There are certain passages in his works
that should be read in connection with this question, in order that
we may clearly see how he had an eye to contingent and historical
events in his criticism. "In the Christian world in general (he writes)
there is in force an ideal of the perfect man, who cannot exist as
multitude in a people; and if this ideal is found realized in monks,
quakers, and such-like pious folk, it must be remarked that a mass of
these sad creatures does not constitute a people, just as lice and
parasitic plants cannot exist by themselves, but only on an organic
body. In order to constitute a people, it would be above all desirable
to destroy that lamblike gentleness of theirs, that vanity which is
occupied solely with their own persons, the caring for them and holding
them dear, and has always before it the image and consciousness of
its own excellence. For life in the universal and for the universal
demands, not such vile and listless gentleness, but an energetic
gentleness, not a thinking of oneself and one's own sins, but of the
universal and of what should be done for it. To him who nourishes so
false an ideal, men must always appear to be affected with weakness
and corruption, and that ideal to be so constituted that it can never
be translated into reality. They attribute importance to trifles, to
which no reasonable person pays special attention, and believe that
such weaknesses and defects exist, even when they are not remarked.
Nor should we admire their greatness of soul, but note rather that
their corruption lies precisely in standing still and looking at that
which they call weaknesses and errors, and in making out of nothing
something that exists. A man with such weaknesses and defects is
immediately quit of them, if he do not attach to them importance." The
observations that Hegel makes in his _Æsthetic,_ regarding the type of
the Magdalen in Italian art, are in this respect especially curious.
"In Italian painting the Magdalen appears, both within and without,
as the _beautiful sinner;_ sin in her is as seductive as conversion.
But here neither sin nor sanctity are to be taken too seriously. She
was pardoned, because she had loved much; she sinned through love and
beauty; and the affecting element lies in this, that she has scruples
about her love, and beautiful and sensible as she is, sheds torrents of
tears. But her error is not that she has loved so much; her beautiful
and moving error is precisely that she believes herself to be a sinner,
whereas her sensitive beauty gives the impression that she could not
have been otherwise than noble and of lofty senses in her love."[17]

[Sidenote: _The doctrine of the passions._]

V. The relation between the passions or desires and the will has rather
been studied at the moment of strife between the will and the passions,
than for itself and within its two terms, although Aristotle had
already begun an analysis as to the diversity of appetites or βούλησις
in respect to the intention or προαίρεσις, observing that the intention
relates only to what can be done, whereas the appetition relates also
to things that are impossible.[18] The opposed schools of the Cynics
and Cyrenaïcs, Stoics and Epicureans, and others such, were chiefly
concerned with the antithesis of the passions and the rational will;
but the formulæ of all these schools, if they have some empirical value
as precepts of life more or less suitable for definite individuals,
classes and times, possess none or very little for philosophy. Cynics
and Cyrenaïcs, Stoics and Epicureans, they seem rather to be monks
following this or that rule than philosophers. The question as to the
mode of freeing oneself from the passions and of dominating them,
which lingered till the treatises of Descartes and Spinoza, has
also a chiefly empirical character. G. B. Vico took up a position
opposed to the two opposed degenerations arising from those practical
tendencies, that of "quenching the senses," and of "making a rule of
them." He despised both Stoics and Epicureans as "monastic or solitary
philosophers," and maintained as "a philosopher politician," that it is
needful "not to tear away his own nature from man, nor to abandon him
in his corruption," but "to moderate the human passions and to make of
them human virtues."[19] Rarely has the defence of the passions enjoyed
an equally limpid philosophical enunciation; as a rule, and even in
Hegel, it has been directed chiefly against certain social tendencies,
rather than against philosophical doctrines.[20] The absolute
abandonment to the passions or their absolute destruction, are theories
that have not had true and proper representatives.--The confusion
between the various meanings of the word "passion," understood now
as appetition, or concrete and actual passion, now as a state of the
soul (joy and sorrow), now as volitional habit, is to be found in the
various treatises that we have already had occasion to record. It is
natural that their character of indifference when understood as habits
should have often been observed. Thus for Descartes, _elles sont toutes
bonnes de leur nature et nous n'avons rien à éviter que leurs mauvais
usages ou leur excès._[21]

[Sidenote: _Virtues and Vices._]

On the other hand, the erroneous form of the defence of the passions,
consisting of making them the preparation or cause of the virtues, is
already to be found in the English philosophers of the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries (More, Shaftesbury, etc.); and in the
celebrated _Fable of the Bees_ of Mandeville, it assumes the aspect of
a paradoxical theory, in which the vices are looked upon as promoters
and factors of progress, morality as inefficacious and harmful for this
purpose. And La Rochefoucauld had written: "_Les vices entrent dans
la composition des vertus comme les poisons dans la composition des
remèdes._"[22]

[Sidenote: _The doctrine of individuality: Schleiermacher._]

All these are false or crude forms, in which is involved the doctrine
of the right to individuality, and they have always constituted and
still constitute its danger. This doctrine received its most energetic
expression in the romantic and preromantic period, thanks above all to
Schleiermacher, after it had been referred to in a rather vague way by
Jacobi.[23]

"For some time" (writes Schleiermacher in the _Monologues_) "I too was
satisfied that I had discovered Reason; and venerating equality with
the _Unique Being_ as that which is most lofty, I believed that there
was one single measure for every case, that action should be in all of
them the same, and that each one is distinguished from the other only
in so far as it occupies a place of its own in space. I believed that
humanity manifested itself differently only in the variety of external
facts; but that the internal man, the individual, was not a being
peculiarly (_eigenthümlich_) constructed, and that each was everywhere
equal to the other." "But afterwards was revealed to me that which
instantly raised me to a high state of exaltation: it became clear that
every man must represent humanity in his own way, in an altogether
individual combination of its elements, in order that it may manifest
itself in every mode, and that everything most different may issue from
its bosom and become effectual in the fulness of time and space....
Owing to this thought, I felt myself to be a work individually willed
and therefore elected by the Divinity and such that it must enjoy a
particular form and culture; and the free act to which this thought
belongs has collected and intimately joined together the elements of
human nature in a peculiar existence."

"While I now do whatever I do according to my spirit and sense,
my fancy places before me as very clear proof of the internal
determination, a thousand other modes, in which it would be possible to
act otherwise without offending the laws of humanity: I rethink myself
in a thousand different forms, in order to discover with the greater
certainty that which is especially mine."[24]

[Sidenote: _Romantic and very modern theories._]

But this peculiarity (_Eigenthümlichkeit,_) opportunely placed in
relief by Schleiermacher, and a thought much loved by the Romantics
(Herder, Jacobi, G. Humboldt, the Schlegels, etc.), is often seen to
degenerate into individual caprice, even in those times, as may be
observed in the sort of caricature which Frederick Schlegel made of the
Fichtian I, become the individual I, and in the notorious _Lucinde,_
to which the same Schleiermacher inconsiderately devoted a series of
letters of comment and defence. The last offshoots of the Romantics
were Max Stirner and Frederick Nietzsche: in the former the value
of individuality becomes changed into an affirmation of spasmodic
egotism; in the second there is a continuous mixture of true and false,
of good and of bad individuality, as is natural in a writer whose
_Eigenthümlichkeit_ was rather that of a poet than of a thinker.

[Sidenote: _The concept of development and progress._]

VI. We have discussed elsewhere Hegel's concept of development, and
his thought as synthesis of opposites, which essentially belongs to
the Hegelian philosophy and has been superficially treated and adopted
by other philosophical schools, and this is not the place either to
retrace their history or to demonstrate into what errors Hegel fell
through abusing the truth that he had discovered. Among the errors of
that philosophy (as for that matter of all contemporary philosophies
and of those that have followed one another down to our own day), is
to be noted the persistence of the concept of Nature as a mode of
reality opposed to the mode of the Spirit, whence came a dualism that
was not effectually surpassed, save in appearance. The doctrine of
development by opposites is to be understood as accepted and maintained
here, with the correction of the concept of nature, and also the
doctrine of the synthesis of opposites, free from the use or abuse
of it by Hegel for distinct concepts (and worse still, for empirical
concepts). As for the concept of Providence, which is neither Fate
nor Fortune, nor the work of a transcendent God, this, in its modern
form, goes back to the _Scienza nuova_ of Vico and is not to be
confounded with the personal religious beliefs that Vico held and kept
distinct from his philosophical concept as to immanent Providence.
The same concept reappears in the Hegelian philosophy under the form
of the Idea, or of the _astuteness of Reason,_ which avails itself
of men as its instruments and managers of business.[25] Finally, the
conception of cosmic progress was extraneous to the oriental world,
to the Græco-Roman, and to the Christian worlds, prevailing in turn
in the latter that of decadence from an original state of perfection
and of circles or returns. In its modern form it takes its origin from
thinkers free of these religious views, who merge in the philosophies
of becoming and of evolution. But the concept of progress destroyed
itself in many of these rationalistic philosophies, the "disappearance
of evil" being posited as possible (Spencer), and a definite state
of perfection conceived (though transferred from the past into the
future), that is to say a Reality that should be Reality, indeed,
perfect Reality having ceased to be development, that is to say, itself.



[1] _Kr. d. prakt. Vern._ p. 119.

[2] _Phil. d. Rechtes,_ §§ 4, 15.

[3] Lotze, _Grundzüge der Ethik_ (Leipzig, 1884), pp. 26, 30-31; Wundt,
_Ethik_² (Stuttgart, 1892), pp. 463-464.

[4] _Essai sur les données immédiates de la conscience_ (Paris, 1898).

[5] _Tract, theol.-pol._ vi. c. 6; _Ethica,_ p. iv. intr.; _Epist._36
(_Opera,_ pp. 208, 378, 597).

[6] _Kr. d. pr. Vernf._ p. 79.

[7] _System der Sittenlehre,_ in _Werke,_ iv. pp. 198-205.

[8] See my study: _Ciò che è vivo e ciò che è morto della filosofia di
Hegel_ (Bari, 1907).

[9] _Médit._ iv.

[10] For example, _Compendio di Etica_ (Roma, 1907), p. 56.

[11] _Mentor,_ iv. c. 2, § 19 _sqq._

[12] _Hippias minor,_ 375.

[13] Pascal, _Provine,_ i, iv.; Hegel, _Phil. d. Rechtes,_ § 40.

[14] _Enc._§ 248.

[15] _Allg. prakt. Phil._ pp. 121-122; _Einl. i. d. Phil._ (trad,
ital.), pp. 118, 171, 224.

[16] _Ethic,_ iv. prop. 54, p. 480.

[17] _Gesch. d. Phil._ ii. 240-241; _Vorles. üb. Aesth._ ii. 162-163.

[18] _Eth. Nicom._ Bk. iii. cc. 2-3, 1111-1113.

[19] _Scienza nuova seconda,_ degn. 5.

[20] _Phän. d. Geistes,_ pp. 484-486; _Encycl._ § 474; _Phil. d.
Rechtes,_ § 124; _Phil. d. Gesch._ pp. 39-41.

[21] _Traité des passions,_ iii. § 211.

[22] _Maximes,_ n. 182 (Ed. Garnier, p. 43).

[23] _Woldemar,_ pp. 112-113.

[24] _Monologen,_ in _Werke,_ i. 366-368, 372.

[25] See the study of Hegel mentioned.




THIRD SECTION


UNITY OF THE THEORETICAL AND THE PRACTICAL


[Sidenote: _Double result; precedence of the theoretical over the
practical and of the practical over the theoretical._]


The study of the practical activity in its relations that we made in
the first section has removed all doubt as to the thesis that the
practical activity presupposes the theoretical, or that _knowledge is
the necessary precedent of volition and action._[1] But the succeeding
study of the practical activity in its dialectic having led to the
result that the practical activity is reality itself in its immediacy,
and that no other reality (or we may say _other nature_) is conceivable
outside will-action, compels us also to affirm the opposite thesis,
that the theoretic activity presupposes the practical, and that
_the will is the necessary precedent of knowledge_.[2] And it is a
precedent, not indeed in the sense admitted from the beginning, of
the necessary implication of the will in every theoretical act, as
will to know, by means of the unity of the Spirit[3] (for this will
is subsidiary and not constitutive; but if it become constitutive it
produces, as has been seen, wilfulness and the theoretical error[4]),
but precisely in the sense of a constitutive will, without which no
knowledge would be thinkable.

Knowledge, indeed, is knowledge of something: it is the remaking of
a fact, an ideal recreation of a real creation. If there have not
previously been a desire, an aspiration, a nostalgia, there cannot be
poetry; if there have not been an impulse or a heroic deed, the epic
cannot arise; if the sun do not illumine a landscape, or a soul invoke
a ray of sunlight upon the countryside, the picture of a luminous
landscape cannot exist. And if there be not a world of reality that
generates a world of representations, Philosophy, which is the search
for the universal, is not conceivable, nor History, the understanding
of the individual.

[Sidenote: _Error of those who maintain the exclusive precedence of
either._]

The indubitability of this affirmation, which no force of sophistry
can destroy, renders fallacious both the opposite theses, which have
several times been variously proposed and maintained: the exclusive
priority of the theoretic, and the exclusive priority of the practical.

Those who maintain them enter into so desperate a contest with
reality, that in order to issue from it without too much dishonour,
they are finally compelled to call in the aid of a third term, which is
in turn either thought that is not thought, or will that is not will,
or something grey that contains in itself thought and will, without
being either the one or the other, nor the unity of that duality. On
the one hand is postulated a Logos, a thought _in se_ (one does not
understand how this can ever think and be thought), and it is made to
adopt the resolution (which one does not understand how it can ever
adopt) of coming forth _from itself_ and creating a nature, in order
to be able to return finally to itself, by means of this alienation,
and to be henceforth _per se,_ that is to say, able to think and to
will. The defect of this artificial construction, its mythological and
religious origin, can be said to have been already revealed, in the
comparison employed with reference to it by the author who maintained
it (Hegel), to the effect that the Logos is God _before_ the creation
of the world: a God, that is to say, altogether unreal and absurd.
On the other hand, the excogitation of a _blind Will_ (Schelling,
Schopenhauer) completely tallies with this Thought that does not think
because it has not previously willed, and that does not truly will
because it has not previously thought, and all of a sudden fashions
for itself the instrument of knowledge, to succeed in surpassing
itself in this alienation from itself, by means of liberation from
willing obtained in the contemplation of the ideas and in asceticism.
Here, too, we must repeat that the one error passes over and converts
itself into the other, and this inevitable conversion causes the other
secondary and hybrid forms of theory to have but slight interest, those
in which the priority has been conceived as that of fancy, or feeling,
or the unconscious, or the indifferentiated, and the like, all of which
represent vain efforts to suppress one of the two fundamental forms of
the spirit, or to derive them from a third, which consciousness does
not reveal.

[Sidenote: _Problem of the unity of this duality._]

This however does not mean that the demand to conceive the link of that
duality, or the unity of the theoretical and the practical, manifested
in all these erroneous attempts, is not legitimate. But in order to
conceive this, it is necessary to insist above all upon the reality of
this duality, of which is sought the connection and the unity.

[Sidenote: _Not the duality of opposites._]

This connection cannot be the relation or synthesis of opposites. The
theoretical is not the opposite of the practical, nor the practical
the opposite of the theoretical: the opposite of the theoretical is
error or the false, as the opposite of the practical is the volitional
contradiction or evil. The theoretical, far from being negative, is
positive, not less than the practical, and inversely. Neither form can
therefore be in any way debased to a simple opposite. Opposition is
intrinsic to the spirit and is to be found in each one of its forms:
hence the general value of the spirit (activity against passivity,
rationality and reality against irrationality and unreality, being
against not-being) and that of its special forms (beautiful against
ugly, true against false, useful against useless, good against evil).
But precisely for this reason, it cannot constitute the character of
one form in respect to the other: neither that of the true against the
good, nor that of the beautiful against the useful, and so on.

[Sidenote: _Not duality of finite and infinite._]

Nor can the connection be thought as are thought the subdivisions of
the theoretic and the practical forms, or according to the relations
of individual to universal, of finite to infinite, the first of
which terms conditions the second, but is conditioned by it only in
an implicit manner. Of the two theoretical forms (and we shall see
further on that the forms of the practical are also two), the æsthetic
precedes the logical and is autonomous: a song, a story, a statue, do
not express any concept; but the philosophy that gives the concept, is
at the same time fancy, expression, word: the prose of the philosopher
is his song. The æsthetic form is the knowledge of the individual;
the logical that of the universal, which is also individual. But this
relation that arises within the theoretic, as within the practical
form, cannot be transported to the relation of the two forms without
logical incoherence: the subdivision, so to speak, is not the
division. Thought is not the finite in respect of willing, which is
the infinite; nor is the will the finite in respect of thought, which
is the infinite. Thought and will are both of them at once finite
and infinite, individual and universal. He who passes from action to
thought, does not limit his own being by becoming finite; nor does he
limit it by passing from thought to action; or better, in both cases he
makes himself finite to attain to the infinite; poet to open to himself
the way to the thought of the eternally true; man of action, that he
may dedicate his work to the eternal good.

[Sidenote: _Perfect analogy of the two forms, theoretic and practical._]

The two forms, theoretical and practical, both positive, both a
connection of finite and infinite, correspond in everything, as has
already appeared from our exposition, in which the appeal to the one
from the problems of the other has always aided a better penetration
of the nature of such problems and the finding of their solution.
Thus in both there is genius and creation (geniuses of art and of
thought, and geniuses of action); in both, reproduction and judgment
take place in the same way (æsthetic taste, practical taste; history
of art and history of philosophy, history of actions); in both arise
representative concepts and empirical rules. The analogy will be
better illustrated by what is to follow, when will be demonstrated the
correspondence between art and economic, logical thought and ethicity,
historical discrimination and ethical discrimination, empirical
concepts and laws of action, and so on.


[Sidenote: _Not a parallelism, but a circle._]

If this analogy exclude the possibility of the two forms being
_unequal,_ it must not, on the other hand, be perverted with the
object of conceiving them _parallel,_ as would perhaps be pleasing
to the parallelists of spirit and nature, soul and body; this is an
expedient that is certainly easy, but certainly not satisfying. They
are not parallel, but are on the contrary bound, the one to the
other, in such a way that the one proceeds from the other. From the
æsthetic apprehension of reality, from philosophical reflection upon
it, from historical reconstruction, which is its result, is obtained
that knowledge of the actual situation, on which alone is formed and
can be formed the volitional and practical synthesis, the new action.
And this new action is in its turn the material of the new æsthetic
figuration, of the new philosophical reflection, of the new historical
reconstruction. In short, knowledge and will, theory and practice,
are not two parallels, but two lines, such that the head of the one
is joined to the tail of the other; or, if a geometric symbol also be
desired, such that they constitute, not a parallelism, but a _circle._

[Sidenote: _The circle of Reality: thought and being, subject and
object._]

They constitute therefore the circle of reality and of life, which is
duality-unity of thought and being, of subject and object, in such
a way that to think the subject is the same as to think the subject
of an object, and to think an object is the same as to think the
object of a subject. In truth, it sometimes seems strange and almost
impossible that such hard and difficult questions should have arisen
as to the objectivity of knowledge, and as to whether thought attains
to being, or whether there be a being beyond thought. Thought is such,
precisely because it affirms being, and being is such, precisely
because it is generated by a thought. It is only when we remember
that in those questions were included others of a very difficult and
intricate nature, concerning divine transcendency and the content of
the concept of nature (gnoseological questions, which it is the glory
of modern philosophy to have asked and solved);--it is only then that
we understand how the relation of thought and being, of knowing and of
willing, has also become obscure. Kant was forced to come to a stop
before the mystery of reality, because he had not altogether conquered
transcendency, nor altogether surpassed the false conception of nature
as _ens,_ given by the naturalists. It revealed itself to him, not
as a circle, but as an assemblage of lines diverging or joining to
infinity. Hegel made two of will and nature, owing to the insufficiency
of his gnoseological theory relating to the natural sciences, and was
led to posit a Philosophy of nature in opposition to a Philosophy of
the spirit, thus permitting to exist a form of non-mediate dualism,
after he had destroyed so many, or making it mediate in the artificial
manner to which we have referred. The shadows of that gnoseology having
been dispersed, the relation between theory and practice, subject and
object, appears in full light; and the answer becomes very simple to
the question as to how, when everything is unconvertible relation of
condition and conditioned, thought and being are reciprocally condition
and conditioned, and as to how the vicious circle is avoided. The
criticism of vicious circles includes in itself and affirms the idea
of a circularity that is not vicious; thought and being are not a
succession of two finites, but an absolute relation, that is, the
Absolute itself. To express ourselves mythologically, if the creation
of the world be the passage from chaos to cosmos, from not-being to
being, this passage does not begin either with the theoretic or with
the practical, with the subject, or with the object, but with the
Absolute, which is the absolute relation of the two terms. _In the
beginning was neither the Word nor the Act; but the Word of the Act and
the Act of the Word._

[Sidenote: _Critique of the theories as to the primacy of theoretical
or of practical reason._]

It is well to state again that in consequence of the relation and
correlation established, all the questions as to the primacy of
thought or will, of the contemplative or active life, and speaking
more empirically, of the thinker or the man of action, disappear.
To pose such problems is as though one were to ask which of the two
semicircles of a circle has precedence. Similar questions, always
insoluble or badly solved, have their origin in internal obscurity as
to the fundamental correlation. When man has attained to the summit of
knowledge (a summit that is certainly not Art; nor, strictly speaking,
Philosophy, but History, the knowledge of the concrete real, that
is, the actuality of philosophy), when he has completely penetrated
the actual situation, can he perhaps stop at this point and say _hic
manebimus optime?_ Can he arrest life which is raging and demanding
to be continued? And if he succeed in suspending it for an instant in
thought, why has he suspended, if not to continue it? Knowledge is
not an end, but an instrument of life: knowledge that did not serve
life would be superfluous and harmful.--On the other hand, when a man
has willed and has thrown himself into action, when he has produced
another piece of life, can he blindly continue to produce life for
ever? Would not blindness impede the production itself? Therefore he
must rise from life to knowing, if he wish to look in the face the
product that he has lived, and surpass it with thought, for which life
is now means and instrument. Knowledge serves life and life serves
knowledge; the contemplative life, if it do not wish to become insipid
ease, must lead to activity, and that activity, if it do not wish to
become an irrational and sterile tumult, must lead to contemplation.
Reality, in specifying aptitudes, has formed men of thought and men
of action, or of prevailing thought or prevailing action, these not
superior to those, for they are collaborators.--Thus the discussions
as to whether human progress be moral or intellectual, or whether the
propelling force be the practical and economic activity, or philosophy,
or religion (Buckle, Kidd, etc.), are shown to be vain.

[Sidenote: _New pragmatism: life conditioning Philosophy._]

It is rather to be considered that from this bond between theory
and practice is obtained a pragmatism of a new sort, of which the
pragmatists have never thought, or at least have not been able to
distinguish from the others and to give it value. If Life condition
Thought, we have in this the apodictic demonstration of the always
historically conditioned form of every thought; not only of Art, which
is always the art of a time, of a soul, of a moment; but also of
Philosophy which can solve only those problems presented by Life. Every
philosophy reflects and cannot but reflect the preoccupations, as
they are called, of a definite historical moment; and this, not in the
quality of its _solutions_ (in which case it would be and is indeed bad
philosophy), but in the quality of its _problems._ Thus it is at once
contingent and eternal, mortal and immortal, extratemporal and living
only in time and history.

[Sidenote: _Deductive confirmation of the two forms and deductive
exclusion of the third feeling._]

Finally, with the establishment of the duality-unity of the theoretical
and the practical, we have demonstrated that which at the beginning
of the exposition had only been asserted and presupposed: namely,
why a _practical_ form of the spirit must be placed beside the
theoretical,[5] and why there is no _third_ form beyond these, whether
it be called _feeling_ or by any other name.[6] The theoretical form
postulates the practical, because the subject postulates the object;
but the spirit does not postulate a third form intermediate between the
two, or unity of the two, because it is itself precisely mediator and
unity of itself, _subject-object._



[1] Section I.

[2] Section II.

[3] Section I. c. 3.

[4] Section I. c. 4.

[5] Section I. c. 1.

[6] Section I. c. 2.




SECOND PART

THE PRACTICAL ACTIVITY IN ITS SPECIAL FORMS




FIRST SECTION


THE TWO PRACTICAL FORMS: ECONOMIC AND ETHIC




