I


DISTINCTION OF THE TWO FORMS IN THE PRACTICAL CONSCIOUSNESS


[Sidenote: _The utilitarian or economic form, and the moral or ethical
form._]

All that has been developed in the preceding book concerns the
practical activity _in general:_ therefore no account has been taken of
the special distinctions of the practical forms, as though there were
none, or they have only been alluded to as something problematical;
and when exemplifications have been given, recourse has been had
indifferently to one or to the other of the forms commonly admitted,
whether or no they are to be held philosophically distinguishable.
Now, on the contrary, we affirm in an explicit manner that the spirit,
which we have seen distinguished as theoretical and practical, is
sub-distinguished as practical spirit, into two forms, of which the
first may be called utilitarian or _economic,_ the second moral or
_ethical._

[Sidenote: _Insufficiency of the descriptive and psychological
distinction._]

In affirming this sub-distinction, we are obliged to renounce (as we
have already done for the practical in respect to the theoretical) a
demonstration by the psychological method, which has already shown
itself to be vicious. If indeed it were applicable in this field, we
should doubtless be able to strike the intellect and persuade the soul
for a moment, by pointing to the spectacle of life as a demonstration
of the two forms, economic and ethic, showing on the one hand, farmers,
commercial men, speculators, conquerors of men and of territories,
wielders of the word or of the sword as instrument of dominion;
and, on the other hand, educators, benefactors, disinterested and
self-sacrificing men, martyrs and heroes; on the one hand, economic
institutions (manufactories, mines, exchanges, exploration companies),
and on the other moral institutions (educators and schools, charitable
societies, orders of Sisters of Charity, or red, white, or blue Cross
Companies, and so on). What can be better proof of the reality of the
bipartition enunciated? Cannot we touch it, as with the hand? However
(as already in the case of the distinction between the theoretical
and the practical), what is touched with the hand is not on that
account seized by the intellect, and indeed in a little while it also
escapes the hand which had thought to be its master. For when we better
observe the individuals who seemed to be merely economic, they seem to
be also moral, and inversely;--moral institutions are also economic,
and economic moral The benefactor calculates and wishes to attain his
object with the same _cupiditas_ as the peasant, all intent upon gain;
and the peasant in his turn is ennobled in his chase after lucre by
the dignity of labour and by the moral impulses that sustain it;--all
charitable institutions are economic undertakings, and economic
undertakings are subject to moral laws, so that in drawing up accounts
there is no knowing where is that material distinction between the
economic and the ethical activities. The truth is that here too it is
not possible to start from contingent facts and from their classes
with empirical limitations, to attain to philosophical distinctions,
but that it is necessary to start from these, in order to interpret
contingent facts, and finally to understand also the mode of formation
of empirical classes. For this reason the psychological method revolves
in a circle that is effectively vicious.

[Sidenote: _Deduction and the necessity of integrating it with
induction._]

Neither is it possible to proceed with the method that we shall call
deductive solely; that is, we see the necessity of the two sub-forms
of the practical activity, which, being the object of the subject and
therefore in every way analogous to the activity of the subject, that
is, to the theoretical, must have a duplication of forms answering
to the duplication of the theoretical activity into æsthetic and
logical, and cannot posit the universal practical without positing the
individual that shall be its vehicle. This deduction, although in every
way correct and rigorous, cannot be convincing, save when it is also
demonstrated that it responds to fact as revealed by observation, that
is, when deduction is also induction, as the speculative method demands.

[Sidenote: _The two forms as a fact of consciousness._]

Leaving, therefore, on this occasion also, the deductive proof to the
complete development of the theory, we shall begin by appealing to
observation of self, in order that every one may verify in himself
the existence of the two different forms of volitional acts, termed
by us economic and ethic. The economic activity is that which wills
and effects only what corresponds to the conditions of fact in which
a man finds himself; the ethical activity is that which, although
it correspond to these conditions, also refers to something that
transcends them. To the first correspond what are called individual
ends, to the second universal ends; the one gives rise to the judgment
concerning the greater or less coherence of the action taken in itself,
the other to that concerning its greater or less coherence in respect
to the universal end, which transcends the individual.

[Sidenote: _The economic form._]

If we wish to recognize only the moral form of activity, we soon
perceive that it draws with it the other, from which it is distinct;
for our action, although universal in its meaning, cannot but be
something concrete and individually determined. What is put in practice
is not morality in universal, but always a determinate moral volition:
as Hegel remarked in a different connection, we do not eat fruit in
general, but cherries, pears, plums, or, these cherries, these pears,
these plums; we hasten to comfort in this or that way an individual,
made in this or that way, who finds himself in this or that state of
misfortune; we do justice at this or that point of time and space to
individual beings on a definite matter. If a good action be not solely
our individual pleasure, it must become so: otherwise, how could we
carry it out? Thus, by closer examination, we realize that our action
always obeys a rational law, even when its moral law is suppressed, so
that, when every inclination that transcends the individual has been
set aside, we do not on that account remain the prey of caprice. We
shall desire only our own will, we shall follow only our own individual
inclination; but, even so, it is necessary to will this will and this
inclination coherently, not to undulate between two or more volitions
at the same time. And if we succeed in really obtaining our desire,
if, while the moral conscience is for a moment suspended within us,
we abandon ourselves to the execution of a project of vengeance and
attain to it in spite of many obstacles, thus executing a masterpiece
of ability, a practical masterpiece; even when, in this case, _populus
non plaudit,_ we for our part certainly _nos nobis plaudimus,_ and feel
most satisfied, at least so long as lasts the suspension of the moral
consciousness; for we have done what we willed to do, we have tasted,
though but for a little while, the pleasure of the gods. Whereas if,
although we follow our desire, we do something different from it, or
mingle several mutually exclusive desires with one, and having decided
not to drink wine, for example, in order to obey the advice of the
doctor and to remain in good health, we yet yield to the wish to drink
it, that pleasure is, so to say, poisoned by preoccupation, the taste
is at the same time distaste, unless we succeed in forgetting for some
moments the advice of the doctor, or think that very possibly he does
not know what he is saying. We continually apply the same criterion
to the incidents of life; actions and individuals, of whom we cannot
morally approve, drag from us sometimes cries of admiration for the
ability with which they have conducted themselves, for the firmness
that they display, worthy (as is said) of a better cause. The Epicurean
Farinata, who raised himself erect on his red-hot bed, or the impious
Capaneus who cursed Jove beneath the rain of punishing fire, obtain
from us that esteem which we refuse to those sad souls who lived
without infamy and without praise. Art has celebrated in tragedies and
poems the strong characters of great criminals, but it has turned to
ridicule in comedies little criminals, the violent who show themselves
timid, the astute who let themselves be cheated.

[Sidenote: _The ethical form._]

As we cannot fail to recognize this form of the practical activity,
quite individual, hedonistic, utilitarian, and economic, and the
importance that it possesses, joined to or separated from morality,
as the case may be, and the special practical judgments that have
their origin in it (the judgment of convenience, whether it be called
utilitarian or economic), so it would be impossible not to recognize
the moral form. Yes, the volitional act satisfies us as individuals
occupying a definite point of time and space, but if it fail to
satisfy us at the same time as beings transcending time and space,
our satisfaction will be ephemeral and will rapidly be changed into
dissatisfaction. To one desire succeeds another, and to this another,
and so on to infinity; but the one is different from the other, and
the new either condemns the old or is by it condemned. If we succeed
in arranging our pleasures in series and classes, and in subordinating
and connecting them, certainly there will be some gain; but the gain
will not have been a true one on this occasion either. We shall at
the most be able to guide our life according to some plan, and for a
certain time that has not the exactitude of the moment; instead of the
instantaneous will to which succeeds a different will, we shall have
general ends for which we shall work. We shall propose, for instance,
to do certain work and to abstain from doing certain other work, in
order to marry a loved one, to win a seat in Parliament, or to obtain
literary fame. But those ends are also merely contingent (they are
general, not universal), and consequently cannot assuage our thirst.
When we all have attained to them, we shall experience _le déboire_
that _la cueillaison d'un rêve au cœur qui l'a cueilli_ always leaves
behind. The company of the fair beloved will weary, the political
ambition realized will leave the soul empty, literary fame will seem
the shadow of vanity. Perhaps too, we shall change our side, like
the sick man who cannot rest on his bed of feathers, and begin to
follow other ends; the lover deluded with matrimony will turn to other
loves; the ambitious man, weary of political life, will think of new
ambitions, or of that of not having any, and of retiring to so-called
domestic peace; the seeker for literary fame will long for ease,
silence, and forgetting. But in vain: dissatisfaction persists. And it
will always persist, and pallid Care will always sit behind us, on the
croup of our horse, if we are not able to tear from the contingent its
character of contingent, breaking its spell, and bringing ourselves to
a full stop in that _progressus ad infinitum_ from thing to thing, from
pleasure to pleasure, to which it impels us, if we be not able to place
the eternal in the contingent, the universal in the individual, duty
in desire. Then only do we acquire that internal peace, which is not
in the future, but in the present, because eternity is in the moment,
for him who knows how to place it there. Our actions will always be
new, because reality always places new problems before us, but if we
accomplish them with lofty souls, and with purity of heart, seeking in
them that which surpasses them, we shall on every occasion possess the
Whole. Such is the character of the moral action, which satisfies us,
not as individuals, but as men, and as individuals only in so far as
we are men; and in so far as we are men, only by means of individual
satisfaction.

[Sidenote: _Impossibility of eliminating it._]

Those men in whom the moral consciousness is wanting, or is confused
and intermittent, make us fearful--fearful for ourselves, obliged to be
on our guard against them and to ward off their snares and injuries,
and fearful for them, for if they have not already fallen the prey to
the most terrible torments, they certainly will do so. They are like
people dancing unconsciously upon ground that has been mined; the
conscious spectator trembles for them, they do not; but if by chance
they escape the danger, they will be retrospectively horrified when
they look back. The inebriation evaporates and the clear outlines of
reality reappear, but that which restores form to those outlines is
the eternal, not the contingent, morality, not desire. We see this take
place in an intense form in what are called _conversions,_ followed by
the intention of leaving the world and its false joys and retiring to a
cloister; or, without metaphor, of becoming regenerated, of beginning
a new life with new ideal presuppositions. But intensive conversions
are catastrophes which occur, like popular revolutions, when continuous
evolution is impeded. The wise man is converted and renewed at every
moment, without the solemnity of a conversion, and with the _memorare
novissima_ he retains in the contingent, his contact with the eternal.
He knows that he must love things and creatures one by one, each in
its individuality, for he who does not love thus is neither good nor
bad, not even being a man. He will wish for literary fame, political
power, matrimony, according to his aptitudes and to the conditions in
which he finds himself; but he will wish for all these things without
wishing for them; he will wish for them, not for themselves, but for
that which they contain of universal and constant; he will love them
in God, ready to abandon them immediately their ideal content shall
have left them; he will seriously desire them with all ardour for
themselves, but only when their self is also "his other self." No
thing, no creature possesses unconditioned value, which belongs only to
that which is neither thing nor creature. The value of our individual
life is conditioned for each of us, and we must guarantee and defend
it as vehicle of the universal, and we must be ready to throw it
away, as a useless and pernicious thing, when it does not serve this
end, or rebels. But the value of every being dear to us is not less
conditioned, and Jesus said with reason, when preparing himself for
his divine mission, that he had come to separate men from their wives,
their sons, their friends, and from their native land. That separation
in union, that union in separation, is the moral activity, individual
and universal.

[Sidenote: _Confirmed by facts._]

Thus it happens that art, which has celebrated strong characters, able
men and affairs well conducted, has also celebrated, and with greater
liveliness, those strong men who have placed their strength at the
service of that other strength which surpasses them and makes them
eternal. For this reason, no embittered soul, no sceptic and pessimist
remains long firm in his negation of all moral light; such negations
are indeed as a rule true _amantium irae. _ The singer of the lesser
Brutus who had thus ferociously imprecated:

    Foolish Virtue, hollow mists and fields
              Of restless ghosts
    Are thy schools, and Repentance turns her back upon
        thee,...

is the same who, on witnessing a slight act of generosity, exclaims
with emotion:

    Fair Virtue, when my spirit becomes aware of thee,
    It exults, as at a joyous event....

The coldest and most self-contained philosophers, when they speak of
it, find themselves sometimes impelled to adopt a poetic tone, and
Aristotle will say of Justice that it is "a more wonderful thing than
Hesperus or the Morning Star,"[1] and Emmanuel Kant will compose an
apostrophe to Duty, and will write at the end of the _Critique of
Practical Reason_: "Two things fill the soul with ever new and ever
increasing veneration and admiration the more often and the longer
reflection is occupied with them: _the starry heaven_ above me, and
_the moral law_ within me." And even the great mass of rhetoric that
has for its object virtue or the moral law is a homage rendered to this
supreme force of life, reality of reality.

The impossibility of suppressing the economic or the moral form of the
activity in our practical consciousness, the continual appeal that the
one makes to the other, the revolving of our practical judgment about
the two aspects, both of them necessary, of the useful and the honest,
energy and goodness, pleasure and duty, explain why the Psychology
and the Description of practical life have constituted the two kinds
of types and classes, of economic and of moral men, of economic and
of moral institutions. Such rough and approximate distinctions have
however at bottom, in this as in other cases, an intimate and rigorous
distinction, which every one will find evident in himself, if he look
inward upon himself and fix his gaze persistently on the universal
forms of the spirit that acts within him.



[1] _Eth. Nicom._1. v. c. i, 1129 b.




