III


HISTORICAL NOTES


[Sidenote: _Merit of the Kantian Ethic._]

I. It is the singular merit of Kant to have put an end, once for all,
to every material Ethic, by proving its utilitarian character: a
merit that is not cancelled by the lacunæ that exist in other parts
of his thought, entangling him unawares in the materialism and in the
utilitarianism that he had surpassed. It would be anti-historical to
desire to judge a thinker by the contradictions into which he falls
and so to declare his work to be a failure and of no importance, when
it is only imperfect. There are errors in all the works of man, and
error is always contradiction; but he who has the eye of the historian
discovers where lies the true strength of a thought and does not deny
the light, because of necessity accompanied with shadow. Before Kant,
ethic was either openly utilitarian or such that although presenting
itself in the deceitful form of Ethic of sympathy, or religious Ethic,
was yet reducible to utilitarianism. Kant conducted an implacable and
destructive war, not only against admitted utilitarian forms, but also
against those that were masked and spurious, called by him material
Ethic.

[Sidenote: _The predecessors of Kant._]

In this too, his predecessors are to be found in traditional philosophy
of Christian origin, or, if it be preferred, Platonic (opposition
of material to formal Ethic can already be observed in the attitude
of Aristotle to Plato). If the fathers and the scholastics had been
divided as to the question of the relation between moral laws and the
divine will, and many of them, especially the mystics, had made that
law to depend upon the divine will and upon nothing else, yet views
had not been wanting, according to which the power of changing at
will the moral laws, that is to say, of changing his own essence, was
denied to God, since he could not be _supra se._ Religious Ethic was
cleansed of every admixture of arbitrarism and utilitarianism by this
solution, accepted by nearly all religious thinkers of the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries (by Cudworth, by Malebranche, and finally by
Leibnitz). On the other hand, we cannot but recognize that many other
material formulæ used to be understood in an ideal, or, as we have
said, in a symbolical manner; and certainly that very eudæmonism
of Aristotle, toward which Kant showed himself too severe, was not
the pleasure and happiness of the hedonists and utilitarians, and the
mediety (μεσότης) proposed as the distinctive character of virtue,
although without doubt empty and often incoherent, was already almost
a formal principle. The same is to be said of the Stoic principle of
_following nature_; and coming to the immediate predecessors of Kant,
of that _perfectio_ already mentioned, which Kant, after wavering a
little, reduced to happiness, not, however, without stating that it is
a more indeterminate concept than any other. With Kant, however, the
point was admitted, that the moral law is not to be expressed in any
formula, which contains representative and contingent elements.

[Sidenote: _Defect of that Ethic: agnosticism._]

The defect of the Kantian Ethic is the defect of his whole philosophy:
agnosticism, which prevents his truly surpassing either the phenomenon
or the thing in itself, leading him, on the one hand, toward
empiricism, on the other toward that transcendental metaphysic, which
no one had done more to discredit than himself. He combated the concept
of the good or supreme good as the principle of Ethic, and he was right
in so far as he understood it as object of any sort, of "a good," as of
a "thing." But this did not exempt him from the duty of defining the
supreme good as that which is not exhausted in any particular object,
or of determining the universal. Now his philosophy was incapable of
attaining to the universal.

[Sidenote: _Critique of Hegel and of others._]

Hence the involuntary return to utilitarianism, clearly stated by Hegel
in his youthful essay upon natural Right. The practical principle of
Kant (remarked Hegel) is not a true but a negative absolute; hence
with him the principle of morality becomes converted into immorality:
since every fact can be thought in the form of universality, it is
never known what fact should be received into the law. In the famous
example of the deposit, Kant had said that it is necessary to keep
faith as regards the deposit, otherwise there would no longer be
deposits.[1] But if there were no more deposits, how would this
constitute a contradiction to the form of the law? There would perhaps
be contradiction and absurdity for material reasons, but it is already
agreed that this is not to be brought up in the argument. Kant wishes
to justify property, but he does not attain to more than the tautology,
that property, if it be property, must be property, opening the way
to the free choice of conceiving at will as duties these or those
contingent definitions of property. The moral maxims of Kant, owing to
the empirical determinations that they assume, are contradictory, not
only of one another, but of themselves. This inevitable degeneration
of the Kantian Ethic was called by Hegel _tautology and formalism_.[2]
Other thinkers were also affected by the utilitarianism of the
Kantian Ethic: Schopenhauer even declared that his doctrine has no
other foundation than egoism, since it can be reduced to the concept
of reciprocity, and he protested against the Kantian theory that we
should be compassionate to animals, in order to exercize ourselves
in the virtue of compassion, judging it to be the effect of the
Judæo-Christian views of Kant.[3] Schopenhauer was in some respect
right in these observations, although as regards animals we must note
that the same attitude is found in Spinoza and in other thinkers and
that it derives from material and utilitarian Ethic; and for the rest
that it would be very unjust to see nothing but egoism in the categoric
imperative of Kant, for this, we repeat, though it constitute its
danger, does not constitute its essential character.

[Sidenote: _Kant and the concept of freedom._]

Nevertheless, in Kant himself, in this thinker, so rich in
contradictions and suggestions, was indicated the concept which, when
elaborated, was to constitute the principle, not merely of tautological
and formalistic, but of concrete and formal Ethic, the concept of
_freedom._ By means of this concept Kant enters into the heart of the
real and reaches that region of which mysticism and religion had from
time to time caught a glimpse and had here and there attained. As the
origin of the rigid Kantian ethical conception and of his abhorrence
for the material and mundane is to be found in Christianity (and in
Paganism), so the origin of the concrete moral idea is to be sought in
St. Augustine, and also in St. Paul, in the mystics and in the great
French Christians of the seventeenth century; in that virtue of which
Pascal wrote as _plus haute que celle des pharisiens et des plus sages
du paganisme,_ and it operates with omnipotent hand, by means of which
alone is it possible _dégager l'âme de l'amour du monde, la retirer
de ce quelle a de plus cher, la faire mourir à soi-même, la porter et
l'attacher uniquement et invariablement à Dieu._[4] The successors
of Kant, especially Fichte and Hegel, closed the circle which he had
left open, and altogether excluding transcendency, they made of God
freedom and of freedom reality. Fichte, who expelled the phantom of the
thing in itself from theoretical philosophy, removed from the categoric
imperative the appearance of _qualitas occulta,_ which it had borne in
the Philosophy of the practical, illuminating that tenebrous region,
ready to receive any sort of phantasm or superstition, such as belief
in a moral law arbitrarily imposed by the divinity.[5] Hegel does not
recognize duty and the categoric imperative, but freedom only, and as
he says, the free spirit is that in which subject and object coincide
and freedom is freely willed.

[Sidenote: _Ethic in the nineteenth century._]

II. After the classical epoch of modern philosophy, in the general
regression of Ethic, the concept of the concreteness and universality
of the practical principle was also lost. Omitting the utilitarians,
who no longer have a place here, it must suffice to record how there
was a return either to the formalistic principles, which Hegel
criticized in Kant (for instance the principle of the Ethic of Rosmini,
the _respect for being,_ afterwards combated by Gioberti), or directly
to those material principles which Kant had already excluded. Such
are the _compassion_ of Schopenhauer, the _five practical ideas_ of
Herbart, the love of Feuerbach, _benevolence_ as the supreme ethical
idea of Lotze, the _theological_ morality of Baader, the _life_ of
Nietzsche, and the like.

The principles of the first were completed with a religious conception
(here too Rosmini may afford an example), and those of the second, when
they did not reveal themselves as utilitarian or tautological, showed
an obscure tendency toward the Ethic of Freedom. This must not be
overlooked in the Ethic of Nietzsche, which despite the rocks and mud
that the thought of Nietzsche drags with it, is yet anti-hedonistic and
anti-utilitarian and quite full of the sense of Life as activity and
power. Positivistic evolutionism is also often unconscious idealism;
and the moral actions, united to evolution, can be interpreted as
those which correspond to the Spirit in universal. The concepts of the
pessimists alone are altogether incapable of idealistic interpretation
(for example, Schopenhauer), and those of the semi-pessimist and
semi-idealist Hartmann are strangely contradictory. He makes morality
to consist of the promotion of civilization, whence so lofty a
condition of the spirit can be attained that it will be possible to
decree universal suicide by means of the vote of all the world.

The question asked after Kant, whether Ethic should be formal
or material, is one that we have made more precise in the other
form, whether Ethic should be abstract or concrete, full or empty,
tautological or expressive--that is (with even greater precision),
whether Ethic can be established before and without a philosophical
system and even be reconciled with agnosticism, has no longer been
understood, even by its pretended followers, the Neocriticists or
Neokantians. These have either believed they had solved it by means of
moderate utilitarianism, or by going outside it and denying the most
secure result of the Kantian critique of Ethic; or they have discussed
it tiresomely, without making a step in advance. Progress indeed was
possible on one condition alone: that a philosophical system should
be constructed not inferior to that of the postkantian idealists. But
this would have been tantamount to demanding the death of neokantianism
or neocriticism, which has not only not attempted to surpass the
idealistic systems, but has even maintained that we should philosophize
without a system, declaring that a system is altogether inconceivable.
The Neokantians can thus be recognized as the descendants of Kant; but
in the same way as the last descendant of the Hapsburgs in Spain,
who was neither emperor, king, soldier, nor man, could be recognized
as the descendant of Charles the Fifth, who was man, soldier, king,
and emperor: because, like his great predecessor, he possessed the
deformed, hanging lip of the Hapsburgs.


[1] _Krit. d. prakt. Vern._ pp. 30-31.

[2] _Ueb. d. wissensch. Behandlungsarten d. Naturrechts,_ in _Werke,_
i. 353; cf. _Gesch. d. Phil._ iii. 533 sqq.

[3] _Gründl, d. Moral,_ in _Werke,_ ed. cit., iii. 538, 542-543.

[4] _Lettres prov._ 1. 5.

[5] _System d. Sittenlehre,_ pp. 49-51.




THIRD PART


LAWS




