II


THE CONSTITUTIVE ELEMENTS OF LAWS. CRITIQUE OF PERMISSIVE LAWS AND OF
NATURAL LAW


[Sidenote: _The volitional character and the character of class._]

The undue restrictions and empirical divisions of the concept of
laws having been destroyed, if our attention be now directed to the
character that has been determined as properly belonging to them,
we have the means of distinguishing them from the other spiritual
forms with which they are often confused, partly as the result of the
metaphors and homonyms usual in ordinary speech. Laws, as has been
said, are _volitional acts_ concerning _classes_ of actions. Therefore,
where the volitional element or the element of class is wanting, there
cannot be law, save in name and by metaphor.


[Sidenote: Distinction of laws from the so-called laws of nature.]

So-called _laws of nature_ or _naturalistic laws_ are not laws,
owing to the absence of the volitional element: they consist of
simple enunciations of relations between empirical concepts, that
is, of rules. This is an instance of what is called a natural law:
platinum melts at a temperature of 1780 degrees; or this other of a
grammatical law: that in the Greek language masculine nouns of the
second declension have the genitive in _ου_(with exceptions, in this
as in the other case). But they are laws in about the same way as
the King of Cups is king; and indeed it is known historically that
this denomination was transported by the Stoics from the domain of
politics, where it had first appeared, to that of nature. Empirical
concepts and rules may, as we know, assume an imperative literary form;
hence it will be said: "If you wish to melt platinum, heat it to 1780
degrees"; "If you wish to speak Greek, decline masculine nouns of the
second declension with an _ου_ in the genitive." But the literary form
does not change anything of their true nature: those imperatives are
hypothetical imperatives, that is, false imperatives, improper laws.
Grammatical and chemical laws will remain mere formulæ, instruments
of knowledge, and not at all of action, until some one obliges me or
I oblige myself to talk Greek, or to open a chemical laboratory where
platinum is melted. The jurist who elaborates cases and rules is not
the legislator: the latter alone (with a sword in one hand) can endow
the excogitations cf the other with the character of law.

[Sidenote: _Implication of the second in the first._]

Certainly an act of will is necessary in order to construct empirical
concepts, formulæ, and rules (as indeed we know), an act of will
which is not that of the will implied in every act of thought, but
is a special and explicit act which, by manipulating representations
and concepts, makes a _quid medium,_ which is neither representation
nor concept, and although altogether irrational from the theoretical
point of view, is of use in the economy of the spirit. But the law in
its true meaning is a volitional act, which _assumes_ that primary
volitional act whence are formed the pseudo-concepts or concepts of
class _as already completed;_ precisely because it is the will which
has for its _object_ a _class_ of objects. It is not possible to
impose speaking according to the rule of the Greek language, or to
melt platinum according to its chemical formula, before these rules
have been laid down. And here appears very clearly the difference
between those two kinds of spiritual products, which the imperative
literary form, given to classes and rules, darkens and confuses. This
difference can be recognized in concrete cases by means of a most
simple expedient: if the rule (as we have already had occasion to
prove) can be converted into a statement of class, then the law is
inconvertible. "If you wish to melt platinum, heat it to 1780 degrees"
is a proposition that is exactly equal to "platinum melts at 1780
degrees." But the law, "Let there be opened in every city a chemical
laboratory where platinum is to be melted," is not to be converted from
the imperative to the indicative, whatever efforts we make.

[Sidenote: _Distinction of laws from practical principles._]

If the volitional element be wanting to naturalistic laws, it is
certainly present in other spiritual formations also denominated and
considered as laws: but not that of _class,_ therefore neither are
these laws. Such is the case with economic and moral law, and through
them, with logical and æsthetic laws. The moral law says, "Will the
universal"; that is to say, "Will the good, the useful, the true, the
beautiful." Therefore (considered in reality and not in scientific
theory, where it appears as the concept of itself) it is a volitional
act. But this volitional act has the spirit itself for object, which
is and exists, in so far as it wills and affirms itself; it has for
object a form or a _universal,_ whereas laws have for object something
material and at the same time not instantaneous, something more or less
fixed, something _general:_ a _class,_ not an _idea._ Universal laws
(that would better be called _principles_) are the Spirit or producer;
true and proper laws are the special product of the spirit; therefore
the first can certainly be called laws, but for an altogether different
reason to the second.

[Sidenote: _Laws and single acts._]

Owing to the absence of the element of generality or of class, no
one would describe a single individuated act as law. The resolution
and action by which I do not rise from my seat at this moment and go
eagerly to meet the friend whose coming at the wrong moment interrupts
me at my work, is a volitional act, not a law; such as on the other
hand would be the volitional act that I might form within myself,
consisting in the intention or the programme of receiving my friends
seated and in a lukewarm way, whenever they should come to visit me in
the hours before noon, in order to make them understand by this act of
mine that they disturb me at my work, and that they should abstain from
their inopportune visits, unless they wish to submit to the penalty of
meeting with anything but a cordial reception from their friend.

[Sidenote: _Identity of imperative, prohibitive, and permissive laws._]

From the general but not universal character that we must recognize
to the content of laws, we have the solution of certain controversies
of the greatest importance which have been and are much discussed,
hitherto without a satisfactory or duly demonstrated conclusion. In
the first place, we must mention the dispute as to whether or no there
exist _permissive_ laws, and whether the formula that the law _aut
jubet aut vetat aut permittit_ is to be accepted. It has generally been
admitted that the law _aut jubet aut vetat,_ and that the permission
is nothing but the removal of a previous inhibition, that is, the
partial or total abrogation of a law. But in reality, the law, since it
is a volitional act, _jubet_ only; to command is to will: to command
that a chemical laboratory be opened in every city means to will that
one should be opened. And since every willing is at the same time a
not-willing, as every affirmation is at the same time a negation, every
command is at the same time an inhibition, and every _jubeo_ is a
_veto_ (whether the will be expressed in the literary form of positive
or negative, of command or of inhibition, is here without importance).

[Sidenote: _Permissive character of every law, and impermissive
character of every principle._]

As to permissive laws, these are inconceivable side by side with the
imperative or prohibitive, not indeed because no law ever permits, but
because by the very fact that those are imperative or prohibitive,
they are at the same time permissive: every _jubeo_ or _veto_ is at
the same time a _permitto._ Principles, as universal volitions, never
permit, because nothing escapes their command; but a single volitional
act, affirming itself, does not exclude for that reason the possibility
that other volitional acts, indeed infinite acts, should be affirmed;
for the singular never exhausts its universal. And laws are volitions
of class, they impose groups of single acts--groups that are more or
less rich, but always contingent: hence a law always leaves all the
other actions and classes of action that can be the object of will
unwilled (that is, neither commanded nor prohibited), and, therefore,
_permitted._ And even if we take all the laws formulated up to a
given moment, all together they do not exhaust the universal; and if
new laws be accumulated, one upon the other, be divided and split up
"with panting breath," to obtain complete exhaustion, a _progressus in
infinitum_ will certainly be attained, but never exhaustion, which is
unattainable. This amounts to saying that outside law or laws, there
is always _the permitted, the lawful, the indifferent, the privilege,
the right,_ or whatever be termed the concept correlative to that
of command, veto, or duty, a duality of terms that expresses the
_finitude_ of law; hence, when a determined privilege, a determined
legal right, a determined right, has been annulled by a new law, when
something previously indifferent has been differentiated, privilege,
the permitted, the indifferent, right, always arise from the bosom of
the new law.

[Sidenote: _Mutability of laws._]

Another contingent character of the content of laws is their
_mutability._ Laws are changeable, whereas principles, or laws of
the universal content, are unchangeable, and ready to give form to
all the most various historical material. Since actual conditions
are constantly changing, it is necessary to add new laws to the old,
to retouch and correct these, or to abolish them altogether. This is
to be seen equally in the programmes of individual lives, as in the
programmes of social and political laws.

[Sidenote: _Empirical concepts as to the modes of change._]

The question as to the number of modes of changing that laws possess
does not concern us, because, philosophically speaking, there is never
but one mode: the free will that produces the new law in new conditions
of fact. Involuntary changing can only be a formula for indicating
certain changes, always voluntary, that occur in a less solemn way
than others; but from these, can never be absent the solemnity of the
human will that celebrates itself. Thus, in like manner, the question
as to whether we should recognize conservation or revolution as the
fundamental concept of practical life, does not concern us; for every
conservative is at the same time a revolutionary, since he is always
obliged to adapt the law that he wishes to preserve to the new facts;
and every revolutionary is also a conservative, since he is obliged to
start from certain laws that he preserves, at any rate provisionally,
that he may change others and substitute for them new laws, which he
in his turn intends to preserve. Revolution for revolution's sake, the
cult of the Goddess Revolution, is an insane effort, which is so none
the less because it has sometimes appeared in History and like all
insane efforts it ends with suicide. Revolution revolutionizes itself
and turns into reaction. Thus when revolutionaries and conservatives
are distinguished and opposed to one another, an empirical distinction
is made there also, the meaning of which is to be found in the
historical circumstances among which it has arisen. Count Cavour was
a conservative in respect to certain problems and revolutionary in
respect to certain others, to such a degree that he seemed to the
Mazzinians to be a conservative and to the clericals and legitimists
a revolutionary. Robespierre, if he were a revolutionary for the
Girondins and at last even for the neo-moderate Danton, yet to the eyes
of Hébert and of Chaumette seemed to be a conservative, enemy of the
free development of the rights of man.

[Sidenote: _Critique of the eternal Code or natural Right._]

We should on the other hand be very careful as to the demand so
often made and also so far as possible put into execution, for _an
eternal code, a limit-legislation or model, a universal, rational, or
natural_ justice, as it has been variously termed. Natural justice,
universal legislation, eternal code, claim to fix the transitory
and are therefore a contradictory concept: contradictory precisely
to the principle of the mutability of laws, which is the necessary
consequence of their contingent and historical character. Were natural
Right permitted to do what it announces, were God to permit that the
affairs of Reality should be carried on according to the ill-assorted
ideas of writers and professors, we should witness with the formation
and application of the eternal Code, the cessation _ipso facto_ of
Development, the end of History, the death of Life and the dissolution
of Reality.

[Sidenote: _Natural justice as the new justice._]

This world-ending does not take place, because, though it be possible
to dwell in contradiction, it is impossible to make it concrete and
actual: God, that is to say Reality, does not permit this. Thus it
happens that under the name of natural justice, two sorts of products
have existed in turn, or sometimes a mixture of those two different
products, which have nothing to do with the programme announced. On the
one hand, projects of new laws that seemed better than the old or good
by comparison with these judged more or less bad, have been proposed
as natural or rational justice, and precisely for this reason the old
laws were called unnatural and irrational and the new _rational and
natural._ Just as passionate and erotic temperaments, uninstructed by
the experience of their past, swear with the utmost seriousness that
their new love will be _constant, eternal and their last,_ so man, when
he creates new laws, is often seized with the illusion that his laws
will not change as did the old ones, forgetting that the old ones were
once young and that they "satisfied divers" in their heyday, to express
oneself in the words of the old carnavalesque song. Those natural
laws are historical, those eternal laws are transitory, like all the
others. All know how in certain times and places, religious tolerance,
freedom of trade, private property, constitutional monarchy, have been
proclaimed eternal; and in others, the extirpation of unbelievers,
commercial protection, communism, the republic, and anarchy.

[Sidenote: _Natural justice as philosophy of the practical._]

Universal concepts, which were nothing but the Principles of the
philosophy of the practical themselves, have on the other hand had a
tendency to be classed as natural justice and to surpass the transitory
and contingent. They are certainly eternal and unchangeable, but no
longer laws, for they are formal and not material. Thus treatises of
natural justice have sometimes become simply treatises (sometimes
very valuable) of the Philosophy of the practical and especially of
Ethic.--When (as to tell the truth has generally been the case) a
practical description has accompanied a general treatment of Ethic,
leading to a series of proposals for social, judicial or political
reform, there has then occurred a _mingling_ of two different
productions, which we have mentioned, philosophy and casuistic. But a
natural justice has always remained unachieved, because unachievable
and contradictory.

[Sidenote: _Critique of natural justice._]

In our times, owing to the increase of the historical sense, the
constructions of natural justice and of the eternal Code have almost
altogether lost the attraction they once exercized. But absurd problems
having their origin in those contradictory concepts still persist
and absurd methods of treating problems of similar origin legitimate
when taken in their true terms. An example of the first of these two
kinds of diseased residues is the treating of the _natural rights_ of
man and the attempt to establish what rights belong to man by nature
and what by historical contingencies. Among the first are enumerated
the right to life, to liberty, to work, to the family and so on; and
among the second, those that have their origin in the Italian State
or in special contracts that have been concluded. But no right of any
sort belongs to man outside society (which in this case means outside
history), that is to say, considered as spirit in universal, save that
of existing as spirit, which indeed is not a right, but necessary
reality. Catalogues of natural rights are either tautologies, which
repeat that man as spirit has the right (and therefore at the same
time the duty) of developing himself as spirit (and he does develop
in this manner, if he be man and be alive); or they are arbitrary
rationalizations of historical contingencies, such as the right to
work, which is nothing but the formula of the workpeople of the
_ateliers nationaux_ in forty-eight, or of the insurgents of Lyons; or
the right to private property, which was the formula of the burghers
against the bonds of feudalism and is again their formula against the
modern proletariat movement.

[Sidenote: _Jusnaturalism persisting in judgments and juridical
problems._]

We must recognize examples of the second kind of error in the
discussions constantly held as to social or political institutions,
when instead of combating them as irrational, or of defending them as
rational in historical circumstances, they are defended and combated
because they differ from or conform to the true idea of right or to
the true idea of those particular institutions, recourse being thus
had to abstract reasons, as has very well been said. A reformer will
maintain the recognition of the right of women to the administrative
or political vote, because women also form part of the State and
have general and particular interests, which they wish to guarantee
directly, without the inter-position of men, whose interests are
sometimes at variance with theirs: an argument that a conservative
will deny altogether, making appeal to the function of woman, enclosed
by eternal law in the circle of the family. A reformer will propose
divorce as the natural complement to matrimony, because, where
spiritual agreement ends, there too should end every other tie, whereas
a conservative will oppose the argument as contradictory to the very
essence of matrimony, comparing such a proposal with concubinage,
or with what is called free love. And so on.--When such arguments
are heard, it is remarked that natural rights are not dead. But
the question as to the political vote for women may be serious or
ridiculous, according to place and time; as divorce is loftily moral or
profoundly immoral, according to time and place, and it is only mental
narrowness or ignorance that can place outside humanity, or believe to
be living or persisting in immorality, peoples that practise divorce
or indissoluble matrimony, or those of to-day, who refuse the vote to
women or those of the future who will recognize their right to it, if
they do recognize it. But even polygamy or free love is not immoral,
irrational and unnatural, once it has been an institution considered
legitimate in certain times and places; nor even, we insist upon saying
it (however repugnant to our hearts and to our stomachs of civilized
Europeans), anthropophagy, for even among the anthropophagi were men
(we hope it will be admitted), who felt themselves to be most virtuous
in their clearest consciousness of self, and who nevertheless ate their
like with the same tranquillity that we eat a roast chicken, without
hatred of the chicken, but being quite well aware, for the moment
at any rate, that we are not able to do otherwise. The unconscious
reasoners on the basis of natural law must have forgotten that
page of Cornelius Νepos, which, however, they must certainly have
translated in their first years at the gymnasium: _Expertes literarum
Graecarum nihil rectum nisi quod ipsorum moribus conveniat putabunt.
Hi, si didicerint non eadem omnibus esse honesta atque turpia, SED
OMNIA MAJORUM INSTITUTIS JUDICARI, non admirabuntur nos in Graiorum
virtutibus exponendis mores eorum secutos. Neque enim Cimoni fuit turpe
Atheniensium summo viro, sororem germanam habere in matrimonium: quippe
quum ejus cives eodem uterentur instituto; at id quidem nostris moribus
nefas habetur. Laudi in Graecia ducitur adolescentulis quam plurimos
habere amatores. Nulla Lacedaemoni tam est nobilis vidua quae non ad
scenam eat mercede conducta..._. And he continues to give further
examples.[1] So ancient are the unreasonable tendency to be scandalized
and the reasonable defence of the variety of customs made by good sense.

[1] _Vitae excell. imper.,_ pref.




