II


CRITIQUE OF THE NEGATIONS OF THE ETHICAL FORM


[Sidenote: _Exclusion of materialistic and of intellectualistic
criticisms._]

The distinction of the two forms, well known to the inner
consciousness, will appear more clearly when we examine the reasons
for which the one or the other of them has been denied. We say the one
or the other, because we have now freed ourselves from the obligation
of refuting the theses that have their origin in presuppositions,
both materialistic and intellectualiste, and therefore deny the moral
and economic activities, either because they do not admit the concept
of spiritual activity itself, or because they do not admit the more
special conception of practical activity. The greater number of
those who deny morality are nothing but mechanicists, empiricists,
materialists, and positivists, to whose brains not only do economy and
morality appear inconceivable, but also art and science and, in short,
every spiritual value. They ask: Where is this moral principle of which
you discourse? Point it out to us with your finger. But they also ask:
Where are the categories or the pure concept? Where is the æsthetic
synthesis and the pure intuition? Where is the _a priori_ of perception
and of history? Where are all these fine things you talk of as though
they existed, and that we neither see nor touch?--And for our part, we
can henceforth let them say what they will, only praying in our hearts
that God may illuminate them and make them discover (at least when they
are near to death and the dense veil of their bodies has become more
thin) that if the universals were _things_ that it was possible to
perceive as we do individual things, they would not be universals.

[Sidenote: _The two possible negations._]

When the double assumption of a spiritual activity and of a practical
form of it has been admitted, it is not possible to do otherwise
than either to deny the economic for the moral form, or the moral
for the economic. What might seem to be a third possibility, that of
denying the two forms, is reducible to the first, because, when the
distinction of the terms has been suppressed, there remains nothing
but the practical activity considered in general, which coincides with
the individual and economic activity. We shall begin then with the
examination of the negation of morality for economy, which is the
thesis of _utilitarianism._ Those same materialists have recourse to
utilitarianism when they wish to present some sort of a Philosophy
of the practical, but with what little right they avail themselves
of such aid, is clear from what has already been said: the useful is
always value and teleology, and materialism, in all its sub-forms and
varieties, is incapable of positing the smallest concept of value and
finality.

[Sidenote: _The thesis of utilitarianism against the existence of moral
acts._]

Utilitarianism affirms that no other volition exists save that
which answers to the merely individual determination, or, as it is
also expressed, to the pleasure of the individual, understanding
by pleasure, not the generic pleasure that also accompanies moral
satisfaction in the individual, but that which is exclusively
individual. Actions, therefore, as it says, are what concern it, not
their motives, that is, the motive of the individuality of the act
abstractly conceived, not that of the spirit become concrete in it;
thus, not killing for fear of punishment and not killing because
repugnant to one's own conscience, become the same thing. They are the
consequences of different conditions, but in both cases of the same
motive, which is personal convenience. And as there does not exist
a pleasure that cannot be and is not substituted for a different
pleasure, so there is not an action, however moral it be called, that
cannot be interrupted and changed, when different conditions present
themselves. Every action, every man has his price: it is all a matter
of discovering what that price is. He who seems to place the glory
of his country above all other aspirations, although he cannot, for
example, be corrupted by money, by vanity, or by pleasure, will yet
always have in him some weak point that a more expert corrupter will
discover or be able to discover; and when the discovery has been made
and the suitable transaction proposed, the glory of his country will be
abandoned, because it has been well compensated for by something else.
This way of looking upon human actions has appeared to be concrete,
exact, rational; and the utilitarian theory, if it have often been
called _hedonistic,_ and sometimes even _æsthetic_ (understanding by
æsthetic, individual pleasure), is also wont to be decorated with the
name of ethical or practical _rationalism, rational morality._

[Sidenote: _Difficulties arising from the presence of these._]

All would go very well, and the practical activity would in this way be
entirely explained and unified, if we did not at every moment of life
run against the distinction between mere pleasure and duty, between
the useful and the honest action, and if there did not arise in our
conscience an invincible distinction between the things that have a
price and those that have none, and if an abyss did not differentiate
among apparently similar actions that which has a merely utilitarian
from that which has a moral motive. The utilitarians even (who,
although bad philosophers, are men, and as such carry at the bottom of
their souls a far better philosophy than they profess in books and in
the schools) are not able to suppress that distinction in themselves
and to deny all recognition to the power of morality, to which, as men,
they submit at every moment. How then are they to behave? How are they
to explain the genesis of that distinction which, by the premises that
they have posited, cannot be other than illusion? What is there that
gives effective existence to the fallacious category of morality, side
by side with the veracious one of utility?

[Sidenote: _Attempt to explain them as quantitative distinctions._]

There have been several attempts to solve that hard resisting term
of morality. The first, which was logically bound to present itself,
was that of considering facts called moral as nothing but empirical
groups of utilitarian facts, and of explaining the false category as
an hypostasis of those empirical groups, arbitrarily reduced to a
rigorous and philosophical concept. Banking, usury, commerce, industry,
agriculture, and labour are empirically distinguished, yet are all
economic facts. Courage, prudence, temperance, chastity, justice,
modesty are empirically distinguished, yet are all moral facts. Why
not unite the two series, and recognize the unity and continuity of
nature by the insertion among them of other types and terms? Morality
is also utility, but the utility of the _greater number_; interest is
interest, but _well understood_; pleasure is pleasure, but pleasure of
_greater duration and quantity,_ preferred to another less intense, or
more fugitive; egoism, egoism of family, of race, of human race, egoism
of _species,_ altruism; eudemonism, but _social_ eudemonism, enjoyment,
but enjoyment of _sympathy,_ utility, but utility of conforming, not
to one's own individual judgment, but to that of _public opinion._
Thus are moral facts included in utilitarian, in the same way as the
number a hundred thousand is not less a number than two or three and
the others inferior to it, because it is composed of three and of two
and of other numbers less than itself. Cæsar Borgia murders his brother
and thus gets rid of a rival both in love and in politics, that is, he
seeks his advantage; but Giordano Bruno also seeks his own advantage,
and nothing else, when he allows himself to be burned in order to
assert his philosophy, because, for one constituted as he, with that
demoniacal fury of his for philosophical truth, the pyre must have
seemed a very miserable and negligible thing, just as his brother's
blood seemed to Cæsar Borgia. Call the one of these actions utility
of a complexity of ten and the other utility of a complexity of a
hundred, or give to the complexity a hundred the name of morality, of
well-understood self-interest, of sympathy, of altruism, and so on, and
to the complexity of ten that of utility, of individual interest, of
egoism: the two actions will not thus have been declared of a different
nature.

[Sidenote: _Critique._]

But the fact is that they have already been declared of a _different
nature_ by the utilitarians themselves. No one, indeed, will have been
deceived with the ingenious phraseology excogitated: _well-understood_
interest is no longer mere self-interest; the egoism of _species_ is
not egoism, _durable_ pleasure is not mere pleasure. The difference
between the one term and the other is not quantitative, and even where
a _greater_ quantity is talked of, a _greater_ duration, a _greater_
number, arithmetical definitions are not posited, but symbols pointing
to qualitative differences. There is a difference, not of complexity
but of nature, between the action of Cæsar Borgia and that of Giordano
Bruno; there is no common measure between baseness and moral elevation
as there is between undulating plains and mountains. The two series, of
empirical utilitarian concepts and of empirical moral concepts, are not
only irreducible to a single series, but remain obstinately distinct
and irreducible. All that can be done, and has been done, is to unify
them verbally; and in this the utilitarians have shown themselves as
bold as it was possible to be in so miserable an enterprise. But the
identity or similarity of words does not suffice to cancel the profound
distinctions of things.

[Sidenote: _Attempt to explain them as facts either extraneous to the
practical or irrational and stupid._]

There would have been an immediate passage from the consciousness
of the puerility of such identifications to the recognition of
a distinct ethical form, if purpose and prejudice had not made
resistance, prompting, on the contrary, the search for new expedients
for setting themselves free in theory from the tedious and recurring
phantom of morality. On this occasion also these expedients must have
been just two: that is, to declare morality or concept _extraneous_
to the practical, or intrinsic to it indeed, but _contrary._ The
first was attempted, but feebly, when morality was spoken of as the
fantasticality of poets, as the dream or rosy illusion caressed in
life. No attention was paid to the fact that what the poet imagines
cannot be contradictory and absurd, but must indeed be founded in the
reality of life and in the nature of things; and that morality is
not the æsthetic form in which it is reproduced and represented, but
practical form or action. But the unmaintainability of this attempt
was too evident for its success. The other expedient, on the contrary,
has always had and still has great success. This turns morality into
a practical contradictory concept, that is, into something certainly
practical, but without motive, incoherent, and in contradiction to the
healthy development of the practical. It is true that it is usually
enunciated in very different words from those used by us. They speak
as follows: What is called a good and virtuous action is nothing but
the product of the association between certain acts that are for us
the means to a pleasure, and that pleasure itself; so that gradually,
even where the primitive pleasure is absent, those acts are sought
and repeated for themselves, as though in themselves pleasurable.
The savage fought against the enemies who assailed his tribe, that
he might not be made a slave or sacrificed to the idol of another
tribe, that is to say, in order to defend his personal liberty or his
life; but later on, man, forgetting that the tribe or the city or the
State were simple means for protecting life and goods, defends them
for themselves and allows himself to be despoiled and slain for his
country. In the same way (to employ the classical example), money
is first sought as a means to enjoyment, and to form a supply for
procuring a life more comfortable and secure; but by degrees he who
amasses money turns in his soul the means into the end, and becomes
avaricious, that is, he finds delight in the mere possession of money,
and sacrifices for that all his other joys, even an easy life, food,
house and sleep, which he originally intended that money should obtain
for him. Morality arises entirely from a similar process of association
between means and end, and the case of the miser explains by analogy
every act of virtue that cannot be directly reduced to simple pleasure
and individual utility.

[Sidenote: _Associationism and evolutionism. Critique._]

Now the association here discussed is neither that of logic nor
of æsthetic, nor valid association, synthesis, but irrational and
fallacious association. It is only possible to exchange means for end
as the result of a bad association of ideas: therefore that association
is folly and stupidity, as the miser adduced as an example is stupid
and foolish, being called "miser" precisely for this reason, with the
intention of blaming him (for this word does not mean "economic" or
"provident"). And behold! morality should be defined as that which
is practically irrational, foolish, stupid, the product of illusion
and confusion, or the _contrary_ of the practical activity, which is
clear-sightedness, rationality, wisdom. Thus defined, it is at the
same time annulled. Indeed, irrationality is that which is condemned
to be perpetually subjected to the rational; and what is called the
moral man, if he were nothing but a false associator of ideas, would be
constantly confuted by the man of good sense, by the utilitarian, who
would prevent him from committing the stupidity of sacrificing himself
for his children, for his country, or for knowledge; or, were he to
persist, would cover him with contempt and ridicule. The fear that to
discover its origin would be tantamount to abolishing morality would
therefore be perfectly justified in this new sense also; or better,
it would not be a question of a fear, but of a fact: morality would
be in a state of progressive annulment, as the effect of increasing
instruction, both in the individual and in society. It has been replied
that neither this fear nor this fact arises, because that false
association is _indissoluble,_ being a product of _heredity,_ or, to
speak of it in proper terms, it is hereditary stupidity (evolutionistic
utilitarianism). But whether inherited or acquired, it is so dissoluble
as to be dissolved in the theory proposed: _lux facta est,_ and no
one succeeds in obscuring it any longer. If, notwithstanding that
pretended light, morality be not dissipated, if recourse be had to the
miserable subterfuge of insuperable heredity (which is surpassed at
the very moment in which its origin is made clear), this means to say
that, for the moralist himself, morality is not the irrational, but
something very rational. He does not succeed in identifying it with the
merely individually useful, but neither can he reject it as the pure
and simple negative of this. And since he does not wish to abandon the
utilitaristic hypothesis, there is no other path open to him but that
of recourse to _mystery._

[Sidenote: _A desperate attempt: theological utilitarianism and
mystery._]

This is precisely what happens in the last form of utilitarianism,
which has seemed to be capricious and extravagant, but is on the
contrary profoundly auto-critical, since it reveals the ultimate
essence and defect of the doctrine: what is known as _theological
utilitarianism._ Human actions are always inspired by what is merely
useful to the individual, and if a number of these seems to diverge
from this criterion, this happens because account is not taken of
an actual fact, by means of which even the actions which seem to be
divergent are reduced to the common measure. This given fact is the
life beyond this world, in which God rewards or punishes him who has
obeyed or disobeyed his will, in the life of this world. He who in this
life seems to resist the impulse of his personal advantage and performs
sacrifices of every sort, even to that of his own life, follows equally
with the others his personal advantage; and believing in God, in the
immortality of the soul, and in the reward and the punishment that
await him, he regulates his action according to these actual facts.
_Intuitionistic_ Ethic, which places a moral duty at the side of
individual pleasure, but indeducible from it, is in reality deduced
from individual pleasure, and is likewise turned into _rational_ or
utilitarian Ethic by means of the transcendental datum. In this way the
solution makes shipwreck in mystery; since God, immortality, the other
life, the divine command, punishments and rewards, cannot be defined
and justified by means of thought and concept. When utilitarianism
becomes theological, it abandons the philosophical field, confessing by
so doing its philosophical defeat. And to philosophical consideration
the distinction between the individually useful and that which is
also superindividual shines out ever more clearly after the many vain
attacks of utilitarianism, the affirmation of the moral form, as united
and distinct from the utilitarian; the _autonomy_ of Ethic against
every form of _utilitarianism_ and every _heteronomous Ethic._




