VI


TWO ELUCIDATIONS RELATING TO HISTORIC AND ÆSTHETIC


[Sidenote: _The relation of desires and actions; and two problems of
Historic and of Æsthetic._]

From the consideration of the practical activity in its dialectic, and
in particular from the theory relating to desire and to action, shines
forth, if we mistake not, the full light that has hitherto perhaps been
invoked in vain upon certain capital points of Historic and Æsthetic,
which, when treating of those disciplines, we were obliged either
hardly to touch upon, or to develop in a manner altogether inadequate.
The reason of this was that an adequate development, to be convincing,
demanded as presupposition, a minute exposition as to the nature, the
relations and the constitution of the practical activity, all of them
things that could not be treated incidentally.

[Sidenote: _History and art._]

History or historical narrative is, as we know, very closely related
to art, in contradistinction to the abstract sciences, since both
art and history do not construct concepts of class, but represent
concrete and individuated facts. History, however, is not art pure and
simple, but is distinguished from it, because artistic representation
is in it continually illuminated with the critical distinction
between the real and the possible, what has happened and what has
been imagined, the existing and the inexisting, with the consequent
determinations connected with them, as to this or that particular mode
of reality, event, and existence, that have taken place. In every
historical narrative are always to be found, understood or implied, the
affirmations that the narrative is real, that a different narrative
would be imaginary, that the reality of the event in question properly
belongs to this or that concept of politics, rights, war, diplomacy,
economy, and so on. All this is quite absent from art, which is by
nature ingenuous and free of critical discernment; so much so, that
hardly have its representations become objects of reflection, than they
are dissolved as art, to reappear with a changed appearance (no longer
youthful, but virile or senile), as history.

[Sidenote: _The concept of existentiality in history._]

But if this distinction between art and history be precisely determined
gnoseologically, when it has been said that in history the predicate
of existentiality is added to mere representation (and, therefore,
all the other predicates connected with the case, referring to the
various forms of existence), and that therefore, the representative
and artistic form of history contains in itself rational and
philosophical method as precedent, yet there always remains the
ulterior philosophical problem: What is the origin of that predicate
of reality or existentiality on which all the others lean? We have
already demonstrated that it was altogether inadmissible to derive it
from a mysterious faculty called _Faith,_ or to consider it as the
apprehension of something extraneous to the spirit in universal, as _a
datum or position._ And we also stated that if the spirit recognize
its existence, yet it cannot attain to the criterion elsewhere than
from itself; which criterion was nothing but the first reflection of
the spirit upon the practical activity itself, giving rise to the
duplication of reality that has happened and reality only desired, or
of reality and irreality, of existing and inexisting.

[Sidenote: _Its origin in the Philosophy of the practical: action and
the existing, desires and the unexisting._]

All this now becomes a simple consequence of the connection that
has been made clear between desire and action. The cognoscitive
spirit, when it apprehends and ideally remakes this connection, has,
in enunciating it, also enunciated for the first time the couples
of terms that we have already mentioned and that variously express
the criterion of existence. To distinguish desires from actions is
tantamount to distinguishing the unreal from the real, the existing
from the unexisting, and to think the practical act is tantamount
to thinking the concept of existence and of effectual reality. For
the determination of the relation between desire and action, and
only for that, the criterion of existence is not necessary, because
that relation is itself that criterion. To say "this is a desire"
means, "this does not exist"; to say "this is an action" means, "this
exists." The desires are possibility; the resolutive and volitional
act or action, is actuality. And it is also evident that existent
and inexistent are not separable, as though the inexistent were
heterogeneous to the existent; the inexistent exists in its way, as
possibility is possible reality; the phantasm exists in the fancy and
desire in the spirit that desires. Thus the posing of the one term is
also the posing of the other, as correlative. What is repugnant and
contradictory is the introduction of the one term into the other. This
takes place, for instance, when in narrating the history, reality that
has happened is mingled as one single thing with reality dreamed of or
desired, and history is turned into _legend._

[Sidenote: _History as distinction between actions and desires, and art
as indistinction._]

It can be said that history always represents actions, and in this is
implicit that it represents at the same time also desires, but only in
so far as it distinguishes them from actions: history, therefore, is
perception and memory of perception, and in it fancies and imaginations
are also perceived as such and arranged in their place. And it would
also be possible to say that art represents only desires, and is
therefore all fancy and never perception, all possible reality and
never effectual reality. But since to art is wanting the distinctive
criterion between desires and actions, it in truth represents actions
as desires and desires as actions, the real as possible, and the
possible as real; hence it would be more correct to say that art is
on the near side of the possible and the real, it is pure of these
distinctions, and is therefore pure imagination or _pure intuition._
Desires and actions are, we know, of the same stuff, and art assumes
that stuff just as it is, careless of the new elaboration that it will
receive in an ulterior grade of the spirit, which is indeed impossible
without that first and merely fantastic elaboration. Likewise when art
takes possession of historical material, it removes from it just the
historical character, the critical elements, and by this very fact
reduces it once more to mere intuition.

[Sidenote: _The purely fantastic and the imaginary._]

It must further be noted that the purely fantastic, which is the
representation of a desire, must not be confounded with the mechanical
combination of images, that can be made idly, for amusement, or for
practical ends. This operation (analogous to that of the intellect upon
the pure concepts and representations, when it arbitrarily combines
them in the pseudo-concepts), is secondary and derivative; and it
presupposes the first, which provides it with the material that it cuts
up and combines. Nothing is more extraneous and repugnant to poetry
than this artificial _imagining,_ precisely because it is external and
repugnant to reality. Hence his would be a vain objection who should
coldly and capriciously combine the most different images and ask for
an explanation of the whole, with desire as the fundamental principle.
Such combinations as these, since they do not belong to poetry, are
void of real psychical content.

[Sidenote: _Art as lyrical or representation of feelings._]

But if the relation between desire and action be the ultimate reason
for the distinction between art and history, and this distinction be
the theoretical reflection of that real relation, the conception of
art as representation of volitional facts, taken in their quite general
and indeterminate nature, in which desire is as action and action as
desire, reveals why art affirms itself as _representation of feeling,_
and why a work of art does not seem to possess and does not possess
value, save from its _lyrical_ character and from the imprint of the
artist's personality. The work of art that reasons or instructs as
to things that have happened, and finds a substitute for intimate
and lyrical connections in historical reasonings and connections, is
justly and universally condemned as cold and ineffectual. We do not
ask the artist for a philosophical system nor for a relation of facts
(if all this is to be found in his work it is _per accidens),_ but
for a dream of his own, for nothing but the expression of a world
desired or abhorred, or partly desired and partly abhorred. If he
make us live again in this dream the rapture of joy or the incubus of
terror, in solemnity or in humility, in tragedy or in laughter, that
suffices. Facts and concepts, and the question as to the metaphysical
constitution of reality and how it has been developed in time, are all
things that we shall ask of others.

[Sidenote: _Identity of ingenuous reality and feeling._]

It may seem that in this way the field of art has been much restricted
and the ingenuous representation of the real excluded from it. But
this ingenuous representation is just the representation of reality as
dream. For reality is nothing (as we henceforth know) than becoming,
possibility that passes into actuality, desire that becomes action,
from which desire springs forth again unsatiated. The artist who
represents it ingenuously, produces the lyric for this very reason. For
him there is no necessity to reach it from without, as a new element:
if he do this, he is a bad artist, and will be blamed as a hunter of
emotions, emphatic, convulsive, wearisomely sentimental, forcedly
jocose, an introducer of his own caprice into the coherence of the
work, a confounder of his empirical with his artistic personality,
which exists in the empirical individual, but is not equivalent to it.
The feeling that the true artist portrays is that of things, _lacrymae
rerum_; and by the identity of feeling and volition, of volition and
reality already demonstrated in the Philosophy of the practical, things
are themselves that feeling. The characteristic that Schelling and
Schopenhauer noted in music, of reproducing, not indeed the ideas, but
the ideal rhythm of the universe, and of objectifying the will itself,
belongs equally to all the other forms of art, because it is the
essence itself of Art, or of pure intuition.

[Sidenote: _Artists and the will._]

An obvious confirmation of this theory is also the empirical
observation often made, that the men who lose themselves in desires
are rather poets than men of action, dreamers rather than actors; and
in respect to this, that poets who seem to have the soul overflowing
with energetic plans, magnanimous loves, and fierce hatreds are the
most incapable in the field of action, and the worst of captains in
practical struggles; because those plans, those loves and hates, are
not will, but desires, and desires already weakened as such, because
they are no longer in process of volitional synthetization, but have
become the objects of contemplation and of dream. He who reads the
biographies of artists, or has dealings with artists in daily life,
almost always has the impression that their gusts of passion are
nothing but poetry _about to break forth,_ as a green bud that opens
and breaks the brown sheath. And if this process be painful, that
is because every travail of birth is painful. One sees, indeed, how
everything generally ends _par des chansons._ A fine poem and the
sufferer is calm again.

[Sidenote: _Actions and myths._]

This also explains why individual actions and practical collective
movements are accompanied with hopes, beliefs, and _myths._ These have
no logical or historical truth, but it is on the other hand impossible
to criticize them, because they are not error, but fantastic projection
of the state of soul of individuals and groups of individuals in
action, and testify to the existence of desires ready to transform
themselves into will and action. Utopias are poetry, they are not
practical acts; but beneath that poetry there is always the reality
of a desire that is a factor of future history. Hence it also happens
that poets are thought of as _seers,_ when the utopia of to-day becomes
the reality of the morrow. The Utopian and semi-poetic Address of the
Italian patriots to the Directory of June 18, 1799,[1] the not less
Utopian Proclamation of Rimini of 1815, the song of Manzoni, in which
rang out the fateful verse,

    We shall not be free if we are not one,

will become, for the Italians of 1860, effective action and _historical
event._

[Sidenote: _Art as the pure representation of becoming and the artistic
form of thought._]

Pure intuition, ingenuous representation of reality, representation
of feeling, lyricism and personal intonation, are then all equivalent
formulæ, all of them definitions of the æsthetic activity and of art.
And it would be superfluous to repeat that art thus characterized
remains the concrete form of the superior theoretical grades of the
spirit. In fact, logical thought or concept is also volition, owing to
the unity of the spirit, and the representation of such volition is the
logos made flesh, the concept that incorporates itself in language,
palpitating with the drama of its becoming. What word of man is there
that is not personally and lyrically coloured, whether he communicate
the truth of science or narrate the incidents of life? And how could we
deny a place among the dramas that agitate human life and art portrays,
to that drama of dramas, which is the drama of thought and of the
historical comprehension of the real?


[1] B. Croce, _Relazioni dei patrioti napoletani col Direttorio e col
Consolato e l' idea dell' unità italiana,_ Napoli, 1902, pp. 69-73.




