CHAPTER XII

THE LION FIGHT


Crashing through the jungle the huge beasts turned against those who
had, been driving them on toward the stockade. With wild shouts and
yells, the hunters and their native helpers tried to turn back the
elephant tide, but it was useless. The animals had been frightened by
the airship, and were following their leader, a big bull, that went
crashing against great trees, snapping them off as if they were pipe
stems.

"Say, this is something like!" cried Ned, as he guided the airship over
the closely packed body of elephants, so Tom could get good pictures,
for the herd had divided, and a small number had gone off with one of
the other bulls.

"Yes, I'll get some great pictures," agreed Tom, as he looked in
through a red covered opening in the camera, to see how much film was
left.

The airship was now so low down that Tom, and the others, could easily
make out the faces of the hunters, and the native helpers.  One of the
hunters, evidently the chief, shaking his fist at our hero, cried:

"Can't you take your blooming ship out of the way, my man? It's scaring
the beasts, and we've been a couple of weeks on this drive. We don't
want to lose all our work. Take your bloody ship away!"

"I guess he must be an Englishman," remarked Mr. Nestor, with a laugh.

"Bless my dictionary, I should say so," agreed Mr. Damon.  "Bloody,
blooming ship! The idea!"

"Well, I suppose we have scared the beasts," said Tom. "We ought to get
out of the way. Put her up, Ned, and we'll come down some distance in
advance."

"Why, aren't you going to take any more views of the elephants?"

"Yes, but I've got enough of a view from above. Besides, I've got to
put in a fresh reel of film, and I might as well get out of their sight
to do it. Maybe that will quiet them, and the hunters can turn them
back toward the stockade. If they do, I have another plan."

"What is it?" his chum wanted to know.

"I'm going to make a landing, set up my camera at the entrance to the
stockade, and get a series of pictures as the animals come in. I think
that will be a novelty.

"That certainly will," agreed Mr. Nestor. "I am sure Mr. Period will
appreciate that. But won't it be dangerous, Tom?"

"I suppose so, but I'm getting used to danger," replied our hero, with
a laugh.

Ned put the ship high into the air, as Tom shut off the power from the
camera. Then the Flyer was sent well on in advance of the stampede of
elephants, so they could no longer see it, or hear the throb of the
powerful engines. Tom hoped that this would serve to quiet the immense
creatures.

As the travelers flew on, over the jungle, they could still hear the
racket made by the hunters and beaters, and the shrill trumpeting of
the elephants, as they crashed through the forest.

Tom at once began changing the film in the camera, and Ned altered the
course of the airship, to send it back toward the stockade, which they
had passed just before coming upon the herd of elephants.

I presume most of my readers know what an elephant drive is like. A
stockade, consisting of heavy trees, is made in the jungle. It is like
the old fashioned forts our forefathers used to make, for a defense
against the Indians. There is a broad entrance to it, and, when all is
in readiness, the beaters go out into the jungle, with the white
hunters, to round up the elephants. A number of tame pachyderms are
taken along to persuade the wild ones to follow.

Gradually the elephants are gathered together in a large body, and
gently driven toward the stockade. The tame elephants go in first, and
the others follow. Then the entrance is closed, and all that remains to
be done is to tame the wild beasts, a not very easy task.

"Are you all ready?" asked Ned, after a bit, as he saw Tom come forward
with the camera.

"Yes, I'm loaded for some more excitement. You can put me right over
the stockade now, Ned, and when we see the herd coming back I'll go
down, and take some views from the ground."

"I think they've got 'em turned," said Mr. Damon. "It sounds as if they
were coming back this way."

A moment later they had a glimpse of the herd down below. It was true
that the hunters had succeeded in stopping the stampede, and once more
the huge beasts were going in the right direction.

"There's a good place to make a landing," suggested Tom, as he saw a
comparatively clear place in the jungle. "It's near the stockade, and,
in case of danger, I can make a quick get-away."

"What kind of danger are you looking for?" asked Ned, as he shifted the
deflecting rudder.

"Oh, one of the beasts might take a notion to chase me."

The landing was made, and Tom, taking Ned and Mr. Nestor with him, and
leaving the others to manage the airship in case a quick flight would
be necessary, made his way along a jungle trail to the entrance to the
stockade. He carried his camera with him, for it was not heavy.

On came the elephants, frightened by the shouts and cries of the
beaters, and the firing of guns. The young inventor took his place near
the stockade entrance, and, as the elephants advanced through the
forest, tearing up trees and bushes, Tom got some good pictures of them.

Suddenly the advance of the brutes was checked, and the foremost of
them raised their trunks, trumpeted in anger, and were about to turn
back again.

"Get away from that bloomin' gate!" shouted a hunter to Tom.  "You're
scaring them as bad as your airship did."

"Yes, they won't go in with you there!" added another man.

Tom slipped around the corner of the stockade, out of sight, and from
that vantage point he took scores of pictures, as the tame animals led
the wild ones into the fenced enclosure. Then began another wild scene
as the gate was closed.

The terrified animals rushed about, trying in vain to find a way of
escape. Tom managed to climb up on top of the logs, and got some
splendid pictures. But this was nearly his undoing. For, just as the
last elephant rushed in, a big bull charged against the stockade, and
jarred Tom so that he was on the point of falling. His one thought was
about his camera, and he looked to see if he could drop it on the soft
grass, so it would not be damaged.

He saw Koku standing below him, the giant having slipped out of the
airship, to see the beasts at closer range.

"Catch this, Koku!" cried Tom, tossing the big man his precious camera,
and the giant caught it safely. But Tom's troubles were not over. A
moment later, as the huge elephant again rammed the fence, Tom fell
off, but fortunately outside. Then the large beast, seeing a small
opening in the gate that was not yet entirely closed, made for it. A
moment later he was rushing straight at Tom, who was somewhat stunned
by his fall, though it was not a severe one.

"Look out!" yelled Ned.

"Take a tree, Tom!" cried Mr. Nestor.

The elephant paid no attention to any one but Tom, whom he seemed to
think had caused all his trouble. The young inventor dashed to one
side, and then started to run toward the airship, for which Ned and Mr.
Nestor were already making. The elephant hunters at last succeeded in
closing the gate, blocking the chance of any more animals to escape.

"Run, Tom! Run!" yelled Ned, and Tom ran as he had never run before.
The elephant was close after him though, crashing through the jungle.
Tom could see the airship just ahead of him.

Suddenly he felt something grasp him from behind. He thought surely it
was the elephant's trunk, but a quick glance over his shoulder showed
him the friendly face of Koku, the giant.

"Me run for you," said Koku, as he caught Tom up under one arm, and,
carrying the camera under the other, he set off at top speed. Now Koku
could run well at times, and this time he did. He easily outdistanced
the elephant, and, a little later, he set Tom down on the deck of the
airship, with the camera beside him. Then Ned and Mr. Nestor came up
panting, having run to one side.

"Quick!" cried Tom. "We must get away before the elephant charges the
Flyer."

"He has stopped," shouted Mr. Nestor, and it was indeed so. The big
beast, seeing again the strange craft that had frightened him before,
stood still for a moment, and then plunged off into the jungle,
trumpeting with rage.

"Safe!" gasped Tom, as he looked at his camera to see if it had been
damaged. It seemed all right.

"Bless my latch key!" cried Mr. Damon. "This moving picture business
isn't the most peaceful one in the world."

"No, it has plenty of perils," agreed Mr. Nestor.

"Come on, let's get out of here while we have the chance," suggested
Tom. "There may be another herd upon us before we know it."

The airship was soon ascending, and Tom and his companions could look
down and see the tame elephants in the stockade trying to calm the wild
ones. Then the scene faded from sight.

"Well, if these pictures come out all right I'll have some fine ones,"
exclaimed Tom as he carried his camera to the room where he kept the
films. "I fancy an elephant drive and stampede are novelties in this
line."

"Indeed they are," agreed Mr. Nestor. "Mr. Period made no mistake when
he picked you out, Tom, for this work. What are you going to try for
next?"

"I'd like to get some lion and tiger pictures," said the young
inventor. "I understand this is a good district for that. As soon as
those elephants get quieted down, I'm going back to the stockade and
have a talk with the hunters."

This he did, circling about in the airship until nearly evening. When
they again approached the stockade all was quiet, and they came to
earth. A native showed them where the white hunters had their
headquarters, in some bungalows, and Tom and his party were made
welcome. They apologized for frightening the big beasts, and the
hunters accepted their excuses.

"As long as we got 'em, it's all right," said the head man, "though for
awhile, I didn't like your bloomin' machine." Tom entertained the
hunters aboard his craft, at which they marvelled much, and they gave
him all the information they had about the lions and tigers in the
vicinity.

"You won't find lions and tigers in herds, like elephants though," said
the head hunter. "And you may have to photograph 'em at night, as then
is when they come out to hunt, and drink."

"Well, I can take pictures at night," said Tom, as he showed his camera
apparatus.

The next day, in the airship, they left for another district, where, so
the natives reported, several lions had been seen of late. They had
done much damage, too, carrying off the native cattle, and killing
several Indians.

For nearly a week Tom circled about in his airship, keeping a sharp
lookout down below for a sign of lions that he might photograph them.
But he saw none, though he did get some pictures of a herd of Indian
deer that were well worth his trouble.

"I think I'll have to try for a night photograph," decided Tom at last.
"I'll locate a spring where wild beasts are in the habit of coming, set
the camera with the light going, and leave it there."

"But will the lions come up if they see the light?" asked Ned.

"I think so," replied his chum. "I'll take a chance, anyhow. If that
doesn't work then I'll hide near by, and see what happens."

"Bless my cartridge belt!" cried Mr. Damon.  "You don't mean that; do
you Tom?"

"Of course. Come to think of it, I'm not going to leave my camera out
there for a lion to jump on, and break. As soon as I get a series of
pictures I'll bring it back to the ship, I think."

By inquiry among the natives they learned the location of a spring
where, it was said, lions were in the habit of coming nightly to drink.

"That's the place I want!" cried Tom.

Accordingly the airship was headed for it, and one evening it came
gently to earth in a little clearing on the edge of the jungle, while
Koku, as was his habit, got supper.

After the meal Tom and Ned set the camera, and then, picking out a good
spot nearby, they hid themselves to wait for what might happen. The
lens was focused on the spring, and the powerful electric light set
going. It glowed brightly, and our hero thought it might have the
effect of keeping the beasts away, but Tom figured that, after they had
looked at it for a while, and seen that it did not harm them, they
would lose their suspicions, and come within range of his machine.

"The camera will do the rest," he said. In order not to waste films
uselessly Tom arranged a long electric wire, running it from the camera
to where he and Ned were hid. By pressing a button he could start or
stop the camera any time he wished, and, as he had a view of the spring
from his vantage point, he could have the apparatus begin taking
pictures as soon as there was some animal within focus.

"Well, I'm getting stiff," said Ned, after an hour or so had passed in
silent darkness, the only light being the distant one on the camera.

"So am I," said Tom.

"I don't believe anything will come to-night," went on his chum. "Let's
go back and--"

He stopped suddenly, for there was a crackling in the underbrush, and
the next moment the jungle vibrated to the mighty roar of a lion.

"He's coming!" hoarsely whispered Tom.

Both lads glanced through the trees toward the camera, and, in the
light, they saw a magnificent, tawny beast standing on the edge of the
spring. Once more he roared, as if in defiance, and then, as if
deciding that the light was not harmful, he stooped to lap up the water.

Hardly had he done so than there was another roar, and a moment later a
second lion leaped from the dense jungle into the clearing about the
spring. The two monarchs of the forest stood there in the glare of the
light, and Tom excitedly pressed the button that started the shutter to
working, and the film to moving back of the lens.

There was a slight clicking sound in the camera, and the lions turned
startedly. Then both growled again, and the next instant they sprang at
each other, roaring mightily.

"A fight!" cried Tom. "A lion fight, and right in front of my camera!
It couldn't be better. This is great! This will be a film."

"Quiet!" begged Ned. "They'll hear you, and come for us. I don't want
to be chewed up!"

"No danger of them hearing me!" cried Tom, and he had to shout to be
heard above the roaring of the two tawny beasts, as they bit and clawed
each other, while the camera took picture after picture of them.




