CHAPTER XVIII

THE NATIVE BATTLE


"By Jove, Tom, here they come!"

"From over by that drinking pool?"

"Yes, just as the spies said they would. Wow, what a crowd of the black
beggars there are! And some of 'em have regular guns, too. But most of
'em have clubs, bows and arrows, blow guns, or spears."

Tom and Ned were standing on the forward part of the airship, which was
moving slowly along, over an open plateau, in the jungle where the
native battle was about to take place. Our friends had left the town
where the missionaries lived, and had hovered over the jungle, until
they saw signs of the coming struggle. They had seen nothing of their
English rivals since coming away, but had no doubt but that the
Britishers were somewhere in the neighborhood.

The two forces of black men, who had gone to war over a dispute about
some cattle, approached each other. There was the beating of tom-toms,
and skin drums, and many weird shouts. From their vantage point in the
air, Tom and his companions had an excellent view. The Wizard Camera
was loaded with a long reel of film, and ready for action.

"Bless my handkerchief!" cried Mr. Damon, as he looked down on the
forces that were about to clash. "I never saw anything like this
before!"

"I either," admitted Tom. "But, if things go right, I'm going to get
some dandy films!"

Nearer and nearer the rival forces advanced. At first they had stared,
and shouted in wonder at the sight of the airship, hovering above them,
but their anger soon drew their attention to the fighting at hand, and,
after useless gestures toward the craft of the air, and after some of
them had vainly fired their guns or arrows at it, they paid no more
attention, but rushed on with their shouts and cries and amid the
beating of their rude drums.

"I think I'll begin to take pictures now," said Tom, as Ned, in charge
of the ship, sent it about in a circle, giving a general view of the
rival forces. "I'll show a scene of the two crowds getting ready for
business, and, later on, when they're actually giving each other cats
and dogs, I'll get all the pictures possible."

The camera was started while, safe in the air those on the Flyer watched
what went on below them.

Suddenly the forward squads of the two small armies of blacks met. With
wild, weird yells they rushed at each other. The air was filled with
flying arrows and spears. The sound of the old-fashioned muzzle-loading
guns could be heard, and clouds of smoke arose. Tilting his camera, and
arranging the newly attached reflecting mirrors so as to give the
effect as if a spectator was looking at the battle from in front,
instead of from above, Tom Swift took picture after picture.

The fight was now on. With yells of rage and defiance the Africans came
together, giving blow for blow. It was a wild melee, and those on the
airship looked on fascinated, though greatly wishing that such horrors
could be stopped.

"How about it, Tom?" cried Ned.

"Everything going good! I don't like this business, but now I'm in it
I'm going to stick. Put me down a little lower," answered the young
inventor.

"All right. I say Tom, look over there."

"Where?"

"By that lightning-struck gum tree. See those two men, and some sort of
a machine they've got stuck up on stilts? See it?"

"Sure. Those are the two Englishmen--my rivals! They're taking
pictures, too!"

And then, with a crash and roar, with wild shouts and yells, with
volley after volley of firearms, clouds of smoke and flights of arrows
and spears, the native battle was in full swing, while the young
inventor, sailing above it in his airship, reeled off view after view
of the strange sight.




CHAPTER XIX

A HEAVY LOSS


"Bless my battle axe, but this is awful!" cried Mr. Damon.

"War is always a fearful thing," spoke Mr. Nestor. "But this is not as
bad as if the natives fought with modern weapons. See!  most of them
are fighting with clubs, and their fists. They don't seem to hurt each
other very much."

"That's so," agreed Mr. Damon. The two gentlemen were in the main
cabin, looking down on the fight below them, while Tom, with Ned to
help him change the reels of films, as they became filled with
pictures, attended to the camera. Koku was steering the craft, as he
had readily learned how to manage it.

"Are those Englishmen taking pictures yet?" asked Tom, too busy to turn
his head, and look for himself.

"Yes, they're still at," replied Ned. "But they seem to be having
trouble with their machine," he added as he saw one of the men leave
the apparatus, and run hurriedly back to where they had made a
temporary camp.

"I guess it's an old-fashioned kind," commented Tom. "Say, this is
getting fierce!" he cried, as the natives got in closer contact with
each other. It was now a hand-to-hand battle.

"I should say so!" yelled Ned. "It's a wonder those Englishmen aren't
afraid to be down on the same level with the black fighters."

"Oh, a white person is considered almost sacred by the natives here, so
the missionaries told me," said Tom. "A black man would never think of
raising his hand to one, and the Englishmen probably know this. They're
safe enough. In fact I'm thinking of soon going down myself, and
getting some views from the ground."

"Bless my gizzard, Tom!" cried Mr. Damon. "Don't do it!"

"Yes, I think I will. Why, it's safe enough. Besides, if they attack us
we have the electric rifles. Ned, you tell Koku to get the guns out, to
have in readiness, and then you put the ship down. I'll take a chance."

"Jove! You've been doing nothing but take chances since we came on this
trip!" exclaimed Ned, admiringly. "All right! Here we go," and he went
to relieve Koku at the wheel, while the giant, grinning cheerfully at
the prospect of taking part in the fight himself, got out the rifles,
including his own.

Meanwhile the native battle went on fiercely. Many on both sides fell,
and not a few ran away, when they got the chance, their companions
yelling at them, evidently trying to shame them into coming back.

As the airship landed, Mr. Damon, Mr. Nestor, Ned and Koku stood ready
with the deadly electric rifles, in case an attack should be made on
them. But the fighting natives paid no more attention to our friends
than they did to the two Englishmen.  The latter moved their clumsy
camera from place to place, in order to get various views of the
fighting.

"This is the best yet!" cried Tom, as, after a lull in the fight, when
the two opposing armies had drawn a little apart, they came together
again more desperately than before. "I hope the pictures are being
recorded all right. I have to go at this thing pretty much in the dark.
Say, look at the beggars fight!" he finished.

But a battle, even between uncivilized blacks, cannot go on for very
long at a time. Many had fallen, some being quite severely injured it
seemed, being carried off by their friends. Then, with a sudden rush,
the side which, as our friends learned later, had been robbed of their
cattle, made a fierce attack, overwhelming their enemies, and
compelling them to retreat. Across the open plain the vanquished army
fled, with the others after them. Tom, meanwhile, taking pictures as
fast as he could.

"This ends it!" he remarked to Ned, when the warriors were too far away
to make any more good views. "Now we can take a rest."

"The Englishmen gave up some time ago," said his chum, motioning to the
two men who were taking their machine off the tripod.

"Guess their films gave out," spoke Tom. "Well, you see it didn't do
any harm to come down, and I got some better views here."

"Here they come back!" exclaimed Ned, as a horde of the black fellows
emerged from the jungle, and came on over the plain.

"Hear 'em sing!" commented Tom, as the sound of a rude chant came to
their ears. "They must be the winners all right."

"I guess so," agreed Ned. "But what about staying here now?  Maybe they
won't be so friendly to us when they haven't any fighting to occupy
their minds."

"Don't worry," advised Tom. "They won't bother us."

And the blacks did not. They were caring for their wounded, who had not
already been taken from the field, and they paid no attention to our
friends, save to look curiously at the airship.

"Bless my newspaper!" cried Mr. Damon, with an air of relief.  "I'm
glad that's over, and we didn't have to use the electric rifles, after
all."

"Here come the Englishmen to pay us a visit," spoke Ned a little later,
as they sat about the cabin of the Flyer. The two rival picture men
soon climbed on deck.

"Beg pardon," said the taller of the two, addressing our hero, "but
could you lend us a roll of film? Ours are all used up, and we want to
get some more pictures before going back to our main camp."

"I'm sorry," replied Tom, "but I use a special size, and it fits no
camera but my own."

"Ah! might we see your camera?" asked the other Englishman.  "That is,
see how it works?"

"I don't like to be disobliging," was Tom's answer, "but it is not yet
patented and--well--" he hesitated.

"Oh, I see!" sneered the taller visitor. "You're afraid we might steal
some of your ideas. Hum! Come on Montgomery," and, swinging on his
heels, with a military air, he hurried away, followed by his companion.

"They don't like that, but I can't help it," remarked Tom to his
friends a little later. "I can't afford to take any chances."

"No, you did just right," said Mr. Nestor. "Those men may be all right,
but from the fact that they are in the picture taking business I'd be
suspicious of them."

"Well, what's next on the programme?" asked Ned as Tom put his camera
away.

"Oh, I think we'll stay here over night," was our hero's reply.  "It's
a nice location, and the gas machine needs cleaning. We can do it here,
and maybe I can get some more pictures."

They were busy the rest of the day on the gas generator, but the main
body of natives did not come back, and the Englishmen seemed to have
disappeared.

Everyone slept soundly that night. So soundly, in fact, that the sun
was very high when Koku was the first to awaken, His head felt
strangely dizzy, and he wondered at a queer smell in the room he had to
himself.

"Nobody up yet," he exclaimed in surprise, as he staggered into the
main cabin. There, too, was the strange, sweetish, sickly smell. "Mr.
Tom, where you be? Time to get up!" the giant called to his master, as
he went in, and gently shook the young inventor by the shoulder.

"Eh? What's that? What's the matter?" began Tom, and then he suddenly
sat up. "Oh, my head!" he exclaimed, putting his hands to his aching
temples.

"And that queer smell!" added Ned, who was also awake now.

"Bless my talcum powder!" cried Mr. Damon. "I have a splitting
headache."

"Hum! Chloroform, if I'm any judge!" called Mr. Nestor from his berth.

"Chloroform!" cried Tom, staggering to his feet. "I wonder." He did not
finish his sentence, but made his way to the room where his camera was
kept. "It's gone!" he cried. "We have been chloroformed in the night,
and some one has taken my Wizard Camera."




