II

"THE HOLE IN THE WATER-SKIN"


For the fourth time that day Abdulla, the water-seller of Damascus, had
come to the river's bank to fill his water-skin. The day was hot beyond
endurance; the drinkers had been clamorous and trade had been brisk; and
a bag of small money, the fruits of his merchandise, hung within the
folds of his gaberdine.

Weary with going to and fro in the burning streets, Abdulla seated
himself under a palm tree, the last of a long line that ran down to the
pool where the skins were filled. Resting his back against the cool side
of the tree, the setting sun being behind him, he drew forth his bag and
counted his coins. "One more journey," he said to himself, "and the bag
will be full. Zobeida shall have sweetmeats to-morrow."

The pleasing thought lingered in his mind; fled for a moment and then
returned; Abdulla saw the shop of the infidel Greek, with boxes of
chocolate in the window; he saw himself inside making his choice among
innumerable boxes, and holding the bag of money in his hand. Then his
head fell forward on his chest and he was asleep.

The plunge into sleep had been so sudden, and its duration was so brief,
that no memory of it was left, and Abdulla knew not that he had slept
nor the moment when he awaked. Fluctuating images rose and wavered and
vanished; and then, as though in answer to a signal, the incoherence
ceased, the forms became defined, and a steady stream of consciousness
began to flow.

He was conscious of the figure of a man in the foreground whose presence
he had not previously noticed. The man was sitting motionless on a low
rock less than a stone-cast distant, and close to the river's brim; and
he seemed to be watching the still flow of the stream. A moment later he
stood upright, turned round, and crossed the fifty paces of sand that
lay between him and Abdulla.

As the man drew nearer, Abdulla observed that he bore a bewildering
resemblance to himself. Not many minutes before he had been looking at
his own reflection in a small pocket mirror which he had purchased that
morning from a Jew as a present for Zobeida; and as he had looked at the
image, still thinking of Zobeida, he wished that God had bestowed upon
him a countenance of nobler cast. The face he now saw before him was the
face he had just seen in the mirror, with the nobler cast introduced;
and Abdulla, noticing the difference as well as the resemblance, was
afraid.

"Depart from me, O my master," said he, "for I am a man of no account."
And he bowed himself to the ground.

"Rise," said the other, "and make haste; for the sun is low, and scarce
an hour remains for thy merchandise. Dip thy water-skin into the stream;
and, as thou dippest, think on the hour of thy death, when the
All-merciful will dip into the river of thy life, and thou shalt sleep
for the twinkling of an eye, and know not when thou awakest, and there
shall be no mark left on thee, even as no mark is left on the river when
thou hast filled thy water-skin from its abundance."

"I know not what thou sayest," said Abdulla, "for I am a poor man and
ignorant."

"Thou art young," said the other, "and there is time for thee to learn.
Hear, then, and I will enlighten thee. Everything hath its double, and
the double is redoubled again. To this world there is a next before and
a next after, and to each next a nearest, through a counting that none
can complete. Worlds without end lie enfolded one within another like
the petals of a rose; and as the fragrance of one petal penetrates and
intermingles with the fragrance of all the rest, so is the vision of the
world thou seest now blended with the vision of that which was and of
that which is to come. And I tell thee, O thou seller of water, that
between this world and its next fellow the difference is so faint that
none save the enlightened can discern it. A man may live a thousand
lives, as thou hast already done, and dream but of one. Again thou shalt
sleep and again thou shalt awake, and the world of thy sleeping shall
differ from the world of thy waking no more than thy full water-skin
differs from itself when two drops of water have fallen from its mouth."

"Thou speakest like a devotee," answered Abdulla. "The matter of thy
discourse is utterly beyond me, save for that thou sayest concerning the
dipping of the water-skin. There thy thought is as the echo of mine own.
But know that I am ashamed in thy presence; and again I entreat thee to
depart." And Abdulla bowed himself as before.

"Do, then, as I bid thee," said the man; "dip thy skin in the water of
the flowing river, think on the hour of thy death, and forget not as
thou dippest to pronounce the name of God."

Then Abdulla rose up and did what he was commanded to do. While he was
dipping the skin he tried to think of the hour of his death; but he
could think only of the words, and dying seemed to him a thing of
naught; for he was young and Zobeida was fair. Nevertheless, when he had
lifted the full skin from the river, and saw that his taking left no
mark, an old thought came back to him, and for the thousandth time he
began to wonder at the ways of flowing water. "Only God can understand
them," he murmured. "May the Compassionate have mercy upon the
ignorant!"

Then he adjusted the burden on his back and turned to the palm-belt. But
the stranger was gone.

As one who walks in sleep, Abdulla retraced the path on which for more
than half the year he came and went three or four times a day. Now he
pondered the words of his visitant; now the image of flowing water rose
and glided before the inner eye.

He passed under the gate of the city without noting where he was. But
here a sudden jostle interrupted his reverie. A man driving a string of
donkeys thrust him against the wall, cursing him as he passed. Abdulla
looked up and, when he heard the curses, repeated the name of God as a
protection against evil.

Re-settling the water-skin in the position from which it had been
displaced by the collision with the donkey, he took up the thread of his
musing and went on. He thought of Zobeida, of the Cadi, of the contract
of marriage, of the sweetmeats he would purchase on the morrow, of the
shop of the Greek. But again his reverie was broken; this time by the
sound of his own voice. The cry of his trade had burst automatically
from his lips: "Water; sweet water! Ho, everyone that thirsteth, come
and buy!"

A vision lay before him, and he seemed to be gazing at it from a point
in mid-air. He saw a street in Damascus; the crowd is coming and going,
the merchants are in their shops, and some are crying their wares. Close
by the door of a house a boy is holding forth a wooden bowl, and in
front of him a water-seller is in the act of opening his water-skin.
Abdulla watches the filling of the bowl, and sees the man put forth his
hand to take the coin the boy is offering. The man touches the coin and
instantly becomes Abdulla himself! Abdulla closes his water-skin and
replaces it on his back, not without a momentary sense of bewilderment.
He observes also that some of the water is spilt on the ground. But he
has no memory of the spilling.

Abdulla would fain have questioned himself. But he found no question to
ask and could not begin the interrogation. Something seemed to have
disturbed him, but so completely had it vanished that he could give the
disturbance neither form nor name. Otherwise the chain of his memory was
unbroken. He had finished his last round for the day; scarce a cup of
water remained in the skin, and as he flung the flaccid thing over his
shoulder he began to recall, one by one, the names and faces of his
customers, forty in all, reflecting with satisfaction that the last
skinful had brought him the best gains of the day. Then he remembered
the driver of donkeys who had thrust him against the wall, and,
examining the skin, found that it was frayed almost to bursting. And
Abdulla uttered a curse on the driver and turned homewards.

His road lay through narrow streets, crowded with people, and as he
passed down one of them a veiled woman cried to him from the door of a
hovel.

"O compassionate water-seller, I have two children within who are sore
athirst, for the fever is burning them. Give them, I pray thee, a
mouthful of water, and Allah shall recompense thee in Paradise."

"Woman," said Abdulla, "there is less water in the skin than would
suffice to cool the tongue of a soul in hell. Nevertheless, what I have
I will give thee." And he lowered the mouth of his water-skin into the
woman's bowl.

Not a drop came forth. In vain Abdulla shook the skin and pressed the
corners between the palms of his hands. Then, discovering what had
happened, he began to curse and to swear.

"By the beard of the Prophet," he cried, "the skin has burst! A driver
of donkeys, begotten of Satan, thrust me against the wall at the
entering in of the city, and frayed the water-skin. And now, by the
permission of God, the heat has dried up the remnant of the water and
cracked the skin, thus completing the work of the Deviser of Mischief.
Alas, alas! for the skin was borrowed. And to-morrow restitution will be
demanded, for the lender is likewise a son of the Devil, and the bowels
of mercy are not within him."

"Verily thou raisest a great cry for a small evil," said the woman.
"Bethink thee of them who are perishing with thirst, and hold thy
peace."

"Nay, but I am mindful of them," said Abdulla; "for had not the
water-skin been burst, I would have had the wherewithal to give them to
drink. But know, O mother of sorrows, that the motives of mankind are of
a mixed nature, especially when grief oppresseth them. And my griefs are
greater than thou deemest. Woe is me! Behold this bag of money, and
raise thy voice with mine in lamentation over the miseries of the
unfortunate. A damsel, more beautiful than the full moon seen beyond the
summits of waving palms, is at this hour hungering for the sweetmeats of
the infidel, even as the children of thy body are thirsting for water;
and within this bag is the money which, by the favour of Allah, would
have purchased abundance of all that she desireth. But ere to-morrow's
sun has risen from the edge of the desert, four coins out of every five
will be claimed as damages by the lender of the skin (whom may the
Prophet utterly reject!), the rest being reserved for the daily food
which the All-merciful provides for his creatures. And the damsel will
sit in the corner of the house, rocking her goodly body, which was
created for the angels to gaze upon; and she will bite her hands and
beat them on the wall, and wail for the sweetmeats that come not, and
curse the name of Abdulla, the breaker of vows!"

"Most excellent of water-sellers," said the woman, "many are the damsels
in this city addicted to the sweetmeats of the infidel, and of those
that are beautiful as the full moon beyond the waving palms there are
not a few. Thy description, therefore, availeth not for the
identification of thy beloved. Describe her more narrowly, I beseech
thee, that hereafter, when my children are dead, I may bring her the
balm of consolation. For I am afflicted in her woes; and between women
in sorrow there is ever a bond."

"Yea, verily," answered Abdulla. "I will so describe my beloved that
thou shall recognise her among ten thousand. Know, then, that her form
is like unto a minaret of ivory built by the Waters of Silence in a
king's garden; her eyes are as lighted lamps in the house of the
Enchanter; the flowing of her hair is a troop of wild horses pursued by
Bedouin in the wilderness of Arabia; and the fragrance of her coming is
like an odour of precious nards wafted on the evening breeze from the
Islands of Wak-Wak."

"O Abdulla," replied the other, "of a truth I know this damsel. And now
I perceive that the Devourer of Bliss hath taken thee in his net and
multiplied thy sorrows upon thy head. But forget not the grief of this
thy handmaid, and the suffering of those she has nursed at the breast.
Hear even now the wailing that is within! Lo, a worker of spells has
sent destruction among us, and the sickness is sore in the habitations
of the poor. Press, then, thy skin once more, if peradventure Allah may
have left there one drop of water, that the mouth of the little ones may
be moistened before they die. And add a curse, I pray thee, on the
Worker of Spells; for the Giver of Gifts hath made thy tongue of great
alacrity, and taught thee the putting-together of wise judgments and the
rounding-off of memorable sayings."

By this time a crowd, attracted by the cries and the cursing, had
gathered round the speakers, and so thick was the press that Abdulla had
much ado to move his hands that he might press the water-skin as he was
bidden.

"O wise and much-enduring woman," he cried, "I greatly fear me that thy
prayer is vain. But I will even do as thou biddest, if only these
foolish ones will make room that I may pass my hands craftily over the
skin. Thereafter I will add a goodly curse on the worker of spells, and
at the last thou and I and all this multitude will wail and lament
together, that the heart of the All-merciful may be moved to pity and
his will turned to work us good."

So spake Abdulla, and the crowd began to give way. But, behold, a
marching squad of soldiery, going to the war, with drums beating and
bayonets all aflash, suddenly swings down the street, filling its whole
breadth from side to side. Instantly the crowd backs, and Abdulla and
the woman, separated from one another, are swept along as driftwood by
the torrent. Arrived in the open space into which the street discharged,
Abdulla rushes hither and thither in search of the woman, examining
every face in the crowd, and raising himself on tiptoe that he may look
over their heads. But the woman is nowhere to be seen.

Perturbed by the sudden disappearance of the woman, Abdulla turned once
more into the homeward way. Before he had taken many steps it occurred
to him to examine the rent in his water-skin. Standing quite still and
holding the skin at arm's length before him, he gazed intently at the
small hole, about the size of an olive-stone, which had resulted from
the donkey-driver's assault. As he thus gazed, the incident which had so
abruptly terminated a few minutes before seemed to retreat into the
distant past. Then it became a story, heard he knew not where, about a
water-seller who lived long ago. Next, it seemed a dream of the night
before, the details of which he could not recall. Finally, it vanished
from his memory altogether.

Abdulla, realising that it was gone, turned quickly and found, with some
surprise, that he was standing in front of a large shop with plate-glass
windows, behind which were boxes of chocolate arranged in rows. A
mirror--at least it seemed so to Abdulla,--of equal length with the shop
front, was set at the back and doubled the objects in the window.

The sight of the sweetmeats instantly brought back the memory of his
misfortunes, and, in so doing, gave an occasion to the Tempter.

"I will conceal what has happened from the lender of the skin," thought
Abdulla. "I will insert a cunning patch, which will assuredly burst so
soon as the skin is filled with water, and I will then swear by God and
the Prophet that the skin was patched when I borrowed it. And now I will
go in and bargain with the infidel for yonder box, the circumference
whereof is wide as the belly of a well-fattened sheep."

Raising his eyes from the great box of chocolates, Abdulla's attention
was strangely arrested by the reflection of his own face and figure in
the mirror at the back of the shop front. He noted, with a start, the
unwonted dignity of the figure as thus presented, and immediately
recalled the man who had accosted him but lately by the Water-sellers'
Pool.

Abdulla gazed on what was before him, and thought thus within himself,
"Of a truth I knew not that Allah had bestowed so dignified a
countenance on the least worthy of his servants. The eyes are the eyes
of eagles; the nose is a promontory looking seawards; the brow is a
tower of brass built for defence at the gateway of a kingdom. Verily,
the mirror of Zobeida must have been at fault. Surely God hath now
provided me, in my own countenance, with the means of endearment, and
the sweetmeats of the infidel are needed not. Moreover, it becometh not
one thus favoured to deal crookedly with the followers of the Prophet.
Is Abdulla a man of violence, as the driver of the donkey; or a man of
no bowels, as the lender of the skin? Is he an accursed Greek or a more
accursed Armenian that he should play the cheat with his neighbour,
inserting a cunning patch, which will assuredly produce leakage and make
the rent worse than before? God forbid! Abdulla is a man of pure
occupation, even as yonder image reveals him. Nevertheless, it may be
that the Author of Deception has fashioned a lying picture in the
mirror, that he may cause me to forgo the purchase of the box, and undo
me with the beloved, who will soil her cheeks with rivers of tears, and
rock her body in the corner of the house. Go to, now; I will see whether
the Evil One be not hidden behind the mirror; or if, perchance, there be
not here some witchcraft contrivance of the Franks."

So thinking, Abdulla stepped into the entry of the shop, that he might
examine the back of the mirror. What was his astonishment on discovering
that there was no mirror at all, the boxes of chocolate he had taken for
reflections being just as real as all the rest!

The Greek proprietor, suspecting him to be a thief, rushed out to
apprehend him. He was too late, for Abdulla had fled into the darkness.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sudden night had fallen; aloft, in a firmament of violet-black, the
great stars were shining, and the city was still.

Pursuing his way, Abdulla found himself in front of a lofty house with a
solitary latticed window immediately beneath the roof. It was the
appointed hour. Presently a handkerchief was waved from between the
lattice, and the soft voice of a woman began to speak.

"O Abdulla, my beloved," said the voice, "though it be dark in the
street, yet there is a light round about thee so that I can see thy
countenance as if it were noonday. Wherefore hast thou anointed thyself
with radiance, and made thyself to shine like the sons of the morning?
Where hast thou been? For thy fashion is passing strange, and my heart
turns to water at the sight of thee."

"I have been," said Abdulla, "in the company of the wise, who have
taught me the way of understanding, and shown me all knowledge, and
opened the dark things that are hidden in the secret parts of the earth.
All day have I conversed with enlightened and honourable men, and they
have made me the chief of their company and the father of their sect."

"Begone, then," answered the woman, "for I know thee not, and thy
comeliness makes me afraid. I had deemed that thou wert Abdulla, the
seller of water; and I am even now prepared to let down a basket that he
may place therein the thing for which my soul is an hungered, even the
sweetmeats of the infidel, which I would then draw up again with a cord
of silk, and be refreshed after my manner. But as for the ways of
understanding, thou mayest tread them alone, and the opening up of that
which is hidden is a thing that my soul hateth."

"O thou that speakest behind the lattice," said Abdulla, "thy discourse
is of matters that lack importance in the eyes of the sagacious. I
perceive thou art possessed by a demon, and surmise that the Whetter of
Appetite is leading thee in the path of destruction. Retire, therefore,
to thy inner chamber, and recite quickly the Seven Exorcisms and the Two
Professions of Faith."

"O Abdulla, if indeed thou art he," replied the voice, "I discern thou
art contending for a purpose. Peradventure, the eyes of the wanton have
entangled thee in the way, and thou hast bestowed on another that which,
when thy heart was upright, thou designedst for me. Come now and prove
thine integrity, for I will presently let down the basket that thou
mayest fill it with the delicacies of the Franks."

"Thou fallest deeper into the snares of the demon," said Abdulla, "and
thy voice soundeth afar off, even as the voice of one crying for water
from the flames of the nethermost pit. Know that he to whom thou
speakest is of them that walk in the light; and what have these to do
with the delicacies of the Franks? Verily, I understand not thy topic,
having heard but a rumour thereof among the conversations of the
ignorant."

"O despiser of the knowledge that sweetens life," said the woman,
"verily, I deem thee a man of limited information and degenerate wit.
But hearken unto my words, and I will enlighten thee concerning the
topic of our discourse, that ignorance may excuse thee no further. Know,
then, that the delicacies of the Franks are of many kinds, arranged in
boxes that are tied with silver cords. And the chief of them all is a
thing of two natures, cunningly blended, whereof one nature appertaineth
to the outer shell, and the other to the inner substance. The outer
shell tasteth bitter, and the colour is of the second degree of
blackness, like unto the skin of the Ethiopian eunuch. The inner
substance is sweeter than the honeycomb, and white as the wool of
Helbon, interspersed with all manner of nuts. This is the chief among
the delicacies of the Franks; and such is the marvel of the blending of
the natures that the palate knoweth neither the bitterness of the shell,
nor the sweetness of the kernel, but a third flavour of more eminent
rank, to which Allah hath appointed no name. Hie thee, therefore, O man
of no excuse, and buy from them that sell."

"That for which thou askest," said Abdulla, "is utterly beneath the
dignity of the enlightened to give thee. Ask for the wisdom of the
ancients and thou shalt have it. Ask for the revelation of things
hidden, and it shall be accorded thee. But the delicacies of the
Franks, cunningly blended as to their two natures, and arranged in boxes
that are tied with silver cords, shalt thou in no wise receive."

"O raiser of false expectations," cried the lady, "and betrayer of her
that has trusted thee, among all the sons of Adam there is none more
utterly contemptible than thou. In the dignity of thy carriage thou
appearest unto me as a thing abhorred; I like not thy wisdom; I have no
fellowship with thy knowledge, and I despise the insolent shining of thy
inner light."

"O woman of a light mind and a debased appetite," said Abdulla, "thy
wits have gone astray, and thou babblest like one asleep, confounding
the things that are not with the things that are. Abdulla, the
water-seller, of whom thou speakest, is long numbered with the dead, and
the waters of forgetfulness have flowed over his record. Only this day I
heard afar off the last rumour which the world hath concerning him. And
this was the rumour: that, on a day, perceiving one athirst in the
byways, Abdulla gave him freely three drops of water from the dregs of
his water-skin, thereby earning the favour of Allah (whose name he
exalted!) and the promise of Paradise. But going forth in the way he met
a man having the Evil Eye; and lo, it straightway entered into the heart
of Abdulla to fill his water-skin with the sweetmeats of the infidel,
that he might find favour in the eyes of a frivolous woman--even one
such as thou art. And God (than whom there is no other!), being angered
at the folly of Abdulla, made a hole in the skin, and sent forth the
Terminator of Delights to end his days. So the water-seller died, and
the weight of his water-skin, laden with sweetmeats, went forth with his
soul. And this, being heavy, dragged him down to the place of darkness,
where the sweetmeats fell out through the hole in the skin and were
eaten of devils."

At this the woman banged-to the lattice and disappeared.

Abdulla started at the sound of the closing lattice. He was in a
standing posture on the roof of his house. The mat on which he slept was
tossed into a heap, and the empty water-skin, which served him for a
pillow, had been thrown some yards from its place. Abdulla looked over
the parapet eastwards; and he saw the desert rose-red in the dawn.

For a long time Abdulla walked to and fro on the roof of his house
pondering the things that had happened to him both in the day and the
night. To piece the story together was no easy matter, for there were
gaps in his memory, and, though some of the incidents were clear, others
were perplexingly dim. Moreover, the incidents that were clear seemed to
change places with those that were dim, so that the line between his
dreams and his waking experiences was now in one place and now in
another. He could not be sure, for example, that the fraying of his
water-skin belonged to the one class rather than the other, and so rapid
was the transition from conviction to doubt that he examined the skin
no less than five times to satisfy himself the hole was there.

The longer he meditated on these things the greater became his confusion
of mind, and by the time the sun was fully risen from the desert he was
well-nigh distracted and beginning to doubt of his own identity. In vain
did he repeat the Seven Exorcisms, the Four Prayers, the Tecbir, the
Adan, and the Two Professions of Faith, calling on the name of Allah
between the exercises, and extolling His majesty every time. At last
Abdulla began to wring his hands and to cry aloud like one bereft of
intelligence.

While thus lamenting, it suddenly seemed to him that one from a far
distance was calling him by name. Checking his cries, he listened. The
voice came nearer and nearer, and presently broke out in familiar tones
at his very side.

"What aileth thee, O Abdulla?" said the voice. "Hast thou partaken of
the intoxicating drug? Has the Evil Eye encountered thee? Or sufferest
thou from a visitation of God?"

"O my mother," answered Abdulla, "there is none else besides thee under
heaven who can ease my pain and give me counsel in my perplexity. The
sound of thy voice is to me like running waters to him that perisheth of
thirst. Know that a great bewilderment has overtaken me, so that I
discern no more the things that are not from the things that are."

"That which was foreordained has come to pass," said the woman. "Thou
wast marked on thy forehead in the hour of thy birth; and I saw it, and
knew that things hidden from the foundation of the earth would be
revealed unto thee. Lo, the mark is on thy forehead still. O Abdulla, my
son, thou art no longer a seller of water, but a seer of the Inner
Substance, and divulger of secrets."

"O my mother," said Abdulla, "I know not what thou sayest. The Inner
Substance is a thing whereof I have never heard, and there is no secret
that I can divulge. Only a dream of the night season has troubled me,
and even now it seemeth to mingle with the things that God makes
visible, so that the desert floats like a yellow cloud, and thine own
form undulates before me like the morning mist."

"Thy confusion," said the woman, "is caused by the intermingling of the
worlds, which few among the sons of men are permitted to note; and the
undulations that bewilder thee are made by the river of Time. What thou
seest is the passing of that which was into that which is, and of that
which is into that which is to be. But rouse thy mind quickly, O my son,
and betake thyself on the instant to a skilful Interpreter of Dreams,
that the matter be resolved."

"I hear and obey," said Abdulla; and he ran down the steps of his house
into the street.

As he passed through the door, Selim the courier called to him from the
other side.

"O thou that dwellest alone," cried Selim, "hast thou taken to thyself a
wife? Has Zobeida proved gracious?"

"Nay, verily," answered Abdulla. "I have broken a vow and Zobeida
rejecteth me utterly. And know, O Selim, that I am a man sore troubled
with dreams in the night season, so that a spirit of amazement hath
possessed me, and I discern not the light from the darkness, nor the
shadow from the substance."

"Thou tellest a strange thing," said Selim. "Nevertheless, I heard thee
speaking scarce a moment gone with one on the roof."

"My mother was come from the lower parts of the house to comfort me,"
said Abdulla, "and it was with her that I spake."

"Verily, thou art bewitched," answered the other. "More than twenty
years have passed since thy mother entered into the Mercy of God, and
her body is dust within the tomb."

Abdulla's answer was a piteous cry. He leaned for support against the
wall of his house, spreading out his hands like one who would save
himself from falling.

"O Selim," he cried, "I am encompassed with forgetfulness, and my heart
is eradicated within me. Said I not unto thee that I discern no more
between the darkness and the light, between the shadow and the
substance? But I swear to thee, by the beard of the Prophet, that she
with whom I spake was the mother who bore me. She stretched out her arms
towards me and touched the mark on my forehead, and bade me hasten to
the Interpreter of Dreams that the matter might be resolved."

"It is a sign from Allah," said Selim; "and I doubt not that thou wilt
die the death at the hand of the infidel and be received into Paradise.
For know that thou hast been called two days ago, and the sergeant is
even now seeking for thee."

"That also I had forgotten," said Abdulla. "I will hasten forthwith to
the Interpreter of Dreams, and thereafter I will report me to the
sergeant. And the rest shall be as Allah willeth."

And Abdulla passed on his way to the Interpreter of Dreams.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly he realised that his path was blocked by a crowd, and looking
up he saw above him, on the other side of the street, the lattice of
Zobeida. "Verily," he thought, "I have made a long circuit; for this
house lieth not in the way."

Loud cries were coming from the house, mingled with curses and the sound
of hands beaten against the wall. As soon as Abdulla appeared, one of
the crowd called out towards the lattice:

"O woman that cursest in the darkness, come now to the light, that we
may hear thy maledictions more plainly, and be refreshed by the beauty
of thy countenance. Lo, he who is thy enemy passeth even now beneath the
window. Come forth, then, and the sight of him shall be as a fire in thy
bones, inspiring thy tongue to the invention of disastrous epithets and
calamitous imprecations. And we, on our part, will hold him fast, even
the accursed Abdulla, that he run not away till his destiny is
pronounced and his doom completed."

At this the lattice was burst open, and Zobeida, tearing aside her veil,
displayed a countenance of wrath. Her hair was dishevelled, her cheeks
were soiled with ashes and tears, her eyes were like coals of fire, and
her voice hissed and rang like the sword of a slayer in the day of
battle.

"O Abdulla," she cried, "of a truth thou art the Emperor of liars and
the Sultan of rogues. May the Abaser of Pride rub thy nose in the dust!"

"O my mistress," answered Abdulla, "impose upon thyself, I beseech thee,
the obligation of good manners."

"Dog and son of a dog----" cried Zobeida. But Abdulla heard no more. A
distant confusion of sounds had arisen. It drew nearer with amazing
rapidity, and finally broke forth into the tramp of marching feet, the
rumbling of wheels, and the booming of a drum. The houses melted away,
the sound of Zobeida's voice grew fainter and fainter, and the knot of
bystanders was gone.

Abdulla sprang to attention and looked about him. He was in the main
street of the city, and opposite was the house of the Interpreter of
Dreams. Coming down the street was a regiment of Turkish infantry, with
a battery of guns following behind. And a dim memory passed, like a
swift shadow, over the mind of Abdulla.

For an instant he was bemused, and one who passed by heard him muttering
broken words. "The long way round," he murmured; "the lattice of
Zobeida--a caravan of camels laden with sweetmeats--dog and the son of a
dog." Then a wind passed over his face, and it seemed to him that he had
been thinking foolishly. "Well for me," he replied, "that I went not
round by the house of Zobeida. For the time is short and I too am
called." And with that he crossed over, making haste that he might reach
the other side before the marching column blocked the street.

The house of the Interpreter was built after the European fashion, and
on the door was a large brass knocker after the manner of the Franks.
Abdulla stretched forth his hand, and was about to raise the knocker
when one plucked him by the sleeve. Turning round he saw a man in the
uniform of an officer of artillery.

"Wherefore hast thou not reported thyself?" said the officer. "Thy name
was called two days ago, and verily thou runnest a risk of being shot."

"O my master, a bewilderment hath overtaken me," said Abdulla, "so that
I forget all things and know not the day from the night. Lo, even now, I
seek the Interpreter of Dreams that the matter may be resolved."

"Thou art in a way to have thy dreams interpreted by a bullet through
the brain," said the officer. "Leave then thy dreaming and hold thy
peace; or, by Allah, I will proclaim thy cowardice forthwith and order
thy arrest. Fall in!"

Abdulla had no choice. A moment later he was marching in step with a
squad of reservists who followed in the rear of the guns.

As the column passed down the street a veiled woman stepped out from the
edge of the crowd, and, taking three paces by the side of Abdulla,
whispered in his ear:

"Play the man."

       *       *       *       *       *

They were now at the station, entraining for the seat of war. The
carriages were crowded with shouting soldiery, and many, unable to find
room within, had clambered on the roofs. Among these was Abdulla,
crouching silent.

Suddenly a man in European costume forced his way along the platform and
called him by name.

"Art thou Abdulla, the water-seller of Damascus?" said the man.

"I am he."

"Come down, then, that I may speak with thee. And hasten, for the time
is short."

"Stay thou behind and let these go," said the European, when Abdulla had
descended from the roof. "I will purchase thy release from the Pasha.
Nay, the matter is already arranged, and none of these will hinder thee
if thou stayest."

"And wherefore should I do this?" asked Abdulla.

"For a weighty and good reason," said the European. "Know that the fame
of thee has reached to London, to Paris, to New York. Thou art spoken
of as one who hath a power upon thee which may aid in opening up the
things that have been hidden from the foundation of the earth. And the
probers of secrets have sent me that I may search thee out, and engage
thee at a great salary, and take thee with me to the seats of the
learned and the cities of the West."

"Thou art in error," said Abdulla, "for power such as thou speakest of
belongeth not to me. Of a truth, I am one who walketh in a great
bewilderment, and the spirit of forgetfulness hath overpowered me. But
withal I am a common man, of whom Allah hath created millions, and it
was but yesterday I was seeking the Interpreter of Dreams, that I might
pay him the fee and have the matter resolved."

"I am the Interpreter of Dreams whom thou soughtest," said the other,
"and I dwell in the house built in the European fashion, with the great
knocker of brass, after the manner of the Franks."

"Thy name?" said Abdulla.

"My name is Professor----"--but an escape of steam from the panting
locomotive drowned the next word,--"and I am come from London to fetch
thee."

"I go not with thee," said Abdulla, "for thou seemest to be one whom the
Deluder of Intelligence is leading astray. I have but dreams to tell
thee; and if thou wantest dreams, hast thou none of thine own? Verily, a
dream is but a little thing."

"Thou errest," shouted the other--for Abdulla had now climbed back on to
the roof,--"a dream is a thing more wonderful than aught else the
Creator hath appointed, and there is none among the sons of Adam who
understandeth the coming and the going thereof. But if thou wilt come
with me----"

The Interpreter broke off in the middle of his sentence, for the train
was moving out of the station, and he saw that Abdulla could no longer
hear the words.

       *       *       *       *       *

The battery to which Abdulla was attached lay in a hollow to the rear of
the main battle, awaiting orders to take up a position in the front. It
was the first time he had been under fire. Dead bodies, horridly
mangled, lay around, and a straggling throng of wounded men, some
silent, some unmanned by agony, and all terrible to look upon, was
passing by. As Abdulla saw these things, the fear of death grew strong
within him. His body trembled and his face was blanched.

Seeing his state his companions began to deride him. Presently a gaily
dressed officer, passing where he was, paused in front of him, and
drawing a small mirror from his pocket held it in front of the trembling
man, and said:

"Look in this, O Abdulla, and thou wilt see the face of a coward."

Abdulla looked in the mirror and saw there the very face which had
confronted him not long ago in the shop window of the Greek.

The soldiers around him burst into a roar of laughter as Abdulla looked
in the mirror; but he heard them not.

He was busy in inward colloquy. "O thou that tremblest in thy body," he
was saying to himself, "O Abdulla the coward, hearken unto me. Behold
yon rider coming swiftly, and know, O thou craven carcase, that he
bringeth the order to advance. Thinkest thou to stay behind, and then
run away stealthily, and get thee back to thy water-selling in Damascus
and to thy dallyings with a woman? Yea, verily, thou thinkest it; and
even now contrivest within thyself how thou mayest steal away and not be
seen. But know thou that I who speak to thee will suffer not thy
cowardice. I will force thee presently to carry thy trembling limbs to
yonder line, whence come these whom thou seest in their pain. Thither
will I take thee, and I will hold thee fast in a place where death
cometh to four of every five. Not a step backward shalt thou go. Nay,
rather, I will blow a flame through thy nostrils into the marrow of thy
bones, driving thee forward, until I have thee firm in the very hottest
of the fire. See, the signal rises! Hark, the trumpet sounds! Up then,
thou quaking carrion, for thy hour is come.--Well done! Those behind
thee are taking note that thou tremblest no more! By Allah, I have
conquered thee and have thee utterly in my power!"

Every man was in his place. Abdulla, firm and ready, the rebuking voice
now silent within him, sat on the leading gun-horse; the traces that
bound it to the gun were already taut, and the whip-hand of the driver
was aloft in air. The word is given, the whips descend, and the whole
thundering train of men and beasts, with Abdulla at its head, sweeps
forward to the place of sacrifice.

       *       *       *       *       *

The battle was lost, and the long ridge on which Abdulla's battery had
been posted was carpeted with dead and dying men. A pall of yellow
smoke, broken from moment to moment by the flashes of exploding
shrapnel, hung over the ridge, and a blazing house immediately behind
the position shed a copper-coloured glare over the appalling scene. A
cold and cursed rain was falling, and stricken men, in extremities of
thirst, were lapping pools of water defiled with their own blood.

Of the twelve guns that formed the battery, all were dismantled save
one, and by this there stood a solitary man, the only upright figure
from end to end of the ridge. It was Abdulla. For five hours he had done
his duty untouched by shot, shell, or bayonet. He had continued the
service of his gun till the last round of ammunition was expended; and
when a cry arose among the survivors that they should save themselves,
he had watched the last stragglers depart and refused to stir from his
post. And now he stood inactive and motionless, alone in a
copper-coloured wilderness of agony and death.

Twice the enemy had attempted by desperate charges to storm the hill,
and, save for the lull in the artillery fire which preceded these
attacks, the work of death had hardly ceased for a moment. Even now it
still went on, slaying those who were half slain. Unable to see clearly
the state of things on the ridge, or behind it, and unaware that the
defence was totally annihilated, the enemy had hardly slackened his
fire. Scores of shrapnel were bursting overhead, and the singing of the
rifle bullets was like the hum of bees in swarming time. As the shells
exploded and the pitiless missiles came thrashing down, Abdulla noticed
how, after each explosion, some portion of the human carpet would toss
and undulate for a moment, as though the wind had got under it, and then
subside again into its place. The numbness and exhaustion of other
faculties had liberated his powers of observation, and at that moment
they were abnormally acute.

Fear, even the memory of fear, had long departed, and of mental distress
there was none, save a sense of immobility and powerlessness, such as a
man may have in an ugly dream. Abdulla leaned on the wheel of the
gun-carriage, gazing on the scene around him as a spectacle to be
studied; and he watched the shells bursting overhead with no more
concern than he would have felt for a passing flight of birds. He was
aware of his utter loneliness, and now and then a slight stir of
self-compassion would ripple the lucid depths of his consciousness. With
a certain repugnance, also, he noticed the copper-coloured light, which
shed its glare in every direction as far as he could see.

The tensest hours of his life, during which he had exerted his body with
furious energy, and his senses had been incessantly assailed with every
kind of shock, had ended in a feeling, amounting almost to conviction,
that the events in which he had participated, the deeds he had done, and
the spectacle now before him were the tissue of a dream.

Blustering facts that bludgeon and bombard the senses, often provoke us,
by the very violence of their self-announcement, to suspect them as
illusory. Reality is a low-voiced, soft-footed thing; a mean between two
extremes, clothed at all times in the garments of modesty and reserve,
which neither strives nor cries nor lifts up its voice in the streets.
But when the gods are drunk and the heavens in uproar, and the thing
called "fact" is unrestrained, ranting and storming about the stage like
an ill-mannered actor--then it is that the cup begins to pass away from
us, and a still small voice whispers within that the whole performance
is a masquerade.

Thus had it happened to Abdulla. Dreamer as he was, he had never yet
been able to detect himself in the act of dreaming. But now the waking
state was over-wakeful, and at the very moment when each nerve in his
body was strung to utmost tension, and the sense organs in full
commission, and fact in its most brutal form thundering on the gates of
his mind, there came to him a calm that was more than vacancy, a
conviction that he was in the land of dreams, and a peaceful
foreshadowing that he would soon awake.

"And yet," he thought, "it is weary work, this waiting for the spell to
break. Ha, that one would have done it, had I stood a span further to
the left! Why cannot they wake me? Are not a hundred pieces of artillery
sufficient to rouse one solitary man from his dreams? Stay! What if I am
wakened already? And what if this be hell? If so, is it so much worse
than earth? But please Allah that I stand not thus for all eternity,
waiting for the dream to pass. Ah! I was hit that time"--and he put his
hand to the region of his heart. "A mere graze. Perhaps the next will do
better. Allah send me a thing to do! Ho, thou Selim! Hast thou life in
thee to stand upright and do a thing? I saw thee raise thyself a moment
ago. If thou hast strength, bestir thyself a little, and thou and I will
find another round, and fire a last shot before we pass."

Selim the courier was lying behind the gun with a dozen others, dead or
wounded to death. Abdulla had hardly finished speaking when a shrapnel
burst over the heap, and Selim, who had been lying face downward on the
top, flung himself round in the last agony. As the bullets struck, the
whole heap seemed to disperse, the bodies spreading outward into a ring
with a hollow space in the midst.

Then Abdulla saw a thing that caused his heart to leap for joy. Lying in
the hollow made by the dispersion of the bodies was a round of
ammunition which some man had been carrying at the moment he was
stricken down, and which had hitherto been covered up by the dead. At
the sight of it, a sudden inspiration fell like a thunderbolt upon
Abdulla's dream. The sense of immobility was gone. "By Allah, thou art
alive and awake!" he cried, addressing himself. "Quick, thou slave of a
body! Thou hast yet strength in thee to open the breech-piece of the
gun, and the cartridge is not so heavy but that these arms can lift it.
Up, then, and act!"

He sprang forward. Quick as thought he seized the cartridge and carried
his burden back to the gun.

Then he stretched forth his hand to grasp the lever which controlled the
mechanism of the breech. But before his fingers closed on the metal he
paused for the briefest instant to look around him. In one glance he
took in the whole scene in all its extent and detail--the long ridge
under the copper-coloured light, the carpet of moaning or silent forms,
the dead body of Selim, the dismantled guns, the valley below, the
enemy's position on the further side, and the red spurts of flame from
his artillery. He noted also that the rain had ceased and the setting
sun had broken through the cloud.

Then, on a sudden, the vast view seemed to fall away into an
immeasurable distance, and, as a landscape contracts when seen from the
wrong end of the telescope, drew inwards from its edges with incredible
rapidity until it occupied no more space than is enclosed by the
circumference of the smallest coin. And in the same flash of time it was
gone altogether.

As it went, Abdulla felt his fingers close on the cold metal.

They closed on the metal, and Abdulla saw without the least surprise
that the thing he held in his hand was the knocker of brass on the door
of the Interpreter of Dreams.

       *       *       *       *       *

He knew no shock, asked himself no questions, perceived no breach of
continuity. He lifted the knocker, and its fall sounded in the street of
Damascus at the very instant that the boom of the bursting shell, which
had blown the water-seller to fragments, was reverberating over
Tchatalja.

Abdulla knocked. As he waited for the door to open he looked up and down
the street. He had arrived in Damascus overnight, and his surroundings
were yet strange to him. Nevertheless, as he continued to look at the
houses and the passers-by, a suspicion crossed his mind that he had been
in this place before. "Perhaps I have dreamed of such a place," he
thought. "But surely the face of yonder man is familiar. Where did I see
one like him? In Paris? In London? Ho thou, with the courier's badge on
thine arm! A word with thee."

The man paused at the doorstep, and Abdulla looked him full in the face.
Instantly his mind became confused, his tongue began to stammer, and he
heard himself speaking of he knew not what. "Hast thou life in thee?" he
said. "If so, bestir thyself and thou and I----" But the words broke
off, and Abdulla stood mouthing.

"Thou babblest like one intoxicated," said the man. "May Allah preserve
thy wits!" And he passed on.

The door opened, and Abdulla's mind became clear. A moment later he
stood in the presence of the Interpreter of Dreams.

"Who art thou?" said the Interpreter, "and what is the occasion of thy
coming?"

"I am a Cairene," said Abdulla, "born of Syrian parentage in this city,
but taken hence when I was an infant of five years. I am come to
Damascus for a purpose which thou and I have in common. I, too, am a
student of dreams."

"Of which kind?" asked the Interpreter. "For know that dreams are of two
kinds: dreams of the worlds that were, and dreams of the worlds that are
to be. Of which hast thou knowledge?"

"Of a world that was," said Abdulla.

"Thou hast chosen a thankless study," answered the other. "Few will
trust thy discoveries. For a thousand who will believe thee if thou
teachest of a world that is to be, there is scarce one who will listen
if thou speakest of a world that was. But tell me thy history, and name
thy qualifications."

"I have been educated in the Universities of the West," said Abdulla,
"and there I sat at the feet of one who taught me a doctrine which he
had learnt from a master of the ancient time. And the doctrine was this:
that worlds without end lie enfolded one within the other like the
petals of a rose; and the next world after differs from the next world
before no more than a full water-skin differs from itself when two drops
of water have fallen from its mouth. 'The world,' taught the master, 'is
a memory and a dream, and at every stage of its existence it beholds the
image of its past and the fainter image of its future reflected as in a
glass.'"

"And why makest thou the world that was before of more account than the
world that comes after?"

"I said not that I made it of more account," answered Abdulla, "but that
my knowledge was of this rather than of that. But know that I am a
dreamer of dreams, and it is the world before that my dreams have
revealed to me."

"Tell me thy dreams."

"It is of them that I came to speak with thee. There is one dream that
ever recurreth both in the day and the night. Seventy times seven have I
seen a frayed water-skin, having a hole in a certain part, no larger
than an olive-stone."

"That is a small matter," said the Interpreter, "and such things concern
us not. But I suspect that thou art not at the end of thy story. For,
verily, thou hast not travelled from the cities of the West to speak of
a thing so slight. Say, therefore, what has brought thee to Damascus."

"That also I would tell thee; for it is a matter to be pondered. Thou
art of the wise, and knowest, therefore, that there is a virtue in
places and a power in localities. In one, the light of the soul is
extinguished; in another, it is kindled; in one, the reason dies; in
another, the half-thought becomes a whole, and the doctrine that is
dimly apprehended becomes clear. Now, being in the city of Paris, I
conversed with one of the French who had visited the holy places of his
religion, where he had meditated in solitude and seen visions and
dreamed dreams; and I told him that I had a doctrine newly born, half
grown. 'O Abdulla,' he said, 'there is a virtue in places and a power in
localities. Go thou, therefore, to the city of Damascus, for that is a
place where, in days that are gone, the half-thought became a whole, and
the doctrine dimly apprehended became clear. Put thyself on the way to
Damascus and await the issue.'"

At these words the Interpreter rose from his seat and paced the room in
thought.

"The man of whom thou speakest," he said at length, "is known to me; and
many are they whom he has guided to this place. Rightly sayest thou that
there is a virtue in places and a power in localities. And here the
power still lingers which the world lost when mankind took to babbling.
Thy reason for coming hither is mine also. Seest thou not that I have
made my dwelling in the Street that is called Straight?"

"I see and understand," said Abdulla.

There was another pause, and again the Interpreter paced the room. Then
he resumed:

"Between thee and me there is need of little speech to attain a
comprehension, and the short sentence meaneth more than the long
explanation. Nevertheless, I would fain hear the rest of thy story.
Proceed then, and tell me of the dreams that came to thee on the way to
Damascus."

"On the way itself," said Abdulla, "there came no dreams. But this very
day I sat by the bank of the river, full of thought, and methinks sleep
overpowered me--though I know not. And there came a poor man carrying a
water-skin, and I, looking upon him, saw that his face was like unto
mine own, but marred by his toil and his poverty. And the man sat
himself down, leaning against a palm-tree on the side away from the sun,
and slept. Then I arose and stood before him, and expounded to him my
doctrine, and he seemed as one that saw and heard, though asleep. And
when his eyes were opened he saw me no more, but took up his water-skin
and filled it at the river, making mention of the name of God.

"I followed him into the city, and saw one thrust him against the wall
so that his water-skin was frayed. Thereafter the water-skin burst, and
a hole appeared in a certain part the size of an olive-stone, and the
remnant of the water flowed forth. But, passing a certain street, a
woman called to him to give her little ones to drink. And I, being hard
by, and seeming to know the woman, whispered to the man that he should
pass his hands craftily over the skin, if peradventure a drop remained
to moisten the lips of them that cried out for the thirst. But none
remained, and the man went on his way sorrowing.

"Then I lost him for a while; but as night fell I found him again,
standing in front of a glass window and meditating a thing that was
dishonest. And the man looking through the window saw me standing among
the goods that were in the shop. Whereupon he changed his design and
ran away.

"I wandered through the streets of the city, and passing by a certain
house, a frivolous woman looked out from a lattice and reviled me. I
understood not the things that she spake, and having answered the woman
I departed. Then I bethought me that she had taken me for another, and,
remembering that the face of the water-seller was like unto mine own, I
surmised that it was he.

"Suddenly, I know not how, I found myself in a place of battle, armed
like the rest, and, turning aside, I saw, standing among the harnessed
horses of a gun-team, the man whose water-selling I had watched in the
city. And the spirit of fear was upon him; his countenance was blanched
and his body all aquake; and I, ashamed that one who bore my own
semblance should stand disgraced among his fellows, rebuked him for his
cowardice; and methought I blew a fire through his nostrils into the
marrow of his bones. Then the man took courage and, mounting his horse
with alacrity, went forward with the bravest to the place of death.

"Thereafter I saw him no more. But this very hour, even as I lifted thy
knocker of brass, a great light shone round about me, a sound of thunder
shook the air, and a voice said, 'Lo! thy broken water-skin is mended
and full of water. Go forth, therefore, and give to them that are
athirst.' Whereupon it seemed to me that the half-thought became a
whole, and the doctrine that was dimly apprehended grew clear. And now I
am a man prepared to go forward, even as he was into whom I blew the
breath of courage on the field of death. A thing that was holding me
back is gone from me, and lo! I am free."

"Perchance one has ministered unto thee, even as thou didst minister to
that other in the hour when he was afraid," said the Interpreter.

"That may be," said Abdulla. "But did I not tell thee that as yet I have
no knowledge of the world that will be?"

"The knowledge awaits thee, and will begin from this hour," said the
Interpreter. "Most assuredly that which thou tellest is an image of the
world that was; and he that dreameth of the one world dreameth also in
due season of the other. But hearken now while I put thee to the
question; and if thou answerest according to thy doctrine, peradventure
the interpretation of thy vision will appear in the issue."

"Say on," said Abdulla.

"This, then, is the question. Thinkest thou, O Dreamer, that when a man
dies and enters Paradise, he knows of his condition, as who should say,
'Lo, I am now a disembodied spirit, having just passed through the
article of death, and these before me are the Gates of Heaven, and
yonder shining thing is the Throne of God?'"

"Nay, verily," said Abdulla, "in this and in every world the Throne of
God is revealed after one and the same manner, and never shall it be
seen in any world save by such as follow there the Loyal Path whereby it
is found in this. And he who beholdeth not the Gates of Paradise in the
world where he is, will look for them in vain in the world where he is
to be."

"Art thou willing to think, then, that thou and I are in Paradise even
at this hour?"

"Thou hintest at the doctrine that has been revealed to me," said the
other. "It may be even as thou sayest. For certain am I that thou and I
have died many deaths; and as there is another world in respect of this,
so is this world another in respect of them that went before. Great is
the error which deemeth that the number of the worlds is but two, and
that death, therefore, cometh once only to a man, when he passeth from
the first to the second. Of death, as of life, the kinds are
innumerable; and of these, that which destroyeth the body at the end is
only one, and perhaps not the chief. Whatsoever changeth into its
contrary must needs die in the act; so that except one die, grief cannot
pass into joy, nor darkness into light, nor evil into good; neither can
the lost be found, nor the sleeper awake. Wherefore it may be that thou
and I are in Paradise even now."

"Thou speakest to the question," said the Interpreter. "Some there are,
as thou sayest, who, being in Paradise already, will still be asking
whether Paradise awaits them. And if the enlightened go thus astray, how
much deeper is the ignorance of the darkened! For in no place, O
Abdulla, is Hell more doubted of than in Hell itself."

"I have lived in the cities of the West and have observed that very
thing," said Abdulla. "Many a damned soul have I heard making boast of
his good estate, and many a doubt of Judgment shouted forth from the
very flames of the Pit. For how shall a man know when he is now dead and
come to Judgment? Doth he live in his dying, and, taking note of his
last breath, say within himself, 'Lo, now I am dead'? And if he know not
the single occasion of his dying, how should he remember even though
death worketh upon him daily and passeth over him a thousand times?"

"Death and forgetting are one," said the Interpreter, "and the memory of
dying perisheth like a dream. But some there are to whom Allah hath
appointed a station at the place of passage and set as watchmen at the
intermingling of the worlds. These pass to and fro over the bridges,
gathering tidings from forgotten realms; and much of majesty and worth
that escapeth the common sort is apparent unto them. And of such, O
Abdulla, thy dreams declare thee to be one."

"Hast thou no further interpretation?" asked Abdulla.

"Hark!" said the other. "The full interpretation cometh even now."

And, as he spoke, the brass knocker sounded on the door.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Thus endeth "The Hole in the Water-skin."_




