Chapter XXX
The Delivery of the Letter


The next Sunday Adam joined the Poysers on their way out of church,
hoping for an invitation to go home with them. He had the letter in his
pocket, and was anxious to have an opportunity of talking to Hetty
alone. He could not see her face at church, for she had changed her
seat, and when he came up to her to shake hands, her manner was
doubtful and constrained. He expected this, for it was the first time
she had met him since she had been aware that he had seen her with
Arthur in the Grove.

“Come, you’ll go on with us, Adam,” Mr. Poyser said when they reached
the turning; and as soon as they were in the fields Adam ventured to
offer his arm to Hetty. The children soon gave them an opportunity of
lingering behind a little, and then Adam said:

“Will you contrive for me to walk out in the garden a bit with you this
evening, if it keeps fine, Hetty? I’ve something partic’lar to talk to
you about.”

Hetty said, “Very well.” She was really as anxious as Adam was that she
should have some private talk with him. She wondered what he thought of
her and Arthur. He must have seen them kissing, she knew, but she had
no conception of the scene that had taken place between Arthur and
Adam. Her first feeling had been that Adam would be very angry with
her, and perhaps would tell her aunt and uncle, but it never entered
her mind that he would dare to say anything to Captain Donnithorne. It
was a relief to her that he behaved so kindly to her to-day, and wanted
to speak to _her_ alone; for she had trembled when she found he was
going home with them lest he should mean “to tell.” But, now he wanted
to talk to her by herself, she should learn what he thought and what he
meant to do. She felt a certain confidence that she could persuade him
not to do anything she did not want him to do; she could perhaps even
make him believe that she didn’t care for Arthur; and as long as Adam
thought there was any hope of her having him, he would do just what she
liked, she knew. Besides, she _must_ go on seeming to encourage Adam,
lest her uncle and aunt should be angry and suspect her of having some
secret lover.

Hetty’s little brain was busy with this combination as she hung on
Adam’s arm and said “yes” or “no” to some slight observations of his
about the many hawthorn-berries there would be for the birds this next
winter, and the low-hanging clouds that would hardly hold up till
morning. And when they rejoined her aunt and uncle, she could pursue
her thoughts without interruption, for Mr. Poyser held that though a
young man might like to have the woman he was courting on his arm, he
would nevertheless be glad of a little reasonable talk about business
the while; and, for his own part, he was curious to hear the most
recent news about the Chase Farm. So, through the rest of the walk, he
claimed Adam’s conversation for himself, and Hetty laid her small plots
and imagined her little scenes of cunning blandishment, as she walked
along by the hedgerows on honest Adam’s arm, quite as well as if she
had been an elegantly clad coquette alone in her boudoir. For if a
country beauty in clumsy shoes be only shallow-hearted enough, it is
astonishing how closely her mental processes may resemble those of a
lady in society and crinoline, who applies her refined intellect to the
problem of committing indiscretions without compromising herself.
Perhaps the resemblance was not much the less because Hetty felt very
unhappy all the while. The parting with Arthur was a double pain to
her—mingling with the tumult of passion and vanity there was a dim
undefined fear that the future might shape itself in some way quite
unlike her dream. She clung to the comforting hopeful words Arthur had
uttered in their last meeting—“I shall come again at Christmas, and
then we will see what can be done.” She clung to the belief that he was
so fond of her, he would never be happy without her; and she still
hugged her secret—that a great gentleman loved her—with gratified
pride, as a superiority over all the girls she knew. But the
uncertainty of the future, the possibilities to which she could give no
shape, began to press upon her like the invisible weight of air; she
was alone on her little island of dreams, and all around her was the
dark unknown water where Arthur was gone. She could gather no elation
of spirits now by looking forward, but only by looking backward to
build confidence on past words and caresses. But occasionally, since
Thursday evening, her dim anxieties had been almost lost behind the
more definite fear that Adam might betray what he knew to her uncle and
aunt, and his sudden proposition to talk with her alone had set her
thoughts to work in a new way. She was eager not to lose this evening’s
opportunity; and after tea, when the boys were going into the garden
and Totty begged to go with them, Hetty said, with an alacrity that
surprised Mrs. Poyser, “I’ll go with her, Aunt.”

It did not seem at all surprising that Adam said he would go too, and
soon he and Hetty were left alone together on the walk by the
filbert-trees, while the boys were busy elsewhere gathering the large
unripe nuts to play at “cob-nut” with, and Totty was watching them with
a puppylike air of contemplation. It was but a short time—hardly two
months—since Adam had had his mind filled with delicious hopes as he
stood by Hetty’s side in this garden. The remembrance of that scene had
often been with him since Thursday evening: the sunlight through the
apple-tree boughs, the red bunches, Hetty’s sweet blush. It came
importunately now, on this sad evening, with the low-hanging clouds,
but he tried to suppress it, lest some emotion should impel him to say
more than was needful for Hetty’s sake.

“After what I saw on Thursday night, Hetty,” he began, “you won’t think
me making too free in what I’m going to say. If you was being courted
by any man as ’ud make you his wife, and I’d known you was fond of him
and meant to have him, I should have no right to speak a word to you
about it; but when I see you’re being made love to by a gentleman as
can never marry you, and doesna think o’ marrying you, I feel bound t’
interfere for you. I can’t speak about it to them as are i’ the place
o’ your parents, for that might bring worse trouble than’s needful.”

Adam’s words relieved one of Hetty’s fears, but they also carried a
meaning which sickened her with a strengthened foreboding. She was pale
and trembling, and yet she would have angrily contradicted Adam, if she
had dared to betray her feelings. But she was silent.

“You’re so young, you know, Hetty,” he went on, almost tenderly, “and
y’ haven’t seen much o’ what goes on in the world. It’s right for me to
do what I can to save you from getting into trouble for want o’ your
knowing where you’re being led to. If anybody besides me knew what I
know about your meeting a gentleman and having fine presents from him,
they’d speak light on you, and you’d lose your character. And besides
that, you’ll have to suffer in your feelings, wi’ giving your love to a
man as can never marry you, so as he might take care of you all your
life.”

Adam paused and looked at Hetty, who was plucking the leaves from the
filbert-trees and tearing them up in her hand. Her little plans and
preconcerted speeches had all forsaken her, like an ill-learnt lesson,
under the terrible agitation produced by Adam’s words. There was a
cruel force in their calm certainty which threatened to grapple and
crush her flimsy hopes and fancies. She wanted to resist them—she
wanted to throw them off with angry contradiction—but the determination
to conceal what she felt still governed her. It was nothing more than a
blind prompting now, for she was unable to calculate the effect of her
words.

“You’ve no right to say as I love him,” she said, faintly, but
impetuously, plucking another rough leaf and tearing it up. She was
very beautiful in her paleness and agitation, with her dark childish
eyes dilated and her breath shorter than usual. Adam’s heart yearned
over her as he looked at her. Ah, if he could but comfort her, and
soothe her, and save her from this pain; if he had but some sort of
strength that would enable him to rescue her poor troubled mind, as he
would have rescued her body in the face of all danger!

“I doubt it must be so, Hetty,” he said, tenderly; “for I canna believe
you’d let any man kiss you by yourselves, and give you a gold box with
his hair, and go a-walking i’ the Grove to meet him, if you didna love
him. I’m not blaming you, for I know it ’ud begin by little and little,
till at last you’d not be able to throw it off. It’s him I blame for
stealing your love i’ that way, when he knew he could never make you
the right amends. He’s been trifling with you, and making a plaything
of you, and caring nothing about you as a man ought to care.”

“Yes, he does care for me; I know better nor you,” Hetty burst out.
Everything was forgotten but the pain and anger she felt at Adam’s
words.

“Nay, Hetty,” said Adam, “if he’d cared for you rightly, he’d never ha’
behaved so. He told me himself he meant nothing by his kissing and
presents, and he wanted to make me believe as you thought light of ’em
too. But I know better nor that. I can’t help thinking as you’ve been
trusting to his loving you well enough to marry you, for all he’s a
gentleman. And that’s why I must speak to you about it, Hetty, for fear
you should be deceiving yourself. It’s never entered his head the
thought o’ marrying you.”

“How do you know? How durst you say so?” said Hetty, pausing in her
walk and trembling. The terrible decision of Adam’s tone shook her with
fear. She had no presence of mind left for the reflection that Arthur
would have his reasons for not telling the truth to Adam. Her words and
look were enough to determine Adam: he must give her the letter.

“Perhaps you can’t believe me, Hetty, because you think too well of
him—because you think he loves you better than he does. But I’ve got a
