CHAPTER XII.

DUTIES RELATING TO EXTERNAL GOODS.

    SUMMARY.

    =The necessity of external goods.--Two sorts of duties.=--1. Those
    relative to _use_; 2. Those relative to _acquisition_.

    =Use of external goods.=--They are _means_ and not _ends_: _avarice_,
    _cupidity_, _prodigality_.

    It is not the degree of riches, it is the spirit in which we seek or
    possess them, which is the object of a moral rule.

    _Economy_, a mean between prodigality and avarice.

    Economy and saving are not only duties of _self-preservation_, but of
    _dignity_.

    Maxims of Franklin.--The prodigal and the miser, according to
    Aristotle.

    =Acquisition of external things.=--Universal law of work.--_Servile_
    and _free_ work.--Nobility of work.

    Work is a _pleasure_, a _necessity_, a _duty_.


=142. Necessity of external goods.=--External goods are as necessary to man
as is his body: for it is in the first place a fundamental law of beings
physically organized, that they only subsist by means of a continual
exchange of their component parts, with foreign substances. Life is a
circulation, a vortex: we lose and acquire; we return to nature what it
gave us, and we take from it back again in exchange what we need to repair
our losses. There follows from this that certain external things,
especially food, are indispensable to our existence, and that it is
absolutely necessary that we be in sure possession of them in order to be
ourselves sure of life.

Food is not the only need of man. Shelter and clothing, without being as
rigorously indispensable (especially in warm countries), are nevertheless
of great utility to maintain a certain equilibrium between the temperature
of our bodies and the external temperature; for it is well known that the
derangement of this equilibrium is one of the most ordinary causes of
illness. Nature not having clothed man as she has the other animals, he is
obliged to provide himself with clothes by his industry. As for
habitations, several animals know as well as man how to construct them:
for example, beavers and rabbits; and despite the indisputable superiority
of his art, this is yet, as we see for man, but the development of an
instinct which he shares with other creatures.

These various wants, then, which to be satisfied demand a certain number
of material objects, such as food, houses, clothing, etc., carry with them
others in their train: for example, the need of locomotion to procure what
is wanted: hence, carriages, boats, etc.;--the need of protecting one's
self against those who would take from us what we possess: hence, arms of
every kind;--the need of repose and order in the house: hence, furniture
of every sort;--in a higher degree again the need of pleasing the
imagination: hence, works of art, pictures, statuary;--the need of
information: hence, books, etc.

Finally, and independently of all these different things, there are yet
two which deserve to be specially noticed, because of their particular and
distinctive character. These are, first, land, which is the common and
inexhaustible source of all riches, the only thing that does not perish,
and which is always found again in the same quantity after as well as
before the enjoyment of it; land, which is as the substance, the very
basis of riches;[98] and the second, money (gold or silver, with their
representative, paper), which is of a nature to be exchanged against all
kind of merchandise, even land, and which, consequently, represents them
all. These two kinds of things, land and money, the one an essential, the
other a condensed image, of all wealth, are the two most natural objects
of man's desires, because, with the one or the other, he can procure all
the rest.

We have not to examine here how man succeeds in securing to himself the
exclusive enjoyment of these several goods: we shall treat the subject of
property further on, and shall explain in what, and why, it is inviolable.
Let it suffice to say here that these goods being bound up with the very
preservation of our existence, the desire and instinct which lead us to
appropriate them, have nothing blameworthy in themselves.

External goods being necessary to life, we have to consider how we should
use them when we possess them, and how acquire them when we do not possess
them.

=143. Duties relating to the use of external
goods.--Cupidity.--Avarice.=--From the very fact that man is a part of
nature, it manifestly follows that he is allowed to make his profit of the
goods of nature and to turn them to his use. The only question is then to
know to what degree and in what spirit, he should love material goods, and
what use he is to make of them, not in regard to others, but in regard to
himself.

A first consideration is that material things or riches have no value in
themselves; they are only worth anything as they suit our wants. Gold and
silver, in particular, are only a value because they can be exchanged
against useful things, and these things, again, are only good because they
are useful. They are, to employ Kant's favorite formula, _means_, not
_ends_. Now we precisely overthrow this order when we take material things
as ends and not as means--that is to say, when we attribute to them an
_absolute_ instead of a _relative_ value. This happens when, for example,
we seek gain for gain's sake; when we accumulate riches for the sole
pleasure of accumulating them--a vice we call _cupidity_.

It is, again, what happens when we enjoy wealth for itself, without
wishing to turn it to use, and depriving ourselves of everything to enjoy
the thing itself, which has no other value except that of buying other
things; a vice we call _avarice_.

The character of these two vices (a character which is not only contrary
to prudence, but also to virtue) is to transform material things into
absolute ends. "Avarice," says Kant, very justly, "is not only economy
misunderstood, but a servile subjection to the goods of fortune; an
incapacity of exercising mastery over them.... It is not only opposed to
generosity, but to liberality of sentiments in general--that is to say, to
the principle of independence which recognizes nothing but the law, and
becomes thus a fraud which man commits against himself." Cupidity does
not, at first glance, appear to be of so shameful, and especially so
ridiculous a character as avarice; for avarice is a contradiction to one's
self (to die rather than lose that which can only serve to prevent us from
dying), and viewed in that light it becomes a comical oddity. But the love
of gain for gain's sake is, no less than avarice, a servile subjection to
the goods of fortune. To earn money is a necessity to which we must submit
(and of which we need not be ashamed, since it is nature herself that
requires it), but it is not, and should not be, an end to the soul. The
end of wealth (without failing in the duties we owe to ourselves) should
be to make sure of the means of self-preservation, self-cultivation,
education--yea, even recreation; for recreation is a thing much more
refined and noble than accumulation of wealth. In one word, according to
an old saying, one must possess riches and not be possessed by them.

Such is the _spirit_ in which man should seek or possess riches; and it is
for him a strict duty; but as to the degree and limits of possession, as
to the extent or quantity of riches, morality gives us neither rules nor
principles. There is no particular limit known beyond which a man in
making money would become immoral. There is no restriction to his becoming
a millionaire if he can. A morality that should teach to look upon the
rich as culpable, would be a very false one. The contempt for riches, such
as the ancient philosophers professed, is a very beautiful thing in
itself; but to make good use of wealth is also very praiseworthy. Wealth,
which in itself has no value, may have a very great one from the use made
of it. There is, therefore, no other rule to be observed here than the one
we have already pointed out, namely, that we should not love money for
itself, but acquire it or receive it as a means to be useful to ourselves
and to others. Let us add, however, that even with this motive, we should
not entertain too great a desire for gain;[99] for to take too much
pleasure in accumulating a fortune, even to make a good use of it, is
again another way to become its slave.

=144. Poverty.=--The duty of not allowing one's self to become morally a
slave to external goods, carries with it, as its corollary, the duty of
bearing poverty patiently if circumstances impose it on us. I do not mean
here the strength of soul with which we should bear adversity of any kind
(we shall speak of that further on), but the resignation with which we
should look upon the deprivation of certain things, which have no value in
themselves. The poor man should, of course, endeavor to improve his
condition by his work, and we are far from recommending to him a stupid
insensibility which would dry up the sources of all industry; but what we
should especially guard against is this uneasy discontent and powerless
desire which are also a kind of slavery. We should try to be satisfied
with our lot, as ancient wisdom has it, and if it requires a certain
amount of heroism to bear extreme misery, a limited share of wisdom will
be sufficient to enable one to accept patiently poverty and mediocrity.

=145. Prodigality.=--Maintaining, as we have done, that riches have no
value in themselves, except as means to satisfy our wants, do we mean
thereby that they are to be spent injudiciously?--and would not that
appear to be condemning saving and economy, virtues which not only
morality, but wisdom also, recommends? Shall we, in order to avoid
cupidity and avarice, run into dissipation and prodigality?

Let us first observe that prodigality, which is the opposite of avarice,
is not always the opposite of cupidity. The need of spending engenders
necessarily the need of obtaining and gaining as much money as possible;
and the prodigal, if he is not so in the beginning, very soon becomes
covetous, through the exhaustion of his resources. "Most prodigals," says
Aristotle, "become greedy and grasping, because they always wish to spend
at their will. Their own resources being soon exhausted, they must needs
procure others; and as they scarcely take thought about dignity and honor,
they appropriate without scruple, and as they can." We should, therefore,
not view prodigality as a noble independence in respect to riches. It is
so in the beginning, in fact, with young rich people; but they soon find
out the limits of their great fortunes, and then begins their slavery in
respect to those very goods they made at first so light of.

Prudence and our own interest teach us, of course, sufficiently that
prodigality is a stupid vice, and that it is absurd to sacrifice the wants
of to-morrow to the pleasures of to-day. Simple common-sense advises
economy and saving. But for this very reason may we ask, with Kant:
"whether they deserve the name of virtues; and whether prodigality even,
inasmuch as it tends to an unexpected indigence, should not be called an
imprudence rather than a vice?" We shall say in reply that self-interest
well understood becomes itself a duty when in opposition to passion. For
instance, if, on the one side, passion lures me on to procure to myself a
certain pleasure, and that, on the other, self-interest shows that this
pleasure imperils my health, it is certain that _duty_ in this
circumstance commands me to prefer my health to a momentary pleasure.[100]
Prudence, then, is but the exercise of a more general duty, which, if not
the basis, is at least the condition of all the others: the duty of
self-preservation.

Economy and saving are not only a duty of self-preservation, but also a
duty of dignity: for experience teaches us that poverty and misery bring
us into the dependency of others and that want leads to beggary. He who
knows how to husband his means of existence, secures for himself in the
future not only his livelihood, but also independence; in depriving
himself of fleeting and commonplace pleasures, he buys what is far better,
namely, dignity.

    "Be economical," says Franklin, "and independence shall be thy shield
    and buckler, thy helmet and crown; then shall thy soul walk upright,
    nor stoop to the silken wretch because he hath riches; nor pocket an
    abuse because the hand which offers it wears a ring set with
    diamonds."

It is from this point of view that the charming and witty, though
sometimes vulgar, precepts of poor Richard may be regarded as moral
maxims, and should have access to all minds:

"If you would be wealthy, think of saving as well as of getting."

"A fat kitchen makes a lean will."

"What maintains one vice would bring up two children."

"Many littles make a mickle."

"Fools make feasts and wise men eat them."

"It is foolish to lay out money in a purchase of repentance."

"Silks and satins, scarlet and velvets put out the kitchen fire."

"When the well is dry, they know the worth of water."

"Pride breakfasted with Plenty, dined with Poverty, and supped with
Infamy."[101]

What Franklin has depicted with greatest force and eloquence, is the
humiliation attached to debts, a sad consequence of the want of economy.
There is a kind of pride which is not that of Rome and Sparta, nor of the
courts and the great, but which has not the less its price.

    "He that goes a borrowing, goes a sorrowing. Alas! think well what you
    do when you run in debt; you give to another power over your liberty.
    If you cannot pay at the time, you will be ashamed to see your
    creditor; you will be in fear when you speak to him; you will make
    poor, pitiful, sneaking excuses, and by degrees come to lose your
    veracity, and sink into base, downright lying. _For lying rides upon
    Debt's back._ A free-born man ought not to be afraid to see or speak
    to any man living. But poverty often deprives a man of all spirit and
    virtue. _It is hard for an empty bag to stand upright._"

We should then avoid so to subject ourselves to material things as not to
dare make use of them, which is avarice; or to spend them foolishly and
thus render ourselves dependent upon men, which is prodigality. Economy
lies between the two, and it is one of the virtues upon which Aristotle
has most successfully established his theory of the golden mean. Kant,
however, does not agree with him on this point. "For," says he, "if
economy is a just medium between two extremes, then should we, in going
from one vice to the opposite vice, have to pass through virtue: the
latter then would be nothing more than a lesser vice." According to Kant,
it is not the _measure_ but the _principle_ which may serve to distinguish
a vice from a virtue: the one is distinguished from the other not
quantitatively, but specifically. The two vices, extremes themselves,
prodigality and avarice, namely, are opposed to each other, not only in
degree, but in kind. What is prodigality? "It is," says Kant, "to procure
means of livelihood with a view to the enjoyment only." What is avarice?
"To acquire and preserve these means in view of possession only,
interdicting one's self the enjoyment thereof." These two qualities, it is
seen, do not only differ from each other in the more or the less, but in
their very nature. There would remain next to ask, what is the quality of
economy, and that is just what Kant does not tell us. In default of it,
it might be formulated thus: "to acquire and preserve the means of
livelihood, not for the sake of possession or enjoyment, but for present
or future need." Only there remains still the difficulty of distinguishing
need from enjoyment. Where does legitimate need end? Where does barren
enjoyment begin? It is here that Aristotle's formula asserts itself, and
that we must finally come to recognize that the virtue of economy consists
in a certain medium between prodigality and avarice.

Yet whatever it be, we cannot better close this subject than by citing
Aristotle's admirable description of the prodigal and the miser: La
Bruyere shows no greater acuteness and force.

    "The prodigal is he who ruins himself on his own accord. The senseless
    squandering of his property is a sort of self-destruction, since one
    can only live on what one has. Prodigality is the excess of giving,
    and the want of receiving; but these two conditions cannot very long
    keep together; for it is not easy to give to every one, when one
    receives from no one. This vice, however, should not appear as
    blameworthy as that of avarice. Age, distress even, may easily enough
    correct the prodigal and bring him back to a just medium. Thus is the
    nature of the prodigal on the whole not a bad one; there is nothing
    vicious or low in this excessive tendency to give much and take
    nothing in return; it is only folly. It is true that prodigals become
    greedy and grasping. This is also why their gifts are not truly
    liberal ... why they enrich some people who should be left in poverty,
    and refuse doing anything for others far more deserving. They give
    with open hands to flatterers or people who procure them pleasures as
    unworthy as those of flattery.

    "Avarice is incurable.... Avarice is more natural to man than
    prodigality; for most of us prefer keeping what we have than giving it
    away.... It consists of two principal elements: defect of giving,
    excess of receiving.... Some show more excess of receiving, some more
    defect of giving. Thus do all those branded by the name shabby,
    stingy, mean, sin through a defect of giving; yet do they not covet,
    nor would they take what belongs to others.... Other misers, on the
    contrary, may be known by their grasping propensities, taking all they
    can get: for example, all those who engage in ignoble speculations ...
    usurers and all those who lend small sums at large interest. All these
    people take where they should not take, and more than they ought to
    take. Lust for the most shameful lucre seems to be the common vice of
    all degraded hearts: there is no infamy they are not willing to
    endure, if they can make it a profit."[102]

=146. Duties relating to the acquisition of external things.--Work.=--The
necessity of procuring the things needful to life imposes on us a
fundamental obligation, which continues even when the want is met: it is
the obligation of _work_.

Work springs from want; this is its first origin; but it survives want;
and its beauty and dignity consist in that, being at first born of a
natural necessity, it becomes the honor of man and the salvation of
society.

In its most general sense, work means activity, and in that sense it may
be said that everything works in nature; everything is in motion;
everywhere we see effort, energy, unfolding of forces. Take but the
animals: the bird works to build its nest; the spider to weave its web;
the bee to make her honey; the beaver to construct its lodges; the dog to
catch the game; the cat to catch mice. We find among animals workmen of
all sorts: masons, architects, tailors, hunters, travelers; even
politicians and artists, as if they had been destined to set us examples
in all kinds of work and activity.

    "In the morning," says Marcus Aurelius, "when thou hast trouble in
    getting up, say to thyself: I awake to do the work of a man: why,
    then, should I grieve for having to do things for which I am born, for
    which I was sent into the world? Was I born to remain warmly in bed
    under my cover?--But it is so pleasant.--Wert thou born for pleasure,
    then? Was it not for action, for work? Seest thou not the plants, the
    sparrows, the ants, the spiders, the bees, filling each their
    functions, and contributing according to their capacity to the harmony
    of the world? And shouldst thou refuse to attend thy functions as man?
    Shouldst thou not follow the biddings of nature?"[103]

The ancients distinguished two kinds of work: noble and independent work,
namely, the arts, the sciences, war and politics; and servile or mercenary
work imposed by necessity. The latter they deemed below the dignity of
man; manual labor, properly so called, useful work, distinct from
gymnastics and military exercises, they considered as belonging
exclusively to slaves. It is to this Aristotle referred when he said:

    "There are men who have but just the necessary amount of reason to
    understand the reason of others: it is they whose only work is useful
    manual labor. It is obvious that such men cannot belong to themselves;
    they belong necessarily to others; they are slaves by nature."

Aristotle believed, moreover, that nature herself had made the distinction
between the freeman and the slave:

    "Nature," he said, "made the bodies of the freemen different from
    those of the slaves; she gave to the latter the necessary vigor for
    the heavy work of society, and made the former unable to bend their
    erect natures to such rude labors."[104]

It is not necessary to have lived to this present time to find these
errors refuted. Before Aristotle, Socrates had already understood the
dignity of labor, even of the productive labor insuring a livelihood; he
had seen that work in itself was not servile, as the following charming
account related by Xenophon, well proves:

"Socrates, observing, on one occasion, Aristarchus looking gloomily, 'You
seem,' said he, 'Aristarchus, to be taking something to heart; but you
ought to impart the cause of your uneasiness to your friends; for,
perhaps, we may by some means lighten it.'

"'I am indeed, Socrates,' replied Aristarchus, 'in great perplexity; for
since the city has been disturbed, and many of our people have fled to the
Piraeus, my surviving sisters and nieces and cousins have gathered about me
in such numbers, that there are now in my house fourteen free-born
persons. At the same time, we receive no profit from our lands, for the
enemy are in possession of them; nor any rent from our houses, for but few
inhabitants are left in the city; no one will buy our furniture, nor is it
possible to borrow money from any quarter; a person, indeed, as it seems
to me, would sooner find money by seeking it on the road, than get it by
borrowing. It is a grievous thing to me, therefore, to leave my relations
to perish; and it is impossible for me to support such a number under such
circumstances.' Socrates, on hearing this, replied: 'Are you not aware
that Cyrebus, by making bread, maintains his whole household and lives
luxuriously; that Demea supports himself by making cloaks, Menon by making
woolen cloaks, and that most of the Megarians live by making mantles?'
'Certainly they do,' said Aristarchus; 'for they purchase barbarian slaves
and keep them, in order to force them to do what they please; but I have
with me free-born persons and relatives.' 'Then,' added Socrates, 'because
they are free and related to you, do you think that they ought to do
nothing else but eat and sleep? Do you find that idleness and carelessness
are serviceable to mankind, either for learning what it becomes them to
know, or for remembering what they have learned, or for maintaining the
health and strength of their bodies, and that industry and diligence are
of no service at all? And as to the arts which you say they know, did they
learn them as being useless to maintain life, and with the intention of
never practicing any of them, or, on the contrary, with a view to occupy
themselves about them, and to reap profit from them? In which condition
will men be more temperate, living in idleness or attending to useful
employments? In which condition will they be more honest, if they work, or
if they sit in idleness meditating how to procure necessaries?' 'By the
gods,' exclaimed Aristarchus, 'you seem to me to give such excellent
advice, Socrates, that though hitherto I did not like to borrow money,
knowing that, when I had spent what I got, I should have no means of
repaying it, I now think that I can endure to do so, in order to gain the
necessary means for commencing work.'

"The necessary means were accordingly provided; wool was bought; and the
women took their dinners as they continued at work, and supped when they
had finished their tasks; they became cheerful instead of gloomy in
countenance, and, instead of regarding each other with dislike, met the
looks of one another with pleasure; they loved Aristarchus as their
protector, and he loved them as being of use to him. At last he came to
Socrates, and told him with delight of the state of things in the house;
adding that, 'the women complained of him as being the only person in the
house that ate the bread of idleness.' 'And do you not tell them,' said
Socrates, 'the fable of the dog? For they say that when beasts had the
faculty of speech, the sheep said to her master: "You act strangely, in
granting nothing to us who supply you with wool, and lambs, and cheese,
except what we get from the ground; while to the dog, who brings you no
such profits, you give a share of the food which you take yourself."

"The dog hearing these remarks, said, 'And not indeed without reason: for
I am he that protects even yourselves, so that you are neither stolen by
men, nor carried off by wolves; while, if I were not to guard you, you
would be unable even to feed, for fear lest you should be destroyed.' In
consequence it is said that the sheep agreed that the dog should have
superior honor. You, accordingly, tell your relations that you are, in the
place of the dog, their guardian and protector, and that, by your means,
they work and live in security and pleasure, without suffering injury from
any one.'"[105]

If it is unjust to regard manual and productive work as servile, it is
equally unjust to regard them as alone entitled to the name of work.

    "There are," says a Chinese sage, "two kinds of work: some people work
    with their minds; some with their hands. Those who work with their
    minds govern men; those who work with their hands are governed by men.
    Those who are governed by men feed men; those who govern men are fed
    by men."[106]

The same author shows further how divers functions are necessarily divided
in society.

    "The holy man said to his brother: Go and comfort men; call them to
    thee; bring them back to virtue; correct them, help them; make them
    prosper. In thus busying themselves with the welfare of the people,
    could these holy men find leisure to engage in agriculture?"

We must, therefore, admit that all activity usefully employed is work, and
that all work, whether manual or intellectual, mercenary[107] or
gratuitous, is noble and legitimate.

Work being taken in its most general sense, may be set down as being a
_pleasure_, a _necessity_, a _duty_.

Kant, who, as we have seen, refuses to admit in morals any other principle
but that of duty, would probably disagree with us when we say that work is
a pleasure and a necessity. But if it be true, why should we not say so?
Is it necessary, in order that the duty of work be truly accomplished,
that it be both painful and useless? Wisdom nowise requires this.
Providence having attached to work, whilst making it the necessary
condition of our self-preservation, a certain pleasure, lightening thereby
our efforts, morality nowise forbids us to enjoy this pleasure and accept
this necessity.

It will be easily granted that work is a necessity; but it is more
difficult to obtain from men the admission that it is a pleasure. Man, if
he will not die of hunger, must work, unquestionably, they will say; but
that it is a pleasure is quite another thing.

If the pleasure of work is put to question, no one at least will maintain
that it is a pleasure not to work. For when does rest, leisure, recreation
give us most pleasure? Everybody knows, it is when we have worked. Recall
to mind any unusually heavy work, any hurried and necessary task, or even
our daily or weekly duty scrupulously fulfilled: what joy is it not when
the task is done to give ourselves a holiday!

Idleness brings with it satiety, weariness, disgust, disorder, the ruin
of the family, the destruction of health, and other evils still more
baleful. Work, on the contrary, makes repose enjoyable. Without the
fatigue of the day's work, no pleasure in sleep, and even no sleep at all.
A manifest proof that Providence did not intend us for repose, but for
action, for effort, for struggle, for energetic and constant work.

We should even go so far as to say that work is not only a stimulant, but
that it is in itself a pleasure and a joy.

There is, in the first place, the joy of self-love. We all experience joy
when we have accomplished something; when we have succeeded in a difficult
work, and the more difficult it was, the prouder we are of it. Besides,
the exercise which accompanies activity is in itself a great good. The
unfolding of strength, physical or moral, is the source of the truest
pleasures. Activity is life itself: to live, is to act. Work, again, gives
us the pleasure which accompanies any kind of struggle: in working we
struggle against the forces of nature, we subdue them, discipline them, we
teach them to obey us. Unquestionably the first efforts are painful: but
when once the first difficulties are overcome, work is so little a fatigue
that it becomes a pleasant necessity. One is even obliged to make an
effort to take rest. Yes, after having in childhood had trouble to get
accustomed to work, what in the long run becomes the most difficult, is
not to work. One is almost obliged to fight against himself, to force
himself to recreation and rest. Leisure in its turn becomes a duty to
which we almost submit against our will, and only because reason bids us
to submit to it; for we know that we must not abuse the strength
Providence has entrusted to us.

It is not necessary to dwell long on this point to fix in our memory that
work alone insures security and comfort. Certainly it does not always
secure them; this is unfortunately too true; but if we are not quite sure
that by working we can provide for wife and children, and secure a
legitimate rest for our old age, we may, on the other hand, be quite sure
that without work we shall bring upon ourselves and our family certain
misery. There have not yet been found any means whereby wealth may be
struck out of the earth without work. This wealth which dazzles our eyes;
these palaces, carriages, splendid dresses, this furniture, luxury, all
these riches and others more substantial: machinery, iron-works, land
produce, all this is accumulated work. Between the condition of savages
that wander about famished in the forests of America, and the condition of
our civilized societies, there is no other difference but work. Suppose (a
thing impossible) that in a society like this our own, all work should all
at once be stopped: distress and hunger would be the immediate and
inevitable consequence. Spain, on discovering the gold mines of America,
thought herself enriched forever; she ceased work; it was her ruin; for
from being Europe's sovereign mistress, as she then was, she fell to the
rank we see her occupy to-day. Laziness brings with it misery; misery
beggary, and beggary is not always satisfied with asking merely--it
steals.

Work is not only a pleasure or a necessity, it is also a duty; though
painful and joyless, work is, nevertheless, an obligation for man; it were
still an obligation for him if he could live without it. Work does not
only insure security: it secures dignity. Man was created to exercise the
faculties of his mind and body. He was created to act. I do not speak here
of what he owes to others, but of what he owes to himself. "The happy
man," says Aristotle, "is not the man asleep, but the man awake," and to
be awake is to work and act.




