XII

AS A WRITER


My pre-literary career was three-fold: I was a student for eight years,
during two a village doctor, and for six more a baker.

These having elapsed, being already close upon thirty, I began to write.

My new course was a wise one. It was the best thing that I could have
done; anything else would have annoyed me more and have pleased me less.
I have enjoyed writing, and I have made some money, although not much,
yet it has been sufficient to enable me to travel, which otherwise I
should not have been able to do.

The first considerable sum which I received was upon the publication of
my novel _The Mayorazgo of Labraz_. Henrich of Barcelona paid me
two thousand pesetas for it. I invested the two thousand pesetas in a
speculation upon the Bourse, and they disappeared in two weeks.

The money which I have received for my other books, I have employed to
better purpose.




BOHEMIA


I have never been a believer in the absurd myth called Bohemia. The idea
of living gaily and irresponsibly in Madrid, or in any other Spanish
city, without taking thought for the morrow, is so preposterous that it
passes comprehension. Bohemia is utterly false in Paris and London, but
in Spain, where life is difficult, it is even more of a cheat.

Bohemia is not only false, it is contemptible. It suggests to me a minor
Christian sect, of the most inconsequential degree, nicely calculated
for the convenience of hangers on at cafés.

Henri Murger was the son of the wife of a _concièrge_.

Of course, this would not have mattered had his outlook upon life not
been that of the son of the wife of a _concièrge_.




OUR OWN GENERATION


The beginner in letters makes his way up, as a rule, amid a literary
environment which is distinguished by reputations and hierarchies,
all respected by him. But this was not the case with the young writers
of my day. During the years 1898 to 1900, a number of young men suddenly
found themselves thrown together in Madrid, whose only rule was the
principle that the immediate past did not exist for them.

This aggregation of authors and artists might have seemed to have been
brought together under some leadership, and to have been directed to
some purpose; yet one who entertained such an assumption would have been
mistaken.

Chance brought us together for a moment, a very brief moment, to be
followed by a general dispersal. There were days when thirty or forty
young men, apprentices in the art of writing, sat around the tables in
the old Café de Madrid.

Doubtless such gatherings of new men, eager to interfere in and to
influence the operations of the social system, yet without either the
warrant of tradition or any proved ability to do so, are common upon a
larger scale in all revolutions.

As we neither had, nor could have had, in the nature of the case, a task
to perform, we soon found that we were divided into small groups, and
finally broke up altogether.




AZORÍN


A few days after the publication of my first book, _Sombre Lives_,
Miguel Poveda, who was responsible for printing it, sent a copy to
Martínez Ruiz, who was at that time in Monóvar. Martínez Ruiz wrote me a
long letter concerning the book by return mail; on the following day he
sent another.

Poveda handed me the letters to read and I was filled with surprise and
joy. Some weeks later, returning from the National Library, Martínez
Ruiz, whom I knew by sight, came up to me on the Recoletos.

"Are you Baroja?" he asked.

"Yes."

"I am Martínez Ruiz."

We shook hands and became friends.

In those days we travelled about the country together, we contributed to
the same papers, and the ideas and the men we attacked were the same.

Later, Azorín became an enthusiastic partisan of Maura, which appeared
to me particularly absurd, as I have never been able to see anything but
an actor of the grand style in Maura, a man of small ideas. Next he
became a partisan of La Cierva, which was as bad in my opinion as being
a Maurista. I am unable to say at the moment whether he is contemplating
any further transformations.

But, whether he is or not, Azorín will always remain a master of
language to me, besides an excellent friend who has a weakness for
believing all men to be great who talk in a loud voice and who pull
their cuffs down out of their coat sleeves with a grand gesture whenever
they appear upon the platform.




PAUL SCHMITZ


Another friendship which I found stimulating was that of Paul Schmitz, a
Swiss from Basle, who had come to Madrid because of some weakness of the
lungs, spending three years among us in order to rehabilitate himself.
Schmitz had studied in Switzerland and in Germany, and also had lived
for a long time in the north of Russia.

He was familiar with what in my judgment are the two most interesting
countries of Europe.

Paul Schmitz was a timid person of an inquiring turn of mind, whose
youth had been tempestuous. I made a number of excursions with Schmitz
to Toledo, to El Paular and to the Springs of Urbión; a year or two
later we visited Switzerland several times together.

Schmitz was like an open window through which I looked out upon an
unknown world. I held long conversations with him upon life, literature,
art and philosophy.

I recall that I took him one Sunday afternoon to the home of Don Juan
Valera.

When Schmitz and I arrived, Valera had just settled down for the
afternoon to listen to his daughter, who was reading aloud one of the
latest novels of Zola.

Valera, Schmitz and I sat chatting for perhaps four or five hours. There
was no subject that we could all agree upon. Valera and I were no sooner
against the Swiss than the Swiss and Valera were against me, or the
Swiss and I against Valera, and then each flew off after his own
opinion.

Valera, who saw that the Swiss and I were anarchists, said it was beyond
his comprehension how any man could conceive of a state of general well
being.

"Do you mean to say that you believe," he said to me, "that there will
ever come a time when every man will be able to set a bowl of oysters
from Arcachón upon his table and top it off with a bottle of champagne
of first-rate vintage, besides having a woman sitting beside him in a
Worth gown?"

"No, no, Don Juan," I replied. "In the eyes of the anarchist, oysters,
champagne, and Worth are mere superstitions, myths to which we attach no
importance. We do not spend our time dreaming about oysters, while
champagne is not nectar to our tastes. All that we ask is to live well,
and to have those about us live well also."

We could not convince each other. When Schmitz and I left Valera's house
it was already night, and we found ourselves absorbed in his talents and
his limitations.




ORTEGA Y GASSET


Ortega y Gasset impresses me as a traveller who has journeyed through
the world of culture. He moves upon a higher level, which it is
difficult to reach, and upon which it is still more difficult to
maintain oneself.

It may be that Ortega has no great sympathy for my manner of living,
which is insubordinate; it may be that I look with unfriendly eye upon
his ambitious and aristocratic sympathies; nevertheless, he is a master
who brings glad news of the unknown--that is, of the unknown to us.

Doctor San Martín was fond of telling how he was sitting one day upon a
bench in the Retiro, reading.

"Are you reading a novel?" inquired a gentleman, sitting down beside
him.

"No, I am studying."

"What! Studying at your age?" exclaimed the gentleman, amazed.

The same remark might be made to me: "What! Sitting under a master at
your age?"

As far as I am concerned, every man who knows more than I do is my
master.

I know very well that philosophy and metaphysics are nothing to the
great mass of physicians who pick up their science out of foreign
reviews, adding nothing themselves to what they read; nor, for that
matter, are they to most Spanish engineers, who are skilled in doing
sufficiently badly today what was done in England and Germany very well
thirty years ago; and the same thing is true of the apothecaries. The
practical is all that these people concede to exist, but how do they
know what is practical? Considering the matter from the practical point
of view, there can be no doubt but that civilization has attained a high
development wherever there have been great metaphysicisms, and then with
the philosophers have come the inventors, who between them are the glory
of mankind. Unamuno despises inventors, but in this case it is his
misfortune. It is far easier for a nation which is destitute of a
tradition of culture to improvise an histologist or a physicist, than a
philosopher or a real thinker.

Ortega y Gasset, the only approach to a philosopher whom I have ever
known, is one of the few Spaniards whom it is interesting to hear talk.




A PSEUDO-PATRON


Although a man may never have amounted to anything, and will probably
continue in much the same case, that is to say never amounting to
anything, yet there are persons who will take pride in having given him
his start in the world--in short, upon having made him known. Señor
Ruiz Contreras has set up some such absurd claim in regard to me.
According to Ruiz Contreras, he brought me into public notice through a
review which he published in 1899, under the title _Revista Nueva_.
Thus, according to Ruiz Contreras, I am known, and have been for
eighteen years! Although it may seem scarcely worth while to expose such
an obvious joke, I should like to clear up this question for the benefit
of any future biographers. Why should I not indulge the hope of having
them?

In 1899, Ruiz Contreras invited my co-operation in a weekly magazine, in
which I was to be both stockholder and editor. Those days already seem a
long way off. At first I refused, but he insisted; at length we agreed
that I should write for the magazine and share in meeting the expenses,
in company with Ruiz Contreras, Reparaz, Lassalle and the novelist
Matheu.

I made two or three payments, and moved down some of my pictures and
furniture to the office in consequence, until the time came when I began
to feel that it was humorous for me to be paying for publishing my
articles, when I was perfectly well able to dispose of them to any other
sheet. Upon my cutting off payments, Ruiz Contreras informed me that a
number of the stockholders, among whom was Icaza, who had replaced
Reparaz, took the position that if I did not pay, I should not be
permitted to write for the magazine.

"Very well, I shall not write." And I ceased to write.

Previous to my connection with the _Revista Nueva_, I had contributed
articles to _El Liberal_, _El Pais_, _El Globo_, _La Justicia_, and
_La Voz de Guipúzcoa_, as well as to other publications.

A year after my contributions to the _Revista Nueva_, I brought out
_Sombre Lives_, which scarcely sold one hundred copies, and, then,
a little later, _The House of Aizgorri_, the sale of which fell
short of fifty.

At this time, Martínez Ruiz published a comedy, _The Power of
Love_, for which I provided a prologue, and I went about with the
publisher, Rodríguez Serra, through the bookshops, peddling the book. In
a shop on the Plaza de Santa Ana, Rodríguez Serra asked the proprietor,
not altogether without a touch of malice:

"What do you think of this book?"

"It would be all right," answered the proprietor, who did not know me,
"if anybody knew who Martínez Ruiz was; and who is this Pío Baroja?"

Señor Ruiz Contreras says that he made me known, but the fact is that
nobody knew me in those days; Señor Ruiz Contreras flatters himself that
he did me a great favour by publishing my articles, at a cost to me, at
the very least, of two or three _duros_ apiece.

If this is to be a patron of letters, I should like to patronize half
the planet.

As for literary influence, Ruiz Contreras never had any upon me. He was
an admirer of Arsène Houssage, Paul Bourget, and other novelists with a
sophisticated air, who never meant anything to me. The theatre also
obsessed him, a malady which I have never suffered, and he was a devotee
of the poet, Zorrilla, in which respect I was unable to share his
enthusiasm, nor can I do so today. Finally, he was a political
reactionary, while I am a man of radical tendencies.




