X

AS A VILLAGE DOCTOR


I returned to Burjasot, a small town near Valencia, where my family
lived at the time, a full-fledged doctor. We had a tiny house, besides a
garden containing pear, peach and pomegranate trees.

I passed some time there very pleasantly.

My father was a contributor to the _Voz de Guipúzcoa_ of San
Sebastian, so he always received the paper. One day I read--or it may
have been one of the family--that the post of official physician was
vacant in the town of Cestona.

I decided to apply for the place, and dispatched a letter accompanied by
a copy of my diploma. It turned out that I was the only applicant, and
so the post was awarded to me.

I set out for Madrid, where I passed the night, and then proceeded to
San Sebastian, receiving a letter from my father upon my arrival,
informing me that there was another physician at Cestona who was
receiving a larger salary than that which had been offered to me, and
recommending that perhaps it would be better not to put in appearance
too soon, until I was better advised as to the prospects.

I hesitated.

"In any event," I thought, "I shall learn what the town is like. If I
like it, I shall stay; if not, I shall return to Burjasot."

I took the diligence, which goes by the name of "La Vascongada," and
made the trip from San Sebastian to Cestona, which proved to be long
enough in all conscience, as we were five or six hours late. I got off
at a posada, or small inn, at Alcorta, to get something to eat. I dined
sumptuously, drank bravely, and, encouraged by the good food, made up my
mind to remain in the village. I talked with the other doctor and with
the alcalde, and soon everything was arranged that had to be arranged.

As night was coming on, the priest and the doctor recommended that I go
to board at the house of the Sacristana, as she had a room vacant, which
had formerly been occupied by a notary.




DOLORES, LA SACRISTANA


Dolores, my landlady and mistress of the Sacristy, was an agreeable,
exceedingly energetic, exceedingly hard-working woman, who was a
pronounced conservative.

I have met few women as good as she. In spite of the fact that she soon
discovered that I was not at all religious, she did not hold it against
me, nor did I harbour any resentment against her.

I often read her the _Añalejo_, or church calendar, which is known
as the _Gallofa_, or beggars' mite, in the northern provinces, in
allusion to the ancient custom of making pilgrimages to Santiago, and I
cooked sugar wafers over the fire with her on the eve of feast days, at
which times her work was especially severe.

I realized in Cestona my childish ambitions of having a house of my own,
and a dog, which had lain in my mind ever since reading _Robinson
Crusoe_ and _The Mysterious Island_.

I also had an old horse named Juanillo, which I borrowed from a coachman
in San Sebastian, but I never liked horses.

The horse seems to me to be a militaristic, antipathetic animal. Neither
Robinson Crusoe nor Cyrus Harding rode horse-back.

I committed no blunders while I was a village doctor. I had already
grown prudent, and my sceptical temperament was a bar to any great
mistakes.

I first began to realize that I was a Basque in Cestona, and I recovered
my pride of race there, which I had lost.




XI

AS A BAKER


I have been asked frequently: "How did you ever come to go into the
baking business?" I shall now proceed to answer the question, although
the story is a long one.

My mother had an aunt, Juana Nessi, who was a sister of her father's.

This lady was reasonably attractive when young, and married a rich
gentleman just returned from America, whose name was Don Matías Lacasa.

Once settled in Madrid, Don Matías, who deemed himself an eagle, when,
in reality, he was a common barnyard rooster, embarked upon a series of
undertakings that failed with truly extraordinary unanimity. About 1870,
a physician from Valencia by the name of Martí, who had visited Vienna,
gave him an account of the bread they make there, and of the yeast they
use to raise it, enlarging upon the profits which lay ready to hand in
that line.

Don Matías was convinced, and he bought an old house near the Church of
the Descalzas upon Martí's advice. It stood in a street which boasted
only one number--the number 2. I believe the street was, and still is,
called the Calle de la Misericordia.

Martí set up ovens in the old building by the Church of the Descalzas,
and the business began to yield fabulous profits. Being a devotee of the
life of pleasure, Martí died three or four years after the business had
been established, and Don Matías continued his gallinaceous evolutions
until he was utterly ruined, and had pawned everything he possessed,
remaining at last with the bakery as his only means of support.

He succeeded in entangling and ruining that, too, before he died. My
aunt then wrote my mother requesting that my brother Ricardo come up to
Madrid.

My brother remained in Madrid for some time, when he grew tired and
left; then I went, and later we were both there together, making an
effort to improve the business and to push it ahead. Times were bad:
there was no way of pushing ahead. Surely the proverb "Where flour is
lacking, everything goes packing," could never have been applied with
more truth. And we could get no flour.

When the bakery was just about to do better, the Conde de Romanones, who
was our landlord in those days, notified us that the building was to be
torn down.

Then our troubles began. We were obliged to move elsewhere, and to
undertake alterations, for which money was indispensable, but we had no
money. In that predicament, we began to speculate upon the Exchange, and
the Exchange proved a kind mother to us; it sustained us until we were
on our feet again. As soon as we had established ourselves upon another
site, we proceeded to lose money, so we withdrew.

It is not surprising, therefore, that I have always regarded the Stock
Exchange as a philanthropic institution, or that, on the other hand, a
church has always seemed a sombre place in which a black priest leaps
forth from behind a confessional to seize one by the throat in the dark,
and to throttle him.




MY FATHER'S DISILLUSIONMENT


My father was endowed with a due share of the romantic fervour which
distinguished men of his epoch, and set great store by friendship. More
particularly, he was wrapped up in his friends in San Sebastian.

When we discovered that we were in trouble, before throwing ourselves
into the loving arms of the Bourse, my father spoke to two intimate
friends of his who were from San Sebastian. They made an appointment to
meet me in the Café Suizo. I explained the situation to them, after
which they made me certain propositions, which were so usurious, so
outrageously extortionate, that they took my breath away. They offered
to advance us the money we needed for fifty per cent of the gross
receipts, while we were to meet the running expenses out of our fifty
per cent, receiving no compensation whatever for our services in taking
care of the business.

I was astonished, and naturally did not accept. The episode was a great
blow to my father. I frequently came face to face with one of our
friends at a later date, but I never bowed to him. He was offended. I
was tempted to approach him and say: "The reason that I do not bow to
you is because I know you are a rascal."

If either of these friends of ours were alive, I should proceed to
mention their names, but, as they are dead, it will serve no useful
purpose.




INDUSTRY AND DEMOCRACY


The bakery has been brandished against me in literature.

When I first wrote, it was said:

"This Baroja is a crusty fellow; naturally, he is a baker."

A certain picturesque academician, who was also a dramatist, and given
to composing stupendous _quintillas_ and _cuartetas_ in his
day, which, despite their flatness, were received with applause, had the
inspiration to add:

"All this modernism has been cooked up in Baroja's oven."

Even the Catalans lost no time in throwing the fact of my being a baker
in my face, although they are a commercial, manufacturing people.
Whether calico is nobler than flour, or flour than calico, I am not
sure, but the subject is one for discussion, as Maeztu would have it.

I am an eclectic myself on this score. I prefer flour in the shape of
bread with my dinner, but cloth will go further with a man who desires
to appear well in public.

When I was serving upon the Town Council, an anonymous publication
entitled "Masks Off," printed the following among other gems: "Pío
Baroja is a man of letters who runs a bake-shop."

A Madrid critic recently declared in an American periodical that I had
two personalities: one that of a writer and the other of a baker. He was
solicitous to let me know later that he intended no harm.

But if I should say to him: "Mr. So and So" is a writer who is
excellently posted upon the value of cloth, as his father sold
dry-goods, it would appeal to his mind as bad taste.

Another journalist paid his respects to me some months ago in _El
Parlamentario_, saying I baked rolls, oppressed the people, and
sucked the blood of the workingman.

It would appear to be more demeaning to own a small factory or a shop,
according to the standards of both literary and non-literary circles,
than it is to accept money from the corruption funds of the Government,
or bounties from the exchequers of foreign Embassies.

When I hear talk nowadays about the dues of the common people, my
propensity to laugh is so great that I am apprehensive that my end may
be like that of the Greek philosopher in Diogenes Laertius, who died of
laughter because he saw an ass eating figs.




THE VEXATIONS OF A SMALL TRADESMAN


The trials and tribulations of the literary life, its feuds and its
backbitings are a common topic of conversation. However, I have never
experienced anything of the kind in literature. The trouble with
literature is that there is very little money in it, which renders the
writer's existence both mean and precarious.

Nothing compares for vexation with the life of the petty tradesman,
especially when that tradesman is a baker. Upon occasion, I have
repeated to my friends the series of outrages to which we were obliged
to submit, in particular at the hands of the municipal authorities.

Sometimes it was through malice, but more often through sheer insentient
imbecility.

When my brother and I moved to the new site, we drew up a plan and
submitted it to the _Ayuntamiento_, or City Government. A clerk
discovered that no provision had been made for a stall for a mule to run
the kneading machine, and so rejected it. When we learned that our
application had not been granted, we inquired the reason and explained
to the clerk that no provision had been made for the mule because we had
no mule, as our kneading machine was operated by an electric motor.

"That makes no difference, no difference whatever," replied the clerk
with the importance and obtuseness of the bureaucrat. "The ordinance
requires that there be a stall for one."

Another of the thousand instances of official barbarity was perpetrated
at our expense while Sánchez de Toca was Alcalde. This gentleman is a
Siamese twin of Maura's when it comes to garrulousness and muddy
thinking, and he had resolved to do away with the distribution of bread
by public delivery, and to license only deliveries by private bakeries.
The order was arbitrary enough, but the manner in which it was put into
effect was a masterpiece. It was reported that plates bearing license
numbers would be given out at the _Ayuntamiento_ to the delivery
men from the bakeries. So we repaired to the _Ayuntamiento_ and
questioned a clerk:

"Where do they give out the numbers?

"There are no numbers."

"What will happen tomorrow then, when we make our deliveries?"

"How do I know?"

The next day when the delivery men began their rounds, a policeman
accosted them:

"Have you your numbers?"

"No, sir; they are not ready yet."

"Well, come with me then, to the police station."

And that was the last of our bread.

The Caid of Mechuar in Morocco favoured his subjects in some such
fashion several years since, but the Moors, being men of spirit, fell on
him one day, and left him at death's door on a dung heap. Meanwhile,
Sánchez de Toca continues to talk nonsense in these parts, and is
considered by some to be one of the bulwarks of the country.

I could spin many a tale of tyranny in high places, and almost as many,
no doubt, of the pettinesses of workingmen. But what is the good? Why
stir up my bile? In progressive incarnations, I have now passed through
those of baker and petty tradesman. I am no longer an employer who
exploits the workingman, nor can I see that I ever did so. If I have
exploited workers merely because I employed them, all that was some time
ago. I support myself by my writings now, although it is quite proper to
state that I live on very little.




