VIII

MEMORIES OF CHILDHOOD

SAN SEBASTIAN


I was born in San Sebastian on the 28th of December, 1872. So I am not
only a Guipúzcoan but a native of San Sebastian. The former I regard as
an honour, but the latter means very little to me.

I should prefer to have been born in a mountain hamlet or in a small
coast town, rather than in a city of summer visitors and hotel keepers.

Garat, who was a most conventional person who lived in Bayonne, always
used to maintain that he came from Ustariz. I might say that I am from
Vera del Bidasoa, but I should not deceive myself.

There are several reasons why I dislike San Sebastian:

In the first place, the city is not beautiful, when it might well be so.
It is made up of straight streets which are all alike, together with two
or three monuments that are horrible. The general construction is
miserable and shoddy. Although excellent stone abounds in the
neighbourhood, no one has had the sense to erect anything either noble
or dignified. Cheap houses confront the eye on all sides, whether simple
or pretentious. Whenever the citizens of San Sebastian raise their
hands--and in this they are abetted by the _Madrileños_--they do
something ugly. They have defaced Monte Igueldo already, and now they
are defacing the Castillo. Tomorrow, they will manage somehow to spoil
the sea, the sky, and the air.

As for the spirit of the city, it is lamentable. There is no interest in
science, art, literature, history, politics, or anything else. All that
the inhabitants think about are the King, the Queen Regent, yachts, bull
fights, and the latest fashions in trousers.

San Sebastian is a conglomeration of parvenus and upstarts from
Pamplona, Saragossa, Valladolid, Chile and Chuquisaca, who are anxious
to show themselves off. Some do this by walking alongside of the King,
or by taking coffee with a famous bull-fighter, or by bowing to some
aristocrat. The young men of San Sebastian are among the most worthless
in Spain. I have always looked upon them as _infra_ human.

As for the ladies, many of them might be taken for princesses in summer,
but their winter tertulias are on a level with a porter's lodge where
they play _julepe_. It is a card game, but the word means dose, and
Madame Recamier would have fainted at the mention of it.

When I observe these parvenus' attempts to shine, I think to myself:
"The ostentation of the freshman year at college. How unfortunate that
some of us have moved on to the doctorate!"

No one reads in San Sebastian. They run over the society news, and then
drop the paper for fear their brains will begin to smoke.

This city, imagining itself to be so cultivated, although it really is a
new town, is under the domination of a few Jesuit fathers, who, like
most of the present days sons of Loyola, are coarse, heavy and wholly
lacking in real ability.

The Jesuit manages the women, which is not a very difficult thing to do,
as he holds the leading strings of the sexual life in his hands. In
addition he influences the men.

He assists the young who are of good social standing, who belong to
distinguished families, and brings about desirable matches. The poor can
do anything they like. They are at liberty to eat, to get drunk, to do
whatever they will except to read. These unhappy, timid, torpid clerks
and hangers-on imagine they are free men whenever they get drunk. They
do not see that they are like the Redskins, whom the Yankees poisoned
with alcohol so as to hold them in check.

I inspected a club installed in a house in the older part of the city
some years ago.

A sign on one door read "Library." When it was opened, I was shown,
laughing, a room filled with bottles.

"If a Jesuit could see this, he would be in ecstasy," I exclaimed. "Yes,
replacing books with wines and liquors! What a business for the sons of
Saint Ignatius!"

In spite of all its display, all its tinsel, all its Jesuitism, all its
bad taste, San Sebastian will become an important, dignified city within
a very few years. When that time comes, the author who has been born
there, will not prefer to hail from some hamlet buried in the mountains,
rather than from the capital of Guipúzcoa. But I myself prefer it. I
have no city, and I hold myself to be strictly extra-urban.




MY PARENTS


My father, Serafín Baroja y Zornoza, was a mining engineer, who wrote
books both in Castilian and Basque, and he, too, came from San
Sebastian. My mother's name is Carmen Nessi y Goñi. She was born in
Madrid.

I should be a very good man. My father was a good man, although he was
capricious and arbitrary, and my mother is a good woman, firmer and more
positive in her manifestations of virtue. Yet, I am not without
reputation for ferocity, which, perhaps, is deserved.

I do not know why I believed for a long while that I had been born in
the Calle del Puyuelo in San Sebastian, where we once lived. The street
is well within the old town, and truly ugly and forlorn. The mere idea
of it was and is distasteful to me.

When I complained to my mother about my birthplace and its want of
attractiveness, she replied that I was born in a beautiful house near
the esplanade of La Zurriola, fronting on the Calle de Oquendo, which
belonged to my grandmother and looked out upon the sea, although the
house does so no longer, as a theatre has been erected directly in
front. I am glad that I was born near the sea, because it suggests
freedom and change.

My paternal grandmother, Doña Concepción Zornoza, was a woman of
positive ideas and somewhat eccentric. She was already old when I knew
her. She had mortgaged several houses which she owned in the city in
order to build the house which was occupied by us in La Zurriola.

Her plan was to furnish it and rent it to King Amadeo. Before Amadeo
arrived at San Sebastian, however, the Carlist war broke out, and the
monarch of the house of Savoy was compelled to abdicate, and my
grandmother to abandon her plans.

My earliest recollection is the Carlist attempt to bombard San
Sebastian. It is a memory which has now grown very dim, and what I saw
has been confused with what I have heard. I have a confused recollection
of the bringing in of soldiers on stretchers, and of having peeped over
the wall of a little cemetery near the city, in which corpses were laid
out, still unburied.

As I have said, my father was a mining engineer, but during the war he
was engaged in teaching natural history at the Institute. I have no idea
how this came about. He was also one of the Liberal volunteers.

I have a vague idea that one night I was taken from my bed, wrapped up
in a mantle, and carried to a chalet on the Concha, belonging to one
Errazu, who was a relative of my mother's. We lived there for a time in
the cellar of the chalet.

Three shells, which were known in those days as cucumbers, dropped on
the house, and wrecked the roof, making a great hole in the wall which
separated our garden from the next.




MONSIGNOR, THE CAT


Monsignor was a handsome yellow cat belonging to us while we were living
in the cellar of Señor Errazu's chalet.

From what I have since learned, his name was a tribute to the
extraordinary reputation enjoyed at that period by Monsignor Simeoni.

Monsignor--I am referring to the yellow cat--was intelligent. A bell
surmounted the Castillo de la Mota at San Sebastian, by whose side was
stationed a look-out. When the look-out spied the flash of Carlist guns,
he rang the bell, and then the townspeople retired into the doorways and
cellars.

Monsignor was aware of the relation of the bell to the cannonading, so
when the bell rang, he promptly withdrew into the house, even going so
far sometimes as to creep under the beds.

My father had friends who were not above going down into our cellar on
such occasions so as better to observe the manoeuvres of the cat.




TWO LUNATICS


After the war, I used to stroll as a boy with my mother and brothers to
the Castillo de la Mota on Sundays. It was truly a beautiful walk, which
will soon be ruined utterly by the citizens of San Sebastian. We looked
out to sea from the Castillo and then we talked with the guard. We often
met a lunatic there, who was in the care of a servant. As soon as he
caught sight of us children, the lunatic was happy at once, but if a
woman came near him, he ran away and flattened himself against the
walls, kicking and crying out: "Blind dog! Blind dog!"

I remember also having seen a young woman, who was insane, in a great
house which we used to visit in those days at Loyola. She gesticulated
and gazed continually into a deep well, where a half moon of black water
was visible far below. These lunatics, one at the Castillo and the other
in that great house, haunted my imagination as a child.




THE HAWK


My latest recollection of San Sebastian is of a hawk, which we
brought home to our house from the Castillo.

Some soldiers gave us the hawk when it was still very young, and it grew
up and became accustomed to living indoors. We fed it snails, which it
gulped down as if they were bonbons.

When it was full-grown, it escaped to the courtyard and attacked our
chickens, to say nothing of all the cats of the neighbourhood. It hid
under the beds during thundershowers.

When we moved away from San Sebastian, we were obliged to leave the hawk
behind. We carried him up to the Castillo one day, turned him loose, and
off he flew.




IN MADRID


We moved from San Sebastian to Madrid. My father had received an
appointment to the Geographic and Political Institute. We lived on the
Calle Real, just beyond the Glorieta de Bilbao, in a street which is now
a prolongation of the Calle de Fuencarral.

Opposite our house, there was a piece of high ground, which has not yet
been removed, which went by the name of "_La Era del Mico_," or
"The Monkey Field." Swings and merry-go-rounds were scattered all over
it, so that the diversions of "_La Era del Mico_," together with
the two-wheeled calashes and chaises which were still in use in those
days, and the funerals passing continually through the street, were the
amusements which were provided ready-made for us, as we looked down from
our balcony.

Two sensational executions took place while we lived here--those of the
regicide Otero and of Oliva--one following closely on the heels of the
other. We heard the _Salve_, or prayer, which is sung by the
prisoners for the criminal awaiting death, hawked about us then on the
streets.




IN PAMPLONA


From Madrid we went to Pamplona. Pamplona was still a curious city
maintaining customs which would have been appropriate to a state of war.
The draw-bridges were raised at night, only one, or perhaps two, gates
being left open, I am not certain which.

Pamplona proved an amusing place for a small boy. There were the walls
with their glacis, their sentry boxes, their cannon; there were the
gates, the river, the cathedral and the surrounding quarters--all of
them very attractive to us.

We studied at the Institute and committed all sorts of pranks like the
other students. We played practical jokes in the houses of the canons,
and threw stones at the bishop's palace, many of the windows of which
were already paneless and forlorn.

We also made wild excursions to the roof of our house and to those of
other houses in the neighbourhood, prying about the garrets and peering
down over the cornices into the courtyards.

Once we seized a stuffed eagle, cherished by a neighbour, hauled it to
the attic, pulled it through the skylight to the roof, and flung it down
into the street, creating a genuine panic among the innocent passers-by,
when they saw the huge bird drop at their feet.

One of my most vivid memories of Pamplona is seeing a criminal on his
way to execution passing our house, attired in a round cap and yellow
robe.

It was one of the sights which has impressed me most. Later in the
afternoon, driven by curiosity, knowing that the man who had been
garroted must be still on the scaffold, I ventured alone to see him, and
remained there examining him closely for a long time. When I returned
home that night, I was unable to sleep because of the impression he had
made.




DON TIRSO LAREQUI


Many other vivid memories of Pamplona remain with me, never to be
forgotten. I remember a lad of our own age who died, leaping from the
wall, and then there were our adventures along the river.

Another terrible memory was associated with the cathedral. I had begun
my first year of Latin, and was exactly nine at the time.

We had come out of the Institute, and were watching a funeral.
Afterwards, three or four of the boys, among whom were my brother
Ricardo and myself, entered the cathedral. The echo of the responses was
ringing in my ears and I hummed them, as I wandered about the aisles.

Suddenly, a black shadow shot from behind one of the confessionals,
pounced upon me and seized me around the neck with both hands, almost
choking me. I was paralyzed with fear. It proved to be a fat, greasy
canon, by name Don Tirso Larequi.

"What is your name?" he shouted, shaking me vigorously.

I could not answer because of my fright.

"What is his name?" the priest demanded of the other boys.

"His name is Antonio García," replied my brother Ricardo, coolly.

"Where does he live?"

"In the Calle de Curia, Number 14."

There was no such place, of course.

"I shall see your father at once," shouted the priest, and he rushed out
of the cathedral like a bull.

My brother and I then made our escape through the cloister.

This red-faced priest, fat and ferocious, rushing out of the dark to
choke a nine-year-old boy, has always been to me a symbol of the
Catholic religion.

This experience of my boyhood partly explains my anti-clericalism. I
recall Don Tirso with an undying hate, and were he still alive--I have
no idea whether he is or not--I should not hesitate to climb up to the
roof of his house some dark night, and shout down his chimney in a
cavernous voice: "Don Tirso! You are a damned villain!"




A VISIONARY ROWDY


I was something of a rowdy as a boy and rather quarrelsome. The first
day I went to school in Pamplona, I came out disputing with another boy
of my own age, and we fought in the street until we were separated by a
cobbler and the blows of a leather strap, to which he added kicks.
Later, I foolishly quarrelled and fought whenever the other boys set me
on. In our stone-throwing escapades on the outskirts of the town, I was
always the aggressor, and quite indefatigable.

When I began to study medicine, I found that my aggressiveness had
departed completely. One day after quarrelling with another student in
the cloisters of San Carlos, I challenged him to fight. When we got out
on the street, it struck me as foolish to goad him to hit me in the eye
or else to land on my nose with his fist, and I slipped off and went
home. I lost my morale as a bully then and there. Although I was a
fighter from infancy, I was also something of a dreamer, and the two
strains scarcely make a harmonious blend.

Before I was grown, I saw Gisbert's Death of the Comuneros reproduced as
a chromo. For a long, long while, I always seemed to see that picture
hanging in all its variety of colour on the wall before me at night. For
months and months after my vigil with the body of the man who had been
garroted outside of Pamplona, I never entered a dark room but that his
image rose up before me in all its gruesome details. I also passed
through a period of disagreeable dreams. Some time would elapse after I
awoke before I was able to tell where I was, and I was frightened by it.




SARASATE


It was my opinion then, and still is, that a fiesta at Pamplona is among
the most vapid things in the world.

There was a mixture of incomprehension and culture in Pamplona, that was
truly ridiculous. The people would devote several days to going to bull
fights, and then turn about, when evening came, and welcome Sarasate
with Greek fire.

A rude and fanatical populace forgot its orgy of blood to acclaim a
violinist. And what a violinist! He was one of the most effeminate and
grotesque individuals in the world. I can see him yet, strutting along
with his long hair, his ample rear, and his shoes with their little
quarter-heels, which gave him the appearance of a fat cook dressed up in
men's clothes for Carnival.

When Sarasate died he left a number of trinkets which had been presented
to him during his artistic career--mostly match-boxes, cigarette cases,
and the like--which the Town Council of Pamplona has assembled and now
exhibits in glass cases, but which, in the public interest, should be
promptly disposed of at auction.




ROBINSON CRUSOE AND THE MYSTERIOUS ISLAND


During my life in Pamplona, my brother Ricardo imparted his enthusiasm
for two stories to me. These were _Robinson Crusoe_ and Jules
Verne's _The Mysterious Island_, or rather, I should say they were
_The Mysterious Island_ and _Robinson Crusoe_, because we
preferred Jules Verne's tale greatly to Defoe's.

We would dream about desert islands, about manufacturing electric
batteries in the fashion of the engineer Cyrus Harding, and as we were
not very certain of finding any "Granite House" during the course of our
adventures, Ricardo would paint and paint at plans and elevations of
houses which we hoped to construct in its place in those far-off, savage
lands.

He also made pictures of ships which we took care should be rigged
properly.

There were two variations of this dream of adventure--one involving a
snow-house, with appropriate episodes such as nocturnal attacks by
bears, wolves, and the like, and then we planned a sea voyage.

I rebelled a long time at the notion that my life must be like that of
everybody else, but I had no recourse in the end but to capitulate.




