Chapter XVII


Vaccination


The pernicious aftereffects of vaccination upon the system are
similar to those of the various serum and antitoxin treatments.

Jenner, an English barber and chiropodist, is usually credited with
the discovery of vaccination. The doubtful honor, however, belongs
in reality to an old Circassian woman who, according to the
historian Le Duc, in the year 1672 startled Constantinople with the
announcement that the Virgin Mary had revealed to her an unfailing
preventive against the smallpox.

Her specific was inoculation with the genuine smallpox virus. But
even with her the idea was not an original one, because the
principle of isopathy (curing a disease with its own disease
products) was explicitly taught a hundred years before that by
Paracelsus, the great genius of the Renaissance of learning of the
Middle Ages. But even he was only voicing the secret teachings of
ancient folklore, sympathy healing and magic dating back to the
Druids and Seers of ancient Britain and Germany.

The Circassian seeress cut a cross in the flesh of people and
inoculated this wound with the smallpox virus. Together with this
she prescribed prayer, abstinence from meat and fasting for forty
days.

As at that time smallpox was a terrible and widespread scourge, the
practice of inoculation was carried all over Europe. At first the
operation was performed by women and laymen; but when vaccination
became popular and people were willing to pay for it, the doctors
began to incorporate it into their regular practice.

Popular superstitions run a very similar course to epidemics. They
have a period of inception, of virulence and of abatement. As germs
and bacteria become inactive and die a natural death in their own
poisonous excreta, so popular superstitions die as a natural result
of their own falsities and exaggerations.

It soon became evident that inoculation with the virus did not
prevent smallpox, but, on the contrary, frequently caused it; and
therefore the practice gradually fell into disuse, only to be
revived by Jenner about one hundred years later in a modified form.
He substituted cowpox virus for smallpox virus.

Modern allopathy, in applying the isopathic principle, gives large
and poisonous doses of virus, lymph, serums and antitoxins, while
homeopathy, as did ancient mysticism, applies the isopathic remedies
in highly diluted and triturated doses only.

From England vaccination gradually spread over the civilized world
and during the nineteenth century the smallpox disease (variola)
constantly diminished in virulence and frequency until today it has
become of comparatively rare occurrence.

"Therefore vaccination has exterminated smallpox," say the disciples
of Jenner.

Is that really so? Is vaccination actually a preventive of smallpox?
This seems very doubtful when the advocates of vaccination
themselves do not believe it. "What," I hear them say, "we do not
believe in our own theory?" Evidently you do not, my friends. If you
believe that vaccination protects you against smallpox, why are you
afraid of catching it from those who are not vaccinated? If you are
thoroughly protected, as you claim to be, how can you catch the
disease from those who are not protected? Why do you not allow the
other fellow to have his fill of smallpox and then enjoy a good
laugh on him? The fact of the matter is you know full well that you
are not safe, that you can catch the disease just as readily as the
unprotected.

German statistics are more reliable than those of any other country.
In the years of 1870-71 smallpox was rampant in the Fatherland. Over
1,000,000 persons had the disease, and 120,000 died. Ninety-six
percent of these had been vaccinated and only four percent had not
been protected. Most of the victims were vaccinated, once at least,
shortly before they took the disease.

In 1888 Bismarck sent an address to the governments of all the
German states in which it was admitted that numerous eczematous
diseases, even those of an epidemic nature, were directly
attributable to vaccination and that the origin and cure of smallpox
were still unsolved problems.

In this message to the various legislatures the great statesman
said: "The hopes placed in the efficacy of the cowpox virus as a
preventive of smallpox have proved entirely deceptive."

Realizing this to be a fact, most of the German governments have
modified or entirely relinquished their compulsory vaccination laws.

"But," our opponents insist, "you cannot deny that smallpox has
greatly diminished since the almost universal adoption of
vaccination."

Certainly the disease has diminished. But so have diminished and, in
fact, nearly disappeared the plague, the Black Death, cholera, the
bubonic plague, yellow fever and numerous other epidemic pests which
only recently decimated entire nations.

Not one of these epidemics was treated by vaccination. Why, then,
did they abate and practically disappear?

Not vaccination, but the more universal adoption of soap, bathtubs,
all kinds of sanitary measures, such as plumbing, drainage,
ventilation and more hygienic modes of living generally have subdued
smallpox as well as all other plagues.

Many of us remember how the yellow fever raged in Havanna during the
Spanish occupancy. Within two months after the energetic Yankees
took possession and gave the filthy city a good scouring, yellow
fever had entirely disappeared--without any yellow fever
vaccination.

The question is now in order why, of all the dreaded plagues of the
past, smallpox alone survives to this day.

The answer is: on account of vaccination. If scrofulous and
syphilitic poisons were not artificially kept alive in human blood
by vaccination, smallpox would by this time be as rare as cholera
and yellow fever.

Thanks to the oft-repeated compulsory vaccination of every citizen,
young and old, we as a nation have become saturated with the
smallpox virus. Is it any wonder that every once in a while this
latent taint breaks out in acute epidemics?

Undoubtedly, the almost universal systematic contamination and
degeneration of vital fluids and tissues, not alone with vaccine
virus, but also with many other filthy serums, antitoxins and drug
poisons, account in a large measure for the steady increase of
tuberculosis, cancer, insanity and a multitude of other chronic
destructive diseases unknown among primitive people that have not
come in contact with the blessings (?) of vaccination.

By weakening the system's reactionary powers against one disease,
its reactionary powers against all diseases are weakened. In other
words, creating in the body a form of chronic smallpox by means of
vaccination favors the development of all kinds of chronic diseases.

Quit sowing the seed, gentlemen, and you will cease reaping the
harvest. By the mercurial suppression of syphilis and by means of
vaccination you are perpetuating smallpox.

What has syphilis to do with smallpox? They are very closely
related, and similar in appearance, symtomatology and in their
effects upon the organism.

A German physician, Dr. Cruwell, who studied the subject thoroughly,
says: "Every vaccination with so-called cowpox virus means
syphilitic infection. Cowpox is not a disease peculiar to cattle; it
is always due to syphilitic or smallpox infection from the diseased
hands of human beings. Cowpox pustules have been found only on the
udders of milk cows which came in contact with human hands. Cattle
roaming in pasture and prairie have never been affected by cowpox,
nor have domesticated steers and oxen. If this disease were a
disorder peculiar to cattle, both sexes would be equally affected.
Jenner's cowpox was caused by the diseased hands of the syphilitic
milkmaid, Sarah Nehnes."

Vaccination of healthy children and adults is often followed by a
multitude of symptoms which cannot be distinguished from syphilis,
viz., characteristic ulcers and eczematous eruptions, swellings of
the axillary and other lymphatic glands, atrophy of the mammary
glands in the breasts of women and of girls above the age of
puberty, etc.

This explains the constantly growing demand for "bust foods" and
"bust developers." A perfectly developed bust has become so rare
that many hundreds of beauty doctors and of business concerns that
make a specialty of developing the flat-bosomed realize thousands of
dollars annually. One firm in this city, and a small concern at
that, has made from $2,500 to $5,000 a year and has over ten
thousand names on its constantly increasing list of patrons.

It is reasonable to assume that almost without exception these ten
thousand women had been vaccinated from one to three times before
the age of puberty. When this is realized, and the fact that
vaccination dries up the mammary glands is taken into account, is it
not time to pause and consider?

The figures of this one small concern represent the report of only
one out of several hundred such firms doing business in all parts of
the country.

Some years ago, a disease similar to smallpox broke out among the
sheep in certain parts of Scotland. As a preventive, the sheep were
vaccinated. In the course of a few years it was noticed that a great
many ewes were unable to nourish their lambs. With the
discontinuance of vaccination this phenomenon disappeared.

Does this help to explain why nowadays over fifty percent of human
mothers are incapable of nursing their babies?

Looking Forward

At present the trend of allopathic medical science is undoubtedly
toward the serum, antitoxin and vaccine treatment. Practically all
medical research tends that way. Every few days we see in the daily
papers reports of new serums and antitoxins which are claimed to
cure or create immunity to certain diseases.

Suppose the research and practice of medical science continue along
these lines and are generally accepted or, as the medical
associations would have it, forced upon the public by law. What
would be the result? Before a child reached the years of
adolescence, it would have had injected into its blood the vaccines,
serums, and antitoxins of smallpox, hydrophobia, tetanus (lockjaw),
cerebro-spinal meningitis, typhoid fever, diphtheria, pneumonia,
scarlet fever, etc.

If allopathy were to have its way, the blood of the adult would be a
mixture of dozens of filthy bacterial extracts, disease taints and
destructive drug poisons. The tonsils and adenoids, the appendix
vermiformis and probably a few other parts of the human anatomy
would be extirpated in early youth under compulsion of the health
departments.

What is more rational and sensible: the endeavor to produce immunity
to disease by making the human body the breeding ground for all
sorts of antibacteria and antipoisons, or to create natural immunity
by building up the blood on a normal basis, purifying the body of
morbid matter and poisons, correcting mechanical lesions and by
cultivating the right mental attitude? Which one of these methods is
more likely to be disease-building, which health-building?

Just imagine what human blood will be like in coming generations if
this artificial contamination with all sorts of disease taints and
drug poisons is to be forced upon the people!



