Chapter XXV


Natural Dietetics


The chemical composition of blood and lymph depends upon the
chemical composition of food and drink, and upon the normal or
abnormal condition of the digestive organs.

The purer the food and drink, the less it contains of morbid matter
and poison-producing materials and the more it contains of the
elements necessary for the proper execution of the manifold
functions of the organism, for the building and repair of tissues
and for the neutralization and elimination of waste and systemic
poisons, the more "normal" and the more "natural" will be the diet.

The system of dietetics of the Nature Cure school is based upon the
composition of MILK, which is the only perfect natural food
combination in existence.

In its composition, milk corresponds very closely to red, arterial
blood and contains all the elements which the newborn and growing
organism needs in exactly the right proportions, providing, of
course, that the human or animal body which produces the milk is in
good health and lives on pure and normal foods.

Therefore, if any food combination or diet is to be "normal" or
"natural," it must approach in its chemical composition the chemical
composition of milk or of red, arterial blood. This furnishes a
strictly scientific basis for an exact science of dietetics, and
proves true not only in the chemical aspect of the diet problem, but
also in every other aspect and in its practical application.

The "regular" school of medicine pays little or no attention to
rational food regulation. In fact, it knows nothing about it,
because "natural dietetics" are as yet not taught in medical
schools. As a result of this condition, the dietary advice given by
the majority of Old School practitioners is something as follows:
"Eat what agrees with you: plenty of good, nourishing food. There is
nothing in dietetic fads. What is one man's meat is another man's
poison, etc."

However, if we study dietetics from a strictly scientific point of
view, we find that certain foods--among these especially the highly
valued flesh foods, eggs, pulses and cereals--create in the system
large quantities of morbid, poisonous substances, while on the other
hand fruits and vegetables, which are rich in the organic salts,
tend to neutralize and to eliminate from the system the waste
materials and poisons created in the processes of protein and starch
digestion.

The accumulations of waste and systemic poisons are the cause of the
majority of diseases arising within the human organism. Therefore it
is imperative that the neutralizing and eliminating food elements be
provided in sufficient quantities.

On this turns the entire problem of natural dietetics. While the
"Old School" of medicine looks upon starches, sugars, fats and
proteins as the only elements of nutrition worthy of consideration,
Nature Cure aims to reduce these foods in the natural dietary and to
increase the purifying and eliminating fruits and vegetables.

In this volume we cannot go into the details of the diet question.
They will be treated in full in our ~Vegetarian Cookbook~ and in our
volume on ~Natural Dietetics.~ We shall say here in a general way
that in the treatment of chronic diseases, with few exceptions, we
favor a strict vegetarian diet for the reason that most chronic
diseases are created, as before stated, by the accumulation of the
"feces of the cells" in the system.

Every piece of animal flesh is saturated with these excrements of
the cells in the form of uric acid and many other kinds of acids,
alkaloids of putrefaction, xanthines, ptomaines, etc. The organism
of the meat eater must dispose not only of its own impurities
produced in the processes of digestion and of cell metabolism, but
also of the morbid substances that are already contained in the
animal flesh.

Since the cure of chronic diseases consists largely in purifying the
body of morbid materials, it stands to reason that a "chronic" must
cease taking these in his daily food and drink. To do otherwise
would be like sweeping the dirt out of a house through the front
door and carrying it in again through the back door.

Whether one approves of strict vegetarianism as a continuous mode of
living or not, it will be admitted that the change from a meat diet
to a nonmeat diet must be of great benefit in the treatment of
chronic diseases.

The cure of chronic conditions depends upon radical changes in the
cells and tissues of the body, as explained in Chapter Twenty. The
old, abnormal, faulty diet will continue to build the same abnormal
and disease-encumbered tissues. The more thorough and radical the
change in diet toward normality and purity, the quicker the cells
and tissues of the body will change toward the normal and thus bring
about a complete regeneration of the organism.

Anything short of this may be palliative treatment, but is not
worthy the name of cure.

Natural Foods

In the following I shall give the outline a natural diet regimen
which has been found by experience to meet all requirements of the
healthy organism, even when people have to work very hard physically
or mentally. In case of disease, certain modifications may have to
be made according to individual conditions. Persons in a low,
negative state, whether physical, mental or psychical, may
temporarily require the addition of flesh foods to their diet.

Dietetics In A Nutshell

Food Classes

Predominant

Chemical

Elements

Functions in Vital Processes

Foods in Which the Elements of the Respective Groups Predominate

GROUP I

Carbohydrates

Starches and Dextrines

Carbon

Oxygen

Hydrogen

Producers of Heat and Energy

CEREALS: The inner, white parts of wheat, corn, rye, oats, barley,
buckewheat and rice. VEGETABLES: Potatoes, pumpkins, squashes.
FRUITS: Bananas. NUTS: Chestnuts

GROUP II

Carbohydrates

Sugars

Carbon

Oxygen

Hydrogen

Producers of

Heat and

Energy

VEGETABLES: Melons, beets, sorghum. FRUITS: Bananas, dates, figs,
grapes, raisins. DAIRY PRODUCTS: Milk. NATURAL SUGARS: Honey, maple
sugar. COMMERCIAL SUGARS: White sugar, syrup, glucose, candy. NUTS:
Cocoanuts.

GROUP III

Hydrocarbons

Fats and

Oils

Carbon

Oxygen

Hydrogen

Producers of

Heat and

Energy

FRUITS: Olives. DAIRY PRODUCTS: Cream, butter, cheese. NUTS:
Peanuts, almonds, walnuts, cocoanuts, Brazil nuts, pecans,
pignolias, etc. COMMERCIAL FATS: Olive oil, peanut oil, peanut
butter, vegetable-cooking oils. THE YOKES OF EGGS

GROUP IV

Proteids

Albumen

(white of egg)

Gluten

(grains)

Myosin

(lean meat)

Carbon

Oxygen

Hydrogen

Nitrogen

Phosphorus

Sulphur

Producers of Heat and Energy;

Building Materials for Cells and Tissues

CEREALS: The outer, dark parts of wheat, corn, rye, oats, barley,
buckwheat, and rice. VEGETABLES: The legumes (peas, beans, lentils),
mushrooms. NUTS: Cocoanuts, chestnuts, peanuts, pignolias (pine
nuts), hickorynuts, hazelnuts, walnuts, pecans, etc. DAIRY PRODUCTS:
Milk, cheese. MEATS: Muscular parts of animals, fish, and fowls.

GROUP V

Organic Minerals

Organic

Mineral

Elements

Sodium

Na

Ferrum (Iron)

Fe

Calcium (Lime)

Ca

Potassium

K

Magnesium

Mg

Manganese

Mn

Silicon

Si

Chlorine

Cl

Flourine

Fl

Eliminators:

Bone, Blood, and Nerve

Builders;

Antiseptics:

Blood Purifiers;

Laxitives;

Cholagogues;

Producers of

Electro-magnetic Energies

THE RED BLOOD OF ANIMALS. CEREALS: The hulls and outer, dark layers
of grains and rice. VEGETABLES: Lettuce, spinach, cabbage, green
peppers, watercress, celery, onions, asparagus, cauliflower,
tomatoes, string-beans, fresh peas, parsley, cucumbers, radishes,
savoy, horseradish, dandelion, beets, carrots, turnips, eggplant,
kohlrabi, oysterplant, artichokes, leek, rosekale (Brussels
sprouts), parsnips, pumpkins, squashes, sorghum. FRUITS: Apples,
pears, peaches, oranges, lemons, grapefruit, plums, prunes,
apricots, cherries, olives. BERRIES: Strawberries, huckleberries,
cranb \erries, blackberries, blueberries, raspberries, gooseberries,
currants. DAIRY PRODUCTS: Milk, buttermilk, skimmed milk. NUTS:
Cocoanuts.

In the accompanying table entitled "Dietics In A Nutshell" we have
divided all food materials into five groups:

GROUP:

(Carbohydrates): Starches. (Carbohydrates): Dextrins and sugars.
(Hydrocarbons): Fats and oils. (Proteids): white of egg, lean meat,
the gluten of grains and pulses, the proteins of nuts and milk.
(Organic Minerals): Iron, sodium calcium, potassium, magnesium,
silicon. These are contained in largest amounts in the juicy fruits
and the leafy, juicy vegetables.

As a general rule, let one-half of your food consist of Group V and
the other half of a mixture of the first four groups.

If you wish to follow a pure food diet, exclude meat, fish, fowl,
meat soups and sauces and all other foods prepared from the dead
animal carcass.

This is brief and comprehensive. When in doubt, consult this rule.

Also do not use coffee, tea, alcoholic beverages, tobacco or
stimulants of any kind.

Good foods are:

Dairy Products: milk, buttermilk, skimmed milk, cream, butter, fresh
cottage cheese. fermented cheeses, as American, Swiss, Holland and
DeBrie, should be used sparingly. The stronger cheeses like
Camembert and Roquefort should not be used at all

Eggs: Raw, soft-boiled or poached, not fried or hard-boiled. Eggs
should be used sparingly. Two eggs three times a week or on an
average one egg a day, is sufficient.

White of egg is much easier to digest than the yolk, therefore the
whites only should be used in cases of very weak digestion. Beaten
up with orange juice, they are both palatable and wholesome; or they
may be beaten very stiff and served cold with a sauce of prune juice
or other cooked fruit juices. This makes a delicious and very
nutritive dish.

Honey is a very valuable food and a natural laxative. It is not
generally known that honey is not a purely vegetable product, but
that in passing through the organism of the bee it partakes of its
life element (animal magnetism).

Honey is one of the best forms of sugar available. The white sugar
is detrimental to health, because it has become inorganic through
the refining process. The brown, unrefined granulated sugar or maple
sugar should be used instead.

Figs, dates, raisins, bananas and all the other sweet fruits are
excellent to satisfy the craving of the organism for sweets.

Cereal Foods: Rice, wheat, oats, barley, are good when properly
combined with fruits and vegetables and with dairy products. Use
preferably the whole-grain preparations such as shredded wheat or
corn flakes. Oatmeal is not easily digestible; it is all right for
robust people working in the open air, but not so good for invalids
and people of sedentary habits.

Thin mushes are not to be recommended, because they do not require
mastication and therefore escape the action of the saliva, which is
indispensable to the digestion of starchy foods.

Avoid the use of white bread or any other white-flour products,
especially pastry. White flour contains little more than the starchy
elements of the grain. Most of the valuable proteins which are equal
to meat in food value and the all-important organic salts which
lodge in the hulls and the outer layers of the grain have been
refined out of it together with the bran. The latter is in itself
very valuable as a mechanical stimulant to the peristaltic action of
the bowels.

In preference to white bread eat Graham bread or whole rye bread.
Our health bread forms the solid foundation of a well-balanced
vegetarian diet. It is prepared as follows:

Take one-third each of white flour, Graham flour and rye meal (not
the ordinary Bohemian rye flour, but the coarse pumpernickel meal
which contains the whole of the rye, including the hull).

Make a sponge of the white flour in the usual manner, either with
good yeast or with leavened dough from the last baking, which has
been kept cold and sweet. When the sponge has risen sufficiently,
work the graham flour and rye meal into it. Thorough kneading is of
importance. Let rise slowly a second time, place in pans, and bake
slowly until thoroughly done.

By chemical analysis this bread has been found to contain more
nourishment than meat. It is very easily digested and assimilated
and is a natural laxative. Eaten with sweet butter and in
combination with fruits and vegetables, it makes a complete and well
balanced meal.

A good substitute for bread is the following excellent whole wheat
preparation: Soak clean, soft wheat in cold water for about seven
hours and steam in a double boiler for from eight to twelve hours,
or cook in a fireless cooker over night. Eat with honey and milk or
cream, or with prune juice, fig juice, etc., or add butter and dates
or raisins. This dish is more nutritious than meat, and one of the
finest laxative foods in existence.

Nuts are exceedingly rich in fats (60 percent) and proteins (15
percent), but rank low in mineral salts. Therefore they should be
used sparingly, and always in combination with fruits, berries or
vegetables. The coconut differs from the other nuts in that it
contains less fats and proteins and more organic salts. The meat of
the coconut together with its milk comes nearer to the chemical
composition of human milk than any other food in existence.

Vegetables

Leguminous Vegetables, such as peas, beans and lentils in the
ripened state are richer in protein than meat (25 percent), and
besides they contain a large percentage of starchy food elements (60
percent); therefore they produce in the process of digestion large
quantities of poisonous acids, alkaloids of putrefaction and noxious
gases.

They should not be taken in large quantities and only in combination
cooked or raw vegetables. As a dressing use lemon juice and olive
oil.

Peas and beans in the green state differ very much from their
chemical composition in the ripened state. As long as these
vegetables are green and in the pulp, they contain large quantities
of sugars and organic minerals, with but little starch and protein.
As the ripening process advances, the percentages of starches and
proteins increase, while those of the sugars and of the organic
minerals decrease. The latter retire into the leaves and stems
(polarization).

In the green, pulpy state these foods may, therefore, be classed
with Group II (Sugars) and with Group V (Organic Minerals), while in
the ripened state they must be classed with Groups I (Starches) and
Groups IV (Proteids).

Dried peas, beans and lentils are more palatable and wholesome when
cooked in combination with tomatoes or prunes.

The Leafy and Juicy Vegetables growing in or near the ground are
very rich in the positive organic salts and therefore of great
nutritive and medicinal value. For this reason they are best suited
to balance the negative, acid-producing starches, sugars, fats and
proteins.

Lettuce, spinach, cabbage, watercress, celery, parsley, savoy
cabbage, brussels sprouts, Scotch kale, leek and endive rank highest
in organic mineral salts. Next to these come tomatoes, cucumbers,
green peppers, radishes, onions, asparagus, cauliflower and
horseradish.(See also Group V in "Dietetics in a Nutshell.")

Splendid, cooling summer foods, rich in the blood-purifying organic
salts, are watermelons, muskmelons. cantaloupes, pumpkins, squashes
and other members of the melon family.

The green vegetables are most beneficial when eaten raw, with a
dressing of lemon juice and olive oil. Avoid the use of vinegar as
much as possible. It is a product of fermentation and a powerful
preservative which retards digestion as well as fermentation, both
processes being very much of the same character.

Use neither pepper nor salt at the table. They may be used sparingly
in cooking. Strong spices and condiments are more or less irritating
to the mucous linings of the intestinal tract. They paralyze
gradually the nerves of taste. At first they stimulate the digestive
organs; but, like all other stimulants, in time they produce
weakness and atrophy.

Cooking of Vegetables

While most vegetables are not improved by cooking, we do not mean
that they should never be cooked. Many diet reformers go to extremes
when they claim that all the organic salts in fruits and vegetables
are rendered inorganic by cooking. This is an exaggera-tion. Cooking
is merely a mechanical process of subdivision, not a chemical
process of transformation. Mechanical processes of division do not
dissolve or destroy organic molecules to any great extent.

Nevertheless, it remains true that the green leafy vegetables are
not improved by cooking. It is different with the starchy tubers and
roots like potatoes, turnips, etc., and with other starchy foods
such as rice and grains. Here the cooking serves to break up and
separate the hard starch granules and to make them more pervious to
penetration by the digestive juices.

How to Cook Vegetables

After the vegetables are thoroughly washed and cut into pieces as
desired, place them in the cooking vessel, adding only enough water
to keep them from burning, cover the vessel closely with a lid and
let them steam slowly in their own juices.

The leafy vegetables (cabbage, spinach, kale, etc.), usually contain
enough water for their own steaming.

Cook all vegetables only as long as is required to make them soft
enough for easy mastication. Do not throw away a drop of the water
in which such vegetables as carrots, beets, asparagus, oyster plant,
egg plant, etc., have been cooked. Use what is left for the making
of soups and sauces.

The organic mineral salts contained in the vegetables readily boil
out into the water. If the vegetables, as is the usual custom, are
boiled in a large quantity of water, then drained or, what is still
worse, pressed out, they have lost their nutritive and medicinal
value. The mineral salts have vanished in the sink, the remains are
insipid and indigestible and have to be soaked in soup stock and
seasoned with strong condiments and spices to make them at all
palatable.

Fruits and Berries

Next to the leafy vegetables, fruits and berries are the most
valuable foods of the organic minerals group. Lemons, grapefruit,
oranges, apples are especially beneficial as blood purifiers. Plums,
pears, peaches, apricots, cherries, grapes, etc., contain large
amounts of fruit sugars in easily assimilable form and are also very
valuable on account of their mineral salts.

The different kinds of berries are even richer in mineral salts than
the acid and subacid fruits. In the country homes of Germany they
are always at hand either dried or preserved to serve during the
winter not only as delicious foods but also as valuable home
remedies.

Fruits and berries are best eaten raw, although they may be stewed
or baked. Very few people know that rhubarb and cranberries are very
palatable when cut up fine and well mixed with honey, being allowed
to stand for about an hour before serving. Prepared in this way,
they require much less sweetening and therefore do not tax the
organism nearly as much as the ordinary rhubarb or cranberry sauce,
which usually contains an excessive amount of sugar.

Cooking of Fruits

It is better to cook apples, cranberries, rhubarb, strawberries, and
all other acid fruits without sugar until soft, and to add the sugar
afterward. Much less sugar will be required to sweeten them
sufficiently than when the sugar is added before or during the
cooking.

Dried fruits rank next to the fresh in value, as the evaporating
process only removes a large percentage of water, without changing
the chemical composition of the fruit in any way. Prunes, apricots,
apples, pears, peaches and berries may be obtained in the dried
state all through the year. Dates, figs, raisins and currants also
come under this head.

Olives are an excellent food. They are very rich in fats (about 50
percent), and contain also considerable quantities of organic salts.
They are therefore a good substitute for animal fat.

Avoid factory-canned fruits. In the first place, they have become
deteriorated by the cooking process and secondly, they usually
contain poisonous chemical preservatives. Home-preserved fruits and
vegetables are all right providing they do not contain too much
sugar and no poisonous preservative.

Bananas differ from the juicy fruits in that they consist almost
entirely of starches, dextrines and sugars. They belong to the
carbohydrate groups and should be used sparingly by people suffering
from intestinal indigestion.

However, we do not share the belief entertained by many people that
bananas are injurious under all circumstances. We consider them an
excellent food, especially for children.

Mixing Fruits and Vegetables

Many people, when they first sit down to our table, are horrified to
see how we mix fruits and vegetables in the same meal. They have
been taught that it is a cardinal sin against the laws of health to
do this. After they overcome their prejudice and partake heartily of
the meals as we serve them, they are greatly surprised to find that
these combinations of vegetables and juicy fruits are not only
harmless, but agreeable and highly beneficial.

We have never been able to find any good reason why these foods
should not be mixed and our experience proves that no ill effects
can be traced to this practice except in very rare instances. There
are a few individuals with whom the mixing of fruits and vegetables
does not seem to agree. These, of course, should refrain from it. We
must comply with idiosyncrasies until they are overcome by natural
living.

Eating fruits only or vegetables only at one and the same meal
limits the selection and combination of foods to a very considerable
extent and tends to create monotony, which is not only unpleasant
but injurious. The flow of saliva and of the digestive juices is
greatly increased by the agreeable sight, smell and taste of
appetizing food and these depend largely upon its variety.

With very few exceptions, every one of our patients (and we have in
our institution as fine a collection of dyspeptics as can be found
anywhere) heartily enjoys our mixed dietary and is greatly benefited
by it.

Mixing Starches and Acid Fruits

Occasionally we find that one or another of our patients cannot eat
starchy foods and acid fruits at the same meal without experiencing
digestive disturbances. Whenever this is the case, it is best to
take with bread or cereals only sweet, alkaline fruits such as
prunes, figs, dates, raisins, or, in their season, watermelons and
cantaloupes or the alkaline vegetables such as radishes, lettuce,
onions, cabbage slaw, etc. The acid and subacid fruits should then
be taken between those meals which consist largely of starchy foods.

A Word About the Milk Diet

When we explain that the natural diet is based upon the chemical
composition of milk because milk is the only perfect natural food
combination in existence, the question comes up: "Why, then, not
live on milk entirely?" To this we reply: While milk is the natural
food for the newborn and growing infant, it is not natural for the
adult. The digestive apparatus of the infant is especially adapted
to the digestion of milk, while that of the adult requires more
solid and bulky food.

Milk is a very beneficial article of diet in all acid diseases,
because it contains comparatively low percentages of carbohydrates
and proteins and large amounts of organic salts.

However, not everybody can use milk as a food or medicine. In many
instances it causes biliousness, fermentation and constipation.

In cases where it is easily digested, a straight milk diet often
proves very beneficial. As a rule, however, it is better to take
fruits or vegetable salads with the milk.

Directly with milk may be taken any sweetish, alkaline fruits such
as melons, sweet pears, etc., or the dried fruits, such as prunes,
dates, figs, and raisins, also vegetable salads. With the latter, if
taken together with milk, little or no lemon juice should be used.

All acid and subacid fruits should be taken between the milk meals.

A patient on a milk diet may take from one to five quarts of milk
daily, according to his capacity to digest it. This quantity may be
distributed over the day after the following plan:

Breakfast: One to three pints of milk, sipped slowly with any of the
sweetish, alkaline fruits mentioned above, or with vegetable salads
composed of lettuce, celery, raw cabbage slaw, watercress, green
onions, radishes, carrots, etc

10:00 A.M.: Grapefruit, oranges, peaches, apples, apricots, berries,
grapes or other acid and subacid fruits.

Luncheon: The same as breakfast.

3:00 P.M. The same as 10 a.m.

Supper: The same as breakfast. An orange or apple may be taken
before retiring.

When it is advisable to take a greater variety of food together with
large quantities of milk, good whole grain bread and butter, cream,
honey, cooked vegetables, moderate amounts of potatoes and cereals
may be added to the dietary.

Buttermilk

Buttermilk is an excellent food for those with whom it agrees. In
many instances a straight buttermilk diet for a certain period will
prove very beneficial. This is especially true in all forms of uric
acid diseases.

Sour milk or clabber also has excellent medicinal qualities and may
be taken freely by those with whom it agrees.

Drinks

It has been stated before that coffee, tea and alcoholic beverages
should be avoided.

Instead of the customary coffee, tea or cocoa, delicious drinks,
which are nutritious and at the same time nonstimulating, may be
prepared from the different fruit and vegetable juices. They may be
served cold in hot weather and warm in winter. Recipes for fruit and
vegetable drinks will be included in our new Vegetarian Cookbook,
now in preparation.

If more substantial drinks are desired, white of egg may be added or
the entire egg may be used in combination with prune juice, fig
juice or any of the acid fruit juices. Other desirable and
unobjectionable additions to beverages are flaked nuts or bananas
mashed to a liquid.

The juice of a lemon or an orange, unsweetened, diluted with twice
the amount of water, taken upon rising, is one of the best means of
purifying the blood and other fluids of the body and, incidentally,
clearing the complexion. The water in which prunes or figs have been
cooked should be taken freely to remedy constipation.

As a practical illustration, I shall describe briefly the daily
dietary regimen as it is followed in our sanitarium work.

Breakfast consists of juicy fruits, raw, baked or stewed, a cereal
(whole wheat steamed, cracked wheat, shredded wheat, corn flakes,
oat meal, etc.), and our health bread with butter, cottage cheese or
honey. Nuts of various kinds, as well as figs, dates, or raisins,
are always on the table. To those of our patients who desire a
drink, we serve milk, buttermilk or cereal coffee.

Twice a week we serve eggs, preferably raw, soft boiled or poached.

Luncheon is served at noontime and is composed altogether of acid
and subacid fruits, vegetable salads or both. We have found by
experience that, by having one meal consist entirely of fruits and
vegetables, the medicinal properties of these foods have a chance to
act on the system without interference by starchy and protein food
elements.

Dinner is served to our patients between five and six. The items of
the daily menu comprise relishes, such as radishes, celery, olives,
young onions, raw carrots, etc., soup, one or two cooked vegetables,
potatoes, preferably boiled or baked in their skins, and a dessert
consisting of either a fruit combination or a pudding.

We serve soup three times a week only, because we believe that a
large amount of fluid of any kind taken into the system at meal time
dilutes and thereby weakens the digestive juices. For this reason it
is well to masticate with the soup some bread or crackers or some
vegetable relish.

As drinks we serve to those who desire it water, milk or buttermilk.

Prunes or figs, stewed or raw, are served at every meal to those who
require a specially laxative diet.



