Chapter XL


Scientific Relaxation and Normal Suggestion


Under the strain of work-a-day hurry and worry, your nerve
vibrations are apt to become more and more intense and excited. They
run away with you until, as the saying goes, "you are flying all to
pieces."

A good illustration of this condition of the nervous system may be
found in a team of horses shying at some object in their path. The
driver, panic-stricken, has dropped the reins, the frightened horses
have taken the bits between their teeth and are dashing headlong
down the road, until their master regains control, checks the
animals in their maddened course, and compels them to resume their
ordinary pace.

So the high-strung, oversensitive individual must gain control over
his nervous system and must subdue his runaway mental and emotional
activities into restful, harmonious vibrations.

This is done by insuring sufficient rest and sleep under the right
conditions and by practicing scientific relaxation at all times.

The "nervous" person gets easily excited. Comparatively little
things will cause an outbreak of intense irritation or emotional
hyperactivity.

Usually, the victim of unbalanced nerves is of the high-strung,
sensitive type, naturally inclining to more rapid vibrations on all
planes, capable of greater achievement than the stolid, heavy,
slow-vibrating person who doesn't know that he has any nerves, but
he is also in greater danger of mental and emotional overstrain and
physical depletion as a result of the excessive and uncontrolled
expenditure of life force and nervous energy.

Relaxation while Working

At first glance this expression may seem paradoxical, but experience
will teach that it is not only possible, but absolutely necessary
that we perform our work in a relaxed and serene condition of body
and mind. The most strenuous physical or mental labor will then not
cause as much exhaustion as light work done in a state of nervous
tension, irritability, fretfulness or worry.

Relaxation while working necessitates planning and system. Most
nervous breakdowns result not so much from overwork as from the
vitality wasted through lack of orderly procedure. Therefore, take
some time to plan and arrange your work and form the habit of doing
certain things that have to be done every day as nearly as possible
in the same way (making sure that it is the right way) and at the
same time of the day. Such orderly system will soon become habitual
and result in saving much valuable time and energy.

Always cultivate a serene and cheerful attitude of mind and soul,
taking whatever comes as part of the day's work, doing your best
under the circumstances, but absolutely refusing to worry and fret
about anything. Do not cross a bridge before you get to it, and do
not waste time regretting something that cannot be undone.

Relaxation while Sitting

Sit upright in a comfortable chair without strain or tension, spine
and head erect, the legs forming right angles with the thighs (the
chair should be neither too high nor too low), feet resting firmly
upon the floor, toes pointing slightly outward, the forearms resting
lightly upon the legs with the hands upon the knees. This must be
accomplished without effort, for effort means tension.

Dismiss all thoughts of hurry, care, worry or fear and dwell upon
the following thoughts:

"I am now completely relaxed in body and mind. I am receptive to
Nature's harmonious and invigorating vibrations--they dispel the
discordant and destructive vibrations of hurry, worry, fear and
anger. New life, new health, new strength are entering into me with
every breath, pervading my whole being."

Repeat these thoughts mentally, or, if it helps you, say them aloud
several times, quietly and forcefully, impressing them deeply upon
your inner consciousness.

After practicing relaxation in this manner, lie down for a few
minutes' rest--if circumstances permit--or practice rhythmical
breathing (see Chapter Twenty-Eight). Then return to your work and
endeavor to maintain a calm, trustful, controlled attitude of mind.

If you are inclined to be irritable, suspicious, jealous,
fault-finding, envious, etc., dwell on the following thought
pictures:

"I am now fully relaxed, at rest and at peace. The world is an echo.
If I send forth irritable, suspicious, hateful thought vibrations,
the like will return to me from other minds. I shall think such
thoughts no longer. God is love, love is harmony, happiness, heaven.
The more I send forth Love, the more I am like God; the more of love
will God and men return to me; the more shall I realize true
happiness, true health, true strength and true success."

Relaxation Before Going to Sleep

When ready to go to sleep, lie flat on your back, so that as nearly
as possible every part of the spine touches the bed, extend the arms
along the sides of the body, hands turned upward, palms open, every
muscle relaxed. Dismiss all thoughts of work, annoyance or anxiety.
Say to yourself: "I am now going to sleep soundly and peacefully. I
am master of my body, my mind and my soul. Nothing evil shall
disturb me. At .... A. M., neither earlier nor later, I shall awaken
rested and refreshed, strong in body and mind. I shall meet
tomorrow's tasks and duties promptly and serenely."

Simple as this formula may seem, it has helped cure many a case of
persistent insomnia and nervous prostration. Having thus set your
mental alarm clock, with a few times, practice you will be able to
wake up, without being called, at the appointed time and to
demonstrate to yourself the power of your mind over your body.

The quality of your sleep and its effect upon your system depend on
the character of the mental and psychic vibrations carried into it.
If you harbor thoughts of passion, worry or fear, these destructive
thought vibrations will disturb your slumbers and you will awaken in
the morning weak and tired. If, however, you repeat mentally a
formula such as the above, suggesting harmonious, constructive
thoughts, until you lose consciousness, you will carry into your
slumbers vibrations of rest, health and strength, producing
corresponding effects upon the physical organism.

After a perfectly relaxed condition of body and mind has been
attained, it is not necessary to remain lying on the back. Any
position of the body may then be assumed which seems most restful.

My patients frequently ask what position of the body is best during
sleep. It is not good to lie continuously in any one position. This
tends to cause unsymmetrical development of the different parts of
the body and to affect unfavorably the functions of various organs.
It is best to change occasionally from one position to another, as
bodily comfort seems to indicate and require.

Many persons fret and worry if sleep does not come as quickly as
desired. They picture to themselves in darkest colors the dire
results of wakefulness. Such a state of mind makes sleep impossible.
If persisted in, it will inevitably lead to chronic insomnia.

Instead of indulging in hurtful worry, say to yourself: "I do not
care whether I sleep or not! Though I do not sleep, I am lying here
perfectly relaxed, at rest and at peace. I am strengthened and
rested by remaining in a state of peaceful relaxation."

However, the "I do not care" must be actually meant and felt, must
not be merely a mechanical repetition of words.

Nothing is more conducive to sleep, even under the most trying
circumstances, than such an "I-don't-care" attitude of mind. Try it,
and the chances are that just because you do not care, you will fall
fast asleep.



