Chapter IX


The Effects of Suppression of Venereal Diseases


Another good illustration of suppression may be found in the
allopathic treatment of venereal diseases. Almost invariably the
drug treatment suppresses these diseases in the stages of incubation
and aggravation, thus locking them up in the system. The venereal
taints and germs, however, are living things which grow and multiply
until the body has been completely permeated by them. Then they must
find an outlet somehow and somewhere, and consequently they break
out in the manifold so-called "secondary" and "tertiary" symptoms.

The drug poisons which are used to "cure" (suppress) these symptoms,
greatly aggravate the disease. They create conditions in the system
infinitely worse than the venereal diseases themselves. Thus the
acute, easily curable stages of these ailments are changed into the
dreadful and obstinate chronic conditions. It is in this way that
venereal diseases are made hereditary and transmitted to future
generations.

In a special article on this subject entitled "Venereal Diseases,"
published in ~"The Naturopath,"~ January, 1913, I have substantiated
the following claims:

"Venereal diseases are not necessarily chronic in their progressive
development. "They are essentially acute and self-limited. But may
become chronic through neglect or through suppressive drug
treatment. "The chronic, so-called secondary and tertiary
manifestations of venereal diseases, such as ulceration of bones and
fleshy tissue, gummata of the brain, sclerosis of the spinal cord,
arthritic rheumatism, degeneration and destruction of other vital
parts and organs of the body, are not so much the result of the
original gonorrheal or syphilitic infection, as of the destructive
drug poisons which have been taken to cure or rather to suppress the
primary lesions and acute inflammatory symptoms. "Venereal diseases
in the acute inflammatory stages are easily and completely curable
by natural methods of living and of treatment. "Venereal diseases
treated and cured by natural methods during the acute inflammatory
stages are never followed by any chronic after-effects or secondary
and tertiary manifestations whatsoever. "When venereal diseases have
reached the secondary and tertiary stages, they are still curable by
natural methods of living and of treatment, providing there is left
sufficient vitality to respond to treatment and providing the
destruction of vital parts and organs has not advanced too far.

"Hundreds of cases of well-developed locomotor ataxy, paresis, and
other so-called secondary and tertiary diseases of the brain and the
nervous system, of bony and fleshy tissues, and of vital organs have
been cured by our natural methods of treatment.

"It is self-evident, however, that the treatment and cure of the
chronic conditions require more patience and perseverance than the
cure of acute conditions not tampered with and suppressed by drugs.
"Venereal diseases treated and cured by natural methods are never
followed by chronic after-effects. On the other hand, mercury,
iodine, quinine, and coal-tar poisons produce all the so-called
secondary and tertiary symptoms of syphilis in people who never in
their lives were afflicted with venereal diseases, but who have
taken or absorbed these drug poisons in other ways.

". . . These facts are proven beyond doubt by the Diagnosis from the
Eye. All, destructive poisons taken in sufficient quantities will in
time reveal their presence and exact location in the body through
certain well-defined signs or discolorations in the iris.

"These poisons undermine the structures of the body and deteriorate
vital parts and organs so slowly and insidiously that the
superficial observer does not trace and connect cause and effect."

The Wasserman and Noguchi Tests

Medical men may say to the foregoing that the Wasserman and Noguchi
tests furnish positive proofs of syphilis in the system. These
chemical tests are supposed to reveal with certainty the presence of
venereal taints in the body,--at least, the public is left under
this impression.

I am convinced, however, that in many instances the "positive"
Wasserman or Noguchi tests are the result of mercurial poison
instead of syphilitic infection. In a number of cases where these
tests proved "positive," that is, where, according to the theory of
allopathic medical science, they indicated a luetic condition of the
system, the subjects of these tests had never in their lives shown
any symptoms of syphilis nor, as far as they knew, had they ever
been exposed to infection, but every one of them showed plainly the
sign of mercurial poisoning in the iris of the eye, and had taken
considerable mercury in the form of calomel or of other medicinal
preparations for diseases not of a luetic nature, or they had been
"salivated" by coming in contact with the mercurial poison in mines,
smelters, mirror factories, etc.

This leads me to believe that, sooner or later, medical science will
have to admit that the Wasserman and Noguchi tests reveal, in many
instances at least, the effects of mercurial poisoning instead of
the effects of syphilitic infection. And this would not be
surprising since it is well known that mercury has very similar
effects upon the system as syphilis.

It takes the mercurial poison from five to ten and even fifteen
years before it works its way into the brain and spinal cord, and
there causes its characteristic degeneration and destruction of
brain and. nerve tissues which manifest outwardly as locomotor
ataxy, paralysis agitans, paresis, apoplexy, hemiplegia, epilepsy,
St. Vitus dance, and the different forms of idiocy and insanity.
Mercurial poisoning is also in many instances the cause of deafness
and blindness.

When the symptoms of mercurial destruction begin to show, then they,
in turn, are suppressed by preparations of iodine, the "606," or
other "alteratives," and so the merry war goes, on: poison against
poison, Beelzebub against the Devil, and the poor suffering body has
to stand it all.

In this way the system is periodically saturated with the most
virulent poisons on earth, until the undertaker finishes the job.
And this is miscalled "scientific treatment." There never was
invented by cruel Indian or fanatical inquisition worse torture than
this. They mercifully finished the sufferings of their victims
within a few hours or, at the worst, days; but this torture
inflicted upon human beings in the name of medical science continues
for a lifetime. It means dying by inches under the most horrible
conditions for ten, twenty, thirty years or longer.

In this connection it may be well to quote the testimony of
Professor E. A. Farrington of Philadelphia, one of the most
celebrated homeopathic physicians of the nineteenth century. He
says, in his ~"Clinical Materia Medica,"~ third edition, page 141:

"The various constitutions or dyscrasia underlying chronic and acute
affections are, indeed, very numerous. As yet, we do not know them
all. We do know that one of them comes in gonorrhoea, a disease
which is frightfully common, so that the constitution arising from
this disease is rapidly on the increase.

"Now I want to tell you why it is so. It is because allopathic
physicians, and many homeopaths as well, do not properly cure it. I
do not believe gonorrhoea to be a local disease. If it is not
properly cured, a constitutional poison which may be transmitted to
the children is developed. I know, from years of experience and
observation, that gonorrhoea is a serious difficulty, and one, too,
that complicates many cases that we have to treat.

"The same is true of syphilis in a modified degree. Gonorrhoea seems
to attack the nobler tissues, the lungs, the heart, and the nervous
system, all of which are reached by syphilis only after the lapse of
years."

The Destructive After-Effects of Mercury

Concerning the destructive after-effects of mercury, of which
homeopaths have made a most careful study, Professor Farrington
says, on pages 558-559 of the same volume:

"The more remote symptoms of mercurial poisoning are these: You will
find that the blood becomes impoverished. The albumin and fibrin of
that fluid are affected. They are diminished, and you find in their
place a certain fatty substance, the composition of which I do not
exactly know. Consequently, as a prominent symptom, the body wastes
and emaciates. The patient suffers from fever which is rather hectic
in its character. The periosteum becomes affected, and you then have
a characteristic group of mercurial pains, bone pains worse in
changes of the weather, worse in the warmth of the bed, and
chilliness with or after stool. The skin becomes rather of a
brownish hue; ulcers form, particularly on the legs; they are
stubborn and will not heal. The patient is troubled with
sleeplessness and ebullitions of blood at night; he is hot and
cannot sleep; he is thrown quickly into a perspiration, which
perspiration gives him no relief.

"The entire system suffers also, and you have here two series of
symptoms. At first the patient becomes anxious and restless and
cannot remain quiet; he changes his position; he moves about from
place to place; he seems to have a great deal of anxiety about the
heart, praecordial anguish, as it is termed, particularly at night.

"Then, in another series of symptoms, there are jerkings of the
limbs, making the patient appear as though he were attacked by St.
Vitus' dance. Or, you may notice what is more common yet, trembling
of the hands, this tremor being altogether beyond the control of the
patient and gradually spreading over the entire body, giving you a
resemblance to paralysis agitans or shaking palsy.

"Finally, the patient becomes paralyzed, cannot move his limbs, his
mind becomes lost, and he presents a perfect picture of imbecility.
He does all sorts of queer things. He sits in the corner with an
idiotic smile on his face, playing with straws; he is forgetful, he
cannot remember even the most ordinary events. He becomes
disgustingly filthy and eats his own excrement. In fact, he is a
perfect idiot.

"Be careful how you give mercury; it is a treacherous medicine. It
seems often indicated. You give it and relieve; but your patient is
worse again in a few weeks and then you give it again with relief.
By and by, it fails you. Now, if I want to make a permanent cure,
for instance, in a scrofulous child, I will very seldom give him
mercury; should I do so, it will be at least only as an intercurrent
remedy."



