_Summary--Predictions_


To sum up: If I look at contemporary humanity from the point of
view of its moral state as revealed by its political life, I see
(_a_) A mass in whom realist passions in its two chief forms--class
passion, national passion--has attained a degree of consciousness and
organization hitherto unknown; (_b_) A body of men who used to be in
opposition to the realism of the masses, but who now, not only do not
oppose it, but adopt it, proclaim its grandeur and morality; in short,
a humanity which has abandoned itself to realism with a unanimity,
an absence of reserve, a sanctification of its passion unexampled in
history.

This remark may be put in another form. Imagine an observer of the
twelfth century taking a bird’s-eye view of the Europe of his time. He
would see men groping in the obscurity of their minds and striving to
form themselves into nations (to mention only the most striking aspect
of the realist will); he would see them beginning to succeed; he would
see groups of men attaining consistency, determined to seize a portion
of the earth and tending to feel conscious of themselves as distinct
from the groups surrounding them. But at the same time he would see a
whole class of men, regarded with the greatest reverence, labouring
to thwart this movement. He would see men of learning, artists and
philosophers, displaying to the world a spirit which cared nothing for
nations, using a universal language among themselves. He would see
those who gave Europe its moral values preaching the cult of the human,
or at least of the Christian, and not of the national, he would see
them striving to found, in opposition to the nations, a great universal
empire on spiritual foundations. And so he might say to himself:
‘Which of these two currents will triumph? Will humanity be national
or spiritual? Will it depend on the will of the laymen or of the
“clerks”?’ And for long ages the realist cause will not be completely
victorious; the spiritual body will remain faithful to itself long
enough to our observer to be uncertain of the result. To-day the game
is over. Humanity is national. The layman has won. But his triumph
has gone beyond anything he could have expected. The ‘clerk’ is not
only conquered, he is assimilated. The man of science, the artist, the
philosopher are attached to their nations as much as the day-labourer
and the merchant. Those who make the world’s values, make them for
a nation; the Ministers of Jesus defend the national. All humanity
including the ‘clerks’, have become laymen. All Europe, including
Erasmus, has followed Luther.

I said above that the humanity of the past, more precisely the humanity
of Europe in the Middle Ages, with the values imposed upon it by the
‘clerks’, acted ill but honoured the good. It may be said that modern
Europe with teachers who inform it that its realist instincts are
beautiful, acts ill and honours what is ill. Modern Europe is like
the brigand in one of Tolstoi’s stories, who made his confession to a
hermit, and the hermit said in amazement: ‘Others were at least ashamed
of being brigands; but what is to be done with this man, who is proud
of it?’

Indeed, if we ask ourselves what will happen to a humanity where
every group is striving more eagerly than ever to feel conscious of
its own particular interests, and makes its moralists tell it that it
is sublime to the extent that it knows no law but this interest--a
child can give the answer. This humanity is heading for the greatest
and most perfect war ever seen in the world, whether it is a war of
nations, or a war of classes. A race of which one group exalts one of
its masters (Barrès) to the skies because he teaches: ‘We must defend
the essential part of ourselves as sectarians,’ while a neighbouring
group acclaims a leader because, when he attacks a defenceless small
nation, he says, ‘Necessity knows no law’--such a race is ripe for the
zoological wars Renan talks about, which, he said, would be like the
life and death wars which occur among rodents and among the carnivora.
As regards the nation, think of Italy; as regards class, think of
Russia; and you will see the hitherto unknown point of perfection
attained by the spirit of hatred against what is ‘different’ among
a group of men, consciously realist and at last liberated from all
non-practical morality. And my predictions are not rendered less
probable by the fact that these two nations are hailed as models
throughout the world by those who desire either the grandeur of their
nation or the triumph of their class.

These dark predictions do not seem to me to need as much modification
as some people think, on account of certain actions resolutely directed
against war, such as the setting up of a supernational institution
and the agreements recently made by the rival nations. Imposed upon
the nations by their Ministers rather than desired by them, dictated
solely by interest (the fear of war and its ravages) and not at all
by a change in public morality, these new institutions may perhaps
be opposed to war but leave intact the _spirit of war_, and nothing
leads us to suppose that a nation which only respects a contract for
practical reasons, will not break it as soon as breaking it appears
more profitable. Peace, if it ever exists, will not be based on the
fear of war but on the love of peace. It will not be the abstaining
from an act, but the coming of a state of mind.[164] In this sense
the most insignificant writer can serve peace where the most powerful
tribunals can do nothing. And moreover these tribunals leave untouched
the economic war between the nations and the class wars.

Peace, it must be repeated after so many others have said this, is
only possible if men cease to place their happiness in the possession
of things ‘which cannot be shared’, and if they raise themselves to
a point where they adopt an abstract principle superior to their
egotisms. In other words, it can only be obtained by a betterment of
human morality. But, as I have pointed out above, not only do men
to-day steel themselves entirely against this, but the very first
condition of peace, which is to recognize the necessity for this
progress of the soul, is seriously menaced. A school arose in the
nineteenth century which told men to expect peace from enlightened
self-interest, from the belief that a war, even when victorious, is
disastrous, especially to economic transformations, to ‘the evolution
of production’, in a phrase, to factors totally foreign to their moral
improvement, from which, these thinkers say, it would be frivolous to
expect anything. So that humanity, even if it had any desire for peace,
is exhorted to neglect the one effort which might procure it, an effort
it is delighted not to make. The cause of peace, which is always
surrounded with adverse factors, in our days has one more against
it--the pacifism which pretends to be scientific.[165]

I can point to other sorts of pacifism, whose chief result I dare to
say is to weaken the cause of peace, at least among serious-minded
persons:--

(_a_) First, there is the pacifism I shall call ‘vulgar’, meaning
thereby the pacifism which does nothing but denounce ‘the man who
kills’, and sneer at the prejudices of patriotism. When I see certain
teachers, even if they are Montaigne, Voltaire, and Anatole France,
whose whole case against war consists in saying that highwaymen are no
more criminal than leaders of armies, and in laughing at people who
kill each other because one party is dressed in yellow and the other in
blue, I feel inclined to desert a cause whose champions over-simplify
things to this extent, and I begin to feel some sympathy for the
impulses of profound humanity which created the nations and which are
thereby so grossly insulted.[166]

(_b_) _Mystic pacifism_, by which I mean the pacifism which is solely
animated by a blind hatred of war and refuses to inquire whether
a war is just or not, whether those fighting are the attackers or
the defenders, whether they wanted war or only submit to it. This
pacifism is essentially the pacifism of the people (and that of all the
so-called pacifist newspapers) and was strikingly embodied in 1914 by
a French writer who, having to judge between two fighting nations one
of which had attacked the other contrary to all its pledges while the
other was only defending itself, could do nothing but intone ‘I have
a horror of war’ and condemned them both equally. It is impossible to
exaggerate the consequences of this behaviour, which showed mankind
that mystic pacifism, just like mystic militarism, may entirely
obliterate the feeling of justice in those who are smitten with it.

I think I see another motive in the French writers who in 1914 adopted
the attitude of M. Romain Rolland--the fear that they would fall into
national partiality if they admitted that their nation was in the
right. It may be asserted that these writers would have warmly taken up
the cause of France, if France had not been their own country. Whereas
Barrès said, ‘I always maintain my country is right even if it is in
the wrong,’ these strange friends of justice are not unwilling to say:
‘I always maintain my country is in the wrong, even if it is right.’
There again we see that the frenzy of impartiality, like any other
frenzy, leads to injustice.

I have also a word to say about the severities of these ‘justiciaries’
towards France’s attitude immediately after her victory, towards her
desire to force the enemy to make good the damage done to her, and to
seize on pledges if he refused. The motive which here animated these
moralists without their perceiving it, seems to me very remarkable;
it was the thought that the just person must inevitably be weak and
suffer, that he must be a victim. If the just man becomes strong and
comes to possess the means of enforcing justice towards himself, then
he ceases to be just to these thinkers. If Socrates and Jesus make
their persecutors disgorge, then they cease to embody justice; one step
more and the persecutors, having become victims, would embody right.
In this the cult of justice is replaced by the cult of misfortune,
a Christian Romanticism which is somewhat unexpected in a man like
Anatole France. No doubt the events of 1918 upset all the habits of the
advocates of right. Outraged right became the stronger, the assailed
toga triumphed over the sword, the Curiatii were victorious. Perhaps
some coolness of mind was needed to recognize that right remained
right, even when thus invested with force. The French pacifists failed
to remain cool. In short, their attitude in the past ten years has been
inspired by sentiment alone, and nothing could show better the degree
of weakness to which intellectual discipline has now fallen among our
‘princes of the mind’.[167]

(_c_) _Pacifism claiming to be patriotic_, by which I mean the pacifism
which claims to exalt humanitarianism, to preach the abatement of the
militarist spirit and of national passion, and yet not to harm the
interests of the nation nor to compromise its power of resistance to
foreign nations. This attitude--which is that of all Parliamentary
pacifists--is the more antipathetic to upright minds in that it is
inevitably accompanied by the assertion (which is also nearly always
contrary to the truth) that the nation is not in the least threatened
and that the malevolence of neighbouring nations is a pure invention
of people who want war. But that is merely an aspect of a very general
fact, which is of supreme importance to the matter under discussion.

By this I mean the ‘clerk’s’ determination to put forth his principles
as valid in the practical order of things, as reconcilable with the
safeguarding of the sword’s conquests. This determination, which has
affected the Church for twenty centuries and almost all the idealists
(give me the names of those since Jesus who have declared themselves
incompetent in the practical order of things), is the source of all the
‘clerk’s failures’. It may be said that the ‘clerk’s’ defeat begins
from the very moment when he claims to be practical. As soon as the
‘clerk’ claims that he does not disregard the interests of the nation
or of the established classes, he is inevitably beaten, for the very
good reason that it is impossible to preach the spiritual and the
universal without undermining the institutions whose foundations are
the possession of the material and the desire to feel distinct from
others. A true ‘clerk’ (Renan) says excellently: ‘The mother-country
is a worldly thing; the man who wants to play the angel will always
be a bad patriot.’ Thus we see that the ‘clerk’ who claims to secure
the works of the world has a choice between two consequences. Either
he secures them and transgresses all his principles, which is the case
with the Church supporting the nation and property; or he maintains
his principles and causes the ruin of the institutions he claimed he
was supporting, which is the case with the humanitarian who claims to
safeguard what is national. In the first case the ‘clerk’ is despised
by the just man, who denounces him as cunning and strikes him out of
the rank of ‘clerk’; and in the second case he collapses under the
hooting of the nations who call him inefficient, while he provokes a
violent and loudly acclaimed reaction on the part of the realist, which
is what is now happening in Italy. From all this it follows that the
‘clerk’ is only strong if he is clearly conscious of his essential
qualities and his true function, and shows mankind that he is clearly
conscious of them. In other words he declares to them that his kingdom
is not of this world, that _the grandeur of his teaching lies precisely
in this absence of practical value, and that the right morality for
the prosperity of the kingdoms which are of this world, is not his, but
Caesar’s_. When he takes up this position, the ‘clerk’ is crucified,
but he is respected, and his words haunt the memory of mankind.[168]
The need to remind the modern ‘clerks’ of these truths (for everyone of
them is angry at being called Utopian) is one of the most suggestive
observations in connection with our subject. It shows that the desire
to be practical has become general, that the claim to be so has now
become necessary in order to obtain an audience, and that the very
notion of ‘clerkdom’ has become obscured even in those who still tend
to exercise that function.

It will be seen that I entirely dissociate myself from those who want
the ‘clerk’ to govern the world, and who wish with Renan for the ‘reign
of the philosophers’; for it seems to me that human affairs can only
adopt the religions of the true ‘clerk’ under penalty of becoming
divine, i.e. of perishing as human. This has been clearly seen by all
lovers of the divine who did not desire the destruction of what is
human. This is marvellously expressed by one of them when he makes
Jesus say so profoundly to His disciple: ‘My son, I must not give you a
clear idea of your substance ... for if you saw clearly what you are,
you could no longer remain so closely united to your body. You would
no longer watch over the preservation of your life.’[169] But though
I think it a bad thing that the ‘clerk’s’ religion should possess the
lay world, I think it still more to be dreaded that it should not be
preached to the layman at all, and that he should thus be allowed to
yield to his practical passions without the least shame or the least,
even hypocritical, desire to raise himself however slightly above them.
‘There are a few just men who prevent me from sleeping’--that was what
the realist said of the teachers of old. Nietzsche, Barrès, and Sorel
do not prevent any realist from sleeping; on the contrary. This is the
novelty I want to point out, which to me seems so serious. It seems to
me serious that a humanity, which is more than ever obsessed by the
passions of the world, should receive from its spiritual leaders the
command: ‘remain faithful to the earth.’

Is this adoption of ‘integral realism’ by the human species permanent,
or merely temporary? Are we, as some people think, witnessing the
beginning of a new Middle Ages (and one far more barbarous than the
former, for though it practised realism, it did not extol realism),
from which, however, will arise a new Renaissance, a new return to
the religion of disinterestedness? The elements we have discovered
as forming the new realism scarcely allow us to hope so. It is hard
to imagine the nations sincerely striving not to feel conscious of
themselves as distinct from others, or, if they do so, having any
other motive than that of concentrating inter-human hatred into that
of class. It is hard to imagine the clergy regaining a real moral sway
over the faithful and being able (supposing they desired to do so) to
tell them with impunity unpleasant truths. It is hard to imagine a
body of men of letters (for corporative action becomes more and more
important) attempting to withstand the bourgeois classes instead of
flattering them. It is still harder to imagine them turning against the
tide of their intellectual decadence and ceasing to think that they
display a lofty culture when they sneer at rational morality and fall
on their knees before history. Nevertheless one thinks of a humanity
of the future, weary of its ‘sacred egotisms’ and the slaughterings to
which they inevitably lead, coming as humanity came two thousand years
ago, to the acceptance of a good situated beyond itself, accepting it
even more ardently than before, with the knowledge of all the tears and
blood that have been shed through departing from that doctrine. Once
more Vauvenargues’ admirable saying would be verified. ‘The passions
have taught men reason.’ But such a thing only seems to me possible
after a long lapse of time, when war has caused far more woes than
have yet been endured. Men will not revise their values for wars which
only last fifty months and only kill a couple of million men in each
nation. One may even doubt whether war will ever become so terrible as
to discourage those who love it, the more so since they are not always
the men who have to fight.

When I set this limit to my pessimistic outlook and admit that such
a Renaissance is possible, I mean no more than that it is just
possible. I cannot agree with those who say it is certain, either
because it happened once before, or because ‘civilization is due to
the human race’. Civilization as I understand it here--moral supremacy
conferred on the cult of the spiritual and on the feeling of the
universal--appears to me as a lucky accident in man’s development. It
blossomed three thousand years ago under a set of circumstances whose
contingent character was perfectly perceived by the historian who
called it ‘the Greek miracle’. It does not appear to me in the least to
be a thing due to the human race by virtue of the data of its nature.
It seems to me so little such a thing that I observe large portions
of the species (the Asiatic world in antiquity, the Germanic world in
modern times) who showed themselves incapable of it and quite likely
to remain so. And this means that if humanity loses this jewel, there
is not much chance of finding it again. On the contrary there is every
chance that humanity will not find it again, just as a man who should
find a precious stone in the sea and then drop it back in the water
would have little chance of ever seeing it again. Nothing seems to me
more doubtful than Aristotle’s remark that it is probable the arts
and philosophy have several times been discovered and several times
lost. The other position which maintains that civilization, despite
partial eclipses, is something which humanity cannot lose, seems to
me quite worthless except as an act of faith--though it is valuable
as a means of preserving the good we wish to keep. I should not think
it a serious objection to what I have said if someone should point
out that civilization, lost once with the fall of the ancient world,
nevertheless had its Renaissance. Everyone knows that the Graeco-Roman
form of mind was far from being wholly extinguished during the Middle
Ages and that the sixteenth century only brought to life what was not
dead; to which I add that even if that form of mind had been ‘reborn’
_ex nihilo_, the fact that this is the only instance would make it
insufficient to reassure me, although the fact that it had occurred
would disturb me.

Let me point out in this respect that insufficient attention is perhaps
paid to the fact that there are always only a very tiny number of
instances in history on which are built up a ‘law’, which claims to be
valid for the whole past and future evolution of humanity. Vico says
that history is a series of alternations between periods of progress
and periods of retrogression; and he gives _two_ examples. Saint-Simon
says history is a series of oscillations between organic epochs and
critical epochs; and he gives _two_ examples. Marx says history is a
series of economic systems, each of which casts out its predecessor by
means of violence; and he gives _one_ example! I shall be told that
these examples could not be more numerous, owing to the fact that
history, at least known history, is so short. The truth, implied by
this very reply, is that history has lasted too short a time for us
to be able to deduce laws from it to enable us to infer the future
from the past. Those who do so are like a mathematician who should
decide the nature of a curve from the form he finds it has at its
very beginning. True, a somewhat uncommon turn of mind is required to
confess that human history, after several thousands of years, is only
beginning. I cannot sufficiently admire the rare mental value displayed
by La Bruyère (in my opinion) when he wrote the following lines in a
century which was strongly inclined to think it was the topmost summit
of human development: ‘If the world lasts only a hundred million years,
it will still be in all its freshness and only beginning; we ourselves
are almost contemporary with the first men and the patriarchs, and who,
in those far-off ages, will be able to avoid confusing us with them?
But if we judge of the future from the past, what new things are we
ignorant of in the arts, in the sciences, in Nature, and, I dare say,
in history? What discoveries will be made! What different revolutions
will occur in our Empires all over the world! How ignorant we are! And
how slight is an experience of six or seven thousand years!’

I shall go further and say that even if an examination of the past
could lead to any valid prediction concerning man’s future, that
prediction would be the contrary of reassuring. People forget that
Hellenic rationalism only really enlightened the world during seven
hundred years, that it was then hidden (this _a minima_ verdict will
be granted me) for twelve centuries, and has begun to shine again for
barely four centuries; so that _the longest period of consecutive time
in human history on which we can found inductions is, upon the whole,
a period of intellectual and moral darkness_. Looking at history, we
may say in a more synthetic manner that, with the exception of two or
three very short, luminous epochs whose light, like that of certain
stars, lightens the world long after they are extinct, humanity lives
generally in darkness; while literatures live generally in a state of
decadence and the organism in disorder. And the disturbing thing is
that humanity does not seem to mind these long periods of cave-dwelling.

To come back to the realism of my contemporaries and their contempt
for a disinterested existence, I must add that my mind is sometimes
haunted by a dreadful question. I wonder whether humanity, by adopting
this system to-day, has not discovered its true law of existence and
adopted the true scale of values demanded by its essence? The religion
of the spiritual, I said just now, seems to me a lucky accident in
man’s history. I shall go further, and say it seems to me a paradox.
The obvious law of human substance is the conquest of things and the
exaltation of the impulses which secure this conquest. Only through an
amazing abuse were a handful of men at desks able to succeed in making
humanity believe that the supreme values are the good things of the
spirit. To-day humanity has awakened from this dream, knows its true
nature and its real desires, and utters its war-cry against those who
for centuries have robbed it of itself. Instead of waxing indignant at
the ruin of their domination, would it not be more reasonable for these
usurpers (if there are any left) to wonder that it lasted so long?
Orpheus could not aspire to charm the wild beasts with his music until
the end of time. However, one could have hoped that Orpheus himself
would not become a wild beast.

It is scarcely necessary to say my remarks on realist desires and
their violent perfecting do not blind me to the immense growth of
gentleness, justice, and love written to-day in our customs and laws,
which would certainly have amazed our most optimistic ancestors.
There is an immense improvement in the relations between man and man
within the groups which fight each other--especially within the nation
where security is the rule and injustice is a scandal. But to keep
more closely to our subject, perhaps we do not sufficiently realize
the incredible degree of civilization implied by the good treatment
of prisoners, and the care of enemy wounded in wars between nations,
and by the institution of public and private charity in the relations
between the classes. The denial of progress, the assertion that
barbarity of heart has never been worse, are natural themes for poets
and those who are discontented, and perhaps they are even necessary
to progress. But the historian, whether he looks at national or class
warfare, is amazed at the transformation of a species which only four
centuries ago roasted prisoners of war in baker’s ovens, and, only two
centuries ago forbade the workers to establish a pension fund for their
aged members. Nevertheless I must point out that these improvements
cannot be credited to the present age. They are the results of the
teaching of the eighteenth century, against which the ‘masters of
modern thought’ are in complete revolt. The establishment of war
ambulances, the wide development of State charities are the work of the
Second Empire, are connected with the ‘humanitarian clichés’ of Victor
Hugo and Michelet, which are immeasureably despised by the moralists
of the past half century. They exist to some extent _despite of_ these
moralists, not one of whom has conducted a truly humane campaign, while
the chief of them--Nietzsche, Barrès, Sorel--would blush to be able
to say like Voltaire: ‘I have done a little good, ’tis my best work.’
I must add that these good works are now merely customs, i.e. actions
performed from habit, without the will taking any part in them, without
the mind reflecting on their meaning. And if the mind of our realists
ever came to think of them, I think there is every possibility that
it might prohibit them. I can well imagine a future war when a nation
would decide not to look after the enemy wounded, a strike where the
bourgeoisie would make up its mind not to support hospitals for the
benefit of a class which was ruining it and anxious to destroy it. I
can imagine both priding themselves on getting free from a ‘stupid
humanitarianism’, and finding disciples of Nietzsche and Sorel to
praise them for it. The attitude of the Italian Fascists and the
Russian Bolshevists towards their enemies is not calculated to give me
the lie here. The modern world still displays certain failures in pure
practicality, a few stains of idealism from which it might well cleanse
itself.

I said above that the logical end of the ‘integral realism’ professed
by humanity to-day is the organized slaughter of nations or classes.
It is possible to conceive of a third, which would be their
reconciliation. The thing to possess would be the whole earth, and they
would finally come to realize that the only way to exploit it properly
is by union, while the desire to set themselves up as distinct from
others would be transferred from the nation to the species, arrogantly
drawn up against everything which is not itself. And, as a matter of
fact, such a movement does exist. Above classes and nations there
does exist a desire of the species to become the master of things,
and, when a human being flies from one end of the world to the other
in a few hours, the whole human race quivers with pride and adores
itself as distinct from all the rest of creation. At bottom, this
imperialism of the species is preached by all the great directors of
the modern conscience. It is Man, and not the nation or the class,
whom Nietzsche, Sorel, Bergson extoll in his genius for making himself
master of the world. It is humanity, and not any one section of it,
whom Auguste Comte exhorts to plunge into consciousness of itself
and to make itself the object of its adoration. Sometimes one may
feel that such an impulse will grow ever stronger, and that in this
way inter-human wars will come to an end. In this way humanity would
attain ‘universal fraternity’. But, far from being the abolition of the
national spirit with its appetites and its arrogance, this would simply
be its supreme form, the nation being called Man and the enemy God.
Thereafter, humanity would be unified in one immense army, one immense
factory, would be aware only of heroisms, disciplines, inventions,
would denounce all free and disinterested activity, would long cease
to situate the good outside the real world, would have no God but
itself and its desires, and would achieve great things; by which I mean
that it would attain to a really grandiose control over the matter
surrounding it, to a really joyous consciousness of its power and its
grandeur. And History will smile to think that this is the species for
which Socrates and Jesus Christ died.

1924-1927.




_Notes_


Note A (Page 1)

_That political passions affect a large number of men they never before
affected ..._

It is very difficult to know to what extent crowds are moved by the
political events of their time (of course, I am leaving on one side all
truly popular movements). Crowds do not write their memoirs, and those
who write memoirs scarcely ever speak of the crowds. However, I do not
think my proposition will be seriously disputed. To limit ourselves to
France and the two examples I quoted--suppose we had another upheaval
like the Religious Wars, I do not think we should see the immense
majority of country districts possessed by no other passion than a
hatred for soldiers, whatever party they belonged to.[170] Nor should
we see cultivated bourgeois who keep diaries giving a couple of lines
to such events as Luther’s preaching, along with the thousand little
facts they relate.[171] Nor do I think that a month after an event like
the taking of the Bastille we should find a foreigner on his travels
in France, writing: ‘13th August, 1789. Before I leave Clermont I must
remark that I have dined or supped five times at the table d’hôte with
some twenty to thirty merchants and tradesmen, officers, etc.; and it
is not easy for me to express the insignificance--the inanity of the
conversation. Scarcely any politics, at a moment when every bosom ought
to beat with none but political sensations.’ (Arthur Young.)[172]

The attitude of populations towards wars between States long seems to
have been that described by Voltaire in the following lines: ‘It is
indeed a deplorable evil that this multitude of soldiers should always
be kept up by all Princes. But, as we have pointed out, this evil
produces a good. The peoples take no part in the wars carried on by
their masters; the citizens of besieged towns often pass from the power
of one to another without having cost the life of a single inhabitant;
they are simply the prize of the King who possesses most soldiers,
cannons and money.’ (_Essai sur les Moeurs_, towards the end.) Again,
in 1870, a Prussian servant girl said to a French prisoner employed
on the farm where she was working: ‘When the war is over I will marry
you. Don’t be surprised at what I say, patriotism doesn’t mean much to
us, you know.’ I imagine that in 1914, many servant girls, Prussian or
otherwise, felt in their hearts and put into practice, this absence of
patriotism; but I dare to assert that very few would have formulated
it, even to themselves. The really new fact to-day is not perhaps that
the peoples feel political passions, but that they claim the right to
feel them. This claim is sufficient to make them act and therefore
furnishes a magnificent opportunity for their leaders to exploit them.


Note B (Page 15)

_Louis XIV annexing Alsace and not for one moment thinking of
forbidding the German language ..._

It was not until 1768 that the Monarchy thought of setting up schools
in Alsace, ‘where French is to be taught’. Vidal de la Blanche, who
relates this (_La France de l’Est_, 1, vi) adds: ‘This indifference
(to the language question) must not shock us too much. Let us rather
learn a lesson from it. It raises us above the narrowly jealous
conceptions which since then have set nation against nation, under this
language pretext. It takes us into an age when another spirit presided
over human relations. There was then no language question. Fortunate
eighteenth century, when war bred no lasting hatred, when the poison of
national animosities was not inoculated and fostered by all the means
now at the disposal of the State, including the schools.’ The eminent
historian forgets that the State has these means at its disposal, _with
the consent of the peoples_. The peoples, or at least the cultivated
classes among them, at the bidding of their men of letters, during the
past century have set themselves up arrogantly against one another in
their languages and cultures, even though they one day come face to
face with the unexpected results of this attitude, as is happening
to-day to France in its difficulties with Alsace.


Note C (Page 19)

_The Union of capitalism, anti-semitism, anti-democracy with
nationalism._

I am under no illusion concerning the solidity of certain among these
unions. Although the conservative passions fully comprehend their
immense interest in identifying themselves with national passion and
thereby benefiting by its popularity, although one may even admit
that they have been caught in their own net and have become sincere
in this feeling, yet it is none the less true that conservatism
(chiefly capitalism) is essentially something entirely different
from patriotism, and that this difference, whose manifestations in
the course of history have been innumerable (how many times have the
bourgeoisie treated with foreigners when they thought it was to their
interests!) may once again display itself. It is easy to imagine that
the French bourgeoisie would turn against France if they thought their
patrimony was being too seriously threatened by the legislation of
the Republic. This may already be seen in the case of families who,
in recent years, have exported their capital abroad. I may say the
same thing of monarchist passion. It is easy to imagine that certain
followers of that passion might one day decide to work against a nation
which decisively and finally rejects the system they propose. I think
I observe this when I see monarchist writers publishing that ‘from the
Spree to the Mekong, the whole world knows that France is in a state of
weakness bordering upon disintegration’. However, such things are still
exceptional, and those who are responsible for them would refuse to
admit--perhaps sincerely--that they meant to harm their nation.

Moreover, the bourgeoisie have another interest in keeping up
nationalism and the fear of war. These feelings create a sort of
permanent military spirit in a nation. More precisely, they create in
the people a disposition to accept the existing hierarchy, to obey
orders, to recognize superiors, i.e. the very things required of
them by those who wish them to continue in a state of service. The
confused perception of this truth inspires the bourgeoisie with that
curious ill-humour they display towards every attempt at international
agreement, in whatever form this may be presented by the governments.
This ill-humour (they declare) arises from the fact that they consider
it simple-minded and imprudent to believe in the extinction of national
hatreds. At bottom, it arises from the fact that _they do not want this
extinction to occur_. They know that the maintenance of these hatreds
will cost the lives of their children, but they do not hesitate to
make the sacrifice, if by doing so they retain possession of their
property[173] and their power over their servants. Here is a grandeur
of egotism which is perhaps insufficiently appreciated.


Note D (Page 28)

_On the attitude of the modern Catholics towards Catholicism when it is
in opposition to their nationalism._

A good example is the attitude of the German Catholics in the past
twenty years. It has been described with all desirable detail by
M. Edmond Bloud in his great study: _Le nouveau Centre et le
catholicisme_.[174] It will be seen that it strangely resembles the
attitude of many a non-German Catholic.

The ‘Centre’ began by declaring itself ‘a political party which has
assumed as its duty the representation of the interests of the whole
nation in all domains of public life, in accordance with the principles
of Christian doctrine.’ (_Katholische Weltanschauung_: Catholic
conception of the world.) Soon they announced political action founded
on ‘a Christian basis’ (christliche Basis), the spirit of which is thus
defined by one of its apostles (Doctor Brauweiler, April, 1913): ‘In
the domain of practical action, _concepts are determined by the end
in view_. The formation of political concepts is comparable with the
formation of juridical concepts. The jurist forms his concepts _with
no other consideration than that of what is needed, in relation solely
to the required end_. But no one can say that the juridical concept
thus formed is a false one. In the same way, one may speak in politics
of Christianity or Christian doctrine.’ In 1914, Doctor Karl Bachem of
Cologne, published a pamphlet entitled: _Centre, Catholic Doctrine,
Practical Politics_, where he declares that the doctrine of ‘universal
Christianity’ is only a political formula intended to render possible
the collaboration of Catholics and Protestants, chiefly in Parliament;
that from the religious point of view this formula has only a negative
meaning, and only means the determination to struggle against
materialism, atheism and nihilism; that its positive content is defined
by the Prussian Constitution which in paragraphs 14 and 18 lays down
that ‘the Christian religion’ is the ‘foundation of the institutions of
the State’.

Thus, as M. Edmond Bloud justly remarks, Doctor Bachem makes the
Prussian Constitution the Rule of Faith. Put ‘national interest’ in
place of ‘Prussian Constitution’ and you will have the state of mind of
many a modern French Catholic.

The attitude of the German Catholics seems to me also representative of
a certain Catholicism common to-day to other nations, in declarations
of this sort:

‘The Catholic members of the “Centre” remain Catholics individually,
_but the party, as a party, does not necessarily accept the Catholic
conception of the world_.’

And again:

‘The Pope and the Bishops have authority in matters of religion, but
wherever political matters are concerned we shall not allow ourselves
to be influenced by the authority of the Pope or by that of the
Bishops.’ (M. Edmond Bloud alludes to a conversation reported in the
_Frankfurter Zeitung_, April, 1914, where one of the chief of the
‘syndicats mixtes’ declared that, ‘The German Catholics have had enough
of the Pope.’)

What M. Bloud calls the ‘declericalization of the Centre’ is not a
thing peculiar to our neighbours, nor is the joy of the great German
nationalist organ (the Prussian Annals) when it observes that ‘the
Catholic idea of the State is ceasing to be ultramontain and is
becoming nationalist’.[175]

The attitude common to German Catholics and to certain Catholics of
other nations seems to me well brought out by two protests which M.
Bloud quotes.

The first is from Father Weiss:

‘There exist,’ says the eminent theologian, ‘several kinds of political
Catholicism.... The worst of all consists in looking upon pure
politics, social politics, national politics, not only as something
wholly independent of religion, but _as being the standard by which we
should determine the degree to which Catholicism or Christianity may be
utilized in public life_.’

The other is from Cardinal Kopp (then Bishop of Fulda) in a letter
written in 1887:

‘Unhappily a gust of madness is blowing over us. Formerly we held
to the principle: Faith first, politics afterwards. Now they say:
_Politics first!_ The Church and the Faith afterwards.’

Our Catholics of the _Action Française_ have not invented much.


Note E (Page 33)

_The ‘clerk’, by adopting political passions, brings them the
tremendous influence of his sensibility if he is an artist, of his
persuasive power if he is a thinker, and in either case his moral
prestige._

This prestige itself is something new in history, at least from my
point of view. The results produced in France by the intervention
of the ‘intellectuals’ in the Dreyfus affair, and those produced by
the manifesto of the German Intellectuals in 1914, not only in their
own country but throughout the world, are things to which I find no
equivalent in the past. One cannot imagine the Roman Republic feeling
that the moral support of Terence and Varro was of value to it during
the war with Carthage, or the government of Louis XIV finding that
the approbation of Racine and Fermat, gave it additional strength in
the war with Holland. This increase of strength which a cause to-day
receives from the approbation of the men of thought (or those who are
considered such) does great honour to the modern world. It is an homage
to the mind hitherto unexampled in humanity.

Naturally, this prestige has a double result. Though the modern ‘clerk’
fortifies a cause by giving it his approbation he can also seriously
harm it by refusing his approbation. If in 1915 men like Ostwald and
Mach had refused to approve the acts of their nation, they would have
seriously harmed it. The ‘clerk’ who to-day condemns the realism of
the State to which he belongs does really harm that State.[176] Hence
it follows that the State, in the name of its practical interests, to
defend which is its function, has a right--perhaps a duty--to punish
them. This appears to me to be the true order of things: The ‘clerk’,
faithful to his essential duty, denounces the realism of States;
whereupon, the States, no less faithful to their duty, made him drink
the hemlock. The serious disorganization in the modern world is that
the ‘clerks’ do not denounce the realism of States, but on the contrary
approve of it; they no longer drink the hemlock.[177]

Let me point to another disorganization. That is when the State does
not punish the ‘clerk’ for denouncing its realism. This occurred
in France during the Dreyfus affair. The order of things demanded
that the ‘clerks’ should demand abstract justice, as they did; but
perhaps it also demanded that the State, weakened in strength by their
idealism, should throw them into prison. When the ‘clerk’ performs the
layman’s task, the result is anarchy; but there is also anarchy when
the layman acts and speaks as a ‘clerk’, when those whose duty is to
defend the nation display their cult for the abolition of frontiers,
universal love, or other spiritual things.[178] When I see philosophers
concerning themselves with the safety of the State and Ministers
striving to bring about love among mankind, I think of what Dante says:
‘You turn to religion him who was born to wear the sword, you make a
King of one who was born to preach. Thus all your steps are out of the
true way.’ However, this second disorganization of orders has been
denounced by others, and it is not my function to combat it.


Note F (Page 37)

