_Long before the disciples of Taine and Auguste Comte._

When this book appeared in a periodical, certain persons declared
that the whole of my attack on the modern ‘clerk’ went astray because
I did not give more space to the author of _Origines de la France
Contemporaine_. He, they said, was the ‘great realist “clerk” of the
past fifty years, while those I attacked were only his small change.’
(This sudden contempt for the thought of Barrès and Maurras of the part
of certain people is certainly surprising.)

There is here a manifest abuse of the word _realism_. Taine threw
light on the true nature of the real, or rather the political real,
and reminded the universalist that this domain is not under his
jurisdiction. He never _exalted_ this real at the expense of the
universal, which is the realism I am denouncing here. He plainly
taught, on the contrary, that the universalist who stays in his own
domain (see his admiration for Spinoza and Goethe) is the great human
model. Compare this with Maurras for whom the universalist, even
when non-political (the infinitist, the pantheist) is profoundly
contemptible. It is also difficult for me to see Taine as the godfather
of those who glorify the soldier at the expense of the man of justice
and the man of study,[182] who exhort the nations to cultivate their
prejudices where they are ‘totally foreign to reason’ (Barrès) and who
declare that the intelligence which cares nothing about what is social
is the activity of a savage. I think Taine would cheerfully say of
those who claim to derive from him the same thing that M. Bergson is
reported to have said of some of his ‘disciples’: ‘These gentlemen are
most original.’

Nevertheless, Taine seems to me to be the initiator of the modern
realists in two points. The first is his condemnation of individualism,
more exactly, of the moral liberty of the citizen (for this, at
bottom, is the meaning of his regret for the old corporations, and,
more generally, of his exhortation to form groups, which shape the
individual’s soul, instead of allowing it to be autonomous as against
the State); and the second, which is far more novel than the first
among French teachers, is his condemnation of idealist education. The
peroration of the ‘_Régime moderne_’ obviously establishes the whole
educational argument of the _Déracines_ and _L’Étape_:--

‘Sometimes when he is with his intimates, as bitter and as overfatigued
as he is, the young man is tempted to say to us: “By your education
you induced us to believe that the world is made in a certain way.
You deceived us. It is much uglier, stupider, dirtier, gloomier and
harsher, at least to our sensibility and our imagination. You think
they are over-excited and out of gear; well, if they are, it is your
fault. That is why we curse and despise the whole of your world, and
reject your pretended truths, which for us are lies, including those
elementary and primary truths which you say are evident to common
sense, and upon which you build your laws, your institutions, your
society, your philosophy, your sciences and your arts.” That is what
contemporary youth have been telling us aloud for fifteen years by
their tastes, their opinions, their inclinations in literature, the
arts and life.’

Against this manifesto in favour of a practical education, let me set
this protest of a true descendant of Montaigne, Pascal and Montesquieu:

‘In his diatribe for the classical spirit and the primary truths of
reason and philosophy which direct literary education of all kinds,
Taine comes to use words similar to those of the adversaries of ancient
literature,[183] of the general ideas which are inseparable from them,
and of disinterested culture even. The only object would then be to
prepare persons for an empirical world,[184] people taught to know the
world as it is, and trained to make it continue as it now is. However,
the school laws are too recent for one to be able decently to blame
them for the evils of the age, and make them the cause of the hatred
and scorn poured on society by those who are bored, enervate and out of
their class. However, even if it were true that the comparison between
the general principles of reason, morality and beauty, and empirical
life engendered more disgust with the realities than it has done in
the past, it would be a sad paradox to ask that this danger should
be averted by banishing from education all elevated views and all
idealism.’ (Renouvier, _Philosophie analytique de l’Histoire_, tome iv,
p. 541.)


Note M (Page 95)

_This cult brings out a silliness of mind which to me seems wholly an
acquisition of the nineteenth century._

This silliness of mind assumes another form, i.e. the belief (rigidly
formulated by Maurras) that in politics you can find laws of cause
and effect as certainly valid as those of weight or electricity.
(‘Politics are a _science_.’) This is the superstition of science,
held to be competent in all domains, including that of morality; a
superstition which, I repeat, is an acquisition of the nineteenth
century. It remains to discover whether those who brandish this
doctrine believe in it or whether they simply want to give the prestige
of a scientific appearance to the passions of their hearts, which they
perfectly well know are nothing but passions. It is to be noted that
the dogma that history is obedient to scientific laws is preached
especially by partisans of arbitrary authority. This is quite natural,
since it eliminates the two realities they most hate, i.e. human
liberty and the historical action of the individual.


Note N (Page 98)

_Our age has seen priests of the mind teaching that the gregarious
is the praiseworthy form of thought, and that independent thought is
contemptible._

Note that what is new in this crusade against individualism (the great
apostle of which is M. Maurras) is not the recognition that ‘the
individual is only an abstraction’, that to a great extent, he is
formed by his race, his surroundings, his nation, a thousand things
which are not himself. The novelty is the cult for this servitude, the
order given to mankind to submit entirely to it, the contempt shown
for any attempt to get free from it. Once again this is the cult (so
strange in French thinkers) for the _inevitable_ part of the human
being, the hatred for its free part.

Note that those who to-day preach obedience of the mind, not only
demand it from the uncultured masses but from the men of thought,
_especially_ from the men of thought. The anti-individualists of the
Dreyfus affair particularly opposed the independence of scientists,
writers, and philosophers--‘the mad vanity of a few intellectuals’.
Nevertheless, the most curious thing is not that they require this
obedience, but that they obtain it. When M. Maritain declares that
‘everyone cannot philosophize and that, for men, the essential thing
is to choose a master’, and when M. Maurras asserts that the function
of most minds is to be ‘servants’ and to reflect the thought of some
leader, these teachers find a number of men of thought to applaud and
abdicate their liberty of mind in their favour. The thinkers of the
eighteenth century said: ‘A religion is needed for the people.’ Those
of our age say: ‘A religion is needed for ourselves.’ What Barrès
wrote: ‘The part of the masters is to justify the habits and prejudices
of France, so as best to prepare our children to take their place in
the national procession,’ he certainly meant that he and his colleagues
were to walk in this procession. Here we again come upon that thirst
for discipline which I spoke of above and which seemed to me so worthy
of remark in the descendants of Montaigne and Renan. The cause, I said,
was their desire to belong to a ‘strong group’. In them it also arises
from a feeling for the artistic value of regimenting a collection of
men in a beautiful ‘procession’, and also from the joy felt by so many
souls in being governed, if not having to make the effort to think for
themselves--a most curious joy in so-called men of thought.

The cult for the collective soul, with all its violation of human
consciousness, seems to me admirably denounced by a passage of Maine
de Biran, quoted by M. L. Brunschvicg (op. cit., _La Sociologie de
l’ordre_, p. 526):--

‘... According to M. Bonald, it is not the human mind, it is not
the individual understanding which is the seat, the true subject of
inherence of the nations or (universal) truths under discussion; but
it is society, which, gifted with a kind of collective understanding
different from that of individuals, was from its origin imbued with
them through the gift of speech and by virtue of a miraculous influence
exerted on the mass alone, independent of its parts. The individual,
the man, is nothing; society alone exists; society is the soul of
the moral world, it alone exists, while individual persons are only
phenomena. Let those who can, understand this social metaphysics. If
the author himself understands it clearly, then I am in the wrong.
Then we must cease to talk of philosophy and recognize the nothingness
of the science of intellectual and moral man, we must admit that all
psychology based on the primitive fact of consciousness is simply
false, and we must consider science itself as an illusion which
perpetually deceives and misleads us by showing us everything, even our
own existence, in a false and fantastic light.’

M. Brunschvicg very rightly adds: ‘The antithesis could not be stated
more clearly. Either the primary fact of consciousness, or the primary
fact of language; either Socrates or Bonald.’

Either Socrates or Bonald. Barrès and Maurras made their choice.


Note O (Page 118)

_... Péguy who admires philosophies to the extent that ‘they are good
fighters.’_[185]

This determination to praise philosophers for their virtues of action
rather than for their intellectual virtues is very frequent among
men of thought to-day. In his _Souvenirs concernant Lagneau_, Alain,
wishing to give as favourable a picture of his master as possible,
praises his energy and his resolution at least as much as his
intelligence. It is also very remarkable--although here literature
only is in question--to see a professor of moral science (M. Jacques
Bardoux) setting a special value on those French literary men who were
soldiers, i.e. Vauvenargues, Vigny, Péguy. As to the men of letters
themselves, I shall content myself with pointing out that one of
them who is most applauded by his own colleagues recently declared
that he chiefly admired d’Annunzio for his attitude as an officer,
and expressed regret that he had returned to literature.[186] The
Emperor Julian praised Aristotle for having said that he felt prouder
of being the author of his _Treatise on Theology_ than he would have
felt if he had destroyed the power of the Persians. One might still
find soldiers in France who would agree with this judgment, but very
few men of letters. Elsewhere (_Les Sentiments de Critias_, p. 206)
I have attempted to give the history and the explanation of this
desire (so curious in men of the pen) to exalt a warlike life and to
scorn a sedentary life. Note that this characteristic is to be seen in
contemporary writers long before the war of 1914, and that those who
talk most about a warlike life are not always those who lead it.

The new thing, I repeat, is not that we see men of letters praising
an active life and scorning a sedentary life; it is _the absence of
naiveté, the dogmatic tone_. When Ronsard exclaims: ‘Good Gods, who
would praise those who let life go by bent over books’;[187] when
Bertrand de Born wishes that ‘no man of high lineage should have any
thought but cutting off heads and arms’; when Froissart sings the
glories of chivalry and casts his scorn in the faces of the bourgeois,
no one will take these candid lyre-players, who like noble poses and
do not even know that the word doctrine exists, for the ancestors of
our grave professors of belligerent aesthetics. Moreover, I doubt
whether the author of _Scenes and Doctrines of Nationalism_ would have
condescended to be a descendant of these simple-minded persons.

I find scorn for the life of the mind clearly professed in a dogmatic
tone, in a writer of the seventeenth century who frequently reminds one
of certain modern authors by his efforts to humiliate the toga before
the sword. (It is true that this writer was a gentleman of the very
minor nobility.)

‘Certainly, there is no better way of relaxing the vigour of men’s
courage than to occupy their minds with peaceful and sedentary
exercises, and idleness cannot enter civilized States in a more subtle
or dangerous disguise than that of literature. Lazy and idle persons
have in part ruined commerce and agriculture, which are the cause
of the weakness of our condition and the cowardice of our age.’ (J.
L. de Balzac, _Le Prince_, 1631. He then admits literature and the
sciences to the State insofar as ‘they strengthen and embellish the
Mother-country’.)

On the other hand, a master from the great period of French literature
writes a eulogy of the life of the mind at the expense of the active
mind, which I hardly think would be accepted by many of the moderns who
venerate that period (I am especially thinking of those who admire the
thought of Georges Sorel).

‘In France great strength of character and width of mind are needed if
a man is to reject offices and employments and thus consent to remain
at home and do nothing. Scarcely anyone possesses sufficient merit to
play this part with dignity, nor sufficient resources to fill up the
void of time without what the vulgar call “business”. But the wise
man’s idleness needs only a better name, and we ought to say that one
who meditates, talks, reads and is calm, is working.’ (La Bruyère, _Du
Mérite personnel_.)


Note P (Page 122)

_The ‘Manifesto of the Party of Intelligence’ (Figaro, 19th July,
1919)._

This manifesto, signed by fifty-four French writers, several of whom
are among the teachers most respected by their fellow-citizens, is
of the greatest importance to the present inquiry. In addition to
the strange passage on the Church’s mission which I quoted above, it
contains things like this:--

‘Nationalism, which the conceptions of the intelligence impose
on political conduct as well as on the order of the world, is a
reasonable, humane system, and French in addition.’

And further on:--

‘When a literature becomes national does it not acquire a more
universal significance, a more humanly general interest?’

And again:--

‘We believe--and the world believes with us--that it is part of the
destiny of our race to defend the spiritual interests of humanity....
We are solicitous for Europe and all the humanity remaining in the
world. French humanity is the sovereign protector of this.’

And above all:--

‘Victorious France means to take her place again in the order of the
mind, the only order whereby a legitimate domination may be exercised.’

Hence the desire to found (the manifesto itself underlines the words):
‘_The intellectual Federation of Europe and the world under the aegis
of victorious France, the guardian of civilization._’

Victory under arms conferring the right to command in the intellectual
order--that is professed to-day by French thinkers! One remembers the
Roman writers, from whom these thinkers claim descent, who took as the
leader of their minds Greece, which had been conquered by force of
arms; one also remembers the German teachers of 1871 who also claimed
intellectual hegemony for their ‘victorious’ nation, which they too
claimed as ‘the guardian of civilization’.[188]

When this manifesto was published, somewhat similar reflections seem
to have occurred to the mind of one of our great writers. In a letter
concerning this document,[189] Marcel Proust deplores the proclamation
of ‘a kind of “Frankreich ueber alles”, the policeman of the literature
of all nations.’ As a true priest of the mind, he goes on: ‘Why take
this peremptory attitude towards other countries in such matters as
literature, where a man only reigns by persuasion?’ I am happy to take
this opportunity to do homage to this true ‘clerk’, and to say that I
know that there are still other writers in France beside those who only
believe in the virtue of cold steel.


Note Q (Page 138)

