
                           The Great Betrayal

                        (La Trahison des Clercs)


                                   By
                              Julien Benda


                             Translated by
                           Richard Aldington


                                 London
                     George Routledge & Sons, Ltd.
                   Broadway House, Carter Lane, E.C.
                                 1928.


                      PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY
                STEPHEN AUSTIN AND SONS, LTD., HERTFORD.




                               _Contents_

                           Translator’s Note
                           Author’s Foreword
            I - The Modern Perfecting of Political Passions
    II - Significance of this Movement--Nature of Political Passions
                 III - The ‘Clerks’--The Great Betrayal
                       IV - Summary--Predictions
                                 Notes
                              [Footnotes]
                         [Transcriber’s Notes]




_Translator’s Note_


The title of M. Benda’s book is _La Trahison des Clercs_. The word
‘Clercs’, which occurs throughout the book, is defined by M. Benda’s
as ‘all those who speak to the world in a transcendental manner’. I
do not know the English word for ‘all those who speak to the world
in a transcendental manner’. But in Chaucer’s time the word ‘clerk’
(‘a clerke of Oxenforde’) meant anyone who was not a ‘layman’, a word
employed by M. Benda as the antithesis to ‘clerk’. We still use the
word in this sense when we speak of a ‘clerk in holy orders’ and retain
its root in ‘cleric’. A ‘cleric’ is the person described by M. Benda as
‘pre-eminently a clerk’. If the words ‘in holy orders’ are subtracted
from ‘a clerk in holy orders’, the remaining ‘clerk’ is roughly what M.
Benda means, though he also uses ‘clerk’ to include ‘a clerk in holy
orders’. Nowadays a clerk is a person who performs sedentary labour in
an office, and the word in England is pronounced ‘clark’. In America a
clerk (pronounced ‘clurrk’) is what the English call a shop-assistant.
In order to avoid a misleading title I have called this translation
_The Great Betrayal_, giving M. Benda’s title in brackets afterwards.
Where the word ‘clerk’ first occurs in the book, I have added the words
‘in the medieval sense’, and throughout the text I have invariably
written the word in inverted commas, ‘clerk’, to avoid any possible
misunderstanding.

I should add that the words ‘real’ and ‘realism’ are nearly always
used in this book as the antithesis to ‘ideal’ and ‘idealism’. Other
abstract words are used in a rather special sense which I hope will be
plain from the context.

                                                                R. A.




            ‘The world is suffering from lack of faith
                 in a transcendental truth.’

                                             _Renouvier._




_Author’s Foreword_


Tolstoi relates that when he was in the Army he saw one of his brother
officers strike a man who fell out from the ranks during a march.
Tolstoi said to him:--

‘Are you not ashamed to treat a fellow human being in this way? Have
you not read the Gospels?’

The other officer replied:--

‘And have you not read Army Orders?’

This retort will always be thrown back at the spiritual man who tries
to take the direction of the material. To me it seems a very wise one.
Those who lead men to the conquest of material things have no need of
justice and charity.

Nevertheless I think it important that there should be men--even if
they are scorned--who urge their fellow beings to other religions than
the religion of the material. Now, those who should play this part
(to whom I have given the name of ‘clerks’ in the medieval sense of
the word) have not only ceased to do so, but are playing an exactly
contrary part. Most of the influential moralists of the past fifty
years in Europe, particularly the men of letters in France, call upon
mankind to sneer at the Gospel and to read Army Orders.

This new teaching seems to me all the more deserving of serious
attention because it is addressed to a humanity which of its own
volition is now established in materialism with a decisiveness hitherto
unknown. And I shall begin by showing this to be true.




I

