_Humanitarianism and Humanism._

Here, on this subject, is a curious passage from one of the ancients:--

‘Those who created the Latin language and those who spoke it well
do not give the word _humanitas_ the vulgar meaning which is
synonymous with the Greek word _philanthropia_, which means an
active kindness, a tender benevolence for all men. But they give
the word the meaning which the Greeks attach to _paideia_, which we
call education, knowledge of the fine arts. Those who show the most
taste and disposition for these studies are the most worthy to be
called _humanissimi_. For man alone among all living beings is able
to devote himself to cultivating a study which for that reason has
been called _humanitas_. Such is the meaning given to this by the
ancients, particularly by Varro and Cicero. Almost all their works
show examples, so I shall content myself with quoting one only. I
have chosen the opening of the first book of Varro “Concerning human
things”: “Praxiteles, qui propter artificium egregium nemini est paulum
modo humaniori ignotus (Praxiteles, whose excellent talent as an
artist has made him known to every man at all skilled in the arts)”.
Here _humanior_ does not bear the vulgar meaning of easy, tractable,
benevolent even though lacking in knowledge of letters. That meaning
would not express the author’s thought. It means an educated, a learned
man, one who is acquainted with Praxiteles through books and history.’
(Aulus Gellius, _Noctes Atticae_, Book XIII, XVI.)


Note J (Page 82)

_... they cannot sufficiently denounce all institutions based on
liberty and discussion._

Note that the novelty here lies in the passion, the fury with which
they condemn liberty of discussion. Otherwise, we see most of the
so-called liberal thinkers in history themselves recognize the
necessity for submission to the sovereign’s judgment. Spinoza declares
that ‘there is no possible government if every man makes himself the
defender of his own rights and the rights of others.’ The _Letters of
Descartes_ contain passages in favour of the ‘reason of State.’

It is perhaps not sufficiently noticed how frequently the old French
absolute monarchists say that justice is the chief function of the
sovereign. ‘The most important of the King’s rights,’ says one of
these theorists (Guy Coquille, _Institution du droit des Français_,
1608) ‘is to make _the laws and general statutes for the good order of
his Kingdom_.’ Another (Loyseau, _Des Seigneuries_, 1608) says: ‘The
usage of public _lordship must be regulated by justice_ ...’ Bossuet
(_Instruction à Louis XIV_) says: ‘When the King administers justice or
has it exactly administered in accordance with the laws, _which is his
principal function_ ...’ The modern absolute monarchists, even French,
seem to be inspired by the German theorist, who says: ‘The State has
two functions to perform: the administration of justice and the waging
of war. _But war is by far the principal._’ (Treitschke.)

Note this famous passage from Bossuet (_Pol._, Book VIII, art. II, par.
I):

‘It is one thing for it (the government) to be absolute, another for
it to be arbitrary. It is absolute in relation to constraint, there
being no power which is capable of compelling the sovereign, who in
this sense is independent of all human authority. But it does not
follow that government is arbitrary; because, apart from the fact that
all things are subject to God’s judgment (which applies also to the
government we have called arbitrary), there are laws in empires, and
everything which is done contrary to them is void of right.’

It will be seen that the defence of arbitrary government is a new thing
among French teachers, even in regard to Bossuet. (I am speaking of
Bossuet’s _doctrines_, not of his practical advice.)


Note K (Page 91)

_This is the teaching of Nietzsche._

I must repeat that throughout this work I am considering the teaching
of Nietzsche (and Hegel’s too) insofar as it has become the pretext
for a great moral preaching, though I know perfectly well that in
reality this teaching is something far more complex. I shall quote
the following judicious observation, in connection with the fact
that certain philosophers have only themselves to blame for ‘the
misunderstanding of their true thought’:

‘Nietzscheism has been subjected to the same test as Hegelianism. And
no doubt here and there philosophical themes have served especially as
pretexts to cover up a new offensive on the part of barbarism. _But
the fact that they have been utilized, the manner in which they have
been utilized, have a significance which must not be overlooked._ Is
it not the criterion of a philosophy which may be called rational
without reserve and equivocation, that it should remain incorruptibly
faithful to itself? On the other hand, _the systems which begin by
accepting contradictions, reserving the right to add that they are
capable of surmounting them or of “living” them, lodge their enemy in
their midst_. Their punishment is that their antithesis still resembles
them; and that is what has happened to Nietzsche.’ (L. Brunschvicg, _Le
Progrès de la Conscience dans la philosophie occidentale_, p. 431.)
This book contains an excellent exposition of ‘Hegelian themes’ and
‘Nietzschean themes’, precisely insofar as they have become political
breviaries.


Note L (Page 94)

