_Think how willingly the ecclesiastics now accept military service._

I think this willingness is worthy of the historian’s attention.
Obviously, it implies some sincere attachment to their country in those
who display this willingness, although their law is to be dead to all
worldly attachments. Moreover, it appears that in the last war most of
the ministers of Jesus Christ able to bear arms were glad to defend
their country, whatever that country was, and whatever notion they
may have had of the justice of its cause. Here is a most suggestive
fact: Certain Belgian monastic orders (and others as well, I am told)
established abroad at the declaration of war, and authorized by the
government to remain abroad, insisted upon returning to the capital to
perform their military duties. True, the behaviour of these monks may
be explained, not on grounds of patriotism, but from the fear that they
would be severely criticized by their fellow-citizens if they acted
otherwise; for the modern ‘clerks’ have ceased to understand that the
sign of an attitude truly in harmony with their function is that it
should be unpopular with the laymen.

But the most remarkable thing here for the historian, is that the
imposition of military service on ecclesiastics does not appear to
arouse any protest from the Church. Certain Church teachers even assert
(Mgr Battifol, _L’Eglise et le Droit de la guerre_): ‘There is no
further doubt about the legality of military service.’[179] It is also
curious to see in the _Dictionnaire apologétique de la foi catholique_
(Art. ‘Paix et Guerre’) the strenuous efforts of the author (Father de
la Brière) to prove that bearing arms, even by ‘clerks’ in holy orders,
is in no sense contrary to Christian law. However, the opinion of these
theologians does not seem to be shared, at least publicly, by the
higher ecclesiastical authorities; for every ‘clerk’ who bears arms is
laid under an interdict, as he was in the past--only the interdict is
taken off a few minutes after it has been declared.

The modern laymen (Barrès for example) praise this patriotism of the
ecclesiastic and his willingness to fight. The laymen of the past tried
to make him ashamed of it, and liked to exhort him to sentiments which
they considered more in harmony with his sacred ministry. The warlike
ardours of John XII and Julius II were severely condemned by their
contemporaries. Apart from Erasmus--the type of the man of letters
fully aware of the ‘clerk’s’ high function, who was continually saying:
‘Their tonsure does not warn them that they ought to be free from all
the passions of this world and think only of the things of Heaven’--the
Italian Tizio wrote: ‘It is astonishing that the Pontiffs, whose part
is to be pacific and independent, should take part in the shedding of
Christian blood.’ The French poet Jean Bouchet shows the weeping Church
imploring Julius II to end the war (though it is true that Julius II
was fighting France):

  ‘Your patron is my Lord Saint Peter,
  Who never warred for worldly goods.’

In _Le Songe du Verger_, a kind of summary of moral doctrines current
in France in the fourteenth century, there is a dialogue between a
Knight and a Clerk, when the Clerk claims for his caste the right to
make war, and the Knight tells him that ‘the arms of the “clerks” are
prayers and tears’. It is suggestive to see a soldier urging a minister
of the spiritual to perform his true function and seeming to think that
the performance of this function is necessary to the good order of the
world. Here is a feeling for ‘clerkdom’ and its social value which is
very seldom to be found among the modern laymen, even the non-military
ones--I nearly said, especially the non-military ones.[180]


Note G (Page 53)

_That self-examination to which every spectator is impelled by a
representation of human beings which he feels to be true and solely
pre-occupied with truth._

Let me quote the following passage concerning the civilizing effects of
such representation:--

‘This spectacle of man offered to man has considerable moral effects.
First, a valuable exercise of the intelligence, an increase of
reflection, a widening of the view in every direction, result from the
habit thus set up of getting out of oneself and entering into others,
to understand their actions, to share in their passions, sympathize
with their sufferings, appreciate their motives. This faculty of the
artist communicated to the spectator or the listener, this faculty of
participation and assimilation, is something set up in opposition to
egotism and is a condition of tolerance and benevolence, frequently
even of justice. Then, lessons of virtue, frequently not the least
effective, are given to the spectator, from the very fact that he
is placed in a position to praise or condemn acts or thoughts which
are set before him relative to cases where his own interests are not
involved. He recognizes his own image in the actor of the epic, a man
like himself, a voluntary and impassioned agent, whose dangers though
perhaps magnified are not foreign to his own experience. Then the
essential phenomena which characterize conscious humanity and morality
occur in him who thus witnesses himself in the person of another,
i.e. disinterested objectivity of himself to himself, generalization
of passion, motive and maxim, judgment founded on the universal,
self-examination to arrive at what is duty, clear and defined sentiment
of the direction of the will.

‘_But this must not lead us to think that the poet’s object is utility
or morality. If it were, he would be lacking in the true feeling of
art._ Teaching, moralizing--this object of the artist is indirect, i.e.
does not exist systematically for him. He must only attain it without
having sought it, and sometimes he attains it when he seems to have
departed from it. What he desires to do, is to touch the feelings,
to arouse emotions. But it happens that by doing so he elevates,
purifies, moralizes. The poet (I am especially speaking of him) does
indeed address himself to everyone. _That means he can only sing the
universal_, however curious such an assembly of words may appear. He
may indeed sing it under the form of the particular, without which
his fictions would be lacking in life, he none the less excludes the
pure, incomprehensible, inexplicable individual, shorn of all truth
if he does not express a relationship.[181] He generalizes passion,
therefore ennobles it and renders it at once the object of observation,
reflection and disinterested emotion. The listener, carried away from
his own relatively base private preoccupations and transported without
hope or fear (at least, too personal and too present hope and fear)
into the superior sphere of humanity’s common passion, feels the
benefit of an elevation of soul; his consciousness is temporarily freed
from egotism.’ (Renouvier, _Introduction à la philosophie analytique de
l’Histoire_, p. 354.)


Note H (Page 56)

_... Napoleon, who ordered the chief of police to take measures for
the history of France to be written in a manner favourable to his own
throne._

Here are some portions of a note on this subject dictated by Napoleon
at Bordeaux in 1808. It promulgates the conception of history as
practised, mutatis mutandis, by many of our historians of the past:--

‘I do not approve the principles laid down in his note by the Minister
of the Interior. They were true twenty years ago, they will be true
sixty years hence, but they are not true to-day. Velly is the one
fairly detailed author who has written on the history of France. The
abridged chronology of the President Hénault is a good classical book.
It is useful to have them both continued. _It is of the greatest
importance to make certain of the spirit in which these continuations
are written._ I ordered the Minister of Police to look after the
continuation of Millot, and I desire the two Ministers will consult
over the continuation of Velly and the President Hénault....

‘They are to be just to Henri IV, Louis XIII, Louis XIV and Louis XV,
but without adulation. The September Massacres and the horrors of the
Revolution must be painted in the same colours as the Inquisition
and the massacres of the Sixteen. They must take care to avoid all
reaction in speaking of the Revolution, no man could have opposed it
successfully. No blame attaches either to those who perished or to
those who survived. There was no individual power capable of changing
the elements and foreseeing the events which arose from the nature of
things and circumstances.

‘They are to point out the perpetual disorganization of the national
finances, the chaos of the provincial assemblies, the claims of the
Parlements, the lack of regulation and resort in the administration.
This checkered France, without unity of laws and administration, was
rather a union of twenty Kingdoms than a single State, so that one
breathes freely on coming to the period when the benefits of unity
of laws, administration and territory are enjoyed.... The opinion
expressed by the Minister, which, if followed, would result in
abandoning this task to private enterprise and the speculation of some
publisher, is wrong and could only produce regrettable results.’

Of course, the champions of authority are not the only persons who make
history serve their own interests. Condorcet (_Tableau historique_,
10^e Epoque) says that history should serve ‘to maintain an active
vigilance in recognizing and crushing under the weight of Reason the
first germs of superstition and tyranny, if they ever dare to appear
again.’


Note I (Page 62)

