CHAPTER III


THE BEAUTY OF ART, OR THE IDEAL


In our consideration of the beauty of art we will confine our attention
to three fundamental points of view:

_First_, the Ideal in its essential import.

_Secondly_, the determination of the Ideal in a particular work of art.

_Thirdly_, the creative subjectivity of the artist.

A. THE IDEAL SIMPLY, OR AS SUCH

1. The most general conclusion which may be gathered from the
examination we have already made in a merely formal way of the Ideal
of art may be thus summarized. Truth, in its unravelment as external
reality, is only fully in possession of a true and determinate
existence, however much it may combine and retain in embracing unity
a manifold content, in so far as every portion of the content thus
unfolded permits this unity, which may be called either the animating
soul or the unified totality, freely to appear. To take the human form
once more under review as the most direct illustration of this, we have
already remarked that it is a totality of organic members each of which
is penetrated by the notion, differentiated thus in every particular
organ by some particular mode of activity and the specific motion
congenial to it. If we ask ourselves now in which particular organ the
soul appears as such in its entirety we shall at once point to the eye.
For in the eye the soul concentrates itself; it not merely uses the eye
as its instrument, but is itself therein manifest. We have, however,
already stated, when referring to the external covering of the human
body, that in contrast with the bodies of animals, the heart of life
pulses through and throughout it. And in much the same sense it can
be asserted of art that it has to convert every point of the external
appearance into the direct testimony of the human eye, which is the
source of soul-life, and reveals Spirit. Take the famous adjuration of
Plato to the stars in the lines:

     When thou gazest forth at the stars, my star,
     Would that I were the heavens and thence on thee
     Could gaze forth out of a thousand eyes.

Conversely we may exclaim that art gives to her forms the dilation
of a thousand-eyed Argus, through which the inward life of Spirit at
every point breaks into view. And not merely is it the bodily form,
the expression of countenance, the attitude and demeanour which thus
avails; the same appearance is everywhere visible in actions and
events, speech and voice-modulation, in short, under every condition of
life through which it passes, and under which it is possible for soul
to make itself recognized in its freedom and ideal infinity.

(_a_) And, in close connection with this inquiry into the
interpenetration through all parts of the animating soul, we may justly
ask ourselves, what precisely we understand under this conception
of a soul which is throughout visible: or to restrict attention to
definite limits we may inquire what are the specific characteristics
of the soul whereof art reveals to us the truest manifestation. For in
ordinary parlance one refers to the animating principle[271] peculiar
to metals, stones, wild animals, to say nothing of that belonging
to every kind of human character and its expressions. To natural
objects, however, such as stones and plants, the expression "soul" in
the complete acceptation of the term above mentioned is not strictly
applicable. Such soul as purely natural objects possess is entirely
finite, transitory, and rather a specific nature than a soul. The
determinate individuality of such existences is consequently completely
exposed in their finite existence; and, inasmuch as all that is
present there is a positive limit of restriction, such appearance as
there may be of a further claim to independence and freedom is only
an appearance; ideal characteristics which may indeed be imported
into them from without by means of art, but are not in the nature of
the objects by themselves. In the same way the soul of sense-feeling,
through which Nature manifests first the Life-principle only betrays
a subjective individuality, which still remains shut within itself,
unable to assert its reality in the further sense of a return upon
itself in a consciousness which shall attach to it the form of
infinity. Its content is, therefore, of a restricted nature, and its
manifestation in part the unrest, power of motion, sexual impulse,
anxiety or fear of the dependent life; and, in part, it is the mere
expression of an _inwardness_ capable of overcoming its finitude. The
animating life of Spirit (mind) brings us first into contact with the
free infinity capable within its own external and determinate existence
of remaining constant to the inner principle of unity, and, in the
act of expression, still reflected back upon its ideal substance. To
Spirit consequently is it alone permitted to impress the hall-mark of
its infinity and free self-recurrence on its external expression, even
though by such expression it enters the realm of narrow boundaries.
At the same time we may observe that Spirit, too, is only free and
infinite in so far as it truly apprehends its universality, and
deliberately posits for itself and accepts those ends which are
adequate to its own notion. Consequently, in so far as it fails to
grasp its own freedom it can only exist in a restricted content,
a character that is stunted, a temperament at once crippled and
superficial. In combination with nullity of this kind the manifestation
of Spirit must perforce remain wholly formal. We shall only find here
the abstract crust of self-conscious Spirit, whereof the content
contradicts the infinity of its freedom. Only by virtue of a genuine
and essentially substantive content through which the restricted and
mutable particularity derives its essential self-subsistency--so
that definite structure and intrinsic worth, determined limit and
substantial content, are realized in one totality--is such existence
thereby able, through the very mode of expression which confines it,
to proclaim itself also in its universal substance of self-contained
soul-life. It is, in short, the province of art to comprehend and
enunciate determinate and rational existence in its _truth_, that is to
say, in the form adequate to its substance, the truly explicit content.
And, consequently, the truth of art cannot consist in a mere conformity
such as that to which we restrict the so-called imitation of Nature;
external form must express harmoniously an internal content which is in
itself harmonious throughout, and consequently can express itself as
such.

(_b_) Art then, by comparing what is otherwise stained and rent
through the contingent elements of external existence with the harmony
that is essential to its notional truth, rejects that in the world
of appearance which it is unable to combine in such a unity, and for
the first time through this _purification_ reveals the Ideal. It
is possible to regard such a result as the flattery of art, as we
sometimes hear it said, for example, that portrait-painters flatter.
But even the portrait-painter, a type of art in which the Ideal is
less prominent than in many others, should at least flatter in this
sense, that he is bound to treat with indifference all that is merely
the external detail of form, texture, and colour, the mere adjuncts,
that is to say, of physical life such as hairs, pores, scars, and other
external accidents, in his undivided effort both to apprehend and
deliver the subject selected in its universal character and permanent
spiritual individuality. It is one thing to imitate a physiognomy in
the general outlines of purely superficial repose apparent at any time;
it is quite another to detect and delineate the particular features
which reveal the fundamental soul-life or character of the sitter.
As already remarked, the Ideal is only truly found when the external
presentment is in itself a vehicle of the soul. It is one of our latest
fashions to attempt, by means of those so-called "living pictures," an
intentional and gratifying imitation of famous masterpieces. In these
we find a fair reproduction of general accessories, such as grouping
and draping; but, instead of the spiritual expression of the figures,
have only too often to put up with faces absolutely commonplace. Such
a defect mars the entire reproduction. The Madonnas of Raphael, on the
contrary, in every detail of their countenance--whether it be cheeks,
eyes, nose, or mouth--exhibit with harmonious consistency one supreme
type of sacred joy, the pious, modest love of a devoted mother. We may
affirm, if we will, that all women are capable of such emotion; but, at
any rate, not every formal shape of feminine countenance is capable of
expressing the depth of the same so consummately.

(_c_) This reference, then, of all points of external existence to
their spiritual significance, so that the external appearance unveils
in adequate measure the spirit thereof, is just what constitutes the
nature of the Ideal. It is, however, a "carrying back" into inwardness,
in which we do not find the universal thus carried back to its
extremest limit to the form of abstract _thought_, that is to say, but
is rather suffered to rest halfway at the point in which we find the
purely external and the purely inward meet together harmoniously. The
Ideal is consequently the reality selected out of the mass of chance
particulars, in so far as the inner core in this external totality thus
raised in opposition to universality is itself manifested as _living
individuality._[272] For the individual subjectivity, which not only
carries in itself a substantive content, but permits the same to appear
in its own external appearance, stands in this central position, that
in it all that is substantially the content is not suffered in its
universal aspect to appear as an abstraction of itself, but still
remains enclosed within the sphere of individuality, and consequently
appears associated with a determinate existence, which now for its
part, freed from mere finitude and transitory condition, is gathered
up in a free and harmonious expression of most intimate soul-life.
Schiller, in his poem "The Ideal and Life," contrasts the reality and
its pains and struggles with "the still shadowland of Beauty." Such
a land of shadow is the Ideal. The _spirits_ which rise up here have
lost in death immediate existence, are released from the hunger of
Nature, freed from the claims which fettered them in subjection to
external forces and all the changes and confusions which are linked
together with finite appearance. But however much the Ideal treads
under foot the mere object of sense and natural form, it draws at the
same time the very wealth of it to itself, for it is art that is able
to assign the very limits to all that the external appearance required
for its self-preservation within which the external thing may appear
as the manifestation of spiritual freedom. For this reason it is the
Ideal which alone among things envisaged to sense presents a free and
self-contained content reposing on its own resources, in complete
sensuous enjoyment and satisfaction with itself. The music of this
rapture may be heard through every embodiment of the Ideal. However far
the external form may be carried the soul of the Ideal is never wholly
absorbed in it. And in truth such manifestation is only beautiful in so
far as its beauty not merely permeates the whole, but is a subjective
unity, by virtue of which the subject-matter of the Ideal must appear
emergent from all the fracture of its former individual parts and their
respective ends and energies, raised in the Ideal itself to a higher
totality and self-subsistence.

(_α_) We may in this respect point to the blessed repose[273], this
self-contentment in its own self-secure consummation, as the crown of
the Ideal. The ideal form of art stands like some blissful god before
us. For the blessed gods are ultimately above and beyond the grim
earnest of actual necessity, anger, and interest in finite existence
and purely finite ends; and this positive withdrawal involved in the
negation of all isolated particularity give them the characteristics of
cheerfulness and repose. In this sense we may interpret that phrase of
Schiller: "Life is earnest, Art is _cheerful._" Pedants, no doubt, have
often enough cracked a joke over it, inasmuch as poetry in general,
and Schiller's in particular, is a serious matter; and in truth no
ideal art is without such a quality; but for all that in this very
earnestness the essential character of cheerfulness[274] remains. This
force of individuality, this triumph of self-concentrated freedom, is
that which we recognize in an exceptional degree in ancient works of
art and the blithesome repose of their figures. And this is not merely
the case when we face a satisfaction that involves no struggle, but
even in an example where the subject is rent by some breach in the
entire content of its existence. For when the heroes of tragedy are
represented as subject to Fate we find that the demeanour they present,
which may be summed up in the words, "It is so!" still remains a simple
withdrawal into personality[275]. The subject thus depicted remains
throughout true to himself. He surrenders that which is seized from
him, but the aims he pursued are not simply taken away; he suffers them
to lapse and consequently does not lose his initiative. The man who is
the bondman of Destiny may lose his life, but not his freedom. This
repose on the essential birthright of Spirit is that which is able to
preserve and reveal the blithe atmosphere of repose in grief itself.

(_β_) In romantic art, it is true, the breach or dissonance of the
subjective principle is carried further, inasmuch as in it the
exposed contradictions are emphasized and their division can be
preserved. Thus, to take an example, we find the art of painting, in
its representation of the Passion, not unfrequently dallies round
the expression of ribaldry visible in the hideous contortions and
grimaces of tormenting common soldiers; and, in its attachment to
such discordant emotions, especially when depicting what is criminal,
shameless, or evil, permitting the glad serenity of the Ideal to pass
away. Even when such disruption loses its force, we find frequently
that ugliness, or, at least, the absence of real beauty, is set up in
its place. In another school of the earlier Flemish art of painting
the downright directness and truth of the representation, no less than
the inextinguishable confidence of the faith to which it testifies,
tend to assert, in despite of itself, a reconciliation in the feelings
of all who behold it[276]. But such an unyielding result falls[277]
short of the entire cheerfulness and satisfaction appropriate to the
Ideal. However, it is possible also in romantic art, albeit here
the representation of suffering and grief penetrates the soul and
its emotions more deeply than is the case with antique art, that
the delineation may reveal to us a spiritual intimacy, a delight in
resignation, a blessedness in pain, a rapture in sorrow, nay, even
a voluptuous ecstasy in martyrdom[278]. Not only in painting but in
the profoundly religious music of Italian composers, we find this
ecstasy and illumination of grief abundantly expressed. We may, as a
summary definition in romantic art, call it "the smile through tears."
The tears have their origin in affliction, the smile in blithesome
serenity, and consequently this smile through weeping indicates, as it
were, the point of self-repose in the midst of pain and suffering. It
is hardly necessary to add that the smile indicated here is no mere
sentimental emotion, no mere vanity of the subject treated or dabbling
with beauty[279] over painful effects and insignificant traits of
subjective feeling; rather (on its artistic side) it must appear as the
firm delineation and freedom of beauty in defiance of all pain, in the
spirit of what was said of Ximenes in the romances of the Cid, "how
beautiful she was in tears." In contrast to this emotional abandonment
in men is either ugly and repellent, or actually ridiculous. Children,
for example, break into tears at the slightest provocation, and we can
only laugh at them. The tears, however, in the eyes of a man of earnest
and self-contained character, under stress of deep feeling, betray a
very different type of emotion. Laughter and tears can, however, very
readily fall apart as unrelated, and are, as such, falsely utilized as
a vehicle of art in such abstraction; the laughter chorus in Weber's
"Freischütz" may be cited as an example. Laughter, after all, is a kind
of explosion, which it is impossible to exercise without restraint and
preserve the Ideal. Another example of this laughter, which is nothing
but laughter, occurs in a duet of Weber's "Oberon," throughout which
we are in a continual state of anxiety for the prima donna's throat
and lungs. How very differently the inextinguishable laughter of the
gods affects us in Homer, a sound which breaks from the blessed repose
of divinity, and rather expresses gladsome serenity than abstract
and wanton abandonment. Just as little ought weeping, devoid of all
restraint, to be introduced into the ideal work of art, of such a kind
as that we may hear in all its comfortlessness in another part of the
"Freischütz." And speaking generally, in music singing must take to
itself the kind of joy and rapture which we catch from the lark in the
open sky. Shrieking, whether of pain or delight, is not music at all.
Even in the expression of suffering the sweet tones of the plaint must
penetrate and clarify the sorrows, so that it continually may seem to
us worth all the suffering to arrive at such sweetness of plaint in its
expression. And this is the sweetness of melody, the singing of every
kind of art.

(_γ_) Regarded in a certain relation to this fundamental axiom of art
we may find some justification for the principle of irony in its modern
sense; but it must not be overlooked that irony is frequently destitute
of all real seriousness, and is particularly prone to expatiate over
bad subject-matter; and, in another aspect of it, it is apt to run to
seed in the mere yearning of emotion rather than actively participate
in practical life, as is proved by the case of Novalis, one of the
finer temperaments who have made this point of view their own, and
for lack of definite interest, or through shrinking from the real
world, are driven up and down, and cajoled into this sort of spiritual
consumption. This is the kind of yearning which will not descend
to mere practical business and production, because it is afraid of
soiling itself with the contact of finite things, although it already
secretly feels the defects of such exclusion. No doubt we find in
irony that absolute principle of negativity, in which the subject of
consciousness becomes self-centred through the annihilation of definite
relations and particulars; but in this case the act of annihilation
of definite relations and particulars, as we have already pointed out
when discussing the principle, is not, as in comedy, essentially in
its right place, simply exposing its own want of substance, but is
directed quite as often against everything else excellent in itself
and of sterling worth. Whether we regard irony, then, as this art of
universal destruction, or as the yearning of which we have spoken in
contrast with the true Ideal, it betrays a secret lack of proportion
and restraint which is detrimental to the artist. Substantive form is
what the Ideal demands, which, owing to the fact that it is clothed in
the form and figure of external things, is unquestionably qualified
by particularity no less than limitation; but this limitation of its
form is at the same time included in such a way that everything merely
external in its appearance is annulled and abolished. Only through
this negation of mere externality is the determinate form of the Ideal
a real exposition of the substantive content which belongs to it in a
mode of appearance susceptible to sense-perception and the imagination.

2. The plastic presentment of form, which is as much a constituent
feature of the Ideal as it is of the essentially homogeneous character
of its content, and the way these two aspects are fused together,
render necessary an inquiry into the relation obtaining between the
ideal representation of art and Nature. For this external aspect and
its embodiment is closely associated with that which we generally
call Nature. In this connection we once more come upon that old and
ever-renewed and still unsettled dispute, whether the representation
of art should follow the objects of Nature as they appear strictly to
sense, or should rather ennoble and illumine them. The right of Nature,
the rule of beauty, the Ideal and the truth of Nature--with indefinite
conceptions such as these arguments for and against may be bandied
about for ever. A work of art, we are told, should unquestionably be
natural, but there is such a thing as a mean or ugly Nature, we must
not of course imitate _that_; on the other hand--and so our disputants
wrangle on and never come to a satisfactory conclusion.

In recent times the opposition between the Ideal and Nature has once
more been emphasized and received an exceptional significance through
the writings of Winckelmann. Winckelmann's enthusiasm, as already
pointed out[280], was first awakened by his study of the antique and
its ideal forms. This insight into the peculiar excellence of classic
art he thoroughly mastered and only ceased from his labours after
making all that he had learned through his study of such masterpieces
famous throughout Europe. From this recognition, however, originated a
kind of craze for ideal representation, which, despite all its belief
in the discovery of beauty, was really a relapse into flatness, absence
of vitality, and superficiality. It is this kind of emptiness more
particularly in the art of painting, which Herr von Rumohr had before
him in the polemical writings I have already noticed.

The theory of art has to solve this difficulty. As for its interest, on
the practical side of art, we shall do well to pass it wholly by. We
may formulate principles as we please for mediocrity and the talents
that express it, the result is always the same. Whether our theory
is a distorted one or unexceptionable all we shall get is something
commonplace or weak. At the same time Art and more particularly
painting has unquestionably received a stimulus other than that we have
deprecated from this very quest of so-called Ideals; and, through the
renewed interest thereby excited in old Italian and German painters,
has at least made an effort to secure a profounder and more vital
content in its work.

The world is quite as tired of hearing the praises of that equally
exclusive Ideal in the opposite camp, namely, that of undiluted realism
in art. Theatregoers are, to take an example close at hand, heartily
sick of the realistic type of domestic drama. The old story over and
over again--disputes between husband and wife, sons and daughters, the
source of our income, the inventory of our expenses, the servility of
ministers and the intrigues of their lackeys and secretaries, down to
the question of the last sixpence between the dame of the house and
her kitchen-maid, or up to the last gossip of the daughters over their
touching love-affairs in the parlour--such tales of woe most of us will
prefer to take where, we may at least get them without adulteration--at
home.

In this opposition between Ideal and Nature writers have been inclined
to regard one type of art to the exclusion of others, with an especial
predilection, however, for painting, whose subject-matter is the
particularity of sense-perception. We will test our problem by putting
the question to start with wholly in general terms, thus: "Is art to
be prose or poetry?" Now what is truly poetical in art is just that
which we have called the Ideal. If the question of difficulty in
question is a mere matter of terminology we are quite prepared to call
the Ideal something else. But, however called, the question remains
what it is which constitutes poetry or prose in art. And although the
adherence to what is in itself poetical in the determination of it by
certain crafts may lead those arts into confusion, and, indeed, has
already done so, it is contended that in so far as any subject has an
express affinity with poetry, such has been also the subject of genuine
pictorial treatment, genuine for the simple reason that such a content
is unquestionably of a true poetical nature.

Well, let us examine a concrete case. The present exhibition of art
(1818) contains several pictures, all of which are of one school, the
so-called Düsseldorf. Every one of these have borrowed subjects from
poetry, and indeed from the emotional side of poetry peculiarly adapted
to pictorial representation. The more often and carefully we examine
these pictures, the more complete will be our impression of their
excessive sweetness and insipidity[281].

In the foregoing contradiction there are present the following general
characteristics[282]:

(_a_) First, there is the formal ideality of the work of art, that is
to say, the element of poetry in its general signification, which is,
as the term implies, something composed and brought together by man,
which he has taken into his imagination[283] and then actively worked
into the artistic composition.

(_α_) The nature of the content of such a translation may however, be
a matter of indifference or, apart from the artistic representation we
thus obtain of common life, may only interest us indirectly for the
moment. In this way the Dutch school of painting, for example, has
recreated, as it were, by means of human workmanship, the evanescent
everyday appearances of natural objects in countless new artistic
effects. Velvet, armour, light, horses, work-folk, old cronies,
peasants puffing their smoke from old pipe stumps, the glitter of wine
in transparent tumblers, rustics in soiled jackets playing with cards
as ancient--such and a hundred other subjects like them which trouble
us little enough in everyday life, for the best of reasons, that
although we too may have our game at cards, our drink, and our gossip
we are really occupied with quite another class of interests--all this
medley of objects is brought before us in their pictures. Now the claim
of art in the representation of such things is precisely this external
show, or reappearance of them as a product of spiritual activity,
which has transmuted that which was purely external and sensuously
material into a new medium supplied by mind. For instead of wool or
silk that are tangible, instead of actual hair, glasses, flesh, and
metals, all we see now is colour; instead of the three dimensions which
are essential to external Nature, we have only superficies; and yet,
despite all our losses, we have a representation identical with that of
reality.

(_β_) In opposition to the immediate and prosaic reality of objects,
then, this _show_ of things which is effected by the mind is the
wonder of ideality, a jest, if anyone cares to put it so, and an
irony directed against purely external existence. Only contrast with
it the preparations Nature or man has to make in ordinary life, the
countless instruments of every kind they have to employ to effect the
same result. What opposition the material of such objects--take a
metal for example--may offer to any active effect upon it. The world
of ideas, on the contrary, out of which art creates its products, is
a malleable and simple element, which readily converts everything,
which either Nature or man in his purely natural existence is forced
to leave bluntly just as they are, to the uses which are appropriate
to it. In the same way the objects of ordinary apprehension and man
as we meet him in everyday life are of no incommensurable wealth, but
subject to limitations--precious stones, plants, animals, etc., by
themselves are of a certain positive and particular character. But
man in his creative capacity is an entire world of content, which
he has filched from Nature, and piled together in the comprehensive
treasure-house of his world of images, and which he is now free to give
forth again simply and without the restraint of external conditions and
the detailed processes of actual phenomena. In this idealization art
stands midway between the purely objective and restricted existence and
the entirely subjective world of idea. It gives indeed objects, but
they are supplied from the life of mind; it offers them for uses other
than those which belong to them; it concentrates their entire interest
in the abstract form of the ideal show which it therewith manifests to
aesthetic contemplation, and to that alone.

(_γ_) Art consequently, through the ideality above explained, _exalts_
objects otherwise unimportant, determining them, despite their ordinary
character, in a fixed relation to her own medium and essential aim,
and by so doing secures from us a sympathy in subject-matter which
otherwise would not have enlisted our serious attention. We find the
same transformation in the relation of art to Time. Its position is
here too frankly ideal. That which in Nature rapidly passes by in art
is secured with permanence; the flash of a smile, the sudden curve of
roguish merriment on the lips, a glance, a gleam of sunshine, together
with all those evanescent traits of human life, events and accidents
which come and are gone, and are as quickly lost to memory. There is
nothing which she cannot wrest from momentary existence, and in this
respect even becomes the vanquisher of Nature herself.

In this formal ideality of art, however, it is not the content itself
which makes the pre-eminent claim upon us, but the satisfaction we
derive from the act of artistic reproduction. The representation must
certainly strike us as natural, but it is not the reality of Nature
that we require; it is rather that of the process of reproduction, this
very deposition, in fact, of material conditions which is the poetical
and ideal element of the work in the formal sense above indicated[284].
We delight in a manifestation, which appears to us a product of Nature,
and which is nevertheless a product of mind without the means at
Nature's disposition. The objects charm us not so much by virtue of
their approach to Nature, but rather because the _artist_ has been able
to effect that approach.

(_b_) A further and still profounder reason for our interest in
artistic products consists in this, that the content is not brought
before us in those forms in which it is found in immediate existence,
but, being itself minted by the mind, is capable of considerable
extension and modification within such forms. All that exists in
Nature is particular, and, indeed, limited in every direction by
such particularity. The creative faculty[285], however, contains an
intrinsic determination of universal import. And all that it produces
possesses forthwith a character of universality distinct from the
particularity of Nature. The creative faculty thereby secures this
advantage; that being of a wider range it is more qualified to grasp
ideal significance, and to insist on that explicitly in all that it
shows us.

It is quite true that a work of art is not entirely the imaginative
concept in its universal aspect, but rather the determinate form of
its envisagement. It is for all that bound, emanating as it does from
the creative medium and operations of mind, and despite the living
resemblance to real things we may find upon it, to permeate the whole
with this universal quality. And in this we have that higher ideality
of the poetical product as contrasted with the purely formal ideality
of the art of production. From this point of view it is the task of
a work of art to grasp the object in its universal relations, and in
the envisagement it presents to let fall everything which stands in a
wholly external or indifferent relation to the content. An artist for
this reason will refuse to accept all forms and means of expression
offered him by the external world, on the mere ground that he finds
them there. His main effort will be, if at least his aim be a real
poetical creation, to secure that which will appropriately work in
with his own imaginative conception; and, if he looks to Nature for
assistance in supplying him with details, or, generally, as material
to translate into his work, he will utilize such, not because he finds
them so in Nature, but because they fall in their _right_ place as a
part of his composition and are rightly made for him. This "right" of
the artist is a higher one than the mere right of immediate _fact._

In his representation of the human form, for instance, an artist will
not attempt such imitation as we find attempted by those restorers of
ancient pictures, who reproduce old cracks, which through the swelling
of either paint or varnish have involved all the older parts of the
picture in a kind of arabesque, even on the portions restored. The
portrait-painter will rather permit the tracery of the flesh, and _a
fortiori_ such incidents as freckles, pustules, warts, and so forth,
to disappear entirely. In this respect the painter Denner, so famous
for his close realization of Nature, is by no means an ideal master.
For the same reason indications of muscles and veins may be given,
but their distinction and relief should be far slighter than that we
observe in Nature. In all such impressions little or nothing of spirit
is manifested, and the expression of spirit is what is essential in
the human form[286]. I cannot think it therefore wholly a disadvantage
that we moderns have less to do with the nude in sculpture than
the ancients. On the other hand the general style of our dress in
comparison with the ideal drapery of classical times is less artistic
and more commonplace. The object in both cases is to cover the form.
The drapery, however, we find in the antique is, taken by itself, a
more or less formal smooth surface only so far determinate in its
adjustment to the frame by its attachment to the shoulder. In other
respects the garment remains entirely formal[287], hanging down simply
and freely by virtue of its own immanent weight, or only determined
through the position of the body and the pose and motion of the limbs.
In the determination thus implied we find the external shape entirely
reflecting the mutable expression of the spirit which animates the
body. The particular form of the garment, the folds of it, the motion
of it either up or down is clothed in the shape dictated direct from
the inward impulse, and as each may momentarily appear appropriate to
the particular pose or movement--and it is this form of determination
which constitutes the ideality of such drapery. In the clothing we
have adopted nowadays, on the contrary, the entire material is, from
the first, cut out and worked up stiffly into the forms of particular
limbs, so that anything approaching spontaneity in its rise and
fall is impossible. Even the character of the folds is determined by
previous models, and generally both cut and fall are worked out wholly
by the technical rules and craftsmanship of the tailor. It is true,
of course, that the configuration of the limbs determines generally
the form of such clothing; but in this arrangement of the bodily form
we merely have either a perverse imitation, or an enveloping of human
limbs according to the convention of fashion and the accidental taste
of the times. The cut of our cloth once made is irrevocably made,
and neither the position of the body nor the motion of the limbs can
appreciably affect it. We may move our arms and legs about as much
as we please, the sleeves of our jackets and our trousers remain
unalterable. Folds or creases may perhaps appear in them, but even
then only on the lines of the original cutting out, as we see them,
for example, on the statue of Scharnhorst. Our modern way of clothing
is consequently, as an external cover, not sufficiently differentiated
from the inner life to appear on its reverse side as the formal
expression of that life; instead of this we have a false imitation of
the human form stereotyped in the preordained and unalterable cut of
our tailor.

A criticism similar to that we have directed to the representation by
art of the human form and its exterior clothing might be applied to a
whole multitude of things which make up the external show of life, or
minister to its wants, such as eating, drinking, and sleeping--things
necessary enough in themselves and useful to all men, which, however
much in their manifold variety, as constituent features of the physical
life of mankind, they may blend with those activities more directly
related to its spirit, do not themselves form part of such activities,
or stand in essential relation either to their determinations or
their interests, and thereby contribute to what is the truly ideal or
universal element in the content of human life. Physical aspects of
life such as these may no doubt receive poetical treatment in art;
and it is generally admitted that the descriptions of a poet such
as Homer in this direction adhere very closely to Nature. Yet we
find that even Homer, despite all his _ἐνέργεια_, all the vividness
of his presentment, is forced to limit his descriptions to general
observations; no one expects to find in him an entirely accurate
picture of the facts in all their detail as they actually would occur
in life. He may give us, no doubt, in his delineation of the bodily
presence of Achilles, the lofty brow, the prominent nose, the long
and stalwart legs, but he is not likely to include in the picture
every detail of the veritable existence of limbs point for point, and
the relation in which they stand to one another in colour, size, and
so forth, in other words to offer us Nature's reality instead of an
artist's portrait. And the reason is obvious inasmuch as in the art of
poetry the type of expression is always the universal concept of the
imagination as distinguished from the bare particularity of Nature.
Instead of the fact the poet always gives us the denominant, the word,
in which the particular thing is universalized; for the word is a
product of mental conception, and as such already carries in itself
the nature of a universal. One is entitled to say, of course, that
it is _natural_ in the formation of concepts and speech to employ a
nomenclature, the word, as such an infinite[288] abridgment of the
existence we find in Nature; but if we do so the Nature to which we
refer it would not merely be opposed to the natural existence with
which we compare it, but would be just that which cancels it. We are
therefore confronted with the question in what sense we use the word
Nature when we contrast it with the characteristic of poetry. The mere
undefined use of the word Nature by itself tells us nothing at all.
What poetry should always give us is the energetic, the essential,
the truly characteristic; and this fundamental expressiveness is
precisely the Ideal and not the merely immediate, to enumerate all the
details of which in the narration of an event or the portrayal of a
scene will render either of these simply dull, spiritless, tedious,
and intolerable. In the manifestation of this universality, however,
one type of art will reveal more clearly its ideal characteristics;
another will rather emphasize, by a restricted use of material form,
the infinite detail of external reality. Sculpture, for example, is
in its presentments more abstract than painting; in poetry the epic
type, in its realization of the external appearance of life itself,
will not be so complete as a dramatic poem should be. On the other
hand it will surpass the latter in its portrayal of the fulness of
its imaginative vision, the epic poet being most indebted to concrete
pictures his imagination borrows from past history. In contrast with
him the dramatist is mainly restricted to the motives of an action, the
attitude of the will to it, the psychological problem in short.

(_c_) It is, then, _Mind_ (Spirit), which gives external realization in
a particular form to the inward world of content which is of essential
interest to it; and it is in close relation to this fact that we should
consider the question, what precise significance we are to infer from
the opposition above discussed between the Ideal and _naturalness._
And first we must observe that from such a point of view the word
_natural_ is not employed in the most genuine signification of the
term. As a description of the external form imposed upon facts by mind
it obviously is neither the immediate naturality we find in animal
life, nor that presented in Nature's landscape. Rather its very form
of determination, in so far, that is to say, as we see the mind here
giving to itself an embodiment, will show us that it is an expression
of mind, an expression moreover suffused with ideality. For this
taking up into the mind, this plastic recreation of form on the part
of mind is nothing less than idealization. It is sometimes remarked
of the countenances of dead people that they take on themselves once
more the lineaments of childhood. The obdurate expression of passion,
custom and strife, the characteristic seal of their life of strenuous
action, passes off, and the indeterminacy of the features of a child's
face reappears. In life, however, all traits whatsoever, the entire
presentment in fact, receive their characteristic expression from the
world of soul; and in much the same way the different races and classes
of mankind reflect the distinguishing features of their spiritual
tendencies and activities in their external manifestation. In all such
organizations that which is outward is visibly permeated with mind;
and, by virtue of its energy, already confronts _mere_ Nature as an
idealized creation. Only a clear perception of this truth will enable
us to sift this significant question of an opposition between Nature
and the Ideal to the bottom. If we do not possess this we shall find
ourselves maintaining that the forms in which Spirit is visualized as
a part of Nature have already lost in that real appearance, which is
independent of art's imitative action, such an intrinsic completeness,
beauty, and excellence, that it is quite impossible that there can be
another and more exalted type of beauty, which presents itself as the
Ideal in contradistinction to this immediate reality, and this all
the more for the reason that art is unable entirely to attain even to
that which is present in Nature herself. Or, if our thoughts lean to
the opposite extreme, we shall look to art to supply us independently,
in opposition to Nature's reality, with more ideal modes of
representation. The polemics of Herr von Rumohr, which we have already
criticized, are well worthy of attention in this connection. This
writer, at any rate, whatever others may say who have the word Ideal so
frequently on their lips in depreciation of the vulgarity of Nature,
refers to the Idea and the Ideal in phrases of respect and contempt
with absolute impartiality.

The real truth of the matter is rather this. There is in the spiritual
world, both outwardly and inwardly regarded, a Nature of vulgar type,
which testifies to its meanness outwardly for the simple reason that
its inward content is mean, that is to say, when all that it can
realize externally in its activities are the aims of envy, jealousy,
and avarice in every detail of sensuous life. Such a poverty-stricken
Nature can no doubt form part of the subject-matter of art, and has
been treated as such. When this is the case, however, as we have
already explained, it is not the subject-matter, but wholly the
artistic handling of it, which creates an interest of any permanent
character; and the artist will look in vain for sympathy in his
subject, or rather the mere material of his subject from the true
connoisseur. A particularly pertinent illustration of this type of
art is the so-called _genre_ painting, which has not shown itself
above accepting subjects of this character, the artistic treatment
of which has been carried by the Dutch school to the extreme limit
of perfection. It may, however, be as well to ask ourselves,
first, what the precise contribution of the Dutch has been to this
_genre_-painting, what, in short, is the nature of content their
dainty pictures express, pictures which at least have asserted an
extraordinary power of attraction and obviously cannot be shelved right
away beneath the common stigma of vulgarity. We shall not improbably
find, on closer examination, that the subject-matter of these pictures
is not so contemptible as it is often taken to be[289].

The Dutch have selected the subject-matter of their artistic production
out of their own substance, out of the actual presence of their daily
life. To have once for all realized that presence even in art is no
matter of reproach to them. To estimate the character of their artistic
interest we must view them in close connection with the actual panorama
of their own times. This is a problem of history. The Dutchman has
in great measure himself created the ground wherein he lives and
finds a home, and has been forced continuously to preserve and defend
that home against the invasion of the sea. The citizens of the towns
no less than the rural population have together, through courage,
endurance, and bravery, repulsed the power of Spain in the hands of
Philip II, son of Charles V, the sovereign of a world-wide empire,
and in fighting their battle for civic freedom, they were fighting
that of religious liberty. This staunch sense of citizenship, this
passionate love of enterprise in the narrow limits of their fatherland,
no less than abroad on the high seas, this careful and at the same
time clean and dainty mode of life, together with the geniality and
invincible self-respect which distinguishes them, all this is as much
the fruit of their own actions as it is the general content of their
artistic production. Such a content as this is no common material,
though obviously it is not of the kind we must suppose we can approach
with the supercilious superiority of critics for whom the exalted
taste of courts and fine society is everything. From a sterling
national self-consciousness of this sort Rembrandt painted his famous
"Night-Watch" now in Amsterdam, Van Dyck so many of his portraits,
Wouvermans so many of his battle-pieces; nor should even those
reflections of rustic drinking-bouts, jovialities, and other scenes of
merriment be wholly excluded from the category. And in illustration of
its excellence we would point, by way of contrast, to a work in this
year's exhibition, which, though not downright bad _genre_-painting,
is much inferior to the handling by old Dutch masters of similar
subject-matter, coming nowhere near to their freedom and joy of life.
In this picture a housewife is seen entering an alehouse to give her
husband a good scolding. Here we have just a scene of cantankerous and
waspish human-kind and nothing more. These Dutchmen painted their folk
very differently; whether we find them among their cups, at weddings
or dances, feasting or drinking, nay, even when the matter proceeds to
ribaldry and blows, liveliness and lustiness is the prevailing temper.
Young maids and women laugh with the rest, and a feeling of free and
abandoned merriment carries all before it. This intimate delight in all
enjoyment justifiably human, which will even absorb itself wholly in
animal life and crop up at times as mere satiety and grossness; this
freshly awakened sense of freedom and life, fully grasped and embodied
in composition and colour, is what constitutes the higher spiritual
import[290] of these Dutch pictures.

On much the same grounds the beggar boys of Murillo, in the central
gallery of the Munich collection, are excellent. Superficially
regarded, the subject here, too, is of a vulgar character. The mother
is scolding one of the youngsters, as he quickly munches a piece of
bread; two others hard by, ragged and poor, are eating melons and
grapes[291]. But in this very poverty of half-nakedness what gleams
forth from the entire composition as the soul of that beggar life is
its complete carelessness and spontaneity. No dancing dervish himself
could give it us more frankly in its impression of entire health and
jubilant vitality. This freedom from all external care, this inward
liberty reflecting itself in that which is visible, is precisely that
which the notion of the Ideal demands. There is in Paris a certain
portrait of a boy by Raphael; the head leans propped at leisure on
one arm, and gazes with such ecstasy of careless contentment into the
open landscape that we are loth to turn away from a picture expressive
of such health and exuberant animation. We receive a delight of very
much the same nature from these lads of Murillo. It is obvious enough
that neither their objects nor their interests aim high, but this is
no result of stupidity; there they chaffer on God's earth with, we may
almost say, the bliss and contentment of the Olympian gods themselves.
They, too, have their business; but though we hear little about it
they are a genuine sample of humanity, neither morose nor discontented
with their lot. Feeling this ground-root in them of all sterling
performance we can readily imagine that in favourable conditions youth
such as this might be capable of most things. A composition of this
kind is entirely on a different level from the one above mentioned of
the scolding housewife, or two others we might also contrast with it,
of a certain peasant mending his whip and a postillion sleeping on a
straw pallet[292]. Such paintings of _genre_ should unquestionably be
of small size; and, indeed, in their total impression on the sense,
they must be made to appear of comparative insignificance, that we may
not feel the character of their subject-matter and its presentment
has received undue prominence. It would be intolerable to have such
subjects painted life size as though the fulness of the reality were
sufficiently attractive to claim our attention.

Such are the principles which should regulate our artistic treatment
of and sympathy with that which it is usual to stigmatize as mean or
vulgar in ordinary life.

There is, no doubt, plenty of material for art to appropriate of
higher grade than the representation of animal spirits and downright
citizenship in all their essentially insignificant detail. Man has
clearly more serious interests and objects than these, interests which
have unfolded as his own spirit has widened and deepened, and in
harmony with which it is his truest interest to remain. An art will
take highest rank which sets before itself the task of giving adequate
representation to this more vital, or at least more profound, content.
And here at once we are confronted with the old question, what is
the source which will supply us with the forms most fitting to such
creations of mind. On the one side theorists maintain the opinion that,
inasmuch as the artist creates these lofty ideas, which he desires to
clothe in artistic form, he must, also supply their artistic forms,
create, for example, from his imagination the ideal figures of Greek
gods, Christ, his apostles, saints, and so on. In strenuous opposition
to this view Herr von Rumohr has entered the lists. This writer is
of opinion that art is on a false track in supposing that the artist
discovers the forms of his production in himself rather than in Nature,
and it is under this conviction that he has reviewed the masterpieces
both of Italian and Dutch painters. On this head he finds it a matter
of censure ("Italian Investigations," i, p. 105) "that the theory
of art, during the sixty years which have elapsed, should be at the
pains to prove that it is an object, or rather the main object, of
art to improve upon creation as it is particularised, and by doing so
to substitute forms which have no particular relation to anything,
which would ape Nature's creation by going several points beyond her,
and release mortal man from all responsibility for the fact that
Nature has not known how to make her appearance more beautiful." And
consistently with such a point of view he further advises the artist
"to have nothing to do with the gigantic task of attempting to ennoble
or elucidate the natural form, or attempt any such exalted function
of the human Spirit under what name soever it may be written down in
works upon art" (_ibid._ p. 63). He is, in short, wholly convinced
that, however exalted and spiritual[293] the subject to be treated may
be, completely adequate forms are to be found in Nature as immediately
perceived, and consequently maintains (p. 83), "that the exposition of
Art, even in the case of subject-matter as highly _spiritual_ as it is
possible to conceive, is never indebted to a symbolism capriciously
created by man[294], but depends wholly for its consistency upon what
is presented as significant by Nature in organic form." No doubt in
advancing this Herr von Rumohr has particularly under review the ideal
types of antique art as they are expounded by Winckelmann. It is for
all that the abiding service of Winckelmann to have pointed out and
set forth in harmonious relation these very types, although he may
doubtless have, committed errors of judgment with regard to particular
masterpieces while carrying through the same. As a possible example
of such an oversight Herr von Rumohr thinks he has made out (p. 115)
that the increase of length in the lower half of the body, which
Winckelmann has characterized as an ideal feature of the antique,
is really borrowed from Roman statuary. And naturally enough, as an
opponent of the Ideal, improves the occasion by insisting that the
artist should unreservedly take Nature into his confidence in the
study of form. Here, and here alone, he will find the presence of true
beauty. To quote this writer once more it is affirmed (p. 144), "that
the beauty of most importance depends on a symbolic of forms rooted in
Nature rather than human caprice, a beauty through which these forms
are nourished into their characteristic and symbolic relations, in
the vision of which we necessarily have brought back to our memory
definite images and conceptions, and are made more definitely conscious
of previously dormant feeling.[295]" I And so finally it appears that
in this writer's view (p. 105) "a mysterious trait of our spiritual
life, what many would perhaps call Idea, seems to bind together the
artist and the appearances of Nature, in which latter he is constantly
and continuously learning to recognize the true character of his own
artistic purpose[296], and to find himself in a position through them
to give expression to it."

There can be no question, of course, that ideal art has no business at
all with "a symbolism capriciously created;" and, if it really is the
case that these ideal types of the ancients have been composed only to
reduce the veritable forms of Nature to false and empty abstraction,
we may freely admit that Herr von Rumohr is justified in his most
trenchant opposition.

For our own part we would emphasize the points of fundamental
importance to be grasped in this antithesis between the ideal of art
and Nature as follows:

The forms which are borrowed from immediate Nature to determine an
ideal content must be assumed to be thus taken symbolically in the
usual sense of the term, namely, that they are not thus immediately
significant in themselves, but only as the external embodiment of that
which is inward and spiritual, the content, in fact, they express. It
is only Spirit, even in the reality which they possess outside the
limits of art, which constitutes their ideality in its contrast with
that they entirely owe to Nature simply as such, and which is unable
to reveal to us what is essentially mind. It is the object of art, on
its more noble plane, to give external shape to the inward content of
Spirit. This content we discover in the conscious life of men realized
in the world. As such it possesses--we include with it our conscious
human experience generally--an external semblance directly presented in
and through which it finds expression. So much may readily be conceded.
At the same time from a philosophical point of view it is simply futile
to inquire whether we ought to look to the direct facts of Nature alone
for objects and physiognomical traits of beauty and expression to serve
as entirely adequate materials for art's representation, shall we say,
of the majesty, repose, and power of a Jupiter or of a Juno, Venus,
Peter, Christ, Madonna, or any other divinity, or saint. Arguments may
be supported on either side, and the question can only remain finally
undecided, being wholly empirical. For the only sufficient way of
deciding the matter would be to contrast what is borrowed with the
realities it purports to represent, and this, in the assumed case of
the Greek gods, might be matter of some difficulty; and, to take the
present day, one man will see traits of beauty in their perfection
where another a thousand times more acute will see nothing. But over
and above such considerations we must observe that the mere beauty
of form will never give us that we have named the Ideal, inasmuch as
the individuality of the content is a constituent part of it, and
therein form is necessarily included. A human face, for example, may
be both regular and beautiful in its outlines and yet remain cold and
devoid of all expression. The ideal figures of the Greek gods are,
on the contrary, true individualizations; the universality of their
ideal conception does not exclude the characteristic determination
which belongs to each of them. And the vitality of the Ideal consists
just in this, that this determinate and fundamental spiritual
significance, which it is the function of art to exhibit, should
wholly transfuse by appropriate artistic treatment all the particular
aspects of the external embodiment, such as composition, pose, motion,
physiognomy, and configuration of limbs, so that nothing empty or
insignificant should be left, but the entire work should reflect that
ideal significance. All that we have learned from Greek sculpture in
recent times of a quality which, in fact, emanates from the school
of Pheidias, is characterized by nothing so much as this penetrative
vitality. The Ideal is preserved in all its severity without any lapse
in the direction of mere grace, softness, elegance, and exuberance,
yet retains the form in close relation to the ideal significance which
should be embodied throughout the whole. This supreme vitality is the
distinguishing mark of the great artist.

We may call a typical significance of this kind, in contrast to the
particularity of the external world, essentially abstract. This is
pre-eminently the case in sculpture and painting, arts which illuminate
but a momentary state, without proceeding to such a varied development
of exposition as we find, for example, in that where Homer is able to
depict the character of Achilles as mild and courteous no less than
severe and terrible, to say nothing of all his other characteristics.
No doubt it is possible to find such a significance expressed in
purely immediate reality. There are, for instance, few countenances
which cannot reflect the moods of piety, devotion, and cheerfulness;
but such faces also express countless other moods which either are
quite inappropriate to that ideal significance, or are only indirectly
related to it. For this reason it is by virtue of its particular
realization that a portrait acquaints us of the fact that it is a
portrait. In many old German and Flemish pictures we find the patron
of the picture included in the composition with his entire family of
sons and daughters. All are necessarily painted as though taken in
an act of devotion, and this spirit illuminates every countenance;
but at the same time we have quite as clearly set before us in the
men stalwart warriors, men of vigorous action, disciplined on the
strenuous field of life and commerce, and in the women dames of an
equally doughty life-experience. If we compare with such faces--and
we may restrict our comparison wholly to these very pictures, which
are famous for their close approach to Nature in their delineation of
physiognomy--those of the Virgin Mary, and the saints and apostles
who surround her, we shall find in these latter one preponderating
expression; and all the physical lineaments, whether we look at build
of bone, structure, or muscle, traits of that express motion or
repose, are concentrated upon this one artistic effect. That which is
felt to be appropriate to the one class and not to the other exactly
differentiates the distinction between the genuine Ideal and mere
portraiture.

Some may imagine it possible for the artist to compose the ideal
content of genuine types by a process of sifting and selection from
the facts of immediate Nature, or quite possibly from the various
physiognomies and compositions which collections of engravings from
the copper-plate or the wood may furnish. But a process such as this
of mere collection and sifting is not the end of the matter. An artist
must maintain the creative impulse alert throughout. He must himself,
in the strength of his own imagination, already impregnated with the
knowledge of appropriate form and made vital with profound experience
and emotion, give such an embodiment to the significance, which is the
inspiring motive of the work, as will make it appear throughout as
metal cast at one time and is one state of fusion.

B. THE DETERMINACY OF THE IDEAL

To comprehend the Ideal in its intrinsic significance, that is to say,
according to its fundamental notion, was a comparatively easy task. But
the beauty of art, in so far as it is the Idea, is not to be restricted
to the purely universal standpoint of its notional concept; even as
so comprehended it must necessarily include within it determination
and particularity, and is compelled to take definite embodiment as
external reality. The question consequently arises in what way is the
Ideal able still to assert itself in this process of objectification
in the medium of external things and their finitude, and despite all
that is antagonistic to ideality; and as a corollary to this we have to
inquire how finite and determinate existence is enabled to attach to
itself the ideality of the beauty of all art.

We propose to regulate this inquiry with the following division of our
subject matter.

_First_, the determination of the Ideal in its simplest terms.

_Secondly_, the determination of it, in so far as it proceeds by virtue
of its particularity to a condition of _discordant parts_ within itself
and to their resolution, a condition we may generally, define as
_action_[297].

_Thirdly_, the determination of the Ideal from the point of view of it
as an _external object._

I. THE IDEAL DEFINITION AS SUCH

1. We have already observed that it is the function of art to make the
Divine the focus or centre of its entire exposition. It is, however,
only possible for thought in its pure medium, that is to say, apart
from all the sensuous material of the figurative imagination, to
comprehend the Divine in its essential significance of _unity_ and
_universality._ To attempt to do otherwise, by imagining a picture of
God more readily grasped by the perception of the senses, is, as we
know, forbidden both Jews and Mahommedans. This cuts away the ground of
the figurative arts, which absolutely require form as their medium in
all its concreteness of actual life; and we have only lyrical poetry
left us to celebrate in its exaltation the praise of His power and
glory.

2. Considered, however, from the reverse point of view, we must equally
assert that however much unity and universality are predicable of the
Divine, He is in His essential substance determined, and, so far as He
withdraws Himself from the pure quality, of such predicates in their
abstraction, is thereby an object for the figurative sense and external
perception. If the Divine is consequently apprehended and figuratively
embodied for us through the forms of the imagination, we are at once
confronted with a possible variety in such determination; and it is at
this point that the actual realm of ideal art finds its commencement.
For, in the _first_ place, the one Divine substance disunites and
breaks itself up into a multiplicity of self-subsistent gods, such as
we find presented by the polytheistic system of Grecian art; and even
in the religious consciousness of Christianity God is, in opposition to
His purely spiritual unity, immediately revealed on Earth and in the
world-process as man. And, _secondly_, the Divine, regarded generally
in its determinate appearance and reality, is both present and realized
in emotional feeling, will, and the education[298] of mankind. For this
reason and in this sphere men who are filled with the Spirit of God,
saints, martyrs, and, in short, all who share in the religious life,
are equally the appropriate subject of ideal art. With this principle
of the individuality of the Divine and its determinate existence
realized necessarily in the world-process, we are face to face
with--and this is the _third_ point to be considered--the particularity
of human existence. For the entire world of human emotion, with all
that stirs it most profoundly--and what a power is implied in that
open sea of feeling and passion, everything of deepest interest to the
human heart--this entire content is nothing less than its exposition
and expression. If it is true, then, that the Divine in its purest
essence of reason is only the object of the thinking consciousness,
it is equally true that Spirit, which takes to itself an actively
bodily presence, so far, that is to say, and only so far as we find it
reverberate in the heart of humanity, all this lies within the sphere
of art. Once admit this, and we must admit the content of particular
interests and actions, specific characters, and momentary situations,
in short, the entire process of development in the external order; and
it becomes of first importance to indicate under a general principle
in what the relation between the Ideal and this positive determination
consists.

3. In conformity with what we have already advanced it is clear
that here, too, the Ideal will be most purely manifested in the
representation--whether it be of gods, Christ, apostles, saints, or
any other type of devout persons--which brings most clearly before
us the qualities of beatified repose and satisfaction, a peace
undisturbed with that which is earthly, and subject to the storms of
life's manifolded complexities, struggles, and contradictions. We are
therefore not surprised to find that both the arts of sculpture and
painting have been peculiarly fitted to incorporate under ideal form
not merely the ancient gods, but Christ as saviour of the world, and
individual apostles and saints. That which is the most essential truth
in actual life is concentrated to a focus on itself in the determinate
embodiment of art, rather than continually forced from its serenity
through dependence upon finite conditions. This essential concentration
is not destitute of particularity, but the divergent separation, which
is a feature of the external and finite state, is purified to one
simple definition, so that it appears as though all traces of external
influence and the relation thus created were overcome. This deedless
and infinite self-repose, this "taking a rest," as we find it, for
example, in certain statues of Hercules, is just what constitutes the
significance of the Ideal. If the gods are represented in contact with
the process of Nature, they must still carry with them their immortal
and unapproachable majesty. Jupiter, Juno, Apollo, Mars, and their
like are, it is true, definite personalities, but they are at the same
time unyielding potentates and powers, which preserve within them
their self-subsistent liberty, even when they are actively related
to the world. And for this reason it is not merely that a specific
particularity must characterize the determinacy of the Ideal, but
spiritual freedom must be manifested thereby as totality, and in this
state of repose suggest the potency of unfettered freedom of action.
If we turn now from the gods to the less exalted plane of temporal
existence and human life, we shall find the Ideal active in its
representation of the substantial content of such humanity, and its
dominant repression of wholly subjective particularity. By this we mean
that all that is entirely isolate in feeling and action is wrested from
the element of contingency, and particularity is represented in its
concreteness, that is to say in its wider bond of relation with what
most truly and intimately belongs to its life. When, for instance,
we speak of the nobility, excellence, or perfection in particular
men, we assert in so many words that the substantial core of what is
spiritual, ethical, and divine has announced itself as prevailing in
the individual, and man has submerged his active life, his volitions,
his interests, and passions wholly in this substantive basis, that he
may thereby give full satisfaction to the most authentic necessities of
his soul.

At the same time, however much in the case of the Ideal the
determination of Spirit and its external presence appears to be
absorbed in the simple self-relation, the principle of _development_
is likewise directly associated with the particularity unfolded[299]
in determinate existence, and along with this in that relation to
environment which necessitates both the opposition and conflict
of clashing forces. This fact necessitates a closer examination
of the determination of the Ideal regarded in this very aspect of
differentiation and process, an aspect which we may in a general way
define as _action_.

II. THE ACTION

The gracious innocence of beatific enjoyment, the inactive repose, the
majesty of power in self-reliant tranquillity, as also the concentrated
compactness generally of that which is most substantial in a given
content--all these are essentially ideal modes of determination. That
which is inward, however, and spiritual is in an equal degree active
movement and development. One-sidedness and division are inseparable
from development. Spirit that is wholly itself and a totality will,
expanding into all particularity, step forth out of its repose,
in despite of all satisfaction therein, and involve itself in the
contradictions of the broken and confused medley of earthly existence,
and is by so doing unable in this divided world to withdraw itself from
the ill-fortune and ill-health that clings to finite existence.

Even the immortal gods of Polytheism do not dwell in eternal peace,
but take sides in mighty conflicts wherein contending passions and
interests are roused, being subject themselves to Destiny; nay,
more, even the God of Christians is, not delivered from a passage
of humiliation endured through suffering and shame of death, is not
spared the bitterness of soul, which perforce cried aloud: "My God, my
God, why hast thou forsaken me." And the mother of Christ experienced
an agony of the same poignant character, and human life in every
direction is a life of struggle, battle, and pain. For greatness and
force of character is evolved in the greatness and force of contending
elements, out of which Spirit concentrates itself again and again
upon its unity. The intensity and depth of subjectivity is only the
more emphasized, the more unbroken and unexampled the resistance
of circumstances to its unity grows, and the more irreconcilable
the contradictions appear under which it has to preserve its own
self-centred equilibrium. In this development and through this alone
the might of the Idea and the Ideal is preserved, for power consists
precisely in this self-preservation through a process of self-negation.

Inasmuch as it is the fact, then, that the particularity of the
Ideal passes into a relation with the external world through such
development, and by so doing is made partaker in a world, which, so
far from manifesting the ideally free association of the notion and
its external reality, presents an existence which is just that which
it ought not to be, in apprehending the true nature of this relation
we have to consider how far the determinations which affect the Ideal
either in themselves contain immediately the principle of Ideality, or
are to a more or less degree susceptible of it.

In this connection we would direct attention to three fundamental
points of view.

In the _first_ place we have the _actual condition_ of the _world
generally_, which is assumed as involved in individual action and
its specific character. _Secondly_, we have the _particularity_ of
condition, the determination of which introduces difference and tension
within the substantive unity, which is the motive-spring of the action,
in other words the _situation._

Thirdly, we have to consider the situation from the side of
subjectivity, and furthermore the reaction by virtue of which the
conflict and resolution of the element of difference is expressly
asserted, in other words, the _action_ in its strict sense.

1. THE GENERAL WORLD-CONDITION

The ideal subjectivity is as such essentially a personal relation,
a relation, that is to say, of self to every aspect of motion or
activity, in which the self has to assert or perfect its own
substance. And to effect this a world environment is necessary as the
universal ground of its realization. When in reference to this we speak
of _condition_ we understand by this the universally prevailing mode,
under which, within the sphere of spiritual reality, that which is the
_substantive_ and essentially coalescing fabric of the same is present.
In this sense we refer to a _condition_ of education, the sciences,
the religious sense, or even of finance, administration of justice,
family life, and similar examples. All these objects of reference are,
however, merely aspects of one and the same spiritual content, which
is thus in and through them rendered explicit and real. In further
considering the general condition of the world as the universal mode of
the reality of Spirit it will be necessary to pursue our examination
from the point of view of the _Will._ It is through the exercise of
volition that Spirit generally unites itself to-determinate existence;
and the substantial _nexi_ which are immediately present in reality
betray themselves in the specific modes in which the determinations of
Will, ethical and legal conceptions, and, indeed, all that belongs to
that which we are accustomed, in a general way, to define as justice,
actively asserts itself.

The question consequently arises how such a universal condition must be
characterized in order that it may appear adequate to the individuality
of the Ideal.

(_a_) Pursuant to the foregoing considerations we may, to begin with,
emphasize the following points:

(_α_) The Ideal is essential unity; not a purely formal and external
unity, but the immanent unity of the content in itself. This
substantive repose on its own resources we have already characterized
as the self-sufficiency, rest, and beatitude of the Ideal. We will, in
direct relation to the plane of discussion we have now reached, develop
this characteristic of _self-subsistency_[300], making it a primary
demand of our argument that what we have termed the general condition
of the world appear in such a self-subsistent form as will enable it to
accept the embodiment of the Ideal.

(_αα_) Now self-subsistency is an equivocal expression to start with.
In ordinary parlance that which is essentially substantial is called
simply self-subsistent by virtue of the element of causation being
implied within this substantiality; we are wont to use it in this sense
when describing the intrinsically divine and absolute. But as retained
in this universality of substance merely as such it is not declared
as itself subjective, and consequently meets with its irresolvable
contradiction in the particularity of concrete individuality. In this
bare antithesis all true self-subsistency disappears.

(_ββ_) On the other hand, it is not uncommon to find such subsistency
ascribed to purely formal individuality, consisting solely in
its self-reliance upon the fixed determinacy of its subjective
characteristics. This subjectivity, however, in so far as the actual
content of life drops away from it, so that the forces and substances
which lie without it acquire in themselves an independent stability,
and as such confront the subject and the inward life as a content
wholly unrelated, lapses through this, too, into unequivocable
contradiction with the actual substantiality of determinate existence,
and forfeits all claim to self-subsistency and freedom of content.
True self-subsistence consists alone in the unity and interpenetration
of both individuality and universality with each other. The universal
acquires through the individual a concrete existence; the subjectivity
of the particular thing discovers for the first time in the universal
the unassailable basis and the most genuine form of its realized
totality.

(_γγ_) Consequently in making this demand of the universal
world-condition we must ask for a form of self-subsistency in the same
sense, namely, that the substantially universal in such a condition
must contain within itself as the vehicle of its self-subsistence
the form of subjectivity. The most obvious presentment of this
identity is that of thought. For if thought is, in one aspect of it,
subjective, in another it possesses universality as the product of its
inherent activity, and encloses both universality and subjectivity
in unfettered unity. The universal of thought is, however, not that
of art, whose object is the beautiful. And, indeed, apart from this
distinction, particular individuality as confronted by thought in its
natural envisagement, or form, no less than in its active effects and
complete realization, stands in no necessary correspondence with the
universality of thought. There is, for example, a clear distinction
between the subject apprehended in its concrete content of the actual
world and that which is simply the thinking subject, or at least it is
open to such a distinction. The same kind of cleavage affects the form
of the universal itself. In other words the moment the universal begins
to assert itself in distinction from its otherwise related reality by
that act it has in _objective_ existence separated itself from all the
varied play of its phenomenal particularity, and, in opposition to
the same, has already established an independent position assured and
powerful.

In the Ideal, however, it is precisely the particular individuality
which ought to persist in inseparable co-ordination with the
substantive reality, and to the full extent that freedom and the
self-subsistency of the subjective principle may attach to the Ideal
the world-environment of conditions and relations should possess no
essential objectivity independent of the individual in the subjective
aspect above referred to or already presupposed. For the ideal
individual is a self-enclosed totality, which already includes the
objective principle, and it must not be permitted to have independent
motion and development apart from the individuality of the subject;
otherwise the subject falls back into a purely subordinate position
in contrast to a world whose independence is already assured.
Consequently the universal must indeed be actual in the individual as
that which is in a unique sense its own, but not so as the property
of the individual, as a _thinker_, but as that of his _character_ and
_temperament._ To put the same truth in another way, what is required
for this unity of the universal and individual in art as opposed to the
mediation and differentiation of thought, is the form of _immediacy_;
and the self-subsistency which we claim here is the form of immediate
self-subsistency. With that, however, the element of _contingency_ is
associated. That is to say, so long as the universal and effective[301]
constituents of spiritual life, such as the self-subsistency of
individuals exhibits, are only presented to us in the immediate guise
of subjective feeling, temperament, and disposition of character, and
debarred any other category of existence, such are thereby already
given over to the contingency of volition and its realization. All
we have left us, then, is what is peculiar to each individual viewed
as such and his sensuous experience. Such a possession of what is
nothing more than personal idiosyncracy is unable to assert for itself
any further potency or necessity; it appears simply as inclusion of
content, fixed achievement and at the same time arbitrary commitment
of the wholly self-dependent subject to the influence of feeling,
disposition, energy, general ability, cunning, and talents, instead
of carrying out its realization over and over again according to a
principle of universal import and acknowledged stability.

This type of contingency, then, is the characteristic quality of the
condition which we required for the ground upon which all the varied
wealth of the Ideal is to appear.

(_β_) In order to make more clear the actual character of the reality
which is most adapted to artistic treatment we will contrast it with
that aspect of existence which is not so adapted.

(_αα_) We find this pre-eminently where the ethical notion, that is,
justice and rational freedom, have already won for themselves and
maintain a fixed position in the social _order_ regulated by _law_,
so that, even in the external world, it appears as a positive and
necessary power, which is quite independent of the individuality and
subjectivity of specific temperament and characters. This is the
case in the life of the _State_, where that life is manifested in a
form adequate to the true notion of citizenship. For obviously it is
not every chance association of human beings, any more than every
patriarchal community, that will fulfil the requisites of State-life.
In the true State laws, customs, and rights, in so far as they
constitute the determinations of freedom applicable to all, are of
paramount force even in this _universal_ and abstract relation, and
are not conditioned in their applicability by the chance requirements
of any individual's idiosyncracy. As the consciousness of society has
issued for itself commands and laws in a mode of statement of general
application, in the same way these are externally valid as such
universal fiat, which proceeds in the path of order thereby indicated,
armed with powers of restraint and compulsion against any individual
who may attempt to assert his caprice in an injurious opposition to
such regulations.

(_ββ_) Such a condition at once assumes a dividing line between the
universal ordinances of the regulative understanding and the immediate
life, connoting by this latter term the unity in which all that is
substantive and essential in morals and the conduct of justice only
finds a form for its existence in the experience of _individuals_,
their ethical feeling and opinion, that is to say, and thereby alone
is exercised. In the civilized State right and justice, even religion
and science, or, at any rate, provident interest in religious and
scientific education, are subject to _public_ control, which directs
and co-ordinates the same.

(_γγ_) The position, then, that isolated individuals occupy in the
State is one which contracts them within a fixed and organized order,
and subordinates them thereto; and they stand in this relation for
the reason that the character and disposition of each is not the only
embodiment of ethical forces; but, if the State to which they belong is
a genuine example, they are on the contrary compelled to regulate all
the external detail of their actions, opinions, and feelings with a due
regard to what is legally permissible, and to bring the same into line
with it. This dependence upon the objective rationality of the State
in its power of self-assertion above all subjective caprice may either
be regarded as a mere subjection, inasmuch as laws and institutions
possess, as the paramount power, a constraining force, or we may see
in it merely the free recognition and acceptance of the reason that
underlies such a necessity of fact, an acknowledgment through which the
individual finds himself again in that objective order.

But even in the latter case isolated individuals continue to remain
as merely incidental facts, and apart from the organic reality of the
State possess no real substantiality in themselves. For substantiality,
in the sense we here use the term, is by no means only the _particular_
property of this or that individual, but a fully _explicit_
reality[302], minted, as it were, in all aspects of it, and down to the
merest detail in a mode universally applicable and _necessary._ All
that mere individuals can effect with _volition_ and _accomplishment_
even in actions right, moral, and legal in themselves in the interest
of and attendant upon the progress of the whole, remains and must
always remain, in contrast with that whole, insignificant and a mere
example. Their actions are always only an entirely partial realization
of a single case; and, moreover, the realization of the same has no
universal significance in the sense that the particular example of it
is thereby of objective validity as law, or, as such law, makes its
appearance. And for the same reason, to put the matter the other way,
it is wholly unimportant whether the validity of right and justice
is acknowledged by private individuals judging as individuals. The
validity is a vital fact of State life which holds whether it be
acknowledged or no. No doubt it is a matter of interest to the general
public that every one should fall in with the order established and
desire it; but the wishes of isolated individuals have no influence
upon that interest in the sense that it is only by virtue of the assent
of this or that person that right and a moral order is preserved. Such
require no such isolated example of assent; and a breach of either is
followed by punishment.

The subordinate position of private persons in the civilized State
is finally emphasized in the fact that, whatever share any one may
have in the general civic life, it is of a definite and in every
case restricted character. In the real State work must have some
relation to the general good[303], just as the active enterprise of
the bourgeoisie in the commercial business is subdivided in the most
varied way, so that the entire life of the State shall not appear as
the concrete achievement of any _single_ person, or in general can be
entrusted to the arbitrary wishes, enterprise, courage, resources,
and discretion of such, but on account of the fact that it comprises
activities and trades of countless complexity, and must be carried out
by associations of business men at least as varied. The punishment of
a criminal is no longer an affair of personal heroism or the virtue
of any _one_ individual, but is throughout the entire process, in the
investigation and discovery of the felonious act, in the pronouncement
of judicial sentence and its execution, contributed to by different
persons; nay, every important phase of such a process is in the same
way subject to some kind of division of labour. To see that the laws
are properly administered, then, is not within the special province of
any _one_ man, but results from an organized effort of great variety
and the rules which direct it. Add to this every man who assists in
such a process is bound to follow certain general principles which are
laid down for his guidance, and all that is carried out under their
direction is further subject to the criticism and control of yet higher
officials.

(_γ_) In all such civic relations, then, we find that in a truly
regulated State the public authority is not impressed with the
imprimatur of any single person, but it is the general Will which
prevails here in its universality, a condition under which the
particular life of the individual has the appearance of vanishing or,
at least, of becoming of a quite subsidiary importance. In a condition
of things such as this the self-subsistency we were seeking for is
out of the question. And for this reason we required for the free
embodiment of individuality conditions which are precisely the reverse
of this, in which the validity of the ethical principle derives its
support from individuals, and only from individuals, men who make for
themselves a great place in the arena of life through the activity
of exceptional volitional power and the inherent greatness and
effectiveness of their character. With such right is simply that which
they choose to accept as such; and if that which is essentially moral
is compromised by their action, there is no all-constraining public
might which brings them to judgment and exacts punishment, but only
the right of that inner voice of necessity, which accentuates itself
as vital in particular character and through external circumstance
and condition and only thus is actually existent. This is what
differentiates _punishment_ from _revenge._ The punishment exacted by
law asserts the validity of the generally applicable and carefully
defined right against the violation of that right, and makes use of
the public power according to a definite process as its instrument, in
other words, it employs a tribunal and a judge, an instrument to which
personality is attached as something accidental. Even revenge may in a
similar way find a justification; but such as it has is based entirely
on the _subjective conscience_ of those who deal with the criminal act,
and, in pursuance of their own _private_ convictions, avenge themselves
on the unrighteous act and its perpetrator. The revenge of Orestes
is, for example, justifiable; but he exacted it under the direction
of the law which his own virtue prescribed, not as the execution of a
judgment and a right. In the condition, then, that we claim as the most
suitable for artistic treatment, that which is moral and just must be
throughout personal, in the sense that its source is exclusively in the
individual life, and it only is actual in such dependence. Moreover,
to proceed with our contrasted conditions, in regulated States the
external environment of man is made secure, and properly is protected,
and he is only permitted to retain in absolute independence for himself
his private views and opinions. But in that condition where the
essential features of a State are not found the protection of life and
property depends on the isolated energy and courage of each individual
by himself, who is compelled to look after his own security and that of
everything which belongs to him. Such a condition we are accustomed to
identify with the _heroic age._ It is not, of course, our province here
either to discuss or decide which of these two contrasted conditions
of life is the worthier; suffice it to say that, so far as the Ideal
of art is concerned, it is imperatively necessary that this hard and
fixed line between the universal as an independent existence and
individuality should be removed, however much this distinction may be
necessary in other directions for the realization of human existence.
The reason of this is that Art and its Ideal is just that universal,
in so far as it may be presented to the perception of the senses, and
by such presentment is permitted to enter into the variety and living
forms of the world of objects.

(_αα_) What we were looking for, therefore, is supplied us by the
heroic age, for it is here that virtue, _ἀρετὴ_ in the full sense of
that Greek word, creates the root-basis of actions. In this connection
it would appear that we must distinguish between _ἀρετὴ_ and _virtus_
as understood by the Roman themselves. The Romans had already their
State, Fatherland, and legal institutions, and as contrasted with
the State, as the controlling object of all, they had surrendered
personality. To be simply a citizen of Rome, to have one object for
the imagination and for every other personal energy to centre itself
upon, namely, the fatherland and its sovereign majesty, therein lies
the earnestness and grit of Roman virtue. Heroes, on the contrary,
are individuals who undertake and accomplish a complete enterprise
in consistent reliance upon their personal resources and initiative,
and with whom it is consequently a purely arbitrary act of their own
when they execute anything in accordance with the moral principle.
This immediate unity, however, of what we may call the substantive
import and individuality of inclination, impulse, and will is the
characteristic of Greek virtue. According to this view personality is
a law to itself without any further subjection to a law, judgment,
and tribunal of independent subsistence. The Greek heroes make their
appearance in an epoch anterior to legal enactment, or they are
themselves the founders of States, so that right and social order,
law and ethical custom, emanate from them, and persist as their own
creation in an indefeasible relation to them. In this way Hercules was
regarded so highly by the ancients themselves, and represents an Ideal
of original and heroic virtue. His free and self-reliant virtue, with
which he championed the right and battled against the monstrosities
of men and Nature is not a prevailing characteristic of the age, but
belongs to him as an exclusive and unique possession. And we may add he
was not strictly a moral hero, as his reception of the fifty daughters
of Thespius in one night[304] clearly shows us; neither would it
appear from the tale about the Augaean stables is he pre-eminent for
gentility. He is rather the general type of self-reliant strength and
resource in its championship of right and justice, to exemplify which
he elected summarily and from a free choice to undergo countless toils
and labours. It is true that some of his deeds were carried out at the
instigation of Eurystheus, but this submission is, after all, rather
a formal association than a real one, no connection at least of legal
validity or inevitable necessity through which the strength of his
self-reliant personality was diverted from its independent course.

The Homeric heroes are of a similar type. No doubt they have their
clan chieftain; but the associating bond is no fixed relation already
determined by law, which enforces their submission; of their own free
will it is that they follow Agamemnon, who is no monarch in the modern
sense of the term. Consequently every hero volunteers his own advice,
the enraged Achilles acts independently for himself in his separation,
and, speaking generally, each and all come and go, act, or take
their leisure as they please. In much the same independent position,
that is to say, united in no fixed organization, to which they are
as individuals entirely subordinate, we find the heroes of Arabian
poetry portrayed, and even the Shah-Rameh of Ferdusi furnishes us
with similar examples. In latter-day Christendom the age of feudalism
and knighthood supplies a fertile field for the free growth of heroic
enterprise and the type of individuality which belongs to it. Of such
are the heroes of the round table, no less than the heroic circle of
which Charles the Great is the focus. Charles is, much like Agamemnon,
surrounded with independent chieftains of heroic mould, a union which
as such is powerless[305]. He is consequently always compelled to
take counsel with them, however much each of them may be influenced
by private passions; he may bluster like a very Olympian Jupiter,
and none the less find himself and his undertakings suddenly left in
the lurch while his confederates are off on some adventures of their
own. The Cid is perhaps the most complete example of the type. He,
too, is the ally of a confederacy, the dependent of a king, and is
bound to render duty as vassal; but in opposition to this obligation
he is pre-eminently influenced by the principle of honour, the purely
personal consideration of his own glory, nobility, and reputation[306].
And so in this case also the king can only determine a fixed line of
action and make war after consulting and obtaining the consent of his
vassals. If this is not given they do not fight, and, moreover, a
mere majority of votes is not sufficient to compel them. Every man is
independent of his neighbour, and exercises his will and steers his own
course as such. We find in the accounts given us of Saracen heroes an
equally brilliant picture of self-reliant and still more inflexible
personality. Even the Reinecke Fuchs fable is a fresh example of this
state of things. Here, it is true, the lion is master and king, but
the wolf and the bear sit in council. Even Reinecke and the rest do
just what they like; and when there is a general outcry, the sly fellow
either gets out of the mess with his story-telling, or manages to make
some particular interest of king and queen work to his own advantage,
and in his own cunning way talks over his sovereign somehow.

(_ββ_) Moreover, in much the same way that each individual example of
this heroic type of _personality_ persists in immediate unity with
all that he may will, act, and accomplish, a similar unity is further
maintained in all the consequences which flow from such initiative.
When we ourselves, on the contrary, act or estimate a particular
action, we assume that only full responsibility can attach where the
individual under consideration is in complete possession of the true
nature of his action and its attendant circumstances. If the content of
those surrounding conditions is otherwise than that which is present
to the agent's consciousness in such a case a man nowadays will not
take upon himself the burden of all that is implied in his action. He
will thrust on one side that part of it which he would not have done
had he known completely or not misconceived the circumstances, and he
only accepts that which was fully under his cognisance and carried out
with deliberate intention in conformity thereto. The heroic character
makes no such distinction. He adheres simply to all the consequences
and makes good his personal responsibility for the whole. Œdipus on
his way to consult the oracle meets a certain man, quarrels with him
and strikes him. In those days such an act was not a crime at all.
He only returned a blow after being vigorously attacked. But the
stranger was his father. Œdipus further marries a royal lady. His
wife is his mother. Without knowing it he commits an act of shame.
On learning the truth he acknowledges such enormities to their full
extent, inflicts a punishment on himself as murderer of his father and
a man of incest, and this although he was entirely ignorant of the
true nature of these acts, or had any intention of doing them. The
self-reliant stubbornness and entirety of the heroic character refuses
to parcel out responsibility and knows nothing of such distinctions
as personal intention and the objective act and its consequences. In
the evolution and ramification of an action as we moderns regard it
these opposed points of view constantly recur, and guilt is thrown into
the background as far as possible. No doubt our view of the matter
is more in accordance with _ethical principle_, in so far as the
condition of a personal knowledge of the particular circumstances, or
the consciousness of an object good in itself, in short, generally the
intent of an act, is what materially assists us in our judgment. But in
the heroic age, where we find the individual essentially indivisible
and the objective act proceeding from himself as entirely his own, each
person claims absolutely all that he may do, and refuses to surrender
one jot or tittle of responsibility therefor.

To an extent equally minute the heroic figure is separated from the
ethical whole, to which he belongs, and his self-consciousness is bound
up wholly in substantial unity with that whole. According to the views
in vogue now we draw a line of distinction as private individuals
between objects which are wholly personal and those which affect the
community. The individual acts in all that he does from his own private
personality as distinct from others, and views even his actions rather
as relative to this than as part of all that is farmed out by the
organic whole to which he belongs. We consequently make a distinction
between individuals and their families. Such is unknown in the heroic
age. The guilt of ancestors adheres to their descendants, and an
entire family will suffer for the original defaulter. Men inherit
the fatality of guilt and transgression. A condemnation such as this
appears to us unjust as an irrational subjection to a blind fate. With
us the achievements of ancestors reflect no more honour on children and
descendants than the punishments and crimes of such contaminate those
that follow after them, and least of all is their private character
thus affected; nay, modern opinion is already close to the view that
the confiscation of family property is a punishment which violates the
profounder conception of liberty. But in the ancient and more plastic
totality the individual is not so isolated, but rather a member
of his family and race. For this reason the character, action, and
fortunes of the family continue to be the private affair of each member
of it; and so far from denying the actions of his parents, each man
voluntarily accepts them as his own; they live in him, and he is just
that which his fathers were, suffered, or transgressed. This appears to
us a hardship, but that which we replace it with, this standing alone
on our own possessions[307], and the more subjective self-stability
thus acquired is also from another point of view only the abstract
self-sufficiency of each. The individuality of heroic times is none
the less of a more ideal type, because it does not declare itself as
satisfied with the mere form of freedom and infinity, but remains in
unalterable and immediate unity with all that is most substantial
in the relations of spirit which it of itself endows with living
actuality. In such an individuality the substantial is immediately
individual, and the individual thereby himself essentially substantive.

(_γγ_) From considerations such as these we conclude that the ideal
figures of art must be sought for in the age of mythos, that is to say,
speaking generally, in past times, where we shall find the soil most
congenial to their growth. If such material is taken from the age we
live in, whose most native form, as we actually find it, is tightly
shut off from the imagination, it matters not how we regard it, then
the modifications which the poet can hardly avoid making in it will not
readily escape the appearance of a purely artificial and intentional
composition. The Past entirely belongs to memory, and memory perfects
the infolding veil of character, events, and actions in the vesture
of universality, through which the particular external or contingent
detail is unable to penetrate. Many trifling circumstances and
mediating conditions, many varied and isolated phases of activity, are
inseparable from the actual existence of an action or a character: in
the mirror of memory all these insignificant details are obliterated.
In this liberation of his work from what is accidental in the
external fact the artist has a freer hand for his artistic powers of
composition, when dealing with that which is individual and particular
in it, if the actions, histories, and characters are borrowed from
ancient times. He has, it is true, also historical memories, out of
which he must mould a content conformable to the universal; but the
picture of the Past possesses, as already observed, an advantage,
taken simply as a picture of greater universality, while the manifold
texture of mediating condition and circumstance, interwoven as it
is in the entire framework of finite existence which surrounds it,
offers him material ample enough to prevent his hand obliterating the
individuality, which is essential to his work of art. The more closely
we consider it, the clearer will be our conclusion that a heroic age
has the advantage over later and more civilized times in that the
isolated character and personality generally in such an age does not as
yet find what is substantive either in the sphere of ethical custom, or
moral obligation opposed to itself in the necessary embodiment of legal
institution, and thereby presents immediately to the poet all that the
form of the Ideal requires. Shakespeare has, for example, selected
much material for his tragedies from chronicles and earlier romances,
framed upon a condition of life which has not as yet received the
impression of a fully articulated social order, but in which the energy
of individuals, as emphasized in personal resolve and achievement, is
still the prevailing characteristic. His genuine historical dramas
have, on the contrary, a vein of historical substance running through
them in the strictest sense, and for this reason lean farther away from
an ideal exposition, although here, too, both circumstances and actions
are made to fall in with, or are removed to suit, the unyielding
self-sufficiency and wilfulness of particular characters. No doubt this
characteristic remains for the most part in their case a purely formal
self-inclusion, whereas if we contrast it with the self-subsistency of
heroic characters we find that here the essential _content_ of all such
have proposed to accomplish is bound up therewith.

It is on account of this contrast that we should find a reason for
repeating the general thesis in connection with the Ideal, to the
effect that the _Idyllic_ is exceptionally adapted for its expression,
inasmuch as where that is presented the cleavage between what is
determined by legal necessity and the living person is wholly absent.
To this we must reply that, however simple and original idyllic
situations may be, however far removed they may be from the artificial
prose-existence of society, such simplicity, if we consider the nature
of its content, has, in fact, too insignificant an interest to satisfy
the most substantial and essential requirements of the Ideal. Material
of this sort fails entirely to include the most weighty motives of
heroic character such as Fatherland, moral and family problems, and
their development; it is a kind of treatment which is apt to select
as the very core of its subject such a fact as the loss of a single
sheep or the falling in love of a girl. In this way the Idyllic not
unfrequently becomes merely the resource and recreation of our hearts,
to which poets such as Gessner, for example, will add their dose of
sickly sweetness and sentimentalism. The idyllic aspect of the days
we live in have, further, this defect, that this _naïveté_, this
domesticated or rural atmosphere in the emotional aspect of love or the
enjoyment of a good cup of coffee in the open and things of that sort
are not likely to awake much interest, when we find in them nothing but
the country parson flavour--find them cut off, that is to say, from
all wider relations with the outside world, and not a trace of the
profounder web of purposes with which that world is interwoven. It is
precisely here that we have reason to admire the genius of Goethe, when
he concentrated his poetic talent on material of this kind in his poem
of "Hermann and Dorothea." It is true that he selects from the life of
the Present a particular theme of very limited extension, but at the
same time he unfolds before us as the background and atmosphere of the
picture in which his characters are portrayed the great interests of
the revolution and his own native country, and, in short, associates
with a subject-matter necessarily narrow in its range facts of
world-history of the widest and most potent significance.

Generally speaking, we shall find that the ills of life and its evil,
war, battles, and revenge, are not excluded from the subject-matter
of the Ideal, but are frequently the very source and substance of
the heroic age and its myths, whose form grows all the wilder and
sterner in proportion to the remoteness of such a period from a fully
developed society of law and moral order. In the chivalrous adventures
of knight-errantry we find the heroes of such tales themselves
often enough sharing the savage and dissolute characteristics of the
times, and in much the same way the martyrdom of the heroes of the
Church presupposes a condition of ferocious cruelty around them. At
bottom, however, the Christian ideal, which is based on the depth and
inwardness of man's spiritual nature, stands in a relation of entire
indifference to the external world.

We have demonstrated that the condition of particular centuries is more
applicable to the Ideal; in the same way Art selects pre-eminently
a particular class of society for the form under which the Ideal
shall appear, the order, that is to say, of _princes._ And the
selection is made not because art is necessarily aristocratic, or has
any predilection for gentility[308], but simply on account of the
perfection in which free will and its products may be exemplified
imaginatively through the highly placed class. We have in the chorus of
ancient tragedy the characteristics and universal background of general
maxims, modes of imaginative thought, and emotion, before which the
definite movements of the action proceed. In contrast to this appear
the more clearly defined individualities of the personages immediately
concerned in the action, men and women of authority, and belonging for
the most part to royal families. On the other hand, the main impression
forced upon us, when seeing representatives of a lower class carrying
on pursuits which are of a narrower range, is one of subjection; and,
indeed, in an artificial[309] state of society the freedom of action
of such a class is fettered in every direction, and is necessarily
involved with all its passions and interests in all the medley and
despotic forces of external circumstance. It is, in fact, held closely
behind the invincible power of the social order, which it is unable to
come out of, and is an alien from the authority of the dominant order,
even when that is asserted in accordance with just principle. In this
limitation of outlook through the hard conditions of life all real
independence is wrecked. For this reason both the circumstances and
characters which we find in such a sphere of life are more appropriate
to the treatment of comedy, everybody being permitted in comedy to rate
themselves as they please, and to lay claims to a self-sufficiency
in all that they will and think, which is none the less immediately
negatived by the spiritual no less than the external dependence of
their lives. As a rule, such a false and second-hand self-subsistency
must inevitably fall to pieces when confronted with the actual
conditions of life and the distorted view which is formed of them. The
force of circumstances is presented to the lower orders of society
on a totally different level from that in which it acts upon rulers
and princes. In Schiller's "Braut von Messina" Don Caesar is able to
exclaim, and justly: "there stands no higher judge than myself!" And
when he has to be punished he must himself give judgment and execute
it. He is, in fact, subject to no external necessity of right and
law, and even when punishment is the question is wholly dependent on
himself. The characters in the Shakespearean drama do not entirely
belong to the princely order and only partially are taken from mythical
sources, but they are placed in the era of civil wars, in which the
ties of social order and legislative enactment are either weakened
or shattered, and they secure from such a condition the exceptional
independence and self-sufficiency we are looking for.

(_b_) If we transfer our attention now from the characteristic
conditions of society we have hitherto mainly considered to the actual
state of the world around us and its carefully articulated scheme
of ethical, judicial, and political institutions, we shall not fail
to observe that the material we have here offered us for figures of
truly ideal type is of a very restricted character. The province
here in which an entirely open field is presented for the display of
independent purpose in its fullest individuality is limited both in
its range and the measure of opportunity. The qualities that make a
man thorough in his relations to his own family and his business, the
ideals, in short, of honest citizens and excellent wives, in so far
as will and activity are concentrated on the field in which it is
still possible for a man to exercise his free personality, to carry
out, in short, all that he has a mind to do, this is the prevailing
feature of our modern society. Such ideals inevitably lack the depth
of a fuller content, and the most significant feature of them is
that of the attitude of the individual mind to their realization;
for we find here the content is already presented by existing social
institutions, and consequently the essential interest we take in it
depends on the particular way in which that content is realized and
appears in the _personal life_, its moral and inward significance.
For this reason it is not possible, as in the case of former times,
to create ideals from the positions of judgeship and kingship. If a
man carries out his judicial functions nowadays in accordance with
duty and the requirements of his office, he merely is acting within
the bounds already marked out for him by legislative enactments in
the social order as the sphere of his responsibilities. All that may
characterize his tenure of office beyond this, as proceeding from
personal qualities, such as suavity of demeanour or acuteness of
judgment, is not the main point or the substantial content, but rather
an aspect of it which it is possible to dispense with as something
accidental. In the same way the monarchs of our own day are no longer,
as was the case with the heroes of mythical times, in themselves the
embodying and culminating unity of society itself, but rather a more
or less unsubstantial _centrum_ around which all legal and social
institutions, however moulded in the course of time, group themselves
in independent relations. All the most important functions of the
executive have nowadays been separated from the royal prerogative.
Kings do not lay down the law, control finance; the preservation
of social order is not one of their most characteristic functions.
Peace and war are determined through the particular circumstances of
international politics, which it is not within their power exclusively
either to direct or control; and, if it happens that any important
decision with regard to either depends in the last resort on their
judgment, such a decision is not generally so much in the nature of
its substance the result of any personal preference, as it is the
formal seal of monarchical authority on what is already determined on
public grounds, the mere imposition of that which is strictly official
rather than personal in its character. In the same way, a general or
field-marshal of our times has unquestionably great authority; objects
and interests of profound importance are under his control and his
circumspection; his courage, his determination, and his intelligence
are involved in the weightiest decisions; nevertheless, whatever may
be definitely traced to the essentially personal characteristics of
the man has little opportunity for display in such a result. For, in
the first place, the objects upon which his decisions turn are not of
his own selection, and arise out of circumstances which lie beyond
the sphere of his influence rather than are spontaneously fixed by
himself; secondly, the means adopted to carry out such objects are not
the sole result of his initiative. On the contrary, they are supplied
him from sources which are not immediately under his authority or
personal influence, but stand rather quite apart from the sphere of his
individual powers as a general.

To sum up, then, though it is true that under the present condition of
the civilized world a man may act independently for himself in many
directions, the fact remains that in whatever direction he may turn
he is still only a member of a fixed order of society and appears as
such limited in his range rather than the vital representative and
individual embodiment of society itself. He acts necessarily under such
a condition of restriction, and our interest in such a personality, no
less than in the content of his aims and activity, is entirely devoid
of completeness. In the end we are invariably driven to concentrate
our attention on the purely personal interest, how far, that is to
say, he attained success, what was the nature of the obstacles and
complications which, in either, through untoward chance or necessity,
confronted or distracted his progress. And if it is, moreover, true
that our modern personality is of infinite significance when we
estimate the character thus manifested as a spiritual product, in
its actions, sufferings, moral opinions, and conduct that is to say,
it is also true that the moral content which is realized in such an
individual is of a restricted character, rather than, as is the case
in the heroic times, the realization of universal right, custom, and
legality. The individual is no longer the exclusive vehicle and actual
embodiment of these powers as in the previous times.

(_c_) Our interest, however, in and need to have presented us such
a completely realized individuality and living self-dependence will
always persist, however strongly we may recognize the worth and
reasonable nature of the more developed condition of an organized and
trained civic society. It is this necessity which makes us regard
with astonishment the youthful spirit of Schiller and Goethe when
they sought to discover that lost self-sufficiency in the prevailing
conditions of modern times. How do we find in particular this attempt
is made by Schiller in his earliest works? Simply by a rebellion
directed against the whole organic framework of civil society. Karl
Moor, suffering injury from the existing order at the hands of those
who abuse the power entrusted them, has the courage to break the
bonds which bind him to law and order altogether, cuts himself adrift
and creates for himself a heroic situation, in which he appears as
the champion of right, and the self-constituted avenger of wrong,
injustice, and oppression. None the less, how insignificant and
isolated must a private revenge of this kind appear, if we estimate
it from the practical point of view, according to the probability of
its success; and, in fact, in one aspect of it, it already contains
the germ of wrong which can only lead to the criminal act on which
it will fall to pieces. No doubt, as personal to Karl Moor himself,
this is a misfortune, a fatality, however, which, despite the tragical
element in it, can only engraft on mere boys the blight of such a
"robber-ideal." In much the same way the characters depicted in "Kabale
und Liebe" suffer wrong under prevailing conditions of life, absorbed
in the trivial facts and passions wholly personal to themselves. It is
not until we come to the dramas of "Fiesco" and "Don Carlos" that we
find characters of nobler significance and more substantive content,
heroes, for example, resolved to liberate their country, or assert the
liberty of religious conviction. With a nobility still more striking
Wallenstein places himself at the head of his army that the crisis in
the political situation may come to a focus. He is fully cognisant
of the nature of the political forces upon which his only means of
control, his army, is dependent; consequently he hesitates for long
whether to follow his private inclination or his duty. He has barely
arrived at a decision when he finds the instrument on which he most
depended slip from his grasp; his means of action is gone. For that
which in the last instance unites the leading officers and generals
is no gratitude for anything that may be due to him on the ground of
past services rendered; his fame as a general has nothing to do with
it, but rather the duty they owe to the universally recognized seat
of government, the oath they have sworn to the head of the State,
the emperor of the Austrian monarchy. He finds himself consequently
in the end isolated, and is not so much fought with and overcome
by an external foe as he is stripped of all means of executing his
purpose. He is deserted by his army and from that moment is a lost
man. The "Götz"[310] of Goethe starts from a dramatic situation of an
analogous though somewhat inverse type. The times of Götz and Franz
von Sickingen belong to the interesting epoch in which knight-errantry
and the self-reliant individuality of the class of nobility is being
superseded by the new creation of an external and legally constituted
social order. To have selected precisely this critical time where we
find the heroic characteristics of the Middle Ages and the legalized
fabric of modern society meet and collide for the subject of his first
artistic production shows much penetration on the part of Goethe.
For Götz and Sickingen are still heroes in the genuine sense, who
are resolved to exercise their influence over circumstances, whether
immediately affecting them or of wider range, out of the resources of
their own personalities, their courage, and their private sense of
right. The new order of things involves Götz in acts of illegality and
brings about the catastrophe of his life. It is only in the Middle
Ages that knight-errantry and the relations of feudalism will supply
a field entirely open to this type of self-reliant manhood. When we
find, moreover, the legalized order co-ordinated more completely in
its prosaic form, the predominant authority in fact, the adventurous
self-dependence of knighthood is left outside it as an unrelated
excrescence; and if an attempt is made to assert it as though it were
still a valid means of attacking wrong, and assisting the oppressed, it
becomes simply an object of ridicule, such as Cervantes illustrates for
us in his "Don Quixote."

In this allusion to the opposition which exists between two
differently constituted _régimes_ of society and the collision which
results from action in defiance of their particular character we have
already indicated what we have above defined generally as the closer
determination and differentiation of the universal state of the world,
that is to say, the _situation_ as generally expressed.

2. THE SITUATION

The ideal world-condition which it is the function of art to present
in contrast to prosaic reality we may conclude from our previous
discussion to be merely a general background of society of a specific
kind; it is merely the _possible_ condition necessary for the
particular presentation, not the presentation itself. What we have
hitherto directed attention to is, in fact, the general background
upon which the living figures of art may appear. It is undoubtedly
fructified with individuality and is supported by its self-subsistency;
but as a _general_ condition it is not yet the active movement of
particular individuals in the very form of life, just as we may say
that the temple which Art erects is not as yet the representation of
the personal godhead, but only encloses the germ of the same. For this
reason we must in the first instance regard this world-condition as
a kind of medium in repose, a harmony, so to speak, of forces which
are operative in it, and to this extent it possesses a substantial
consistency of uniform worth, which, however, must not be accepted
as identical with what has been called "the age of innocence." For
it is a condition in the fulness and sovereignty of whose ethical
atmosphere the terrors of division only are slumbering because, in
our contemplation of it, we have before us, for the first time, the
aspect of its substantial unity, and consequently are only presented
with individuality in its most universal terms, a mode of viewing it
which makes it fade away as though without definition or any essential
disturbance of its unity, instead of giving to it the full value of
definite characteristics. But such characterization is essential to
individuality. And if the Ideal is to appear as _definite form_ it is
necessary for it to escape from such pure universality, or in other
words for it to give the universal a particular expression, and by so
doing impart to it both existence and appearance. Art consequently has
in this connection not only to translate into its medium a _universal_
world-condition, but must proceed beyond this quite indefinite
conception to the composition of pictures of _definite_ character and
action.

Regarded from the aspect under which it affects _individual_ character
this general condition is the environment of circumstance which,
according to its specifically detached form, tends to excite both
collisions and development, forcing thereby the individuals thus
affected to express their _nature_ and exhibit such expression in a
definite form. From the point of view of the world-condition this
self-revelation of particular individuals appears as the passing of its
universality into the distinct embodiments of living individuality,
an aggregate over which _universal forces_ still assert the
_mastery._[311] For the eternal powers operative in the world-process
constitute the substantive content of the Ideal as specifically
defined in what it essentially is. The mode of existence, however,
which is realized through the bare form of external condition is
unworthy of this content. For in the first place such a condition is
associated with habit, and the habitual is no adequate determination
of those profounder interests which are active in _self-conscious
mind._ Furthermore, as we have observed, it was the _contingency_ and
_caprice_ of individuality, by virtue of whose spontaneous activity
these very interests are permitted to appear in life; but this
unessential contingency and caprice is again quite as little adequate
to the substantive universality, which constitutes the notion of
essential actuality. On these grounds respectively we are therefore
compelled to seek an art-envisagement more worthy and better defined
for the concrete content[312] of the Ideal.

This new configuration the universal powers can only retain in
its _determinate existence_ in virtue of the fact that they are
manifested in their essential modes of difference and movement, or,
to put the matter more specifically, through their assertion of the
contradictions which they relatively unfold. Two aspects of the
process of individualization into which the universal thus passes must
be here emphasized. In the first place, there is the _substance_ as
an embracing sphere of universal forces through the differentiation
indicated, which is broken from its substantive unity into its
component parts; secondly, there are the _individuals_, which spring
forth as the active completion of these forces and give to them a
specific objectification.

Now what we have characterized as the difference and opposition in
which the world-condition, hitherto harmonious with the individuals
conditioned by it, is involved, if we consider it from the point of
view of universal condition, is the manifestation of the _essential
content_ which it carries in itself. On the other hand we observe that
the substantive universal in that condition is articulated through
particular units in such a way that this very universal procures
for itself determinate existence, albeit it is thus immersed in the
appearance of chance, disunion, and division, an appearance, which,
however, is rendered nugatory by the fact that it is the universal
which thus appears.

The separation of these forces and their objectification[313] in
individuals can, however, further take place under definite conditions
and circumstances, under which and as a constituent aspect of which
the entire objective appearance receives a determinate form, or as
the stimulative impulse of this very realization. By themselves such
circumstances are without interest[314], and it is only through their
relation to mankind that they receive such a significance, through
whose self-consciousness the content of these spiritual forces is
carried actively into objective appearance. The external circumstances
are consequently only to be regarded of significance in so far as they
supply an essential relation to Spirit, in so far, that is to say,
as they are comprehended by those individual units and afford them
a stimulus to actualize their inward _spiritual_ needs, the aims,
ideas, the determinate substance, in short, of all that requires an
individual embodiment. Regarded as a stimulating influence of this
kind particular circumstances and conditions create what we have called
the _situation_, which is specifically presupposed in the actual
self-expansion and activity of all that still lies undeveloped in the
universal world-condition; it is for this reason we have considered the
previous determination of the notion of the situation as necessary to
any inquiry into the true constituents of _action._

The situation expressed in general terms is in one aspect of it the
circumstance _particularized_ to the point of _definite character_,
and under this characterization it is, to put it another way, the
stimulating impulse to a particular expression of content, which it
is the function of artistic presentation to transmute into a specific
form of existence. Looked at from this latter point of view especially
the situation offers a wide field for contemplation, inasmuch as it
has ever been one of the most essential objects of art to discover
situations of real interest, that is to say, of such a kind as will
present to us the profound and weighty interest, the truest content of
spiritual life. The requirements of the several arts in this respect no
doubt differ. Sculpture, for example, is pre-eminently limited in its
reference to the inwardly detailed variety of situations. Painting and
music are already operative in a freer and more comprehensive medium.
Finally, we are least able among them all to exhaust the possibilities
of poetry in this respect.

Since we have not yet arrived at that portion of our subject where we
deal directly with the specific arts, it will be sufficient here to
draw attention to a few of the most general aspects of that inquiry,
which we may subdivide in the following manner.

_First_, we would observe that the situation still retains the
form of _universality_ and thereby of _indeterminacy_, so long as
it is undeveloped and without definite characterization; we have,
consequently, at first present before us a situation which is without
situation. For the form of indeterminacy is itself only _one_ form
as opposed to its contradiction of determinacy, and is shown to be,
by virtue of this very contrast, a one-sided aspect which as such
possesses a determinate relation.

_Secondly_, however, the situation passes in separation away from this
universality, and becomes certainly determinate to that extent, but at
first with a determinacy which produces no destructive consequences,
that is to say, it is one which offers no stimulus to _active
opposition_ and its necessary resolution.

_Thirdly_, we find the element of _disunion_ in all its vigour creating
by the definition of its opposed characteristics the essence of the
situation, which thereby is carried into a _collision_, which again
proceeds to reactions, and, as such, forms the point of departure to
the conception of artistic action properly so called.

We may, in fact, characterize the situation generally as the
_intermediate plane_ between the universal world-condition still in
a state of equilibrium, and the concrete action unfolded in all its
tendency to movement and reaction, a position which gives to it the
characteristics of both extremes, and enables us to pass over from the
one to the other.

_(a) The Absence of Situation_[315]

We passed from the notion of the universal world-condition in
presenting to ourselves the form of it as essentially individual
self-subsistency. Self-subsistency, however, regarded simply in its
essential form, presents to us in the first instance merely the
secure repose upon its own resources in its bare tranquillity. The
form as thus defined is carried into no relation with another, but
remains at one with itself in inclusion with its unity both, within
and without. This presents us with the situation which is without
situation, an illustration of which we may take those ancient types of
temple-building dating from the earliest days of art, whose character
of profound immutable seriousness, of tranquil, nay even of austere
and grandiose, dignity has been the object of imitation even in more
recent times proceeding on lines of a similar type. The Egyptian and
most ancient Greek sculptures will further illustrate for us the same
kind of indeterminate situation. In the plastic art of Christianity,
especially if we consider particular examples of early bust-sculpture,
we shall find both God the Father and Christ are presented in a similar
spirit. Indeed, such a mode of delineation is peculiarly adapted to
present us with the secure substantiality of the Divine, whether such
be apprehended as a definite and particular Godhead, or is grasped as
essentially absolute personality; and this is so in virtue of the very
defect of such a representation, that it gives us portraits of persons
of middle-age which are without any trace of definite situations,
in which the character of the individual as such can reveal itself,
and only the attempt is made to express the entirety of determinate
character in its quality of stability[316].

_(b) The Situation defined in its Harmlessness_[317]

The second point to emphasize is, inasmuch as the situation generally
is reached in the _definition_ of form, the passage from this
tranquillity and blessed repose, or from the unbroken severity
and force of self-consistency, forms which subsist in unfeatured
equilibrium, that is to say, immutable both within and without, have to
be set in motion and surrender their undressed simplicity. This bare
progression to a more specific manifestation in some particular mode of
expression is what we may describe certainly as definite situation, but
a situation which has not yet asserted conflicting elements in itself,
and is fully ripe for collision.

This first step in the process of individualized expression is
consequently of a kind that carries with it no further result; it is
set in no antagonistic opposition to something else, in a relation
which evokes both collision and reaction; it is already in its
character of unconstrainedness finished and complete in itself. With
such a type of situation we may associate those which are mainly to
be regarded as a kind of play, in so far as all that proceeds or is
carried out in them indicates no real seriousness of purpose. For
all earnestness in any kind of activity is generally the result of
oppositions and contradictions, which drive on their way to the final
removal or victory of one side or the other. For this reason situations
of this kind cannot themselves be identified with actions, nor are they
the stimulative impulse of actions; they are indeed, in a certain
aspect, of determinate character, but they are either circumstances of
the most trivial significance, or a form of action which is without an
essentially serious object, which either is the result of conflicts, or
is able to carry the action yet further into conflicts.

(_α_) The first thing to arrest us in this process is the passage
generally from the repose of the unfeatured situation to a condition of
emotion and expression: this is asserted partly as purely mechanical
motion, in part also as the first impulse and satisfaction of any
internal want. The Egyptians, for example, represented the gods in
their sculpture with closely locked limbs. The Greeks, on the contrary,
released both arms and legs, and endowed the bodily form with all
that is appropriate to the advance and general variety of movement.
Permanent repose, a seated attitude, a tranquil gaze, are all of them
simple conditions under which the Greeks apprehended their gods; they
are modes which unquestionably gave to the self-subsistent figure of
Godhead a certain characterization, but one nevertheless which is
not carried forward into other relations and oppositions, but rather
remains enclosed within itself, and permanently significant as such.
Situations of this simple kind attach in a particular way to sculpture,
and the ancients, above all others, were inexhaustible in discovering
fit subjects for such a condition of unconstrained freedom. In this
respect they showed an extraordinary insight; for it is precisely
through contrast with the insignificance of the particular situation
that the majesty and self-subsistency of the ideal types of the Greek
Pantheon were made to appear so striking. It was, in fact, through the
harmlessness and insignificance of what appeared to be done or left
undone that the blessed peaceful tranquillity and immutability of the
immortal gods was brought most clearly to consciousness. The situation
merely indicates the particular character of either god or hero in
quite a general way, such as brings them into no relation with other
gods, or at least into no relation suggestive of hostility or division.

(_β_) It is a further step in the direction of more defined situation,
when we find in such any particular purpose already represented in it,
an activity which stands in definite relation to something external,
and the self-subsistent figure itself expressed as within the sphere
of such purpose or activity. Even objectification such as these,
however, which have no real disturbing influence upon the tranquillity
and cheerful blessedness of the figures represented, are rather to be
regarded as particular modes of presentation incidental to this very
quality of cheerful contentment. The invention of the Greeks was here,
too, exceptionally thoughtful and fruitful. It is essential to the
unconstrainedness of such situations that the activity here presented
should merely indicate an action in its initial stage in such a way
that no further developments or oppositions are likely to proceed from
it, but that all that appears necessary to complete it should be found
enclosed in the action depicted.

As an illustration of this the situation of the Belvedere Apollo is
seized at the moment when he moves forward in wrathful majesty after
slaying the Python with his arrow. A situation of this kind has
not the grandiose simplicity of the earlier Greek sculpture, which
asserts for our intelligence the repose and open clarity of the gods
by means of expressed actions of less significance. Take the case of
Aphrodite peacefully gazing at herself while emerging from her bath
in full possession of her charms; or of fauns and satyrs at play,
play that is wholly absorbed in itself; or of that famous satyr who
dandled the young Bacchus in his arms, while he looks down upon him
with infinite tenderness and grace; to say nothing of the endless
variety of unconstrained activities in which Eros is depicted. Such
are a few examples of this type of situation. If the action is of more
concrete character we are confronted with a more involved situation,
which, at least for the artistic presentment of the Greek gods as
self-substantive powers, is less appropriate. In a case of this kind
the pure universality of the individual god is less able to transpierce
the accumulated detail of the particular action which he expresses. The
Mercury of Pigalli, which is a present of Louis XV to the exposition
of statuary in Sanssouci, is fastening on his winged sandals. This
is a perfectly harmonious action. The Mercury of Thorwaldsen, on the
contrary, is depicted under a situation which is almost too complicated
for sculpture. He listens attentively to the flute of Marsyas. At
the same time he is craftily spying him to see how he may slay him
while his hand grasps maliciously for the dagger he has concealed. In
opposition to this, if we may add one more illustration from a more
modern work of art, is that representation by Rudolf Schadow, of a
maiden binding her sandals in much the same simple manner as we find in
the case of Mercury. In this example the naïveté of the situation does
not contain the interest we experience when it is a god who exhibits
such unconstrained action. When it is only a maiden who fastens her
sandals or spins, there is little else to engage our attention but the
simple action, which is by itself of little significance or importance.

(_γ_) We shall find further, if we follow up the above train of
thought, that the more closely defined situation can be treated more
generally, as merely a more or less definite stimulus presenting the
_opportunity_ for further development of expressed action of wider
range related to the primary subject with varying degrees of affinity.
Many lyrical poems have what we may call an occasional situation
of this kind. A particular mood or a certain atmosphere of emotion
is a situation which can be arrested poetically for consciousness,
and, furthermore, in particular relation to external circumstances,
festivals, or public victories, is able to carry us forward to this or
that artistic expression, either of more comprehensive or restricted
range, and in every kind of embodiment of feeling and idea. Pindar's
odes of victory are supreme examples of this type of occasional
poetry. Goethe, too, has selected as the subject-matter of his muse
many lyrical situations of a similar character; and, in fact, if we
look closely into the matter, we shall hardly be wrong in calling his
"Werther" a poem of occasion. It is through the medium of "Werther"
that Goethe has elaborated the convulsions and anguish of his own
heart, incorporated, in short, the facts of his own experience in a
work of art. This, after all, is true of every lyrical poet; he gives
poetical expression to that which nearly affects him, and thereby
throws the windows of his heart open to the fresh air. That which has
hitherto been sealed up within is released in the external object,
from which our humanity has freed itself, just as we are the lighter
for the rain of tears, in which the sorrow is wept away. So Goethe,
as in fact he has told us himself, by his composition of Werther,
liberated himself from the mastery and pressure of his heart troubles.
At the same time we must point out that this last-mentioned situation
is not really appropriate to the type with which we are now dealing;
it obviously presents the profoundest contradiction in itself which
calls for resolution. No doubt in the kind of lyrical situation we have
identified with "the occasional" we may have declared a circumstance
objectively determined, in other words, an activity in close relation
to the external world; but, on the other hand, we find the poetic
temperament equally able to withdraw itself within the atmosphere it
creates wholly free from its external environment, and to make that
inward world which is the combined product of circumstance and emotion
its true point of departure.

_(c) The Collision_

All the situations to which we have hitherto directed attention are,
as already observed, neither true actions in themselves nor indeed the
stimulative source of such action. Their determination was to a greater
or less degree the purely occasional circumstance or condition, or an
action in itself of no significance, in which a substantive content was
expressed in such a way that its specific character appeared as a mere
harmless play, in which nothing of a truly serious nature was implied.
The full seriousness and weighty import of a situation can only begin
when we find in it the element of disruption, where the determination
itself exposes an essential aspect of difference, and by its opposition
to something else becomes the source of a collision.

The _collision_ arises, as we are now considering it, in an act of
_violation_, which is unable to retain its character as such, but is
compelled to find a new principle of unity; it is a change in the
previously existent condition of harmony, a change which is still in
process. The collision is, however, not an _action_, and is to be taken
simply as stimulus to action to all that characterizes the situation.
And this is true, although the contradiction in which the collision
is enclosed may be the result of previous action. As an example of
this we may cite the trilogies of the ancients, which carry forward
the main theme by presenting at the close of one drama the collision
which forms the stimulative impulse of the next, which, in its return,
renders necessary the resolution which is carried out by the third.
And, moreover, for this very reason that the collision always requires
some resolution attendant on this conflict of opposing elements, the
more a situation is full of it the more it is peculiarly adapted to the
subject-matter of dramatic art, it being the especial claim of that
art to present beauty in its completest and profoundest development.
Sculpture, on the contrary, is not wholly suited to give embodiment to
any action, through which the great spiritual forces are manifested
either in their division or reconciliation, and indeed the art of
painting, despite its more extended spatial significance, is only able
to objectify a single moment of action.

These situations of tragic significance introduce a peculiar difficulty
in dealing with them which is inherent in their very conception. For
inasmuch as they obviously arise from violations of the world-condition
they offer to our consideration circumstances which are unable to
continue as they are, which render necessary something of a remedial
nature to reclothe them. But the beauty of the Ideal consists precisely
in its undisturbed unity, repose, and consummation with itself. The
collision, on the other hand, disturbs this harmony of what is truly
real and ethical, and drives this unity of the Ideal into discord
and opposition. Through the representation of such disruption the
Ideal itself suffers violation. The function of art will undoubtedly
consist partly in preventing the entire destruction of free beauty
in this difference, and partly in only carrying this breach of unity
and the conflict it occasions to a point in which harmony may again
be recovered as the result of such a conflict and its resolution,
and in this way become manifest for the first time in its essential
perfection. It is, however, impossible to determine on a general
principle the precise limit to which such discordance may be carried
inasmuch as the several arts in this respect preserve their independent
character. The medium of the subjective idea can support a far intenser
disruption than that of the plastic arts[318]. In other words,
poetry is quite within its right when it breaks up the unity of the
world of the imagination even to the point of the extremest form of
desperation, and in its delineation of external objects to that of
absolute ugliness. In the case of the plastic arts, on the contrary, in
painting, that is to say, and even more so in sculpture, the external
form remains in unalterable fixity; it can neither be removed nor
lightly passed over in such a way that it again disappears. Under such
conditions it would be a serious defect to represent once and for all
an ugliness, which could not possibly be transmuted. Consequently all
that would be quite compatible in dramatic poetry, which is able to
represent a momentary appearance that again vanishes, is not within the
province of the plastic arts.

In discussing the more obvious types of collision we can only in this
portion of our inquiry indicate the most general points of view. We
would particularly draw attention to three fundamental aspects under
which they may be co-ordinated.

_First_, there are those collisions which proceed from purely
_natural_, that is to say, physical conditions, in so far as these
are characterized with qualities which are negative or evil and
consequently discordant.

_Secondly_, we have collisions which are of a _spiritual_ nature,
but which depend on _natural_ conditions, conditions which may in
themselves have a positive[319] character yet for the spirit contain
within themselves the seeds of difference and contradiction.

_Thirdly_, there are divisions which are caused entirely by disruption
in the Spirit alone; to these alone we are justified in attaching the
peculiar interest of contradiction which is bound up with genuine
_human activity_.

(_α_) Now with reference to the first type of conflicting forces--for
the reason that here it is only external Nature, through the
maladies and other evils and infirmities which are incidental to
her creating, conditions which destroy the pre-existent harmony of
life, replacing such with a state of antagonism--such can at most
merely serve as a stimulus for something outside them. Regarded
wholly by themselves such collisions are of no interest; they are the
subject-matter of art simply for the sake of the disruption which may
follow as a _consequence_ of some natural misfortune. The "Alcestis"
of Euripides, we may add, too, that of Gluck, the subject of whose
opera is practically the same, are examples of this; in both the
sickness of Admetus is necessarily presupposed. That sickness merely
by itself could not fitly supply a subject for artistic treatment.
It only becomes, even in the handling of Euripides, associated with
it by virtue of the individual characters, who, on account of such
misfortune, are compelled to face a further collision. It is the word
of the oracle that Admetus must die unless another will pass to the
underworld for his sake. Alcestis, out of love for her husband, devotes
herself to such a sacrifice, resolves to die, in order to restrain
Death from touching her beloved, the father of her children, the king.
In the Philoctetes of Sophocles a physical malady is also the cause of
the collision. Here the Greeks during their voyage to Troy place the
man who is suffering from a wounded foot, caused by the serpent's bite
in Chrysas, on the island of Lemnos. In this case, too, the physical
mishap is merely the extreme meeting point and incentive of a further
collision. For, according to the prophecy, Troy can only fall when the
arrows of Hercules are in the hands of the storming army. Philoctetes
refuses to give them up because he has been compelled for nine years
to suffer the martyrdom of his banishment. This refusal, no less than
the fact of his unrighteous desertion from which it springs, could have
been followed by every variety of result other than that which took
place; the real interest accordingly does not centre in the malady and
its physical necessity, but in the opposition which arises from the
refusal of Philoctetes to surrender the arrows. The case of the plague
in the Greek camp before Troy is very similar; although this is already
represented entirely as the consequence of former transgression, as a
punishment, in short, a mode of statement more adapted to epic than
dramatic poetry, nevertheless it is closely associated with evils
incidental to natural misfortune such as storm, shipwreck, and drought.
As a rule, however, art will not represent such mischance as mere
accident, but rather as an obstruction and misfortune whose necessity
simply consists in assuming precisely this particular form rather than
another.

(_β_) But, to turn now to our second type of the collision, inasmuch
as the external powers of Nature are not that which is most essential
to the interests and contradictions of human life, in cases where they
are found closely associated with such spiritual relations, they will
present themselves merely as the ground from which the collision breaks
forth in its true character. This is the point of view from which we
must regard all situations, where we trace the original source of
conflict in the facts of natural _birth._ We will shortly distinguish
between three particular cases of this.

(_αα_) In the first place we have the right that is bound up with
natural condition, that which constitutes relationship and inheritance
for example, which for the very reason that it stands in close
connection with Nature carries with it a number of relations that are
bound up with her, and this though the right, the fact is one and only
one. The most important example of this is the right of succession to
the throne. It is important to observe that this right must not as
yet, in relation to the collisions which spring from it, be absolutely
fixed by rule, otherwise the resultant conflict will be of quite
another character. If, that is to say, the right of succession is
not as yet entirely controlled by legislation and the social order
which it implies, no wrong will necessarily attach to any one of the
alternatives, namely, whether it be an older or younger brother, or any
other relative of the royal household who obtains the sovereignty. But
inasmuch as sovereignty is a qualitative rather than a quantitative
possession, which cannot like gold and other material goods be divided
up according to a just principle, dispute and contention is inevitably
the result of such a form of succession. When Œdipus, for example,
leaves the throne of Thebes without a ruler, he leaves his two sons
confronting each other with a right and claim of equal strength. The
brothers arrange to occupy the throne alternately from year to year.
Eteocles, however, breaks the compact and Polynices brings an army
against Thebes to enforce his right. The antagonism of brothers has
always been in the history of art a fruitful source of collision; it
commences indeed with the story of Cain who slew his brother Abel. In
the tale of Shah-Rameh, the earliest example we have of a Persian book
of heroic legend, it is a contention of throne succession which is the
source of the most varied conflicts. In this Feridu divided the Earth
among his three brothers. Selm receives as his portion Rum and Chawer;
Turan and Osin are given to Thur, and Fredysh becomes lord of the Earth
from Iran. All three, however, claim the land which belongs to his
brothers, and endless quarrels and wars are the result. In the Middle
Ages we find just the same countless examples of family and dynastic
broils. Such dissensions, however, appear in themselves to be due to
accidental circumstance. It is not necessary that brothers should be
at enmity; particular circumstances and more important causes must be
attached, such as the in itself tragic birth of the sons of Œdipus, or,
as we find in "the Bride of Messina," the author is at pains to shift
the quarrel of the brothers on to still more fateful circumstances.
In Shakespeare's "Macbeth" a similar collision is the foundation of
the tragic dénouement. Duncan is king and Macbeth, as his nearest
and oldest relation, is consequently heir to the throne with a right
precedent even to Duncan's sons. The primary incentive of Macbeth's
crime is the wrong which the king has done him in naming his own son as
heir to the throne. This justification of Macbeth, which is supported
by the chronicles of the time, Shakespeare has entirely passed over,
because, it was solely his object to bring into startling relief the
repulsive aspect of Macbeth's ambitious passion, in order thereby
to make his work agreeable to King James, who would be naturally
interested in finding the crime of Macbeth depicted without extenuating
circumstances. As a consequence we can find no sufficient reason why,
under Shakespeare's handling of the subject, Macbeth fails to murder
the sons of Duncan no less than their father, lets them escape in
fact; nor can we understand why they are wholly overlooked by the
nobles. However, the entire collision upon which, the drama of Macbeth
turns carries us beyond the particular type which we are now mainly
considering.

(_ββ_) In the _second_ of our examples in the type of collision[320]
we are now discussing we find the reverse situation to that just
discussed, and it consists in this that difference of birth, which
carries within itself a _wrongs_ is moreover, through ethical _custom_
or _law_, held within the chains of an insuperable _barrier_, so that
it receives at the same time the appearance of an innate wrong, and
consequently is the cause of collisions. Slavery, serfdom, differences
of caste, the position of Jews in many states and, with certain
qualifications, even the contrast between an aristocratical and citizen
class are all of them cases for consideration under this head. The
conflict here consists in this, that on the one hand humanity has
rights, relations, desires, aims and requirements which belong to it
essentially in virtue of its fundamental idea, which nevertheless
in each one of the above mentioned examples meet with dangerous
restriction and obstruction owing to the compulsive necessity of
natural birth. On this type of collision we have the following remarks
to offer.

The differences which obtain between classes, such as the ruled and
the rulers, are, no doubt, essential to the notion of state-life,
and are founded on reason, for they are caused by the inevitable
articulation of the organic community, and assert themselves as such
through the specific forms of occupation, disposition, modes of life,
and general levels of education in all their branches. It is another
matter, however, when these differences as they affect individuals are
determined absolutely by the accident of birth, so that the individual
man from the very start is not on account of any quality in himself,
but solely through the accident of Nature, irrevocably relegated
to a particular class or caste. In such a case it is obvious these
differences appear as innate and are, moreover, though purely external,
girt with force in its highest and most aggressive mode. We are not
bound to ask ourselves how this fixity and compulsive restraint came
originally into existence. For the nation may originally have been
united, and the natural distinction between freeman and serf been only
evolved at a later time, or the difference between castes, classes,
and privileged persons may have grown out of earlier distinctions of
nations and races, as many are inclined to think is the explanation of
the caste distinctions of India. All this is a matter of no moment to
us here. The main point simply consists in this, that vital relations
of this kind, which regulate the entire course of human existence,
have their source in natural conditions. On general principles, no
doubt, distinctions of class can be justified, but at the same time no
individual should be wholly robbed of his right to determine as his
choice may direct to which particular class he shall belong. Natural
capacity, talents, adaptability, and education are the only right
means to direct the way and decide in this respect. When, however,
the right of choice is debarred from birth onwards and a man is made
thereby dependent on Nature and its contingency, there is always the
possibility of conflict within the sphere of this necessity between
the states thus enforced on the individual by natural conditions and
the measure of spiritual education which he may acquire and the higher
demand which it may justly make. This is a pathetic and unfortunate
type of collision which has its source in an essential _wrong_ which
the freedom of art is quite unable to respect. In the social condition
of our own days distinctions of class, with a few exceptions, are
not determined by birth. The ruling dynasty and the peerage are the
only exceptions, and these depend on a higher conception of the State
altogether. For the rest, the mere fact of birth creates no essential
distinction that can ultimately determine the class to which a man
may belong if he is otherwise competent to join it. For this reason,
however, we must condition the demand for entire liberty of choice
with the requirement that in education, knowledge, ability, and
general tastes the individual is equal to the particular society with
which he may desire to associate. If, on the contrary, the fact of a
man's birth presents an insuperable obstacle to such claims, which he
would otherwise be quite competent to satisfy by virtue of his own
vigorous activity, then such a situation must appear to us not merely
a misfortune, but essentially a wrong under which he is compelled to
suffer injury. He is thus separated by a purely natural partition
wall which is essentially unjust, that is to say, one beyond which
his talents, sentiments, and general education have already raised
him, from that which he was competent to reach, and a purely natural
condition whose legalized fixity has been determined wholly by caprice
presumes to oppose insuperable barriers to the freedom rightly demanded
by all spiritual life.

To examine more closely the nature of this type of collision we shall
do well to look at it from three different points of view, each of
which are of essential importance.

In the _first_ place, it is necessary that the individual should, in
the strength of his own spiritual resources, already really have passed
beyond the natural barriers whose opposition is to give way before
his aims and desires, otherwise the demand is simply an act of folly.
If, for example, a domestic servant, whose education and ability is
merely that of a menial, falls in love with a princess or a lady of
high society, or, inversely, either of these with him, such a love
affair is both absurd and devoid of all taste, and this is so even if
the artistic representation of this passion display all the depth and
interest of which an ardent heart is capable. In such a case it is
not so much the difference of birth which creates the obstacle; this
is rather to be found in the entire content of interests, education,
aims of life, requirements, and mode of sentiment which distinguish in
status, material resources, and social qualifications a lady in high
position from a domestic servant. If love is, as in the case assumed,
the one and only bond of a union, and is associated with nothing else
throughout the entire sphere of all that men and women have to live
through in just accordance with that which a particular status requires
from their intelligence and experience, it must necessarily remain
devoid of content and is simply a union of the senses. Love, to be
wholly complete, is nothing less than a real harmony of the entire
conscious life, in which the full nobility of sentiment can be shared
and appreciated.

The _second_ case we wish to examine is that in which the dependence of
birth surrounds an essentially free human life and the objects it may
rightly set before itself with legalized fetters of obstruction. This
collision also presents an element unadapted for artistic treatment,
opposed, that is to say, to the notion of the Ideal, despite its love
to make use of it and the facility with which it may attempt to do
so. If distinctions of birth through positive laws and the powers
which support them create a persistent wrong, as doubtless may be the
case where a man is born an outcast or a Jew, he obviously, from one
point of view, is entirely right in holding with all the strength of
his inward life, which rebels before such a barrier, that the same is
dissolvable, that he, in fact, recognizes his individuality as apart
from it. To oppose such restraint appears to be wholly justifiable.
But in so far as it becomes impossible through the force of existing
circumstances to overcome such a barrier, which is consequently
converted into an irrevocable necessity, a situation of this kind can
only be regarded as a misfortune which itself is not without an element
of falsity. For the rational man is inevitably forced, in so far as
he is unable to subjugate the opposing necessity, to submit to the
same: it is not in reason to continue to fight against the inevitable,
but rather quietly to let it pass over him. He must, in fact, abandon
the sense of interest in and need of that which is, by virtue of this
barrier, swept from his reach, and suffer what he fails to overcome
with the quiet courage of passive endurance. Where a struggle is of
no avail it is the part of wisdom to be quit of it in order at the
least to retire into the _formal_ independence of personal liberty.
By doing so the forces of wrong have no longer power over him; if, on
the contrary, he battles against them he must necessarily experience
his dependence in its fullest extent. At the same time it remains
unquestionable that neither this abstraction of formal independence any
more than that content which can lead to no result are truly beautiful
when artistically considered.

There is a _third_ type of collision which, while being immediately
connected with that we have just considered, is equally removed from
the genuine Ideal. It is to be found affecting that class of persons
who attempt to assert some privilege which the mere fact of birth
concedes them and supports with the full weight of a religious title,
positive enactments, and the prevailing conditions of society. In such
a case, it is true, we have an independent position in harmonious
relation with what is externally realized in positive institutions,
but when considered as the mere consistency of that which is in itself
unjust and irrational it is quite as much as in our former example a
purely formal independence, and the notion of the Ideal disappears.
We may, no doubt, very possibly persuade ourselves that the Ideal is
retained because we have here an appearance as though the personal life
is in full union with the universal and its legalized constitution,
remaining consistently in such unity; but it will be observed that here
the universal does not assert its dominating power in the _particular
person_, as we found the heroic Ideal demanded, but only in and through
the public authority of positive laws and their administration;
moreover, what the individual here asserts is assumed to be essentially
wrong, and he loses in consequence the substantive significance which
we have seen to be also essential to the Ideal. An affair in which the
ideal subject of art is concerned must itself be at bottom true and
justifiable. To this type belong the legalized lordship exercised over
slaves or serfs, the right to rob a foreigner of his liberty, or to
sacrifice the same to the gods. No doubt it is quite possible that such
a right may be sustained by individuals with unquestioning belief that
they are justified in so doing, as in India, for example, the higher
castes make use of their privileges, or as Thoas ordered the sacrifice
of Orestes, or in Russia the lords are wont to flout their serfs.
In fact, those who are in authority are very likely to execute such
rights as legalized rights on account of the interest they may have in
preserving them. But in a case of this kind their right will be merely
the unrighteous right of the barbarian, and they must themselves appear
to us in the category of barbarians, at least, who resolve to carry
out and perfect what is essentially injustice. The legalized form,
under which the individual shelters himself, is, for the time to which
it belongs, and its spirit and the educational standard adapted to
it, no doubt to be respected and justified. But if we reflect upon it
rationally and apart from that, it is wholly positive[321], containing
no intrinsic claims or authority. Moreover, if the individual makes use
of his privileges for purely personal objects, under the mastery of
particular passions and the aims of mere selfishness, in addition to
our barbarian we get a bad character to boot.

Poets have frequently sought to arouse our pity, and it may be our fear
as well, through the presentation of conflicts of this kind, following
the rule of Aristotle, who lays it down that fear and compassion are
objects of tragedy. Strictly speaking we experience neither fear nor
reverence when confronted with rights which only exist among barbarians
and are the misfortune of uncivilized times. Any compassion which such
situations are likely to arouse is almost immediately converted into a
spirit of indignant hostility. The only true artistic _dénouement_ of
such a conflict is one where we find such illegitimate rights are not
carried into execution, as, for example, neither Iphigenia nor Orestes
are respectively sacrificed in Aulis and Tauris.

(_γγ_) The _third_ and last class of that type of collision which is
based on purely natural condition is that which is duetto personal
passion caused by natural peculiarities of temperament and character.
The jealousy of Othello is a supreme example of this. Ambition,
avarice, nay, even love itself in certain aspects, will furnish other
illustrations. Collision of this kind is only properly referred to such
passions in so far as individuals, seized and dominated exclusively by
the power of such emotions, are thereby forced into antagonism with
the truly ethical constitution and inherently justifiable course of
human existence, and consequently are plunged into a still more serious
conflict.

This carries our inquiry into the consideration of that third
subdivision of our original classification of general types of
collision, the type of which is based exclusively upon the conflict of
spiritual forces, in so far as such opposition is the result of human
activity.

(_γ_) We have already observed when dealing with purely natural
collisions that they only form the starting-point as it were for
further states of contradiction. And the same is more or less true
of the second type of conflict already adverted to. All these, in
artistic compositions of really profound significance, are unable to
remain in such forms of opposition as we have hitherto discussed. Such
disturbances and conflicting elements merely substantiate the opportune
moment, out of which the true and essential forces of spiritual life
will clash together in opposition and contend for the mastery. That
which is spiritual can only be set in activity by virtue of spirit.
Consequently the oppositions of Spirit can only win reality in actual
human deed, can only thus manifest themselves in their true character.

The position we have arrived at, then, is this. We have on one hand a
difficulty, an obstacle, a violation effected through something human
life has carried out in action. We have on the other a violation of
interests and forces intrinsically just and right. By treating these
two forms of determination in close juxtaposition we, for the first
time, are able to gauge the full depth of this last type of collision.

We may distinguish between the prominent examples which fall within the
consideration of this class of cases as follows:

(_αα_) In passing from the sphere of that type of conflict which we
have pointed out rests for its primary basis on what is entirely due
to Nature we observe that the first class of cases which confronts us
on crossing the boundary to the consideration of a new type is closely
related to that we have just left behind us. If, then, human action
is assumed to be responsible for the collision, it will follow that
what is carried out as natural through human action, that is to say,
in so far as humanity is not entirely _spiritual_, will consist in
this that a particular action is performed _unconsciously_ and without
purpose, which will be found afterwards to be a positive infraction of
the forces of self-respecting and civilized society. The consciousness
which any man latterly acquires of the injurious nature of an action,
of which he was previously unaware, will drive him who still accepts
the responsibility of such an action into division and conflict. The
ground of such a conflict, in fact, consists in the opposition with
which the mind is confronted between that which was actually before
it _when the action took place_, and the subsequent discovery of all
that was really _implied_ in the act itself. The cases of Œdipus and
Ajax will at once suggest themselves as examples. The action of Œdipus,
if viewed simply with reference to his will and knowledge, amounted
merely to the fact that he killed a perfect stranger in a quarrel.
The unconscious act was the reality in its full significance, that
is to say, the murder of his own father. Ajax, in a fit of frenzy,
slaughtered the cattle of the Greeks believing them to be the Greek
chieftains. On regaining his senses and discovering what he really did
he is seized with a sense of shame which drives him into collision with
himself. We must, however, observe that what has been unconsciously
violated by a man in the type of collision we are now examining ought
to be something which he himself, when fully in a position to judge,
would both honour and revere. If such a reverential attitude has its
roots merely in personal idiosyncrasy or superstition, such a collision
can arouse, to say the least, no really profound interest.

(_ββ_) Further, inasmuch as in the cases we are now discussing the
conflict arises from a _spiritual_ violation of spiritual forces
through human action, the collision more generally appropriate to
the type will consist in a violation which is perpetrated with full
consciousness _proceeding out of such_ and the intention it implies.
The point of departure here may centre again in passion, violence,
folly, and other similar qualities. The Trojan war, for example,
originates in the rape of Helen. Agamemnon afterwards sacrifices
Iphigenia, and so violates the feelings of her mother, slaying thus the
darling of her womb. Clytemnestra, in consequence, murders her spouse.
Orestes avenges the murder of his father and king by assassinating his
mother. In a similar way in "Hamlet" the father is sent to his grave by
a stratagem, and the mother of Hamlet insults the _manes_ of the dead
man by a precipitate marriage with his murderer.

In the case of these collisions as in those already considered, the
main point is this, that humanity is engaged in a self-imposed conflict
with what is intrinsically moral, true, and worthy of reverence. If
this is not so, then, for all who are really conscious of what is moral
and right, such a conflict can only appear without worth or material
significance, as is the case, for example, in the famous episode of the
Mahâ-Bhârata, with reference to Nalas and Damayanti. King Nalas marries
the princess Damayanti, who is allowed the privilege of making a free
choice among her sisters. All the other suitors are genii floating in
the air; Nalas stands on the Earth alone as a man, and she has the good
sense to select him. The genii are consequently much enraged, and watch
for the moment when they may find King Nalas tripping. For many years
they can bring to his charge no offence, as he is capable of none.
At last, however, they obtain power over him, for he commits a great
crime; the crime is this, namely, that after making water, he treads
with his foot upon the earth thus watered. According to Indian ideas
this is a severe offence which cannot escape punishment. From that
moment the genii have him in their power; one renders all his amatory
desires abortive, another excites his brother against him, and finally
poor Nalas, after forfeiting his throne and being reduced to beggary,
is driven forth a wanderer in wretchedness with Damayanti. At length
he is even compelled to part with her, until, as the tale will have
it, after many adventures, he is once more set on the throne of his
original happiness. The real conflict upon which for the Indians of old
days the whole of this story was supported was an essential desecration
of a sacred thing: according to our notions the tale is absurd from
beginning to end.

(_γγ_) Thirdly, it is not necessary that the disruption should be
direct, or, in other words, that the action taken solely by itself
should be an act of collision; the fact of collision may well appear
out of relations and circumstances of opposition and antagonism which
are forced upon the mind during the process of that action's execution.
Juliet and Romeo are in love with one another. In the mere fact of
their love there is nothing to suggest disunion. But they are aware
that their families are living in mutual hate and hostility, that their
parents will never consent to the marriage, and they are carried into
collision by virtue of this preassumed situation of antagonistic forces.

We must content ourselves here with these very general remarks upon the
relation which the determinate situation occupies in its opposition
to the universal world-condition. Were we to extend our inquiry into
all the divergent aspects, modifications, and nuances of the subject,
attempting thereby to express an opinion upon every possible form of
situation, this chapter would alone present us with sufficient matter
for discussions of endless prolixity and diffuseness. The discovery of
different situations implies a content of exhaustless possibilities;
and in every particular example the essential question involved is
how such may be adapted to the treatment of any specific art, in true
subordination to the principles and character of such an art. To the
fairy story much is permitted which is forbidden to a more stringent
mode of artistic representation. And we may say that generally the
discovery[322] of the situation is a critical point in the process of
art-production which often presents great difficulty to artists. In our
own days the difficulty of obtaining a suitable subject-matter as a
source for the circumstances and situations which the artist requires
is a common complaint. At first sight it may appear to us more in
keeping with our notion of poet if he borrow from his own resources,
and invent situations himself; but such independence does little to
increase his claims as a creative artist. For the situation does not
directly constitute the spirituality of his work nor indeed give us
its true artistic form: all that it does is to supply the external
material in which as its appropriate medium a character or temperament
is unfolded before us. It is only after working into this external
material in which actions and characters find their starting-point
that the true genius of the artist is actively displayed. The poet
consequently has little or no claim to our thanks for merely having
himself invented this least of all poetical aspects of his production.
He is, in fact, fully entitled to draw as much and as frequently as he
pleases from anything that comes to his hand, whether it be history,
saga, mythos, or chronicle, nay, even from material and situations
which have already been artistically treated. Just as we find in the
art of painting the external matter of the situation is borrowed from
legends of saints, and the process has been repeated on similar lines
over and over again. To discover the real artistic significance of
such artistic work we must penetrate far beyond the mere invention of
particular situations. The same remarks will apply in full force to
the entire wealth of the circumstances and developments artistically
handled. In reference to this it is frequently claimed as a virtue of
modern art in contrast with that of the ancients that we find in it
an infinitely more exuberant imagination. As a matter of fact, we do
find in the artistic creations of the Middle Ages and our modern world
the most extraordinary variety and interfusion of situations, events,
and occurrences, whether tragic or otherwise. This fulness of detail,
however, does not take us far. In spite of it all we have very few
dramas or epics of the first excellence. For the main point is not the
external course and interchange of a variety of events, when we find
such events and histories merely complete the entire content of our
work of art; rather it is the ethical and spiritual form which embodies
them, and the masterful movements of temperament and character which
are exposed and unveiled during the entire process of this artistic
embodiment.

Glancing now at the main position we have arrived at, and from which
our inquiry will proceed, we have found that circumstances, conditions,
and relations, whether determined with a reference to the external
world or the subjective consciousness, only create the situation by
virtue of the _temperament_ or passion which experiences them and
derives its nutriment through them. We have further seen that the
situation breaks up this determinate form in opposition, obstruction,
development, and disruption, so that the _emotional_ life feels itself
compelled by the force of the affecting circumstances to _react with
energy against_ this disturbing and restraining influence, which stands
in the way of its objects and passions. It is here, in truth, that
the action, strictly speaking, commences, when, that is to say, the
contradiction has fully asserted itself, which was already implied in
the fully defined situation. Inasmuch as, however, the action which is
based on this collision disturbs the unity of that which is opposed
to it, it calls into being by its antagonism the opposing force of
that which it confronts, and consequently the _action_ is immediately
associated with the _reaction._ With this analysis of the forces
rendered necessary by dramatic action, we have at length arrived at
the notion of the Ideal as a fully defined process. For we are here
presented with two distinct spheres of interest, both of which have
been rent, as it were, from the harmony they originally possessed, and
confront each other in conflict. Such, by the contradiction which is
involved in them, make a _resolution_ of the discord necessary. This
movement, regarded as a homogeneous whole, belongs no more to the
province of the mere situation and its conflicts; we are carried now
into that portion of our inquiry to which we have already given the
name of the genuine action.


3. THE ACTION

In the development of the subject under consideration, the _action_
immediately follows after the universal _world-condition_ and the
particular _situation._ In considering the action in its external
relation to that portion of our inquiry we have just concluded it will
be well to bear in mind the result we arrived at, that it presupposes
circumstances which necessitate collisions, action, and reaction. It
is impossible to determine at what point in the circumstances thus
presupposed the action will _begin._ For that which in one aspect will
appear as commencement will very possibly present itself in another as
the result of earlier developments, and to that extent will postpone
the real starting-point. And in like manner this, too, we may regard
as a fact resulting from former collisions. To take an example; in
the house of Agamemnon Iphigenia in Tauris expiates the guilt and
misfortune of her family. The commencement here of this deliverance on
the part of Iphigenia is the fact that Diana carries her to Tauris.
This circumstance is, however, merely the result of earlier stages of
the story, such as the sacrifice in Aulis, which is again conditioned
by the injury done to Menelaus in the rape of Helen by Paris, and so
on, ever backward, until we come to the famous egg of Leda. In the same
way the events which are the subject-matter of the Iphigenia in Tauris
presuppose the murder of Agamemnon, and all the crimes associated
with the house of Tantalus. An analysis of much the same character
might be applied to the Theban circle of mythos. If an action is to
be represented with all the facts that condition it, poetry is the
only real art that can attempt this. Such a complete exposition of
historical fact has already become, as a certain proverb reminds us,
rather a wearisome business; it is, in fact, more within the province
of simple prose, and, in contrast with such completeness, poetry will
rather consider its true function to be that of taking its audience at
once into the heart of the matter. There is a further important reason
why it should not be to the interest of art to make its commencement
from that point where we find the action under consideration is in the
first instance externally conditioned, and it is this: such a point
of departure is, after all, only related to the process regarded
as natural or historical fact[323]. The association of the action
with this commencement merely concerns the empirical unity of its
appearance; it may, however, in itself be of no significance at all
to the real content of the action. This external unity of historical
sequence remains just as it was, however it may chance that one
particular person is affected by the involved threads of a varying
series of fact. No doubt the entirety of the facts of life, its actions
and fatalities, tends to make the individual what he is; but for all
that his true nature, the real core of his thoughts and capacities, is
manifested in _one_ great situation and action independently of them.
It is the progress of these which reveals to us really what a character
is made of, a character which previously to their occurrence had been
known merely in a nominal way, that is the name of one more fact among
the external facts of experience.

We must therefore not look for the commencement of the action in that
_empirical_ source of it; we must rather centre the attention upon
those circumstances which have taken a hold upon the particular nature
with which we are dealing, and created or satisfied its needs; we
must, in fact, reveal the particular collision in whose conflict and
resolution the action in question consists. Homer, for example, in the
"Iliad," makes a start at once with the particular fact on which his
entire epic is founded, that is to say, with the wrath of Achilles.
He tells us nothing of earlier history of the life of Achilles, but
emphasizes at once the critical collision, and, moreover, does it in a
way which unfolds a background of the greatest interest to his picture.

The representation, then, of the action as a process complete in
itself, in which action, reaction, and resolution are constituent
elements, is, above all, the function of the poetic art; all the other
arts can at most only seize upon and secure in their presentation
one moment of this process. It is quite true that if we direct our
attention to that aspect of the medium they employ which is richest,
they may appear to have an advantage over poetry; in painting
especially[324] we find a control asserted not merely over the entire
external form, but also over the expression of external demeanour and
the play of such relatively to other objects grouped around it. Such a
means of expression, however, cannot compare as an interpreter of truth
with human speech. The action itself is the clearest means of unfolding
to us individual character, whether we view it relatively to the entire
emotional life[325] or the objects of mind. All that a man is at the
very root of his nature is first revealed to us through his acts; and
action, for the reason that it is an expression of spirit, finds its
ultimate expression as such most clearly and concisely in speech alone.
When we speak in general terms of human action we are apt to figure to
ourselves an incalculable variety of mode. For Art, however, the sphere
of action suitable to artistic representation is, generally speaking,
limited. Her province is wholly restricted to the type of action which
is conformable to the necessary configuration of the Idea.

There are three points of essential importance necessary to grasp in
connection with such action as is capable of artistic representation,
and which we may emphasize as follows. The situation and the resulting
conflict is that which generally stimulates it; the active movement,
however, taken by itself, the element of difference, that is to say,
of the Ideal in its activity, is made apparent first by virtue of the
reaction. This movement may be resolved into the following component
features:

_First_, we have the _universal_[326] _forces_, which constitute the
essential content and object, for the sake of which the action takes
place.

_Secondly_, we have the _realization_[327] of these forces in the
_individuals_ who act.

_Thirdly_, the two aspects above mentioned have to unite themselves in
that which, in default of any better generic term, we will here call
_character._

_(a) The Universal Forces of Action_

(_a_) However much we have finally arrived in our consideration of
the action at a point where the definition and differentiation of the
Ideal is of the first importance, nevertheless the very notion of art
renders it necessary that in the sphere of true beauty, be the aspect
of it whatsoever it may, it must still have upon it the stamp of the
Ideal; it cannot, that is to say, maintain itself without rationality
and the justification it implies. Interests of an ideal character must
inevitably be in conflict with another, so that might is opposed to
might. These interests are, in fact, the eternal and universal forces
of spiritual existence, the essential cravings of the human heart,
the spontaneous and inevitable objects of human action, justifiable
and rational in virtue of their own character, and consequently the
very universal powers to which we have referred. They are indeed not
the absolute Divine itself, but rather the sons of the one absolute
Idea[328], and consequently dominant and valid. They are the children
of the one universal truth, albeit only determinate, particular
moments of the same. Through their very distinction, it is true, they
can fall into contradiction or disunion, yet despite all the element
of difference contained, they must possess the original essentiality
within them in order to appear as the determinate Ideal. Such are the
supreme motive forces of art. They are the eternal[329] religious and
ethical modes of relationship, status, personal character[330], and in
the world of romance, before everything else, honour and love. In the
particular grade of their significance these powers differ, but all are
essentially the product of reason. At the same time it is these powers
in the human heart and mind, which man, by virtue of his humanity,
is bound to recognize, to give free play to, and to actualize. At
the same time they ought not directly to appear as rights in positive
legislation. For, to take one reason, the form of positive legislation,
as we have seen, is already in partial conflict with the notion and
content of the Ideal; furthermore, it is quite possible that the
content of positive rights may contribute to that which is essentially
unjust, albeit entirely clothed in the attributes of law. The relations
we have above referred to, however, are not merely the supreme stable
embodiment of the external world[331], but the essentially substantive
powers, which for the very reason that they contain in themselves the
actual content of human existence, continue to be the stimulating
source of its activity, and ultimately all that ever carried it forward
to perfection.

Of this kind are the interests and objects which contend against each
other in the "Antigone" of Sophocles. Creon, the king, as ruler of the
state, by a decree couched in the severest terms, forbade the right
of burial to the son of Œdipus, who had proved himself an enemy of
his country by bringing an army against Thebes. This proclamation was
so far justifiable that it expressed care for the weal of the entire
city. Antigone, however, is animated by an ethical principle of equal
authority, in other words by her love for her brother, whom she finds
it impossible to leave unburied, the prey of carrion birds. To leave
such a duty unfulfilled would be in direct opposition to the sacred
instincts of her personal relationship. She consequently violates the
decree of Creon.

(_β_) Collisions of the type with which we are now dealing may be
introduced in every possible way; the necessity of the reaction,
however, must not be occasioned by means of anything out of place or
at cross purposes[332] with the main action, but through that which is
in itself reasonable and justifiable. For example, in the well-known
German poem of Hartmann von der Aue, "The Poor Henry," the collision
is repulsive. The hero in this poem is visited by a fatality, that is
to say, an incurable disease. He turns for assistance to the monks of
Salermo. They state as the condition of his cure that a human being
must willingly surrender his or her life, on the ground that the
necessary salve can alone be forthcoming from a human heart. A poor
maiden who is in love with the knight offers freely her own life and
accompanies him into Italy. This is pure barbarism, and the silent
love and pathetic devotion of the maiden are unable, consequently,
to produce their full effect. It is true that we find the injustice
of human sacrifice presented us by the ancients as the ground of the
collision. The famous example is that of the story of Iphigenia, who is
first offered as such a sacrifice, and afterwards is on the point of
offering up her brother. But, in the first place, it is to be observed
that in these examples the conflict is in close connection with other
relations which are in themselves justifiable; secondly, the artistic
principle is really satisfied, as we have already observed, by the fact
that both Iphigenia and Orestes are finally delivered, and the power of
a collision which is opposed to our notion of right is thus destroyed.
And, indeed, this is also the case in the above mentioned poem of
Hartmann, in so far as we may acknowledge the _dénouement_ offered us
in which, on Henry refusing to accept the sacrifice, God releases him
from his malady, and the maiden is rewarded for her true love[333].

In apparent association with the positive powers we have enumerated
must be added others set over against them, that is to say, the forces
of that which is negative and bad, evil in short. That which is purely
negative, however, ought not to be taken in the ideal representation of
an action as the essential ground-motive for the necessary reaction.
The reality of the purely negative case, it is true, corresponds to the
negative and its appropriate character, but, if the implied[334] notion
and object is already in itself rendered nugatory, it is even less
possible that the ugliness which is exposed in the inward life should
manifest any genuine beauty upon its external reality. The sophistry of
passion can, indeed, by means of the capacity, strength, and energy of
a character, make the attempt to graft positive characteristics upon
the negative, but we only obtain thereby the vision of a whitewashed
grave. For that which is purely negative is generally flat and stale
and leaves us consequently either void or drives us back, whether
it be used as the motive force of an action or merely as a means to
promote a reaction in another. The horrible, unfortunate, the harshness
of dominion, and the obduracy of superior power may form part of the
content and burden of the imagination when such characteristics are
exalted and carried by the abundant greatness of a particular character
or object. Evil, however, taken simply for what it is, envy, cowardice,
and meanness, is merely repulsive. The devil, if we take him for what
he really ought to be, is consequently a bad subject, or rather a
figure for which Art has no uses at all. He is just a falsehood and
nothing more, and consequently an extremely prosaic personality. In
the same way it is perfectly true that the Furies of hate and many
other allegorical figures of later times are potencies of a kind,
but they are without affirmative subsistency and holdfastness[335],
unfavourable to ideal representation, although in this respect a wide
margin of difference is permissible in the several arts respectively,
and in the particular mode in which they may immediately visualize such
objects. Evil is, to express it in most general terms, essentially
cold and devoid of content, because as such it is merely the source of
negation, discord, and misfortune. All art, however, which is true to
its essential notion, should reflect on us the vision of a harmony.
Meanness, above all, is despicable, for it is a quality which arises
from the envy and hatred of all that is noble, and does not shrink
from distorting even a power that is essentially based upon the good
into a means conformable to its own perverse and shameless passion.
The great poets and artists of the classical world have in consequence
never presented us with the vision of absolute evil and depravity.
Shakespeare, on the contrary, in his tragedy of "King Lear," unfolds
before us the spectacle of wickedness in all its horrors. The old
Lear divides his kingdom among his daughters, and, while doing so, is
foolish enough to believe in their false and flattering speeches, and
to misinterpret the silent and faithful Cordelia. There is already
folly and madness in this, and it is followed by the most outrageous
ingratitude and worthlessness of the elder daughters and their husbands
to the point of absolute craze. As an antithesis of this the heroes
of the French school of tragedy are stretched and puffed out with
every sort of grandiose and sublime motive, and make a great parade of
their honour and nobility, and yet despite of it all destroy the very
meaning of such motives by the mere fact of what they really are and
accomplish. But it is in modern times more especially that we find this
unstable dissolution of everything spiritual[336], which forces its way
through every dissonance, however repulsive, become quite _à la mode_;
moreover, it has even given us what we may describe as the humour of
the abominable thing, a kind of burlesque simulation of irony, an
atmosphere in which a Theodor Hoffmann, for example, has found himself
so much at home.

(_γ_) We may conclude, then, that it is the essentially positive
and substantive powers in the spiritual world which supply the real
content of the ideal action. These sources of energy, however, in their
artistic embodiment, must not appear in their inherent universality,
albeit within the reality of the action they are essential phases of
the Idea. Rather they must receive the form of independent individuals.
If this were not so they would remain as merely the universals of
thought or abstract conceptions which do not properly fall within the
province of art. Though in their origin they should be held as intact
as it is possible to hold them from mere caprices of the fancy, it
is equally necessary that in their development they should acquire
determinacy no less than self-consistency[337], and in this way
appear as essentially particularized. Such definition as they possess
ought not to be carried to the point of the particularity of external
objects, nor should their concentration be carried to that of the
subjective self-consciousness[338]. Otherwise the individuality of
those universal powers is necessarily involved in all the developments
of finite existence. In this respect we may say, then, that the
determinacy of their individuality is not to be taken too seriously.
The gods of the Greek Pantheon are the most conspicuous example of this
manifestation and sway of the universal forces we have just discussed
in their self-subsistent form. However they may be brought before
us, their blessedness and cheerfulness remains unaffected. Regarded
separately as particular gods no doubt they engage in conflict, but
in all their battles we shall ultimately find they are not really
serious in the sense that they concentrate themselves on any definite
object with the entire consequential energy of their character and
passion, fully prepared to stake their existence upon the result. They
engage in this affair or that wherever it may take place, identify
particular interests in concrete examples with their own; they are,
however, equally ready to leave the matter at any point and wing their
way back happily to Olympus. Such is the view we get of the gods when
they engage in warfare on the pages of Homer. The determinacy of their
characterization is capable of conflict, but they remain for all
that the purely universal determinations which at bottom they are.
A battle begins to rage; heroes advance singly one against another;
then we lose sight of individuals altogether in the universal storm
and crush; it is no longer the specific qualities of individuals
which are now set in relief against each other--it is the universal
rush of the fight, the daemon of war loosed and roaring, and now it
is that the universal powers, the gods themselves, step forth on the
scene of battle. From such a temporary display of the contrasts of
their characterization they ever withdraw themselves into the solitude
of their self-subsistency and repose. For though the individuality
of their form carries them perforce into the region of time and
contingency, nevertheless inasmuch as the universal they claim as gods
is that which ultimately must prevail, the individual characteristic
shrinks away into the determination of external form only; they are
unable in their personality to penetrate the true arcana of conscious
spirit[339].

Their physical definition is, in fact, either more or less only the
accommodating form of their divinity. But this self-subsistency and
careless repose is precisely that which gives to them their plastic
individuality, and relieves them of any anxiety and constraint[340] in
relation to earthly objects and events[341]. For this reason we find
in the gods of Homer no final result when actively occupied with the
concrete facts of human life, although such activity is displayed for
us in many and diverse directions. The material and interest of human
events which happen in time is that which gives them something to do
and nothing more. And in like manner we may remark other peculiar
characteristics attached to the Greek gods, which we can only regard as
essentially unrelated to the general notion of divinity which each god
respectively connotes. Mercury is, for example, the slayer of Argus;
Apollo that of the hydra; of the love affairs of Zeus we have countless
tales, and, among other things, he hangs his wife on an anvil. These
and many other stories like them are merely supplementary additions,
which attach to the gods in their aspect of natural forces by virtue
of symbol and allegory, the origin of which we propose to discuss
more fully later on. In modern art we shall, it is true, find certain
indications which point to a conception of definite and at the same
time universal powers. These are, however, for the most part simply
cold and frost-like allegories of hate, envy, hope, love, faithfulness,
that is to say, generally of virtues and vices in the actual truth of
which we can retain no belief. For with us moderns it is the concrete
subjectivity alone, for which we, in the representations of art, feel
that profounder interest, wherein abstractions such as these do not
appear in their isolation, but are made to appear merely as phases or
aspects of human character, whether we regard it in its particularity
or as a concrete whole. In much the same way the angels possess no
essential universality and self-subsistency such as characterize Mars,
Venus, and Apollo, or even Oceanus and Helios. They are, it is true,
objects of imaginative conception, but their specific character is that
of vassals of the one Divine and essential substance, which is not in
this case broken up into self-subsistent individualities, as we find
it in the Greek Pantheon. For this reason we have here no imaginative
vision of many objective powers dwelling in a state of tranquillity,
which may be represented as essentially Divine personalities. We find,
on the contrary, the essential content of such either as subsisting
in the Godhead, or realized in a mode which is both particular and
subjective in wholly human characters and actions. Nevertheless
it was precisely in the conception[342] of self-subsistency and
individualization that the ideal representation of the gods originated.

_(b) The Individuals in the Action_

In the cases we have just discussed of the ideal gods it is not a
difficult matter for art to secure the ideality she requires. But in
approaching the concrete action, ideal representation is confronted
with a real difficulty. For though it is here that the gods and, in
general terms, the universal powers may be identified with a principle
which stimulates and compels activity, we are not therefore on the
plane of reality entitled to find in them the source of genuine
individual action. Action is rather essentially the manifestation of
human life. Consequently there are in this connection two distinct
aspects of the problem to be considered. On the one hand we have these
universal forces in their self-subsistent repose and for that reason
more abstract substantiality; on the other there is the individuality
of men, in which we must seek the final spring and determinating
impulse to action no less than its actual accomplishment. It is, of
course, only the simple truth that these eternally dominant powers
are immanent in the identical nature of mankind, constituting, in
fact, the substantive core of its character; but in so far as they are
comprehended in their Divine nature themselves as individuals[343],
and thereby in an exclusive way, their relation to the subject of human
consciousness must remain an external one. And this fact enables us to
see the essential difficulty we noticed above. There is, in truth, a
contradiction immediately involved in this relation between the gods
and men. It is quite true that the content of the gods is that which
belongs to humanity, and announces itself as his passion, resolve,
and will. It is, however, equally true that the gods must not only be
assumed to be and comprehended as independent from man individually
considered in their actual existence, but, furthermore, as the forces
at the root of all his activity and determination. And this, too, in
such a way that we are forced to consider the same determinations at
one time as personified in the self-subsistent and Divine personality,
and at another that which appears most essentially to belong to the
human heart. And it is for this reason that the free self-subsistency
of the gods no less than the freedom of human individuals in their
activity is seriously compromised if, to the detriment of human
independence, which we have already stated to be of most essential
importance to the Ideal of Art, we ascribe an exclusive power of
command to the gods. And we may observe this is precisely the same
kind of difficulty which confronts us in the form of the religious
conceptions of Christianity. It is stated in terms that the spirit of
God leads up to God. Taken strictly such a phrase can only imply that
the inward life of man is regarded as a purely passive ground, upon
which the spirit of God labours. In such a conception the human will
disappears as a free will, and at the same time the Divine purpose
which motives the "in working" above mentioned can only appear to
man as a kind of Fate, under which he fails to come by his own true
personality[344].

(_α_) If, however, this question of mutual relation[345] is so
understood that man in his action is conceived as standing in a purely
external opposition to God, here posited as eternal substance, the
relation of both is one of pure matter of fact[346]. God gives a
command, and man is obliged to hearken. Even great poets have found
themselves unable to dispense with this conception of external
opposition between gods and men. In the "Philoctetes" of Sophocles,
for example, we find that Philoctetes, after he has confounded the
deceit of Odysseus, persists in his determination not to return to the
Grecian camp until Heracles appears at length as _Deus ex machina_,
and orders him to yield to the entreaty of Neoptolimus. The content of
this apparition is, no doubt, sufficiently motived, and answers to our
own expectation; the catastrophe itself, however, is for all that not
rightly homogeneous, but rather outside the action; and in his noblest
tragedies Sophocles makes no such use of this kind of representation,
according to which, if we but carry it one step further, the gods
are reduced to lifeless machines, and individual men simply to the
instruments of a foreign caprice. In a similar way we constantly in
epic poetry meet with the active intervention of the gods represented
in a mode which is external to human freedom. Hermes, for example,
conducts Priam to Achilles; Apollo gives Patroclus the blow between the
shoulders which ends his life. We also frequently find mythological
traits treated in such a way that they appear as wholly external to the
actual lives of the individuals thus affected. Achilles, for example,
is dipped by his mother in the Styx and thereby rendered invulnerable
and invincible to the one point of his heels. If we reflect on this
rationally it is obvious that all real bravery disappears, and all
that is heroic in the character of Achilles is converted from a real
trait of his essential manhood to a purely physical advantage. Such a
mode of representation is, however, far more permissible to the epic
than it is to the dramatic type of poetry, for the good reason that
in the epic that aspect of spiritual life which is directly concerned
with the intention implied in the execution of objects falls into the
background and a larger field is, in general, offered for the play of
external characteristics. Such a criticism of the prosaic understanding
as the one above, which charges a poet with the absurdity that his
heroes are no heroes at all, should only be advanced with the greatest
caution, for it is partly in such traits as will appear shortly, that
the poetical relation between gods and men is preserved. It is another
matter, and we have nothing left us but prose, when in addition the
powers, which are posited as substantive individuals, are mere empty
shadows, the creations of the caprice of fancy and the arbitrariness of
a false originality. They are then for the most part only the adjuncts
of superstition or imbecility.

(_β_) The truly poetic relation of ideality consists, then, in the
identity of gods and men; and this must assert itself even though
the universal powers are presented as independent and free from
the particularity of human beings and passions. In other words,
all that we attribute to the gods must at the same time establish
itself as that which is essentially cognate with the spiritual life
of particular men in this sense, that while the dominating powers
appear as essentially personified, yet at the same time all that is
thus posited in an external relation to man is none the less clearly
that which is immanent in his own spirit and character. The true
function of the artist is, therefore, to introduce a mediating link
between the difference involved in these two aspects, to bind them, in
short, by a finely conceived thread of relation which, while clearly
emphasizing their springs in the spiritual life of man, shall make
no less visible the universal and essential element which is therein
implied and present such to the imagination in individual form. The
emotional life of man must reveal itself in the gods, who, in fact,
are the self-subsistent and universal embodiments of that which is
active and dominant in his own spiritual experience. Then alone are the
gods at the same time gods in cognate relation with his own heart and
emotions. When, for example, we are told by the ancients that Venus or
Amor has put a constraint upon the heart, no doubt in the first place
these divinities are apprehended as external powers; but human love is
equally a stimulus and a passion, which is implanted in the heart and
is part of that it independently contains.

In much the same sense is the frequent reference to the Eumenides. We
have to picture in the first instance no doubt these avenging maidens
as Furies, who pursue the transgressor in an external form. But this
pursuit is but another aspect of the Fury which drives through the soul
of the perpetrator of crime; and Sophocles in the Œdipus Colonus (I.
1434) actually refers to them in this sense of inward spiritual forces,
as the Eumenides of Œdipus himself, that is to say, who signify the
father's curse as the result of the stress of emotion caused by the
conduct of his sons. We have, then, and equally have not reason on our
side whether we identify the gods with powers external to man, or find
in them that which belongs exclusively to his spiritual life. They are
in fact both. In Homer, for example, the activity of gods and men is a
constantly involved skein[347]. The gods appear to accomplish what is
foreign to human activity, and yet for all that execute only that which
is in vital co-ordination with his own emotional life. In the "Iliad,"
for example, when Achilles, in the stress of controversy, is about to
raise his sword against Agamemnon, Athene steps forth behind him and
takes hold of his head of flaxen hair, visible only to himself. Hero,
who is equally anxious over Achilles and Agamemnon, sends for them from
Olympus, and their admission there appears to be wholly independent
of the desire of Achilles. On the other hand we have no difficulty in
seeing that the sudden appearance of Athene, the wisdom which puts
constraint upon the hero's wrath, is simply a reflection of internal
conflict, that the entire description but states in imaginative form
what was experienced in the heart of our hero. In fact Homer himself
points this out a few verses previously ("Iliad," I, v, 190), when he
relates about the debate that took place in his heart in the following
terms:

     ἢ ὅγε φάσγανον ὀξὺ ἐρυσσάμενος παρὰ μηροῦ
     τοὺς μὲν ἀναστήσειεν, ὃ δ᾽ Ἀτρέιδην ἐναρίξοι,
     ἡὲ χόλον πάυσειεν ἐρητύσείε τε θυμὀν.[348]

This inward breaking up of anger into a divided self, this constraint,
for it is in opposition to the anger, and Achilles appears at first
to be wholly filled with wrath, the epic poet has a perfect right
to represent at the same time as an external event. In a similar
case in the "Odyssey" we find Minerva acting the part of escort for
Telemachus. This attendance is rather more difficult to grasp as a
personal experience of the emotional life of Telemachus, although we
can readily fix on certain points of contact between the external
image and the emotion experienced. And this it is we may generally
say which constitutes the cheerful buoyancy of the Homeric gods, and
the irony implied in the honour paid to them. Their self-consistency
and seriousness are characteristics which tend to dissolve like a
cloud, precisely to the extent that they unfold themselves as the very
powers which are native to man's emotional life, and thereby, in their
manifestation, leave humanity alone with its own possessions.

However, it is not necessary to look so far abroad for a complete
example of the conversion of a purely mechanical conception of Divine
activity into the atmosphere of the subjective consciousness, the
sphere, that is, of freedom and ethical beauty. In his Iphigenia in
Tauris Goethe has in this connection carried the process through with
a beauty that we cannot sufficiently admire. In the drama of Euripides
Orestes in complicity with Iphigenia carries off the statue of Diana.
This is simply an act of stealing. Then Thoas comes on the scene, and
orders their pursuit, and the recovery of the bust of the goddess.
Finally, in very prosaic fashion, Athene appears and orders Thoas
to stay his hand on the ground that she has independently commended
Orestes to the charge of Poseidon, and he, in deference to her wishes,
has already carried Orestes far over seas. Thoas submits to her advice
and replies to it in the following terms (v, 1442, 43): "Lady Athene,
whoever, on hearing the words of the gods, does not obey them is but
a fool. For how could it be right and fit to contend with the mighty
gods."

In this relation we can only see the bare external command of Athene
on the one side, and an equally futile submission of Thoas on the
other. In Goethe's treatment of the subject, on the contrary, Iphigenia
becomes herself exalted to the rank of a goddess, in reliance upon the
truth she feels within herself, the truth of a human heart. In this
sense she turns to Thoas and exclaims:

     Is it then man alone who has the right
     To accomplish things none ever heard before!
     Shall he alone impress upon the strength
     Of hearts heroic the impossible?

That which in the drama of Euripides the command of Athene effects, the
change in the attitude of Thoas, Goethe's Iphigenia endeavours to bring
about, and in fact does bring about, through the depth of the feelings
and ideas with which she confronts him.

                   With motions strange
     An enterprise audacious soars within me;
     A vast reproach and ills yet graver still
     Will break on me if the event miscarry;
     But, see, I place it on your knees! Be true,
     Be only true and worthy of your fame,
     So your assistance shall declare it truth,
     Truth glorified through me.

And to this reply of Thoas:

                        What! you believe
     The Scythian wild and the barbarian
     Hear the wise voice of Truth and hearts humane
     When Atreus of Greece still failed to hear.

she answers with the gentlest, purest trust:

                        Nay, all thus hear
     Beneath whatever sky their birth was laid;
     All needs must hear for whom the springs of life
     Flow without let and purely through the soul.

Then it is she makes the final call upon her greatness of soul, and the
tenderness of her faith at its highest point of effort; her entreaty
touches, then masters and wrings from him, in a way that must appeal
to every heart, the permission to return to her own. This alone is
necessary. She has no need of the statue of the goddess; she can depart
on her journey without deceit or betrayal of trust. And it is with the
finest sense of beauty that Goethe refers here to the oracular word of
the god:

     Bring but to Greece again the sister who
     All loth at heart in holy temple bides
     On shores of Tauris, and the curse is gone.

The very human reconciliation disclosed in these words is clearly
that the pure and holy Iphigenia, the sister, is in fact the divine
personification and the protectress of the house.

     Noble and beautiful I wot in sooth
     All that the goddess counselled seemed to me,

exclaims Orestes to Thoas and Iphigenia:

                Like to a holy picture
     The fate unalterable which walled our town
     By one mysterious word, one word Divine,
     Is banished, now that city takes thee back,
     Who art the true protectress of our home;
     Reserve thyself in holy quietness,
     A blessing to thy brother and thine own;
     It seemed that all deliverance on Earth
     Had passed away, and all comes back with thee.

In the spirit of these healing words of reconciliation Iphigenia has
already revealed herself to Orestes by virtue of the purity and ethical
beauty of her inner life. It is true that her discernment drives him
half mad, who in the convulsion of his spirit has lost all faith in
peace; but the pure love of the sister does not fail to heal him from
every pang with which he is tortured by the Furies of his soul:

                   Within thine arms
     The evil clawed me with its direst clutch
     For the last time, and to the very marrow
     I shuddered horribly: and then it vanished,
     E'en as a serpent to its lair. Anew,
     And all through thee, the day's breadth I enjoy.

Here, as elsewhere throughout it, we can hardly emphasize sufficiently
our admiration for the profound beauty of this poem.

The material which has the impress of Christianity upon it is more
open to criticism than that which was the subject-matter of antique
art. In the sacred legends, and generally speaking where the religious
conceptions of Christendom prevail, no doubt we may find the appearance
of Christ, the Virgin Mary and other saints the subject of universal
belief; but along with them the imagination has clothed itself with
fanciful aberrations in every direction, so that witches, ghosts, and
every sort of spectral apparition are yet more conspicuous objects. In
the face of such conceptions, so far at least as they appear foreign
powers to our human nature, and man submits himself unreservedly to
the charm, seduction, and influence of their illusions, artistic
representation is wholly given up to every kind of folly and caprice of
mere contingency. It is of unique importance that in the treatment of
such material the artist take care that the freedom and independence
of judgment are in no way impaired. Shakespeare has shown us how to
do this in most noble fashion. The witches in Macbeth, for example,
appear as external powers, who foretell for Macbeth his future destiny.
What they _do_ foretell, however, is precisely that which is his own
most secret wish, which is reflected back on him and declared in this,
merely in appearance, external form[349]. With a still closer regard to
beauty, yet profounder insight, is the ghost in Hamlet treated as the
purely objective embodiment of Hamlet's own intuitions. We find Hamlet
in the first instance overpowered with a vague feeling that something
horrible has taken place. His father's ghost then appears and gives
definite form to these awful premonitions. We naturally expect that
Hamlet, after receiving the facts set forth in his father's warning,
will at once proceed with energy and bring the murderer to book, a
revenge which appears to have ample excuse. But he delays and delays.
Critics have made this inactivity a matter of reproach to Shakespeare,
blamed him, in fact, as though for this reason the play to some
extent never gets properly off. But we must remember Hamlet is not a
strongly practical nature, rather a finely strung one, with emotions
held in persistent reserve; a nature which finds it difficult to tear
itself from its internal harmony; melancholy too, prone to subtleties,
hypochondriacal, with emotions deeply rooted. For this reason it is
obvious that he is _prima facie_ indisposed to prompt action. And this
is fundamentally Goethe's conception of him when he tells us that what
Shakespeare sought to represent "was the imposition of some supreme
action on a soul whose growth was unadapted to its execution." He
in fact interprets the entire drama relatively to this conception
of Hamlet. "We have here," he maintains, "an oak tree planted in an
exquisite vase, which ought really only to contain and shelter the
fair flowers; the roots spread, the vase is shattered." But it should
be noticed that Shakespeare, when referring to the apparition of the
ghost, contributes a far profounder trait of character in explanation
of this debated point. Hamlet delays, because he does not right off
wholly believe in the ghost.

             The spirit that I have seen
     May be a devil: and the devil hath power
     To assume a pleasing shape; yea and perhaps,
     Out of my weakness and my melancholy,
     As he is very potent with such spirits,
     Abuses me to damn me: I'll have grounds
     More relative than this: the play's the thing,
     Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the king.

In this passage it is obvious that the apparition as such does
not leave Hamlet merely devoid of all stability[350], but that he
entertains a reasonable doubt, and is determined to make his conviction
a certainty by his own experiments before he proceeds to act upon it.

(_γ_) As a summary description of these universal powers, which appear
not merely in their external independence, but are the vital and
moving forces in the human heart and all that is implied in its most
intimate life, we may borrow an expression in use among the ancients,
that is to say Pathos (_πάθος._) To translate this word adequately is
not easy. Passion almost always implies as its concomitant an element
of meanness or baseness. We contend in ordinary parlance that a man
should not surrender himself to his passions. It must therefore be
understood that we use the expression pathos in a nobler and more
universal sense than this without the slightest implication of anything
blameworthy or egotistic. The devoted love of the sister Antigone is
an excellent example of a pathos in the full significance of the Greek
use of the term. Pathos in this sense is a power of the emotional life
which completely justifies itself, an essential part of the content
of rationality and the free will. Orestes, for example, kills his
mother not so much on account of any force of his emotional life which
we strictly can call passion; rather it is a pathos in itself fully
considered upon and essentially sane which carries him on to the awful
deed. Thus understood we may add that it is impossible to say that the
gods possess pathos. They are merely the universal content of that
which is the stimulating energy in the resolves and actions of human
individuality. The gods as such continue in their repose and freedom
from passion, and however much they may quarrel or contend among
themselves, there is nothing really serious in it all, or their strife
possessed merely a symbolical significance in the view we may take of
it as a universal war of the gods. We must therefore strictly limit
pathos to the actions of mankind, and conceive thereunder the essential
or rational content, which is present in the human consciousness
identical with itself and throughout suffuses the emotional life.

(_αα_) We may say, then, that pathos constitutes the true mediating
link[351], the veritable domain of art. The representation of it is the
most truly effective part of a work of art, as it is its influence upon
those who look at it. Pathos sets a string in motion, which vibrates
through every human heart. Every one must know the type of worth and
reason, which underlies the content of a genuine example of pathos,
must recognize it at once when he sees it. And the cause of this is
that pathos moves us because it is that which is essentially the vital
force of our human existence. And it equally follows that that which
is wholly external, the natural environment and particular scene, in
its active support of the effect of pathos, need only be treated quite
subordinately. Nature must in consequence be drawn upon as a fact
essentially symbolical and suffer the pathos to re-echo from her walls,
which is the most real subject-matter of artistic representation.
Landscape is, for example, a type or genre of painting of less
importance than historical painting; but even there we find that the
school of landscape most independent should not be without a general
harmonic relation to human feeling, and, in fact, possesses a certain
type of pathos. In this sense we are told art generally ought to touch
the emotions. Before accepting this principle, however, we ought first
to inquire through what means this peculiar effect of art must be
brought about. "To touch the emotions" is in general the activity of
something in union with feeling, and mankind, more particularly the
mankind of to-day, are, or a more considerable portion of them are,
only too readily open to such experiments. The man who showers tears
on us, starts the seeds of tears, which grow up fast enough. In art,
however, only that ought to move us which contains in itself the real
import of pathos.

(_ββ_) For such reasons we may affirm that neither in comedy nor
in tragedy ought pathos to be that which is only folly or personal
idiosyncracy. Shakespeare's Timon, for example, is on purely material
grounds a misanthrope; his friends have eaten him up, consumed his
substance, and when he himself requires their gold desert him. He
consequently becomes a passionate enemy of mankind. The situation is
both conceivable and consistent with nature, but it contains no pathos
that can be justified on principle. Even to a more striking extent
is the hate we find in "The Misanthrope," that play of Schiller's
apprenticeship, purely a vagary of modern ideas. For in this latter
case the misanthrope is in addition a thoughtful, perspicacious, and
entirely noble man, great-hearted towards his peasants, whom he has
freed from their villeinage, and devoted to his daughter, who is, apart
from her beauty, in all respects worthy of his love. In much the same
way, in that novel of August Lafontaine, Quintius Heimeran von Flaming
is worried with the follies of mankind. It is, however, our most
latter-day poetry which, above all, loves to wind itself into every
conceivable knot of fantastical falsehood[352], attempting thereby to
secure an effect through mere oddity, but failing to find the slightest
response in any sane person for the reason that every vestige of what
is really present in human life has vanished from such refinements of
mental athletics.

In another direction we may remark that everything which depends
solely, that is to say, in so far as scientific apprehension is
the main requirement, upon instruction, testimony to the truth, and
insight of what is offered as such, is no fit subject-matter for
the representation of a genuine pathos. The facts of _scientific
knowledge_ are a part of this material. And the reason of this is that
science demands a particular form of education, an effort towards
and a knowledge of the specific forms of science and their relative
importance of exceptional variety and extension; an interest in this
type of study is by no means a universally moving influence in the
hearts of men, but is limited and must ever remain limited to a narrow
circle of votaries. The treatment of purely _religious_ instruction
presents similar difficulty, if we mean by that the development of
the same in its profoundest import. No doubt the universal content
of religion, such as the belief in God and similar theses, is of the
deepest interest to anyone worthy of it. Art is, however, not directly
concerned either in the exposition of religious dogmas, nor, indeed,
in any exceptional insight into their truth; it is consequently of
importance that she should be held aloof front such disquisitions. It
is all the more necessary that we should through art entrust every type
of pathos to the human heart, every motive of ethical significance,
which are of practical and vital interest. The influence of religious
ideas is rather upon the subjective world of emotion, the heaven
of the heart, the ever-repeated consolation and uplifting of the
individual life, than upon direct action in the strict sense. For that
which is Divine in religion on its practical side is morality and the
powers which are potent in the ethical life. These powers, however,
in contrast with the heaven of religion in its purest form, are in
definite relation to the world and that which is entirely human. Among
the ancients this worldly content was fundamentally included in their
conception of Deity, and consequently their gods could be related
directly to human action and its artistic presentation.

From all this it will readily appear that the significant moments
of volitional activity which present to us the pathos we have just
endeavoured to define are numerically small and the range of them
restricted. In the opera especially it is inevitable that the sphere
from which such may be selected is a narrow one; we consequently have
for ever dinned in our ears the plaints and delights, the misfortunes
and happiness of love, fame, honour, friendship, maternal and marital
devotion.

(_γγ_) Now a pathos of this kind requires for its display not merely
the power of exposition, but also that of perfected _elaboration_[353].
And what is more, the soul which entrusts to its pathos the spiritual
wealth it possesses must be one with real wealth to dispose of,
and not one that can rest in a condition of purely intensive
self-concentration. It must, in short, be ready to give an outward
semblance to its self-expression and rise to the finished perfection of
that. The distinction between this power of self-concentration and that
of self-revelation is of great importance; and we shall find that in
this respect the types of individuality such as generically represent
different races offer essential points of contrast. Nations whose
reflective consciousness has been highly trained are more eloquent
in the expression of their passions than others who are not so. The
ancients, for example, were accustomed to unfold the pathos, which
is the animating principle of human personality, in its profoundest
significance, without running off into cold generalities or empty
tattle. The French also in this respect are naturally gifted, and
their eloquence in the expression of passion is not by any means
always merely a piling up of words, as we Germans, following the bent
of our national reserve, to which the repeated expression of emotion
appears to be a kind of wrong inflicted upon it, are only too ready
to think it is. In fact, we have gone so far in this direction that
we could mention a distinct phase in our poetical history, when the
younger spirits, at any rate, sick to death of that which they dubbed
"the flush of French rhetorical water-drops," yearned to such an
extent after the simplicity of Nature that their artistic energy could
only express itself for the most part in interjections. It is hardly
necessary to observe, however, that we shall arrive at no "open sesame"
with Ahs and Ohs, a damn here and there thrown in, or any other random
note of storm and bluster. The inspiration of mere interjections is a
feeble one, or rather is simply the way in which the still unrefined
nature expresses itself. The spirit which is to reveal to us pathos
must be a spirit which is full to running over, which is able to spread
itself abroad and give expression to its virtue.

We may add, too, that in this respect Goethe and Schiller present a
most marked contrast. Goethe is less pathetic than Schiller, makes
use of a mode of artistic expression which is more intensive; more
especially in his lyrics we are struck by this characteristic of
self-reserve. His songs, and this is the true quality of the pure
lyric, go naturally on their way, without entirely giving us all
that they contain. Schiller, on the contrary, is clearly anxious to
unfold the pathos of his subject to its furthest limit, and with all
the clearness and force of expression he can muster. Claudius in
"Wands-becker Boten"[354] has contrasted Voltaire and Shakespeare in
much the same fashion, maintaining that the one _is_ what the other
only _appears_ to be. "Master Arouet tells us: 'I weep'; Shakespeare
really weeps!" To this we can only reply that it is precisely with such
telling and appearance that art is concerned and not with the mere
positive fact. If Shakespeare merely wept while Voltaire made others
think he wept, so much the worse for the poet Shakespeare.

To conclude, then, it is necessary that pathos, in order to be in
itself concrete, as it should be in ideal art, be presented in its
artistic manifestation as the pathos issuing from a spiritual nature,
rich and comprehensive. And this result carries us forward to that
third aspect of our consideration of "the action" already adverted to,
that is to say, an inquiry into what is implied by _character_ in this
connection.

_(c) Character_

We will summarize the proceeding argument. Our point of departure was
the _universal_ and substantive powers which are the original stimulus
to action. Such require as the medium of their active realization human
_individuality_, in which they then appear as _affecting_ pathos[355].
But, furthermore, the universal inherent in these powers must in
particular individuals acquire the concentrated unity and concreteness
of a _whole_, and a _single whole._ This totality is man apprehended in
his fulfilled spiritual content and the subjectivity therein comprised,
in one word the entire self-contained human individuality which we
designate as character. The gods are born into the pathos of men, and
pathos in its more concrete form of activity is human character.

In character, then, we find the real focus[356] of the ideal exposition
of art, that is to say in so far as the embodiment unites in itself the
separate aspects of it already developed as consistent phases, in the
construction of its own totality. For the Idea as _Ideal_, by which
we mean as clothed in a form within the grasp of sensuous imagination
and perception, and in its activity as action and accomplishment, is,
if we define it strictly, just this self-relation of the _subjective
individuality._ The individuality, however, which is truly _free_,
and nothing short of this will satisfy the Ideal, has not merely to
declare itself as universality, but at the same time, to assert its
nature as concrete singularity, as the mediating bond which unites and
transpierces both sides thus related, which in their _self-related_
actuality subsist as unity. And this is precisely what we understand
by character, the ideal form of which consists in the wealth of energy
with which all the constituent aspects of the subjective life are
welded in one whole.

We will now inquire rather more closely into the nature of this
conception of character viewed under three distinct aspects.

_First_, as co-extensive[357] individuality, that is to say, with, our
attention directed to the wealth of substance contained in it.

_Secondly_, with direct reference to its particularity, the form in
which it is bound to appear, albeit still a totality, as one that is
more _defined_ or specific.

_Thirdly_, in our final apprehension of it as a unity which is fully
identified with its own determinate form, that is, which is throughout
fused with the same by virtue of its own principle of subjective
self-identity, and thereby attaches to the whole the significance of an
essentially _assured_ character.

We will now develop and elucidate more fully what we conceive to be
implied in the above general propositions.

(_α_) And first we would draw attention to the fact that this
pathos, though an essential feature in the development of completed
individuality, is not, in the specific form of its appearance, the
_sole_ or exclusive interest of the individuality portrayed. It is,
in fact, merely one aspect of the efficient[358] character, if one
of paramount importance. To put it in rather a strong way, the human
soul does not merely carry within it _one_ god as the original of
its pathos; on the contrary, the spiritual scope of humanity has
wider borders, and we may affirm that many gods make their dwelling
in one true man, or, rather, all the powers which are scattered
throughout the heaven of the gods are enclosed within that one breast.
It is co-extensive with the entire field of Olympus. In this sense
one of old has said: "Out of thine own passions, O man, hast thou
created the gods." And, as a matter of fact, in proportion as the
intelligence of the Hellenic folk quickened, the number of their gods
increased; and, furthermore, the gods of their earliest days were less
intelligent, that is to say, they were god-like figures deficient both
in individuality and determinate character.

In this wealth of content, accordingly, it is necessary that the
character adequate to ideal art should display itself. And this is just
that which creates the interest we feel in a character, namely, that
a totality such as that we have above described emerges from it, and
the character, while reposing on its abundance, nevertheless persists
in perfect equality with itself, as one secure and self-excluding
subject. If the character, however, be not conceived and depicted as
this rounded and subjective unity, is abstract in the sense that
it is entirely the sport of one passion, such must then appear as
self-destructive[359], or at least cracked, weak, and without real
fibre. For the weakness and inertness of individuals is just this very
thing, that the eternal forces of which we have spoken never assert
themselves in them as a real part of their most essential substance,
as, to put it logically, predicates which adhere to them as the
subjects of such.

In Homer[360], for example, every hero is the living focus of a whole
congeries of qualities and traits. Achilles is the most youthful hero
in the host, but his youthful exuberance is represented as quite
compatible with all other entirely human qualities, and Homer unfolds
before us this variety through situations which offer the finest
contrast. He loves his mother, Thetis, he weeps for Briseis, when she
is snatched from him, and his violated sense of honour drives him
into the conflict with Agamemnon, which is the original fount of all
the events that follow after it in the "Iliad." Add to this he is the
truest friend of Patroclus and Antilochus; moreover, he is the most
blooming, fiery youth, swift of foot, brave, yet full of reverence
for gray hairs; the faithful Phoenix and trusty servant are at his
feet, and at the funeral of Patroclus the hoary Nestor is treated
with the highest deference and honour. And, in contrast to all this,
Achilles is represented as inflammable to a degree, effervescent,
revengeful, and full of the most brutal austerity when face to face
with the foe. He binds the slain Hector to his chariot, trails the
corpse in fell hunter's fashion three times round the walls of Troy;
yet stays his anger when the old Priam comes to his tent, and, as he
thinks within his heart of his own old father, reaches to the weeping
king the hand which has done to death his son. Of Achilles we may
well exclaim: "here is a man indeed, and human nature, ay, noble
human too, in all the length and breadth of its riches, is unveiled
before us in this one man!" It is just the same with all the other
Homeric characters—-Odysseus, Diomedes, Ajax, Agamemnon, Hector,
Andromache--every one of them is a whole, a world in itself, a complete
and living member of humanity, something very different at least from
your allegorical abstract of some one particular trait. What frosty,
faded personalities, despite all their vigour and rigour, are the
horned Siegfried, Hagen of Troy, nay, even Volker, the musician, in
comparison.

It is this variety of characterization, and this alone, which can give
to a character the interest of life. At the same time this fulness of
detail must really appear as included in the personality itself, that
is, it must not strike us as the mere diversion, passing freak, or
suggestion of an excited fancy, such as we see in the case of children
who will take up everything in turn, and even make something out of it,
yet, for all that, are without essential character. Character in this
latter sense will penetrate and make itself a home in the most diverse
phases of the emotional life of man, will steep itself to overflowing
with that abundance, and, at the same time, not remain thus immersed,
but throughout all the congeries of interest, objects, qualities, all
the traits that distinguish or arrest it, maintain the form of its
self-exclusive and alert subjectivity intact.

For the representation of such exhaustive types of character epic
poetry is, above all others, adapted, dramatic and lyrical poetry are
less so.

(_β_) Art, however, will not be content to remain at the point which
the course of our inquiry has reached, namely, the notion of character
as a mere congeries of traits. For the object we have before us now is
the Ideal in its specific determination, and singularity, or, rather,
concrete _individuality_, are both of them prominent and necessary
features. Action, more than anything else, in its conflict and reaction
is impossible without some restriction and clear definition of form.
For this reason the heroes of dramatic poetry are for the most part of
simpler definition than those of epic poetry. And the way we get at a
clear definition is through some pathos out of the ordinary which is
so portrayed as to make some essential trait of character stand out
in bold relief, and itself to be the stimulus to particular objects,
resolves, and actions. If, however, this simplification is carried so
far that any character appears as though it were pared down to a mere
shadow-like semblance of any form of pathos, such as love or honour,
all real vitality and spiritual depth must necessarily vanish, and the
representation, as is not unfrequently the case in the French school
of drama for this very reason, can only offer us a cold and jejune
result. We may therefore conclude that in this aspect of particularity
the prominent feature which asserts itself pre-eminently will be this,
that within the borders of this very limitation the fulness of life
is completely preserved, so that the personality in question has free
scope allowed it for further expansion in many directions, a power to
adapt itself to every variety of situation, and, in short, is able to
unfold and express in every possible way the wealth of a truly complete
spiritual life[361]. Despite the supreme simplicity of their pathos the
characters in the Sophoclean drama possess this intrinsic vitality. We
may indeed compare them in their plastic self-seclusion to the figures
of sculpture. For it is also quite possible that sculpture express
very various delineations of character despite all the tenacity of its
definition. In contrast to the bluster of overpowering passion, which
concentrates all its forces upon one single point, it exhibits out of
its tranquillity and speechlessness that predominant neutrality, which
peacefully envelops all powers within itself; but this unperturbed
unity does not, however, persist in any indissoluble union with mere
formal definition, but, rather, in virtue of its beauty, suffers at
the same time the birth-throes of all that pertains to it to disrobe
itself as through a cloud of immediate possibility into fresh relations
of every variety. In the finest figures of sculpture we behold a
tranquil depth, which unfolds, as it were, the pregnant womb, from
which all other potencies may be born. In contrast with sculpture it
is yet of more vital importance to the arts of painting, music, and
poetry, that they should display the inmost complexity of character,
and real artists of every age have recognized this. In Shakespeare's
"Romeo and Juliet," for example, the most pathetic characteristic of
Romeo is his love: but he is also placed before us under relations of
the greatest contrast, whether it be in reference to his parents, his
friends, his love troubles, or his affair of honour in which he fights
with Tybalt, his attitude of deference and trust to the monk, nay, even
on the verge of the grave his conversation with the apothecary, from
whom he purchases the poison. Throughout he is the same worthy and
noble man of deep emotions. In the same way the character of Juliet
is unfolded throughout the range of her relations to father, mother,
nurse, the Count Paris, and father Lawrence. And, despite of this, she
is as deeply immersed[362] in her one preoccupation as she is in every
one of these situations, and her entire character is transpierced with
and carried away by the one single emotion, her passionate love for her
lover, which is as deep and broad as the unbounded sea, so that it is
but the simple truth when she exclaims, "The more I give, the more I
possess, both are infinite."

From all this it appears that even when there is but one pathos
visible, it must unfold itself as the wealth of all it possesses. And
this is what really happens even in lyrical poetry, where we find the
pathos is not attached to actions determined by positive circumstances
and conditions. For in this latter case the pathos can only assert
itself as the spiritual state of an emotional nature otherwise complete
in itself, which is, that is to say, free to express itself in any
other conceivable circumstance and situation which may confront it.
The use of words of vital significance, an imagination which can
associate itself with all the world, can restore the Past to the
Present, can transform the entire external environment of man's life
to a symbolical expression of his spirit, can bravely adventure into
the depths of comprehensive thought, and, while doing so, reveal an
exuberant, capacious, clear, exalted, and noble nature--a wealth of
character such as this, freely expressing such a world, is a prize
indeed for the Lyric Muse. No doubt a purely logical reflection may
find it impossible that such, variety of character should co-exist
with a masterful clearness of type. We may be asked, for instance,
in reference to the heroic character of Achilles, whose strength of
youth is the pre-eminent, trait of his beauty, how it is possible to
reconcile the tender heart so manifest in his relations to his father
and his friend with the cruel act of revenge wherewith he drags Hector
round the walls. Precisely the same kind of inconsequence is to be met
with in Shakespeare's clowns. They are, with scarcely an exception,
bubbling over with wit and the humour of genius. And, no doubt, there
will always be fools enough to ask us how men thus spiritually gifted
could ever betake themselves to such tomfooleries. The truth is that
the reflection of the formal logic is sure to emphasize one aspect
of a character, and conclude that the entire man is minted under its
impression to the exclusion of all others. To such everything that
asserts itself as alien to the hallmark of its beggarly mintage can
only appear as an inconsequence. In the truely rational contemplation
of the whole as distinct from the parts, and thereby of the living
thing, that which appears as inconsequent will be precisely that which
brings all into fit co-ordination. For our humanity is just this
very paradox. We have not merely to carry[363] the contradictions of
our complex nature, but to suffer the load[363] with patience, and
throughout prove staunch to our burden.

(_γ_) We may conclude, then, that character must fuse together
its particularity in the element of its spiritual substance; it
should possess a definite type, and at the same time retain in this
distinction the force and stability of a _single_ fully self-consistent
pathos. Where we find our humanity represented without such a centre
of unity, the different aspects of such variety it may possess
will lose all relative meaning or significance and fall away from
each other. In art we shall find that what we distinguish in our
conception of personality as infinite or the Divine is just this
self-consistency in unity. If this view be a just one it is obvious
that such characterizations as stability and determination are of
great importance in the ideal representation of character. And we
shall only obtain such a result, as already observed, in so far as the
universality of the powers inherent in our humanity are permitted to
transpierce the mere particularity of the individual character and, by
virtue of the unity thus set up, create a subjective and at the same
time individual life which supplies its own principle of unity and
self-identity.

Such a condition is all important, and we must now advert to a number
of artistic compositions, more particularly of later times, in express
relation to it.

In the "Cid" of Corneille, for example, the collision between the
opposing principles of love and honour is a match, no doubt, of
brilliant effects. A pathos of this kind, involved as it is in the
opposition of distinct forces may, no doubt, be the operative ground of
conflicts; but when we find such portrayed as the spiritual struggle
of one and the same character, though such antagonism may very readily
supply us with the material for brilliant rhetoric and effective
monologue, the cataclysm which is here presented in the emotional life
of one person driven thus by turns from its abstract subjection to
honour into the equally abstract one of love, and forthwith hounded
back again, is not favourable to the portrayal of a character of
genuine stability and homogeneousness.

It is equally inconsistent with the delineation of resolute personality
when a leading character, already under the predominant influence
of some specific pathos, is portrayed as one overmastered by the
direction or persuasion of a subordinate character, such is thus
enabled to shift the responsibility upon other shoulders. This is
what actually takes place in the "Phedra" of Racine when the mind
of Phedra is depicted as entirely motived by the words of Oenone. A
character of real distinction acts out of its own initiative, and will
not suffer the views of a mere stranger to be that which determines
its own resolution. Only when action is the direct result of its own
reflections do we get that clear relation between personal initiative
and the consequent result which carries with it the full weight of
guilt or responsibility.

We find yet another type of this instability of character as quite a
peculiar possession of the more recent literary output of Germany. It
is a type of character in which a kind of flatulence in emotion is
the rule no less than the source. The classic example is the Werther
of Goethe's romance, a thoroughly morbid type of character, without
any vestige of real manliness such as might carry him beyond the
egotism of his love-passion. What makes him interesting is the passion
and beauty of his emotional life, the intimate fellowship between
himself and Nature which the course of his spiritual experience and
the pliability of his temperament accentuate. This effeminacy has yet
more recently embodied itself in many other forms of expression which
descend with increasing rapidity to the lowest circle of jejune and
tasteless egotism. We must not even omit, for instance, to include
in our list that illustration of the lovely soul which we find in
Jacobi's "Woldemar." In this romance we are made a present of the
glory of emotional volubility in all its pretensions. It would be
difficult, indeed, to cite a better example of the self-deceptive
illusion of personal virtue and excellence. Here we have all that
sublimity and divinity of soul, which relates itself crookedly to every
possible aspect of the actual world; that type of feebleness which is
wholly unable to share in or tolerate any portion of the labours or
interests of practical life as it really is. So rooted is it in its
own consciousness of superiority it passes everything as unworthy of
it on the other side. It is, in fact, a peculiar feature of this type
of "lovely soul" that, even when face to face with the truly ethical
interests and wholly sane objects of life, instead of meeting them
frankly, it retires into the seclusion of itself, where it weaves its
own threads of finery and passes its time in hatching out its exquisite
brood of religious and moral reflections. And connected closely with
this personal enthusiasm for our superabundant excellence, which we set
forth in front of ourselves with such a brave show, there will always
be an intense sensitiveness for all other beings who may appear at any
moment to sympathize with, comprehend, and appreciate this beauty of
the solitary life. If such fellow-feeling is not forthcoming we find
the very heart of us troubled to its depths and infinitely bruised.
We have lost at one stroke all humanity, friendship, and love. We are
unable to put away with whatever act of pedantry or rudeness may be in
question, some trivial circumstance or stupidity over which the vision
of any character of breadth or strength would pass without a tremor. It
whirls away the thought of everything else, and that which is by itself
of least significance proves to be that which finally most reduces us
to despair. Such is the source of all that endless train of melancholy,
trouble, heartache, peevishness, sickness, dejection, and poverty
of spirit which follows, such the spring of all those self-torturing
reflections one on the top of another, that cramp and obstinacy, nay,
finally, that cruelty of soul, through which the wretchedness and
weakness of the spiritual content of such a type, of "loveliness"
consummates and declares itself. No heart that is truly sound can
wish to unite itself with such an emotional hermitage. For it is a
fundamental characteristic of all genuine character that it carries
within itself both the courage and the strength to do and to will some
actual thing. The interest, therefore, that such natures which are for
ever revolving round themselves may arouse in us is after all an empty
interest, and necessarily so despite all the conviction with which such
natures may assure us that they belong to a higher and purer sphere
than our own, a sphere which has revealed to our vision that peculiar
type of the Divine they have uncovered from their secret parts and
finally present to us, to borrow an apt figure, _en negligée._

This want of genuine solidity of character appears in yet another form
where we find the particular manifestations of this world of "fine
feelings" turned as it were upside down and hypostatized as independent
forces. Much that passes for magic, magnetism, spiritualism, the
apparitions of _clairvoyance_, the morbid condition of sleep-walking,
is attributable to this source. The living person in question is
placed in a relation to these abstruse powers, which from one point
of view identifies him with them, and in another makes them appear as
something foreign to his spiritual life, which determines and controls
it. It is assumed that underlying these undefined forces there is some
inexplicable truth which borders on the marvellous, or at any rate
passes comprehension. From the world of art, however, all such powers
of darkness should be banished. In art there is no darkness at all, but
all is lucid and transparent, and in adventuring after such types of
myopy speech merely flounders into spiritual disease, or plays loose as
poetry with the nebulous, empty, and trivial, a good example of which
is the verse of Hoffmann, and that piece by Henry von Klust entitled
the "Prince of Homburg." The truly ideal character has nothing in his
composition, or the pathos which expresses it, of another world and its
ghosts, but only actual interests, in which he finds himself at home.
More particularly is this feature of _clairvoyance_ become a trivial
and vulgar recipe of our more modern poets. In Schiller's "Tell," on
the contrary, when the old Attinghausen on the brink of the grave
foretells the destiny of his country, the prophetic instinct is quite
in its right place. It is always, however, a misfortune for an artist
to find himself forced to exchange the sanity of a character with some
malady of the soul whether it be to motive the collision or excite
interest. For this reason he should only avail himself of the condition
of insanity in quite exceptional cases.

In conclusion we may connect with these distortions of a sane
vision, which are so much opposed to all real unity and consistency
of character, the principle of our latter-day irony. This false
theory has betrayed the poet into grafting upon his characters
qualities so essentially diverse that they are incapable of all
homogeneous relation; the essential unity of every character is thus
confounded. According to this theory a character is first presented
as characterized in a certain way, and immediately after we have that
very determination converted into its opposite, and the character
itself is propounded to us as nothing more than the negation of what
it was and is. Moreover this very futility is accepted by this irony
as the supreme discovery of art. An audience should not, in short,
be carried away by an essentially positive interest, but should be
pulled up at the critical moment, much as the irony itself is no
sooner launched upon anything than it is off again. They would even
explain the characters of Shakespeare according to such a principle.
We are informed that Lady Macbeth was an irreproachable wife of the
tenderest feeling, despite the fact that she not only falls in with
the suggestion of the murder, but actually eggs her husband on to
its execution. But if the signet mark of Shakespeare is conspicuous
on any one quality it is on the firm and decisive delineation of his
characters, even when it is only the formal greatness and consistency
of evil that is in question. Hamlet, it is true, is a case of mental
indecision, but even he is only in doubt as to the way he shall carry
out his purpose, not at all as to what has to be done. Yet nowadays
they would assimilate even Shakespeare's characters to a world of
ghosts, and appear to think that this futility and indecision of ups
and downs, this general squeamishness[364] in short can by itself
contribute to our interest. The Ideal, however, is centred in this,
that Idea is made _actual_, and our humanity is associated with such
actuality as subject and consequently as a unity which is essentially
firm-rooted.

We may here, so far at least as this portion of our inquiry is
concerned, bring our observations upon the individuality which is
consistent with real character to a close. That which we have mainly
sought to emphasize is a pathos which is at once self-determined and
essential, the possession of a rich and complete nature, the spiritual
world of which such a pathos transfuses under such a form that this
process of transfusion no less than the pathos itself receives its
artistic presentment. At the same time this pathos must not be allowed
to come into conflict with itself in the hearts of men so as to
stultify its very nature and consistency as pathos.

III. THE EXTERNAL DETERMINATION OF THE IDEAL

Our consideration of the determination of the Ideal was in the _first_
instance occupied with the general inquiry why it was and how it came
about that the Ideal ever received at all the definite embodiment of
a particular form. Following after this we arrived at the conclusion
that inherent process was essential to our notion of it, that in fact
the element of difference was only by this means asserted within it,
and that this process viewed as a whole is presented us in the action.
We discovered, however, that in virtue of the action the Ideal passes
over into actual relations with the external world; we have therefore,
and this is the _third_ important step, to solve the further question
what kind of form this its final aspect, as associated with external
reality, the Ideal will receive under adequate artistic representation.
We would recall the fact that the Ideal is the Idea under a form which
is in union with its own _actuality._ Up to the present point of our
inquiry our attention has been exclusively occupied with that aspect
or phase of this actuality which we may call in general terms human
individuality and its character. Man is, however, also in possession of
a concrete and _external existence._ In separation from this it is true
he concentrates his spiritual life to a point in self-consciousness,
but he remains for all that, even in this subjective unity, immediately
related to the external world. To the actual existence of mankind the
surrounding sphere of a world is as indispensable as the protection of
a temple is to the statues of the god it contains. And for this very
reason we must now advert to all or some of those many diverse threads,
whereby the Ideal is woven in with this external environment and is
shown in relief against it[365].

This opens to our view a practically immeasurable expanse of relations
and modes under which the process of the external and relative world
is determined. For in the first place we are confronted at once
with the bare facts of external Nature such as particular locality,
situation, whether habitable or not, temporal condition, the nature of
the prevailing climate, whether in our earth's northern or southern
hemispheres, and in fact in whatever direction we advance we have a
fresh picture before us. Moreover, external Nature is made use of by
man to satisfy his own needs and purposes; and all the ways under
which he converts her to that use, that is to say the adroitness with
which he discovers and then equips himself with tools and a home to
live in, with weapons, with seats to recline upon, carriages to ride
in, nay, all that the art of cooking may bring with it for his food,
the entire apparatus of his luxury no less than his comfort, all this
and much more fall within the limits of our inquiry. Add to this the
further and yet more important consideration that every man lives
within a comprehensive and equally real world of spiritual relations,
which itself, too, presents to his view all the different modes under
which command and submission is maintained, that is to say the family,
blood-relationship, property, country and town life, the _cultus_ of
religion, the organization of defence and offence, civic and political
associations, private society, in short every conceivable form under
which ethical customs and usages are organized in the institutions and
permanent activities which contribute to the actual environment of
human existence.

In all the directions enumerated above the Ideal is in immediate
contact with the reality of the practical world in its everyday dress,
or in other words, with the commonplace prose of life. And impressed by
this fact we may easily be led to the conclusion, if we have already
accepted the nebulous conception of idealism elaborated recently,
that art can have no alternative but to dissever herself absolutely
from all connection with this world of relative appearances. Such at
least can only be logically inferred from a theory which assumes that
this relation of externality is one of pure indifference, or rather,
in contrast to the subjective world of spirit, is of no substantive
significance or worth. Agreeably to this view art is a spiritual
dominion, whose sole object is to exalt us above the sphere of material
wants, necessities, and dependence, and to liberate us from the
logic, and we may add the comedy, of facts, which in this field claim
the exclusive attention of our humanity. For, apart from any other
consideration, all that meets us upon this _terra firma_ of life's
prose is for the most part of a purely conventional character, and,
conditioned as it is by time, space, and custom, simply a congeries
of contingent facts, which it is derogatory to the nature of art to
accept. This view of ideality, which is really an illusive one, is
in part due to one of those highly flavoured abstractions of our
latter-day thinking, in which we merely find that the thinker's courage
has failed him to come to terms with the external world in question;
in part also it is due to that type of prepossession which drives a
man to assert summarily his independence of practical necessities
when the advantages of birth, status, and social position have not
already effected this for him. For such a man the only relief available
is a complete withdrawal into the secret world of the emotions, a
prison-house of unreality he steps out of never. Here he remains
in what he conceives to be the temple of wisdom gazing ecstatic at
what he takes to be the stars, and naturally values at the price of
a nutshell all that is found on the Earth. The real Ideal, however,
is not confined to the shadow-like world of the emotions, but in its
perfected whole must freely borrow from the definite structure of
external objects of sight in every direction. And the reason of this
is that man himself, whose nature is the central source that gives
to that Ideal all its significance, is alive, and his life is only
actual in a particular place and time, as one with the Present, as the
individualized type of infinity[366]; and in short the opposition of
an external garland of Nature is a fundamental characteristic of his
life and its association with him and his activity is imperative. It
follows that if this activity is to be apprehended by art, not merely
as belonging to man alone, but in the specific form it may take in
that world of appearance, the mode of its existence there will assert
itself, as the mobility, reaction, and animating force of life itself
in contact and transfusion with the material complex which surrounds it.

Man is, however, in virtue of his self-consciousness a world in
himself[367], and as such is differentiated from the external world of
Nature which confronts him; and this external world is equally with
himself a rounded whole whose unity asserts itself in the principle of
causality. This self-exclusion of these two worlds is, however, only
apparent; they are in their separation essentially related, and it is
precisely this association which constitutes concrete reality, whose
artistic embodiment is the content of the Ideal. And this brings us
once more to the question already mooted, namely, in what semblance or
form the external material which we find in this mutually related world
we have referred to as concrete reality[368] can be presented to us by
art in a manner consistent with the Ideal of art.

We will once more accept the triple division of our subject-matter,
and examine a work of art from three distinct points of view. _First_,
there is the material of externality accepted in the bare abstractness
of its forms, such as space, figure, time, colour, which we must
consider relatively to the artistic form most adapted to it.

_Secondly_, we must consider externality in its full and actualized
concreteness, as above explained, a mode of reality which imperatively
requires in a work of art that it should be in close affiliation with
the subjective content of the spiritual life of man immediately related
to it.

_Thirdly_, our consideration will be directed to the important fact
that a work of art is created for the delight of human perceptions, for
a public in short, which justly claims that the objects of art should
bring home to it the interests of its spiritual life, its real beliefs,
emotions, and ideas, so that it may enter with a genuine response into
their artistic presentation.

1. THE CONDITION OF EXTERNALITY IN ITS SIMPLE ABSTRACTNESS

The Ideal in passing out of the bare image of its essential form into
external or determinate existence secures for itself a reality which
presents two distinct aspects. From one point of view we see that a
work of art discloses necessarily in the content of the Ideal the
concrete semblance of reality, that is to say it presents that content
as a definite situation or particular circumstance, action, event or
character, and presents it moreover in the mode of external existence.
From another it is equally obvious that art makes some specific and
sensuous material the vehicle of the particular content in its entirety
of all that we have above summarized; it creates in short a new world
sensible to eye and ear, the world of art. Under both these aspects
we may further observe that art penetrates to the remotest limits of
externality which are compatible with its form as the self-including
unity of the Ideal and conformable to its appearance as a concrete
whole permeated with the energy of spirit[369]. A work of art moreover
itself may, as an object qualified by externality, be viewed in two
distinct ways. We may regard it simply as an external thing, and as
such only conformable to a unity that is external in the sense external
objects are such. In considering it from this latter point of view
we have once more to consider that relation of externality which
we found it necessary to discuss in our examination of the beauty
of Nature. And for this reason we shall again have to make use of
those specific determinants which we previously discussed, and even
then primarily in their connection with art. The modes under which
external form was in the previous section exhaustively considered were
then treated in a twofold way. First we analysed such conceptions as
uniformity, symmetry, and conformity to rule; we then examined unity
itself regarded as the simplicity and purity of the sensuous material,
which art makes use of as the external medium for the existence of her
expositions.

(_a_) We will start our inquiry by examining the position in which we
now find ourselves relatively to such conceptions as uniformity and
symmetry. It is obvious that these, expressing as they do the entirely
lifeless unity of the geometrical logic, can by no means exhaust the
nature of a work of art even when entirely regarded as an external
object. Such determinations are only exhaustive in their relation
to what is in itself lifeless, such as time and the configuration
of space. Confined in this way though they be to the barest forms
of externality, they are then true witnesses both to the power and
substance of reason. And consequently we find they assert themselves in
a twofold manner even in art. In the first of these, it is this very
quality of their abstractness which operates by way of contrast to
the living pulse of art, which is forced even in the confines of its
sensuous material to raise itself over and beyond mere symmetry into
the freedom of the Ideal. In this process of liberation which may be
exemplified in the melodies of the art of music we do not, however,
find that the conformity to rule disappears altogether, it is merely
made subservient as a foundation. In the second, this principle of
measure and rule in its application to the indefinite and unlimited is
the one and only qualifying principle which certain arts can accept
owing to the nature of the media which those arts make use of. In such
cases uniformity is itself and alone raised to the ideal significance
of the art. The principal example of an art of this type is that of
architecture; and the reason of this is that a work of art which is
wholly architectonic is directed to the one object of reconstituting,
by means of an artistic form, that which is essentially the external
and inorganic environment of spirit. In this art, consequently, all
that is rectilinear, right-angled, circular, or presents uniformity of
pillars, windows, arches, piers, vaults, and so forth is the dominant
principle of unity.

The artistic structure of architecture is not erected entirely as an
object in itself, but rather as an external frame, embellishment and
local habitation for something else which it subserves. A building
is not complete until it has received the statue of the god or the
society of human beings who make their dwelling therein. An artistic
work of this kind should not therefore receive all or indeed the main
attention. Holding this in our minds, it will appear obviously to the
purpose that uniformity and symmetry should be here the prevailing
characteristic of the structure; the mind passes over very readily one
that is throughout uniform, and will not trouble itself about it for
any length of time. Of course, we cannot here discuss the symbolical
significance, which, in addition to that above examined, may attach to
architectural form in its immediate relation to the spiritual content
it envelops and emphasizes with a positive localization. The same
principle applies to the art of making gardens, which we may define
as a specific mode of architecture, in so far at least as an artistic
conformation is imposed on external Nature[370]. In the garden no less
than in the building man himself is the main object. There are two
distinct types in this art of garden-construction. The one adopts as
its main principle uniformity and symmetry; the other those of variety
and irregularity. As an artistic product the former is to be preferred.
Labyrinths, however numerous and intricate, garden-beds in endless
alternation of spiral lines, bridges over water usually stagnant,
with every conceivable surprise that gothic church, temples, Chinese
pagodas, hermitages, urns, summer-houses, mounds, statues may claim to
afford us--one glance and only one glance at such things is sufficient,
the vulgar and artificial pretensions of it all is too patent, and we
do not seek for another. It is quite another matter when we cross any
actual situation of real natural beauty, which has not at least been
exploited expressly for our enjoyment[371], and by its own exceptional
merit makes an irresistible appeal to our love of Nature and our
sense of her beauty. A garden laid out with strict reference to the
other extreme of regularity, makes no such attempts at surprises, but
permits human beings to appear as the principal object in the external
framework of natural beauty[372]. And this is really what a garden
should be. Again in the art of painting the principle of uniformity
and symmetry is clearly visible in the co-ordination of the whole, the
grouping of the figures, their place and pose in the composition. But
inasmuch as in painting the animation of life can assert itself through
objects in a far profounder degree than is possible in architecture
we find that it presents much less scope for the purely formal unity
of the symmetrical, and the rule of uniformity in all its severity is
for the most part to be traced only as the fundamental principle of
composition in the earliest phases of art, making way in its more
advanced forms to the freer line, which is associated in our minds
with organic form rather than such we meet with in the pyramid and
similar geometrical shapes. Conformity to rule and symmetry are further
important factors in the composition of music and poetry. Owing to
the incident of duration in the length of tones we find in these arts
an aspect of what is intrinsically a purely external relation, which
is incompatible with any other more concrete mode of presentation.
If we take the spatial condition it is obvious that here everything
which lies in juxtaposition can be seen at a glance. It is otherwise
with that which occurs in Time. Here we have merely a succession
of moments, every one of which takes the place of another, and in
this vanishing procession they flow on for ever. And it is precisely
this indeterminacy which it is the function of musical time or beat
to inform by adding thereto a real definition capable of uniform
repetition. In this way the indefinite progression is subordinated to
a rational principle. In musical time we have a power which exerts
such a fascination upon us, that, so far from being able to treat it
with indifference, we not unfrequently find ourselves beating time
quite unconsciously with it while listening. This constant recurrence
of equal lengths of time according to a definite measure has nothing
to do with tones and their duration as we find them in Nature. Tone
simply as musical sound and time abstractly regarded, are both of them
equally indifferent to such uniform divisions and repetitions. Musical
time is consequently something wholly created by the human mind; and
indeed there is more than a suggestion of this in the fact that in
listening to musical time we are at once impressed with the conviction,
that we have, in this control of time according to fixed rule, nothing
less than a real reflection of our spiritual nature, or rather that
of the fundamental truth of self-identity, an illustration absolutely
precise of the way in which the subject of consciousness applies this
very principle of uniformity, unity with itself, that is to say, in
constant recurrence, throughout all the variety and most intricate
multiplicity of experience. And it is for this reason that the beat of
musical time meets with such a startling response in the very depths of
our being, gripping hold, as it does, of that self-identity, which is
the fundamental abstract principle of our inmost life. Considered in
this relation it is not; the spiritual content, not the concrete soul
of our emotions, any more than it is the musical tone as tone, which
appeals to us so intimately; it is simply the formal unity which the
unity of consciousness transfers to the temporal process, and which is
thus re-echoed back to our conscious life. And the same remarks apply
to the measure and rhyme of poetry. The sensuous medium is here, too,
in the same way carried out of the sphere of that which is external to
ourselves, and at once asserts there the presence of something over and
above that which is expressed by our ordinary consciousness, which in
its general use treats the time-divisions of tones with indifference or
caprice.

A uniformity of similar character, if not so consistently defined,
may be traced still further, and is involved in the living content of
poetry itself, although the relation here is quite an external one.
By this we mean that in an epic poem or a drama, both of which have
their particular subdivisions, cantos, or acts, whatever may be the
specific term applicable, there is an approximate principle of equality
apparent in the division of subject-matter. And the same characteristic
is generally true in the grouping of the subject in pictures, although
such should not appear to be a necessary result of the nature of the
subject-matter itself, nor create the impression that this uniform
distribution is due to any controlling principle of first importance.

Conformity to rule and symmetry, which are the abstract unity and
definition of all that is essentially spatial and its configuration no
less than of all which is external under temporal condition, are mainly
the co-ordinating principles of quantity and size, as we have already
noticed in our consideration of the beauty of Nature. All that which
does not, in virtue of its own specific medium[373], strictly form part
of external extension, is consequently freed from the range of those
principles which assert themselves exclusively in the relations of
quantity, and are determined through relations of deeper significance,
and the unity which co-ordinates them. It follows from this that
the further art embraces subject-matter which is independent of the
external condition, so much the less significant the principle of
uniformity becomes, in the co-ordination of that art's subject-matter
and the more completely is it restricted to a subordinate position.

It will be, perhaps, advisable here to close the above discussion
of symmetry with a few general observations upon _harmony_. The
relation of harmony is no longer one to mere quantity, but rather one
to essential distinctions of _quality_, differences of tone, that
is to say, which do not persist against each other in their native
opposition, but as harmony or music have to be brought into concord.
In music we find that the relation of the tonic to the mediant and
dominant notes of the scale is no relation of bare quantity[374],
but implies the presence of tones whose difference is _essentially_
a qualitative difference; which, that is to say, combine naturally
in a unity, rather than continue to assert their distinguishing
_timbre_ in all its glaring antithesis and contradiction. The true
discord, on the contrary, requires its harmonic resolution. The same
qualitative consistency is to be found in the harmony of colour, in
reference to which it is likewise one of the requirements of art
that it should neither manifest itself in a picture as a motley and
haphazard juxtaposition of pigments, nor as a neutral surface whereon
all fundamental distinction is dissolved[375], but as the artistic
expression of a whole in which essential contrast is mediated through
some principle of harmonious unity. Furthermore, we observe that
harmony contains in itself a definite number of contrasted differences,
which have naturally a particular significance of their own. Thus we
find under the differentiation of colour a definite number known as
the cardinal colours, which are primary derivatives of the fundamental
notion of colour, and are not due to accidental composition. Harmony
consists in bringing together a number of positive colours such as this
classification implies, and uniting them in concordant unity. We must,
that is to say, have in a picture not merely all the primary colours,
yellow, blue, green, and red present, but also a harmonious scheme
under which they are related; and the old masters have, without direct
consciousness of the principle involved, paid express attention to this
completeness of effect and arrived at artistic results which flowed out
of it. And furthermore, for the very reason that we find in harmony
the beginnings of a release from the bare condition of externality it
is duly qualified to absorb and express a spiritual content of wider
significance. We may mark an illustration of this in the way the old
masters distinguished between the drapery of their principal figures
and of those of less importance, painting that of the former in
elementary colours of absolute purity, but only conceding to that of
the rest compound varieties. The mantle of the Virgin Mary is almost
always blue; blue in its assuaging sense of tranquillity is accepted as
the counterfeit of the repose and tenderness of the heart. It is only
rarely that we find her in a drapery of emphatic red.

(_b_) The second aspect of externality is the relation it occupies
directly in the various material which art employs in the various media
of its presentations. The unity here consists in the clear definition
and homogeneousness of the material, which ought not to deviate
in the direction of a vague characterization and mere confusion,
or, speaking generally, give us the impression of dirtiness. This
determinacy is also entirely dependent upon the spatial condition,
that is to say, upon the purity of its delineation, the distinctness
of its rectilinear and circular lines, and so on, no less than upon a
consistent definition of Time such as we find in the accurate measure
of the musical beat. It depends furthermore on the translucency both
of specific tones and colours. In a good picture we shall find that
there is nothing unclean or "dirty"[376] in the colours employed,
but everything is clear and asserts itself openly for what it is.
The directness of its purity is, in fact, that which constitutes the
lovely impression of colour upon our sense; and those colours which
are most direct in their simplicity, such as a yellow which has no dash
of green in it, or a red that is wholly independent of blue or yellow,
produce the most emphatic effect. On the other hand, it is obviously
more difficult to maintain a harmony of the whole when colours are thus
contrasted in all their pristine simplicity. Yet in despite of this
these essentially simple colours form the foundation of every true
colour scheme, and although it may be impossible to dispense with a
considerable use of their compounds, even these should not be allowed
to appear in one dead and dull interfusion, but with their simple and
luminous derivations shining through them[377]; otherwise instead of
the clear lambency of colour we shall get nothing but a muddy residuum.
We shall find that the same thing is necessary in the _timbre_ of
musical tone. In the case of strings whether of metal or catgut it is
the vibration of the material, and, moreover, of a material of definite
tension and length, which educes the musical note. If the tension is
insufficient, or the length of the string which is struck is not the
right one, the tone inevitably loses its clearness of definition,
rings false, as we say, owing to the interfusion with it of other
tones[378]. We have the same kind of result when a purely mechanical
fretting or scraping is suffered to interfere with the purity of the
vibratory motion, and so to render the emitted sound confused and
harsh. In the same way, it is of the first importance to the art of
singing that the human voice should be produced from throat and chest
freely and with purest intonation; the voice should be heard without
the least indication of its organic instrument, or, as in the case
of hoarseness, with an obstructive accompaniment the singer fails to
repress. We may conclude, then, that this translucency and purity,
free from all admixture with anything foreign to it, and consistent
throughout in its clearness, is that which creates the beauty of tone
as immediately apprehended by our senses, and which distinguishes
it from every kind of mere noise. And we may add further it is this
which in human speech conspicuously applies to the articulation of the
vowels. A language which enunciates the five vowels with distinction
and purity, as is strongly the case in the Italian, is essentially
musical and adapted to song. The diphthongs, on the contrary, always
produce a confused tone. In literature little attention is paid to
the direct reproduction of folk-dialects; we find them rather reduced
to the simplest form of expression. In actual speech, however, this
clearness of intonation only too often entirely disappears, so that we
find, and markedly so in the case of dialects such as the South German,
Swabian, and Swiss, men actually speak with an articulation of sound
it is quite impossible to write down. We do not regard this, however,
to be necessarily a defect in human speech, but rather a reflection of
the rawness of the common folk. And here we must close our observations
upon that external aspect of art, which, from the fact that it is
external, and nothing more, is only capable of receiving an external
and abstract unity.

Now according to its more comprehensive definition it is the _concrete
individuality_ of the Ideal impregnated with reason, which takes to
itself externality as the form of its embodiment, and, moreover, in
such a way that the external semblance, which is thus the medium of
its expression, is throughout suffused with the mind inherent in this
concrete individual form. In consequence of this such modes of relation
as uniformity, symmetry, and harmony, or, in other words, the more
simple determinations of the sensuous material are no longer adequate.
This defect naturally extends our inquiry to that second aspect of the
external determination of the Ideal already stated.


2. THE COALESCENCE OF THE CONCRETE IDEAL WITH ITS EXTERNAL REALITY

The fundamental truth which we shall endeavour to substantiate before
everything in the matter which now immediately engages our attention is
this, that man is under an obligation to make himself at peace and at
home in the environment of the world; or, to put it rather differently,
his individuality must live itself into Nature and all the conditions
of that external world, and by doing so assert its freedom visibly.
And, moreover, this must take place in such a way that these two
related factors, that is, on the one side, the entirety of his inward
life and the character it possesses or displays in all conditions or
actions whatsoever, and, on the other, that objective entirety of
external existence which confronts him, must wholly lose the appearance
of two worlds which are either indifferent to or not homogeneous
with[379] each other, and forthwith proclaim themselves as harmoniously
related and identical in substance. This externally objective world
must, in so far as it is the reality of the Ideal, surrender the
semblance of its own objective self-subsistency and stubbornness, in
order that its fundamental unity with that to which it supplies the
external and particular embodiment may be exhibited in truth.

To establish this unity with more conclusiveness we propose now to
examine our subject under three different heads of discussion.

_First_, we may investigate the same from the point of view that this
unity which binds the two factors already defined is merely a bond
which possesses _no positive reality_[380], but is merely a mysterious
and secret connection both in its origin and appearance, by virtue of
which our humanity is looped together with its environment.

_Secondly_, however, as a deduction from the fact that it is the
concrete _spiritual_ life of man and the individuality which pertains
to it which constitutes the point of departure, or rather the essential
content of the Ideal, we shall further examine this association, as in
truth the creation of _human_ activity itself and only possible as such
a creation.

_Finally_, we shall prove that this unified world created by the human
Spirit is itself a complete entirety, which, in the determinate form
of its existence, is objectively valid, and in essential relation with
which every unit of our common humanity who is actively engaged with
the vital concerns of art must infallibly remain.

In opening our discussion of the position we proposed first we would
at once point out an important conclusion involved in it. We have here
posited that the environment of the Ideal is not directly due to human
activity, it can therefore only be regarded in this first step of our
inquiry as something external to man, that is to say Nature. How, then,
is this something outside man to be exhibited in the ideal work of art?
We will discuss this at least in its more general terms, and here, too,
draw attention to three aspects of importance.

(_α_) In the first place external Nature, so far as the reproduction of
its external form is concerned, is in every respect a reality which is
embodied in some _definite_ shape. If our representation is in every
respect to satisfy really all that is implied in this condition it
must be the exact counterpart of the phenomenal truth of Nature. We
have, however, already drawn attention to material points of difference
between the truth of Nature and its reproduction by art which cannot be
disregarded. We may, however, observe that it is an almost universal
characteristic of the great masters that they are conspicuously true
in their delineation and elaboration of the broad facts of Nature. And
this is not so much due to a love of imitation as it is due to the fact
that Nature is not merely in a general way the objective facts of a
heaven and an Earth with humanity suspended, as it were, in a _vacuo_
between them; but rather that the emotional life and activity of man
can only be rightly conceived as alive and operative in a given place
with all its associations of streams, rivers, hills, mountains, plains,
dales, and forests. Take the case, for example, of Homer, who is not at
all a poet of the picturesque in natural scenery as we now understand
it; we shall, nevertheless, find even in him the descriptions and
indications he gives us of actual places or natural features such
as the rivers Scamander or Simois, the coast and bays of the sea
and so forth correspond with such truth to Nature that geographical
investigators only quite recently have been able to map out the
locality to which he refers in entire accordance with his descriptions.
The ballad-singers of the Middle Ages present a sordid[381] contrast
to him in this respect, no less than in their power of depicting
character; the effect of their productions either way is bald, jejune
and nebulous. Even in the case of the Meistersingers, though they
versify old biblical stories which they locate in Jerusalem and
elsewhere, it is little more than the bare names which we get. In the
Book of heroes[382] the effect is precisely similar. Otnith rides
through the pine-forest, fights with the dragon, but it is no world
of men or distinct locality we can recognize, and our imagination is
consequently in this respect left without any support. Even in the
Nibelungenlied there is no real increase of local interest. It is
true the names of Worms, the Rhine, and the Danube are mentioned;
but practically all further detail is omitted and the result is as
barren as before. And yet it is clearly through this very clearness of
definition that our narration becomes individual and real; without this
it is a mere abstraction which directly gives the lie to the concrete
reality it proposes to present.

(_β_) In addition to these fundamental requirements of clear definition
and correspondence with the natural facts a certain elaboration of
detail will frequently much assist us in presenting the external
aspects of a picture which our perception or imagination can readily
seize. Unquestionably, owing to the nature of the particular medium
in which the several arts express themselves, there will be a marked
difference of range to which, in any particular case, this process
may be carried. If we take the art of sculpture, for example, we
shall find that the repose and universality, which are the fundamental
features of its characterization, are less consistent with this
elaboration of external detail than is the case in some other arts.
Externality is here neither defined as a particular place nor a
particular environment, but is entirely concentrated upon such details
as drapery, arrangement of hair, dress, weapons of war, mode of seat
and the like. Nay more, the actual definition of many figures in
antique sculpture is only obtained through an entirely conventional
arrangement of drapery or hair, or other distinguishing accessories.
This is not, however, the place to discuss further the significance of
the conventional. It is obviously outside the sphere of natural fact
and rather related to the contingent; or, to put the matter in this
particular case more fully, it is the means through which we arrive
at that which is more universal and persistent in our final artistic
effect.

As a reverse case to that of sculpture the subject-matter of lyrical
poetry is pre-eminently man's emotional life; for this reason it is
not so necessary in this type of poetry to lay stress on the detail of
actual facts even when reference is made to the external world. It is,
on the other hand, part of the function of epic poetry to state events
as actual facts, to be precise as to the place where actions occurred
and in what manner they were performed; and, in short, of all types
of poetry it is the one to which the widest latitude and the closest
accuracy of local detail is most essential. And, furthermore, if we
contrast all the arts together in this respect we shall find that not
one of them is, by virtue of its medium[383], so exclusively occupied
with the detail of external Nature as that of painting. At the same
time we must add a word that applies equally to all of them. Whatever
the definition of Nature may be, it never ought to give the erroneous
impression of Nature's prose reality, that is to say, as the immediate
imitation of such; nor should that fulness of detail, which is devoted
to the spiritual aspect of individual life and its events, be carried
by enthusiasm out of the due relation of its importance to the whole.
And generally we may affirm of both that such exclusive definition
ought not to be all that is anywhere presented, inasmuch as everywhere
in a work of art that which is a natural fact should only receive its
artistic embodiment in close relation to man's spiritual life.

(_γ_) We have here struck the very note we wish particularly to
emphasize. We have already remarked that there are two essential
conditions to any effective presentation of a real personality; we
must have before us both the reflection of the man's inner life and
the natural environment which surrounds him. And in order that this
external surrounding appear as one that is truly his own an essential
bond of relation must be established between him and it, one which
to a greater or less degree is part of his own spiritual substance,
where we may, doubtless, cross many traces of contingent matter and
yet find the spiritual bed of this nexus still maintained. Throughout
the entire spiritual _apparatus_ of the heroes of Epic poetry, for
example, their mode of life, that is, opinions, emotions, and all that
they do we ought to be able to recognize a subtle homogeneousness, a
harmonious _en rapport_, which fuses the two aspects of such a life
into one concordant whole. The Arab is thus united with Nature, and,
indeed, apart from his sky, his stars, his torrid deserts, his tents,
his camels, and his horses is unintelligible. He is only truly himself
and at home under such conditions. In the same way the heroes of Ossian
possess in the highest degree an intense inward life; but in their
very gloominess and melancholy they appear as the genuine growth of
their hills of heather, whose thistles are swept by the wind, of their
rain-clouds, mists, mountains, and dark caves. The physiognomy of the
conditions under which they live reveals to us as nothing else can
the secret of that inner life of emotion which is lived through with
all its sadness, mourning, its pains, its battles, and its mist-like
apparitions in such a natural setting; they are, in short, entirely at
home in it and in it alone.

Such considerations supply us with ample ground for the statement we
let fall previously unsupported that the subject-matter of history
offers unrivalled opportunities for perfecting this intimate relation
between the two aspects of human life we have been discussing, and
enabling, us to carry the same directly into the minutest particulars.
Very rarely, indeed, are we likely to find that the imagination can
simply through its own initiative create such a harmony, although
we ought to feel its presence throughout, however little it may, in
fact, have produced of the raw material it combines into artistic
completeness. No doubt there is a common tendency to rate what we
fancy is the free creation of imaginative genius above the effort of
assimilating in artistic form a material which is borrowed; but it is
for all that quite impossible that the imagination should alone create
that harmonious _entente_, the unity of the Ideal requires in the
consistent and defined form which lies before us in actual existence,
where national traits, to cite the examples above, are the veritable
growth of such a harmony.

And here we close our consideration of the principle accordant with
which we have rendered more clear that aspect of the unity of the
inner life with its natural environment which we posited as secret or
potential, not at any rate directly due to human activity.

(_b_) The second phase of this harmonious relation may be explained
more positively, being expressly due to man's own activity and his
adaptation of means to ends. For man adapts external objects to his
own uses and, by means of the satisfaction which his work supplies,
places himself in a harmonious relation to them. In contrast therefore
to our first indefinite[384], and, in fact, entirely general type of
harmonious association the present one is directly concerned with what
is particular, as exemplified in the particular needs of man and their
satisfaction by his converting to his use such natural objects as he
may require. The range of his wants and the consequent impulse of their
satisfaction is of a practically unlimited variety; yet it is nothing
in comparison with the variety of Nature herself. Simplification is
therefore inseparable from the task whereby, our humanity imposes on
the facts of Nature its own vital purposes, and interpenetrates the
external world with its own volitions. In this way man's environment is
humanized; he proves by his own acts that it is capable of satisfying
his nature and is unable to preserve any predominant independence over
against him. Here at last, by virtue, that is, of his own productive
exertions, we find him no longer in a merely general sense of the term,
but actually in every detail of his particular surroundings a real
centre of his own substance and at home.

The fundamental conception which it is most important to emphasize as
that which affects art throughout in its relation to all we have above
considered may be thus stated. If we look closely at the relative
position man occupies in all the infinite variety of his material
wants, desires, and aims, we shall find that it is not one merely of
_general_ significance, but one of actual _dependence_. The absence
of freedom implied in this relative position is antagonistic to the
Ideal; and in order that man may become a suitable object for art, he
must have already released himself from the travail of this enforced
condition, and thrown off the chains of his dependence. Moreover, this
act of mutual accommodation, when we trace it to its origin, may strike
us in one of two different ways. Either he may conclude that Nature
in all friendliness on her own part supplies man with what he needs,
and so far from throwing obstacles in the path of his interests and
objects, rather freely gives them him as one who meets him half way
wherever he goes. Or, on the contrary, we shall not fail to observe
that our humanity has wants and desires, whose immediate satisfaction
Nature is quite unable to secure. In cases that fall under the second
type it is obvious that man can only work out the self-satisfaction
vital to him through his own energies; he must take possession of that
which Nature possesses, set to rights the defects which appear, modify
their form, removing all that stands in his way with adroitness; and,
in short, convert Nature's raw material into means through which he
will be able to attain all that he proposes. The relation in which the
unity between man and his environment will be most conspicuous must be
sought for in an example, where there is already a real contact between
them, where, that is to say, human ability is on such good terms with
the amenability of Nature that all the severity of a conflict between
them as unreconciled forces disappears, and we have forthwith the
completed symphony under our eyes.

For the reasons, then, already advanced the ideal province of art must
be held secure from the bare necessities of life. Property and the
favour of circumstances, in so far as they supply a condition, under
which poverty and labour vanish not merely for this or that hour, but
for the most part altogether, are for this reason, we will not say
incompatible with art, but rather in full concurrence with the Ideal.
Yet it would only betray a real lack of comprehension[385], if in cases
where the conditions of our art compelled us to consider the facts
of life in all their multifold variety, we nevertheless omitted from
our composition all reference to the relation in which human life is
placed to these very natural constraints. It is true enough that such
are purely finite conditions; but art is not therefore able to dispense
with them. They must not, in fact, even be treated by her as something
merely bad. It is rather her function to reconcile them with the Real
in her embracing unity. And indeed the finest actions and opinions
which she reflects on her mirror, if we consider the particular form
of the determination and content alone[386], are necessarily limited
and consequently finite. That I find it necessary to provide myself
with nourishment, food and drink, a house to live in, and clothing to
wear, seats to sit upon, and everything else incidental to domestic
life is no doubt an inevitable concomitant of the fact that I live
in the world; but the life that only I myself experience within me
permeates, this external aspect of my life so completely, that men
are fain to clothe and arm the very gods themselves, and to picture
them under conditions inseparable from a variety of things they seek
to possess, and find their satisfaction in obtaining. In short, for
art to be possible, this satisfaction of the necessities of life must
be assured to us. Or to take an example where this is not so, there
is that of adventurous knights who only secure their immunity from
external hardship through the continued success of their enterprise,
which is therefore itself but a contingency, in much the same way as
the prosperity of savages is contingent upon the amenities of Nature.
The conditions in both cases are not favourable to Art. Her true Ideal
is not merely to be found where our humanity is barely lifted above
the most rigorous condition of dependence upon the smiles or frowns of
Nature, but is most of all at home in that superfluity which suffers it
in conjunction with Nature's bounty to expatiate with freedom no less
than delight.

The above remarks are obviously of very general application. Two
considerations, however, of a somewhat more restricted interest may be
deduced from them.

(_α_) The first of these relates to the kind of use to which mankind
put the objects of Nature in seeking for a satisfaction which is wholly
_aesthetic_, or due to some habit of the mind. Everything in the nature
of ornament and finery, or, in general terms, everything that men
convert to their use for the sake of mere show comes under this head.
And the point to which we draw attention is this, that when we find men
thus decorating themselves no less than their immediate surroundings,
we ought not so much to conclude that all that they thus collect
together from Nature's most costly and beautiful storehouse, whatever
may most attract their eyes in the same--whether it be gold, precious
stones, pearls, ivory, or precious raiment--that all this unrivalled
rarity and brilliancy, in short, is that which for its own sake, and
primarily as a product of Nature, interests them: rather their interest
in it all is essentially personal as a thing suitable for the houses
they live in, or for that which they most love and honour, whether it
be their rulers, their temples, or their gods. A man selects in this
way that which already appears to him as externally beautiful, pure
translucent colour, glitter of metals, fragrant woods, marble, and all
the rest. Poetry, and particularly Oriental poetry, makes a willing
use of such wealth, a fact we may even illustrate from such a poem as
the Nibelungenlied: and generally it is true enough that Art in such
matters is not merely content with a general description of the beauty
or value of such fine things; but, where the artistic form and the
occasion allows, will describe such works in all the detail of their
workmanship with as royal a bounty as the works themselves. There was
no stint of either gold or ivory on the statue of Pallas at Athens,
or that of Zeus at Olympia; and the temples of the ancient gods, the
churches of Christendom, the pictures of saints, and the palaces of
kings, are notable illustrations among all nations that possess any
of them, to what kind of service splendour and brilliant show may be
devoted; thus have nations in every age delighted in seeing upon their
gods the visible presence of their own wealth, precisely as they have
found delight in the splendour of their princes as a glory they still
possessed, though ravished from themselves.

We all know, of course, that type of moralist who is only too ready
to disturb the vision of such an enjoyment. We shall, no doubt, be
reminded how many poor Athenians the aegis of Pallas could have
supplied with a hearty meal, or how many slaves could have thus been
liberated; and, doubtless, we must admit that in the case of the
ancient world, no less than in days more near to our own wealth, all
that has been lavished on temple, cloister, or cathedral, or other
objects of public utility, has been expended under social conditions of
the direst need to many. Nay, we may carry such melancholy reflections
yet further, and find in them a condemnation not merely of particular
works of art, but of Art herself and all that she gives us. What sums
of money are involved in the building by the State of an Academy of
Arts, or the purchase of ancient and modern works of art, and the
appropriate embellishment of public galleries, theatres, and museums!
But whatever the effect of such reflections may be upon us, whether
ethical or otherwise, such is, after all, only due to the fact that
we are once more reminded of those very constraints and hardships
whose removal is a vital condition of the appearance of Fine Art. The
appropriation of a unique sphere in its life for the exposition of its
artistic treasures, which stands safe above the stress of that reality
to which it contributes so largely, can therefore only redound to the
glory and supreme honour of any people.

(_β_) But, further, mankind is not merely interested in the adornment
of individuals and the environment of their life, but is actively
employed in adapting the objects of Nature to its practical needs and
purposes. It is on this plane that we come into contact for the first
time with all the labour and struggle which the dependence of our
humanity upon the prose of its finite life implies. And the question
inevitably arises, how far all that is involved in this practical
effort is suitable to artistic presentation.

(_αα_) In attempting some answer to this problem, we would draw
attention to the historical fact that the earliest way in which Art
attempted to banish all the prose reality of human life was the
conception of the well-known golden age or, if we care to call it so,
the idyllic state. In this we have Nature depicted as satisfying man's
every want with no trouble to himself: while he, for his part, enjoys
in a state of innocence all that mead, wood, flocks, garden, shelter,
and so forth, can supply him with nourishment, dwelling, and all other
comforts incidental to such a life. Of the passions of ambition or
avarice, indeed of every impulse that may appear to run counter to the
nobility of man's spiritual nature, we hear no word at all. At first
blush, no doubt, a state of this description may strike us more or less
as ideal, and certain types of art, limited in their range, may find
definite satisfaction in presenting us with a picture of it. But we
have only to penetrate further below the surface and we shall quickly
have enough of such a vision. The writings of Gessner are little read
nowadays, and when we do read them we find in such little satisfaction.
The truth is that a restricted state of life, such as the above
described, presupposes a very elementary stage in human development.
Manhood which has attained to any real fulness of spiritual stature is
moved by impulses of loftier range, and is not likely to be satisfied
with the life which clings closest to Nature and its immediate
products. In such idyllic poverty of soul no man ought to live, but
rather to accept his birthright of toil: that which his spiritual
impulse urges him forward to, that he must secure through his own
activity. Once regard the matter in this way and these very physical
wants of man will be found to bring into being a wide and diverse range
of activities, implanting in him the conscious sense of his own powers,
from the heart of which the profounder interests and forces of his life
can slowly unravel themselves. But, at the same time, it is necessary
that here, too, the harmonious relation between the outward and inner
life should be maintained as the fundamental principle of artistic
presentation. Few things are more offensive to our aesthetic taste
than to find in a work of art the severity of some physical disaster
portrayed through every detail of horror. Dante flashes on us the
starvation of Ugolino in a few trenchant strokes. When a Gerstenberg,
in his tragedy of Ugolino, wrings out every detail of the catastrophe
to the last drop, telling us precisely how first Ugolino's two sons,
and after them their father, were done to death by starvation, we feel
at once that the subject, as thus handled, is entirely at variance with
the principles of fine art.

(_ββ_) We shall, however, find that the condition of life which offers
the strongest contrast to that we have described as the idyllic state,
we will call it the generally civilized life[387], presents, though on
other grounds, difficulties to an ideal exposition which are equally
serious. In a Culture-State the complexus of social wants and labour,
of interests and all that may go to satisfying the same, is throughout
and in all its comprehensiveness completely evolved. Every individual
here is immersed in an infinite network of relations with other units
of the whole, and with so much loss to his complete independence. What
he himself requires for himself is either nothing at all, or only, in
a quite insignificant fraction of it, the result of his own labour:
add to this the tendency of all a man's normal activities is to become
more and more mechanical. We find, too, at the heart of this industrial
development and the interchange of employment and rejection of human
labour which it implies, on the one hand the most ruthless conditions
of poverty, and on the other a class which, raised as it is above
the bare necessities of existence, stands out in relief as wealthy,
entirely released from all toil for the sake of a subsistence, able
at any rate to devote individual attention to the finer interests of
life and its pathetic contrasts. No doubt the possession of such a
superfluity may create an impression as though for the favoured few the
constant recurrence of a position of dependence had passed away, and
a man is just so much the more released from the accidents incidental
to property because his hands are at length free from the grime which
soils them in securing it. But such a consolatory reflection will never
make a man thoroughly at home in all that immediately surrounds him in
the real sense that such is the garland of his own labour. For he is
the centre of that to the upraising of which he has not himself been
instrumental; it has come there out of that provision store which was
already full without him, which quite other persons and for the most
part in a quite mechanical and, therefore, formal way have provided,
and to which he is only introduced after a long series of effort and
struggle wholly strange to himself.

(_γγ_) We are consequently led to the conclusion that it is rather a
_third_ type of human society, a society which we may place halfway
between the idyllic golden age and the burgher State in its fully
developed industrial form, which is most fitted to be the subject
matter of ideal art. We have already analysed this state of society
in another connection under the description of the _heroic_ and
pre-eminently ideal world-condition. The heroic age is no longer
restricted to that idyllic garden of spiritual attenuation, but
includes within its borders passions and aims of deeper moment; and yet
withal that which in the circle of the individual life touches closest
the satisfaction of each man's immediate wants is still the entire
product of his own activity.

Moreover, the means of nourishment such as honey, milk, and wine are
less complex and consequently lend themselves more readily to ideal
treatment[388]. A diet which includes coffee, brandy, and such like
luxuries is associated in our minds with countless industries which
are necessary to their preparation. Our heroes, on the contrary, kill
and roast their own food, break in their own chargers, are the makers
to a considerable extent of all their household gods; ploughs, armour
for defence, shields, coats of mail, swords, spears, all are either the
work of the possessor, or are made directly under his supervision. In
a condition of life of this kind a man necessarily feels that in all
the things he makes use of, and in all that encircles him, he is in
touch with something produced by himself; that in contact with external
objects he is in contact with his own substance rather than with
objects which emanate from a world strange to himself and outside that
in which he is himself master. It is, of course, assumed that all the
energy he expends upon working up the material into forms adapted for
his use is not so much troublesome labour, but a work which, through
the satisfaction it brings him, falls easy from his shoulders, a work,
in short, which he can carry over every obstacle to success.

We find a society of this type in Homer. Agamemnon's sceptre is a
family staff which his ancestor himself shaped from the block and left
as an heirloom to his descendants. Odysseus put together with his
own hands the mighty bed he shared with Penelope; and if the famous
weapons of Achilles are no work of his own we only find the various and
interfused array of his own activities abated that a god, Hephaestus
himself, may provide them at the request of his mother Thetis. In a
word, we meet everywhere the youthful delight in novel discovery, the
freshness of personal possession, the victorious sense of enjoyment.
Everything is in its place and at home, in everything a man discovers
the energy of his own sinew, the adroitness of his own hand, the
cunning of his own spirit, or somewhat that follows from his own
courage and bravery. In this way, and by this alone, the instruments
which satisfy our human sense are not as yet relegated to a merely
external relation, but men have before them the living process of the
instruments themselves, the vital consciousness of the human worth they
attach to them; and they find it there inasmuch as for them they are
not mere lifeless things or things which habit has made lifeless, but
creations impregnated with their own energies. And for the same reason
we find here an idyllic condition of things, it is true, but not in
that restricted sense of the term that the Earth and her streams, seas,
forests, and cattle supply to mankind their sustaining substance, while
man himself is only visible to us as a passive creature limited by the
active powers which support him and their enjoyment. Rather we already
see within this morning-time of human life deep interests at work, in
relation to which the great world itself is but a subordinate realm,
the ground and the instrument for bringing into being the higher aims
which are present, as a ground and environment, however, over which
that harmonious concord, yet withal independence, of both sides of our
human world prevails; and which does prevail in the sight of all for
this reason that everything there exists as the product and for the use
of human life, is at the same time the creation and enjoyment of the
man who creates and enjoys its use[389].

To apply such a mode of artistic presentation to material borrowed
from more recent times, whose completed culture offers the strongest
contrast to the heroic age above-mentioned, is always beset with
extreme difficulty and liable to failure. Yet for all that Goethe in
his "Hermann and Dorothea" has furnished us in this respect with an
admirable masterpiece. Here an attempt will only be made to elucidate
a few significant points by contrasting the same with a composition
of similar type. Voss, in his famous romance "Louise," had depicted
on much the same idyllic lines our human life and activity in a quiet
circle of narrow range, if also marked with independent characteristics
of its own. The country parson, the tobacco-pipe, the dressing-gown,
the garden-bench, and finally our coffee-pot, have all of them here
important parts to play. Coffee and sugar are, however, products, which
are really here out of place; they belong to an entirely different
world[390] throughout associated with all the varied ramifications
of commercial and textile industries. This circle of country life
is consequently not self-inclusive. In the beautiful picture of
"Hermann and Dorothea" we are, on the contrary, under no necessity to
demand such a consistency. As we already have pointed out in another
connection, we find interwoven with the main threads of this poem,
which is, no doubt, in its prevailing atmosphere entirely idyllic, the
great political interests of the time, the struggles of the French
Revolution, the defence of the Fatherland, asserted in a worthy way
no less than with decision. The more limited scope of family life in
a little country town is not so presented us as a whole which can
even possibly remain in total ignorance of that mighty wave of the
great world under stress of a real cataclysm of events, which is the
view we are given of the pastor in the "Louise" of Voss. In Goethe's
poem we have, on the contrary, by means of the interfusion of these
great world-movements, within which the idyllic characters and events
are portrayed, the picture of a life with a typical character of its
own set in the frame of a world of more significant content; and the
apothecary, who is here presented as the out-and-out Philistine, and
who merely lives within the more narrow borders of that country life's
surroundings, affected by that only, is excellently sketched for us
with the good heart, but at the same time peevish isolation, which we
find so natural. Add to this, in that which most closely touches the
life of the characters thus portrayed, we find a particular emphasis
laid on the fundamental aspect of this idyllic life as previously
indicated in our former discussion of it. To mention one point only, we
may observe that the host does not by any means drink coffee with his
guests, the parson and the apothecary; on the contrary, to cite a line
or two:

    Carefully brought in the mother the sparkling and glorious red-wine,
    Poured in the clear-cut glasses, with rimlets all polished of pewter,
    Brought in the green-coloured rummers, those goblets most fit for the
          Rhine-wine.

They drink in the fresh air what has been grown at home, of the '83
vintage, and withal in glasses that, as home-made, are just the right
ones for Rhine-wine. A few lines further on our fancy is yet further
kindled with the "streams of the Rhine river and its dearly-loved
banks," and we are even introduced to the vineyard of the host behind
the house itself; and, in short, there is nothing to arrest our
attention outside the typical circle of a self-contented life which of
its own bounty provides for its wants.

(_c_) In addition to both these types of human environment we must
mention yet another in close association with which we all necessarily
live. It is no other than the universally prevailing _spiritual_
surroundings of our life whether they be religious, legal, or moral,
the organization of the State, that is to say, the constitution of the
government, the judicial institutions, the family, the institutions
of both public and private life, and all other social relations. For
the ideal character is not merely to be portrayed in its relation
to all that satisfies material wants, but as itself a focus of
spiritual interests. It is certainly true that all that is truly
substantive, divine, and essentially necessary in all these relations
is fundamentally an envisagement of one reality. In the objective
world, however, the forms under which this reality is manifested are
various, and they are, one and all, involved in that which is wholly
contingent in particular examples, and the conventional usages which
are only valid for definite periods of time and distinct nations. In
this variety of form all the interests of men's spiritual life receive
an external embodiment of reality, with which every man is confronted
in the customs, usages, and habits of society. Every man thereby, in
addition to possessing a self-exclusive individuality of his own,
becomes, in virtue of his association with such spiritual realities,
even more a member of a whole cognate with and vital to himself than
as a unit of that external world of Nature with which he is similarly
conjoined. Speaking generally, we may attach to this spiritual
association, of human life very much the same terms and significance we
have already discussed in the foregoing sections; consequently we will
for the present pass over the more detailed consideration of it, whose
most important features will apply more strictly to another aspect of
our inquiry, and will then be more appropriately discussed.

3. THE EXTERNALITY OF THE IDEAL WORK OF ART IN ITS RELATION TO A PUBLIC

It is therefore necessary that art, as the representation of the Ideal,
must embody this Ideal in all the relations to external reality we
have above described, and thereby associate the inward possessions of
character with the objective world. A work of art, however much in form
it may be a self-including and harmonious world by itself, exists none
the less as such an object, both real and particular, not _for itself_
but for such as _behold_ and _enjoy_ it, that is the Public. Actors,
for example, in the representation they give us of a particular drama
do not merely enter into converse with one another, but appeal directly
to ourselves, their audience; and it is equally important that they
make themselves intelligible under both these aspects. Every work of
art is in fact a direct appeal to the intelligence of everyone who
confronts it. Now it is indeed true that the real Ideal, as envisaged
for us in the universal interests and passions of its gods and men, is
so far intelligible to everyone as it gives us a view of its characters
within some typical external world of customs, usages, and everything
else that characteristically distinguishes it. But the condition of art
we have above formulated makes it further necessary that this element
of external reality is not merely one with which the characters thereby
represented are harmoniously associated, but must be also one within
which we ourselves to whom the work is addressed feel equally at home.
The appropriateness of the external environment to the characters
enfolded within it must apply with equal force to our own attitude of
mind in regarding both. But it so happens that from whatever period
of the world's history the subject-matter of a work of art may be
borrowed it will be sure to contain essential features, which are quite
distinct from those which specifically determine other nations and
periods. In other words artists of every description, whether they be
poets, painters, sculptors, or musicians, select subject-matter from
the Past, which in their particular state of culture and intelligence,
ethical customs, usages, and the form of their government, differ
from the civilization of the times they live in. Moreover, as we have
already observed, this return upon the Past possesses the considerable
advantage that in having thus recourse to memory instead of being face
to face with all the facts of the present, there is an appreciable
diminution of the material from which the artist selects his subject,
and this he cannot readily dispense with. At the same time the artist
belongs only to his own century, and it is in the ethical customs,
modes of conception, and generally the intellectual outlook of that he
lives. The Homeric poems Homer, to take him for once as the individual
creator of both "Iliad" and "Odyssey," may have actually lived through
or he may not; but in any case they are at least four hundred years
later[391] than the time of the Trojan war; and further a period twice
as long separates the great Greek tragedians from the days of the
ancient heroes, who, as translated into the atmosphere of their own
time, form the subject-matter of their poetry. It is just the same
in the case of the Niebelungenlied and the artist who finally fused
together the various saga which that poem contains into one homogeneous
work. We may no doubt admit that the artist finds himself entirely on
congenial ground when dealing with everything truly pathetic, either
in the history of gods or men; but the external and actual conditions
of that ancient world, whose characters and actions he endeavours to
portray, have altered in essential features and become consequently
strange to him. And further than this a poet creates for the sake of a
Public, and primarily for his own nation and his time, both of which
should be able to enter into such a work of art with intelligence,
and feel at home in it. The most genuine works of art no doubt assert
a further claim to immortality, a hope that they may continue to be
a source of delight to all times and nations. But even in the case
of works of the highest class it is none the less true that nations
and times situated far away from those which produced them can only
fully apprehend them with the assistance of an extensive apparatus of
geographical, historical, and it may be even philosophical knowledge
and the results of much critical investigation.

Bearing in mind these fundamental, and to some extent incompatible
differences which characterize the various points of view from which
a work of art must be regarded, the question arises what kind of form
relatively to its external framework of locality, custom, usage,
and generally any and every condition of religious, political or
ethical significance a particular work of art should receive. Should
an artist suffer his own times to pass from his mind altogether, and
attempt only to secure the substantial appearance of the Past and
what actually then existed, so that his work become simply a true
portrayal of that; or is he not merely justified, but rather under
an obligation, to pay an exclusive attention to his own nation and
the life around him, elaborating his work with express regard to the
principle that it should stand in harmonious relation to his own
times? Or, to put the same thing in rather more technical language,
we may propound the problem thus: Is the subject-matter of a work
of art to be _objectively_ valid in its content as one entirely
appropriate historically considered, or should such matter be treated
_subjectively_, that is, in complete subordination to the artist's
personal standpoint relatively to the culture and social conditions
of his own time? We would rather observe that both these positions,
if thus pressed unduly, land us in extreme conclusions equally false;
and we propose now to examine them briefly that we may by their means
elucidate a more satisfactory theory.

And we would consider three fundamental aspects which this problem
suggests. We will _first_ examine what is implied in the above
subjective assertion of the particular culture of the artist's own
time; _secondly_, there is the question what may be regarded as
exclusively and objectively true when we refer to the Past; _thirdly_,
we have to consider what may still be objectively valid in the true
sense, though we still have a representation and appropriation of
material borrowed from a time and nationality foreign to that of the
artists.

(_a_) Now to start with, if we consider this purely subjective
assertion, it is obvious that when we press the position closely we
are finally driven to exclude the objective embodiment of the Past
altogether, and to maintain that artistic representation is exclusively
concerned with the appearance of present times.

(_α_) Such a result may be doubtless, under one aspect of it,
presented by mere ignorance of the Past. It is, then, rather the result
of a _naïveté_, which is unable to feel the contradiction between
the object itself and the representation given, or at least fails to
bring the same to consciousness. Such a form of artistic presentation
is therefore fundamentally due to lack of sufficient culture. We
could hardly wish for a more vivid illustration of this than we find
in the _naïve_ productions of Hans Sachs, who has, no doubt with a
vivid freshness of imaginative vigour and spirit, as we may truly say,
domesticated among us[392] our dear Lord and Father God no less than
Adam, Eve, and the rest of the patriarchs. Here, for example, God the
Father is portrayed as teaching a school in which Cain, Abel, and the
rest of Adam's children--are the pupils, precisely as any pedagogue of
the time might have done. He catechizes them upon the ten commandments
and the Lord's Prayer. Abel knows his lesson as a pious and good boy
ought to. Cain on the contrary behaves and replies to his teachers
as only naughty and wicked boys would think of doing; and when it is
his turn to repeat the commandments turns them inside out: thou shalt
steal, thou shalt not honour thy father and mother, and so forth. A
representation of much the same crude simplicity having for its subject
the tale of our Lord's Passion used to be carried out in South Germany,
was then made illegal, and has since once more been resuscitated.
In this Pilate is portrayed in the character of an insolent, rough,
and arrogant official, the common soldiers much in the same familiar
way our own might, offer Christ surreptitiously a pinch of tobacco;
he disdains it, and they flatten it out on his nose. Vulgarity finds
all the more jest in such an incident for the reason that it wholly
conforms to its notions of piety and reverence, indeed calls up such
feelings all the more readily through its immediate reference to that
which it finds in its own world, thereby making more vivid its own
sense of devotional fervour. No doubt there is a certain justification
for this mode of translating, so to speak, the appearance and form
of objective history into modern equivalents, such as we have found
in our literature; and we may even attach a kind of greatness to
the courage of Hans Sachs in making himself so familiar with God
Almighty, and those old religious ideas that without the least vestige
of impiety he could rivet them deep within the conditions of our most
commonplace life. At the same time such an attempt is none the less a
rude intrusion upon our feelings, and indicates lack of cultivation,
inasmuch as it not merely disallows to the object itself a right to
assert itself as it really is, but forces upon it a mode of appearance
so directly contrary to that which it possesses, that the result can
only impress us as an emphatic caricature.

(_β_) As an antithesis to the above type of subjectivity we find
another equally supreme asserting itself out of sheer pride in its
own culture under the belief that the views peculiar to its own
times, its ethical customs, and social conventions are those alone
worth preservation or acceptance. Owing to a bias of this kind it is
quite unable to enjoy the content of a work of art until such a form
of culture prevails in it. An illustration of this latter type is
the so-called classical good taste of the French school. Everything
that is here attempted must forthwith be Frenchified, and all that it
presents under the form of any other nationality and more particularly
with any reference to the Middle Ages is voted incorrect and barbarous
and is cast on one side with absolute contempt. Voltaire expressed
anything but the truth when he said that the French have improved the
works of the ancient world. What they have done is to nationalize
them; and by this process of recasting have corrupted them with every
kind of foreign and angular quality of their own that such a taste as
theirs could develop to any extent, requiring as it did throughout
a culture absolutely based on court etiquette, and a conformity to
conventional rule and generalization in both the meaning and mode of
any dramatic work. Indeed, we shall find the trail of this abstraction
of a superfine culture visible in the very diction of their poetry. Not
a poet among them dare venture to use the word _cochon_, or add their
own nomenclature to spoons, forks, and a thousand other simple objects.
Consequently we have roundabout definitions and circumlocutions. We
cannot have our spoons and forks; we get instead an instrument of the
hand which conveys our victuals in a liquid or arid state to the
mouth; and this by no means stands alone. And with all its refinement
their taste is vulgar to a degree; for the simple truth is that genuine
art, so far from planing away and polishing its content to one flat
and unruffled surface of generalities, is most of all anxious to set
in full relief all that makes toward the well-defined characterization
of life. It is on account of this very taste that the French can make
less of Shakespeare than any other poet. And when they have attempted
to work him up to their graces they have clipped off from him precisely
that portion which we Germans find nearest to our hearts. For the same
reason Voltaire makes merry over Pindar because he has made the remark,
_ἄριστον μὲν ὕδωρ._[393] And, consequently, in their works of art they
find it necessary to make Chinese, Americans, or the heroes of Greek
or Roman antiquity all speak in one tongue and in one manner--that
of their French court. Achilles, for instance, in the "Iphigenie en
Aulide"[394] is nothing more or less than a French prince; and if we
had no name to help us no one could conceivably discover one particle
of Achilles in him. It is true that in the theatrical representation of
this drama he was habited as a Greek, appeared at least in helmet and
coat of mail; but at the same time his hair was curled and powdered,
with broad hips through _poschen_[395], with red claws worked on shoes
fastened on the foot with coloured ribbons; and what is more, the
"Esther" of Racine was expressly popular in the time of Louis XIV, for
the particular reason that Ahasuerus, on his first entrance on the
stage, copied the appearance of Louis XIV himself, when he entered
the great hall of audience. No doubt, in this transcript, there was
a considerable admixture of the oriental luxuriance; but a Ahasuerus
he was none the less fully powdered and wearing the royal mantle of
ermine, and followed by a complete retinue of curled and powdered
chamberlains got up thoroughly _en habit français_ with their wigs,
their feathered caps under arm, their vests and hoses of _drap d'or_,
with their silk stockings and red buckles on their shoes. All that the
court and a select circle of the privileged few were only permitted
to see _de facto_ was here open to all classes alike--the _entrée_
of the king paraded in the poet's verses. The writing of history in
France is not unfrequently conducted on very much the same principle.
That is to say, history itself and the real objects of history are
not the main purpose of the historian, whose interest is rather
concentrated either on giving the government in vogue a lesson or
teaching others how they ought to detest it. And in the same way there
are a host of dramas which, either expressly throughout their entire
content or in passing episodes, divert the attention to the events of
the day; or, if passages occur in pieces which refer to former times
presenting anything which may bear on matters of contemporary interest,
the parallel or the contrast is deliberately emphasized with every
expression of enthusiasm.

(_γ_) A third type of this personal treatment by the artist of his
subject-matter may be sufficiently described as the separation of
the same from all genuine artistic form whether it be characteristic
of past or present works of art, a mode of production in fact which
simply presents us with the entirely evanescent colour of "the man
in the street" in his ordinary everyday action and vocation without
adding aught to the same. In other words we may describe it as the bare
counterpart of what the man of commonsense is conscious in the prosaic
facts of life, that and nothing more. In such an atmosphere of prose
no doubt everyone finds himself at home readily enough; or rather, he
will only not find himself at home who takes up such a work with some
definite conception of that which the very conditions of a work of art
demand, and consequently is aware that it is precisely from this type
of handling that Art undertakes to liberate us. Kotzebue, in his day,
obtained all his popular effects through compositions of this kind,
which aimed at nothing else but letting the general public both see and
hear life's troubles and vexations, the pocketing of silver spoons, the
risking of the pillory, or, to take particular characters, parsons,
chamberlains, ensign-bearers, secretaries, and cavalry-majors, in their
naked colours. Everyone might here recognize his own household, or, at
least, that of some relation or friend, might see at a glance where in
his own precious circumstances and aims of life the shoe pinched. An
originality of this sort necessarily fails to stir any real sense or
idea of that which is the vital content of a work of art, however much
it may awake an interest for its productions in hearts that are wont to
ask for so little and are so ready to put up with the commonplaces of
so-called ethical reflections. We may conclude, then, that the artistic
presentation of the facts of external reality under any one of these
three types just examined is subjective in a one-sided way, that is
to say, it wholly fails to present us with any adequate form of that
objective world as it really exists.

(_b_) We next propose to examine a mode of presentation the reverse of
the above, one which endeavours to restore us the characters and events
of the past so far as may be with every local detail of their former
environment no less than any and every ethical or other particular
characteristic which formerly distinguished them. We Germans have
particularly come to the front in this class of work. As a rule we are,
in striking contrast to the French, the most painstaking recorders of
all that is peculiar in nations other than our own, and consequently
make fidelity to the characteristic usages, dress, weapons, and all
such antiquarian detail appropriate to particular epochs and localities
a first requisite of our art. Add to this we have the necessary
patience to put ourselves to no end of trouble in the way of hard
study in order that we may thoroughly enter into the modes of thought
and perception which belong to foreign nations and centuries distant
from our own, and make ourselves thoroughly conversant with all their
peculiarities. This power of looking at facts from many and diverse
points of view in order to both apprehend and comprehend the spirit of
every kind of national existence makes us not merely tolerant in our
art towards all that strikes us as exceptionally strange in foreign
customs, but clamorous even to a painful degree in our insistence that
we have before us accurate correspondence with objective truth down
to the most insignificant detail. The French are, no doubt, full of
resource and energetic, but, however highly educated and practical men
they may be, such qualities do not increase, but rather diminish the
patience which they possess for quiet and exhaustive study. Criticism
is always of first importance with them. We Germans, on the contrary,
are by nature inclined to accept any picture of real truth for what
it is, and particularly this is so with foreign works of art. From
whatever part of Nature's storehouse such may come, whether it is
plants or other creations of foreign growth, implements of any kind or
form, dogs and cats, even absurdities, we accept them all genially; and
the result of this is we are able to be on excellent terms with modes
of thought the most removed from our own, ay, sacrificial customs,
legends of the saints and all the extraordinary follies that go with
them, to say nothing of a host of other marvels equally surprising.
And for the same reasons it only appears essentially rational that
in attempting to represent characters in action we should make their
conversation and pursuits conformable to their own substance, that
is to say, in strict accord with the times when they lived and their
own national characteristics, whether regarded individually or in
association with each other.

This fundamental idea that the objective truth of a work of art
is established by virtue of the type of historical accuracy above
described has obtained currency in comparatively recent times, mainly,
that is to say, since the literary work of Frederick von Schlegel. From
that time the importance of a first principle in literary criticism has
attached to it; and further than this, it is asserted that our purely
personal interest should above all restrict itself to the enjoyment we
may derive from historical accuracy of this kind and the life it thus
reproduces. Once accept these hard and fast rules and the conclusion
is obvious that we are allowed no additional interest of any superior
quality which an enquiry into the essential significance of any
artistic content may or may not provide for us any more than we are
permitted to derive any interest more vital to ourselves from aspects
of such a work directly associated with the culture and aims of our own
times. It is much on these lines that we find also in Germany, where
the enthusiasm of Herder in this direction started a closer attention
on all sides to the "Volkslied," a poetic inundation of national
folk-songs imitating native tones of every sort of nationality whether
it be the Iroquois, latter-day Greek, Lap, Turk, Tartar, Mongol, and
many another; and, of course, it is assumed to be indicative of
nothing less than first-rate genius[396] to possess the power of thus
diving into the ways and ideas of other folk, and converting all
we discover into poetry. At the same time it is clear that however
completely your poet may work his way into and emotionally realize all
this strange kind of world, it remains and must continue to remain for
that public to whose enjoyment these songs are addressed as something
very much aloof from it.

The truth is that such a theory, if pressed to its abstract logical
conclusion, limits its boundaries solely to the truth of history in
its formal accuracy, and by doing so neglects all consideration of
the nature of Art's content and questions relative to its essential
significance, just as it disregards every aspect of it in which the
culture and resources of modern thought and contemporary life are
asserted. But it is as impossible to detach ourselves from the truth
implied in this theory as it is from equally important truths which it
neglects; all equally claim satisfaction, and imperatively force upon
us the necessity of finding a further solution in which the claims of
historical truth may be reconciled with these rival aspects of truth
in a very different way to that just examined. And this brings us to
the third question we proposed as to the nature of that objectivity and
subjectivity which can be fully sustained together as the reality to
which a genuine work of art conforms.

(_c_) The point of essential importance which we should before
all others wish to emphasize here is this, that no one of those
various aspects of truth we have above indicated should be allowed a
predominant significance such as would impair the relative force of
the others; and, further, or rather notwithstanding this, historical
accuracy pure and simple in external matters, such as local conditions,
customs, usages, and social institutions generally, must receive in a
work of art their due place, if a subordinate one, it being only right
that the interest of mere historical truth should give way before that
of a vitally true and imperishable content for the present no less than
the past.

We cannot, perhaps, do better by way of explaining what we consider
to be the true form of artistic representation than by setting up in
contrast a few examples of some we take to be defective.

(_α_) Now, to start with, the presentation of the characteristic
features of a given period may be entirely just, accurate, and
impregnated with life, nay more, wholly intelligible to a modern
audience, and notwithstanding fail to escape the ordinary atmosphere of
prose, and present us with the real substance of poetry. Goethe's "Götz
von Berlichingen" will alone furnish us with notable illustrations of
this defect. It is only necessary to open the book at the first scene,
which introduces us to an inn near Schwarzenberg in Franconia; the
_dramatis personae_ are Metzler, and Sievers sitting at a table, two
grooms by the fire, also the landlord.

    _Sievers._ Another glass of brandy, Hans, my boy, and good
    Christian measure.

    _Landlord._ You carry a glass that is never full.

    _Metzler._ [_Aside to Sievers_.] Tell us that once again about
    Berlichingen; the Bambergers are in a pretty fume out there;
    ay, black as thunder (etc.).

The same kind of thing we find in the third Act.

    _George._ [_Enters with a gutter-spout._] There you have lead
    and to spare; spot the target with but one half of it, and
    devil a soul shall get off, who is like to say to your Majesty,
    that's a miss this time[397].

    _Lerse._ [_Aloud._] A fine piece of metal.

    _George._ The rain may take another road for all I care; a
    brave knight and a real good rain get through most things.

    _Lerse._ [_Pours into glass._] Hold the spoon. [_Goes to the
    window._] There's one of those imperial cockades prowling about
    with his musket; they believe we have aimed a point too far.
    He shall have a taste of my bullet, hot too and fresh from the
    pan. [_Loads._]

    _George._ [_Drops the spoon._] Let me have a look.

    _Lerse._ [_Fires._] There lies the fool (etc.).

All this is exceedingly vivid, intelligible, depicted in perfect
keeping with the situation and the characters portrayed. Yet for all
that these scenes are both trivial to a degree and essentially prosaic.
All we get from either the matter or the form is just the ordinary
man's way of seeing things and reality as it appears to him or rather
all of us to some extent. We find the same tendency in many another
of Goethe's youthful productions, which no doubt were deliberately
directed against everything which previously had passed for the rule
of the guild, and which sought for their most impressive effect by
means of the nearness made clear to ourselves, an impression gained by
the extraordinary grasp with which the poet's imagination and feeling
seized upon everything. But the nearness was itself too near, and the
vital content in part so petty, that such compositions ran constantly
into mere triviality. We are most conscious of this kind of triviality
in dramatic works when we see them on the stage; it is then that
after being worked up to some excitement by all the concomitants of a
theatrical performance, lights, well-dressed folk, and the rest of it,
we expect to see something more than a couple of peasants, and troopers
and a glass of schnapps thrown in[398]. This phase has mainly found its
admirers in readers; it never had a long run on the stage.

(_β_) If we now consider our subject from an opposite point of view
it may be admitted that we can sufficiently make ourselves acquainted
with and assimilate the historical content of a former mythology
and all that is most strange to ourselves in earlier conditions of
state-life and national custom to secure through such an intimacy
with, the general culture then prevailing a varied knowledge of the
past. In fact, this acquaintance with the art, mythology, literature,
_cultus_, and usages of antiquity is the starting point of our present
system of education. Every schoolboy knows something about the gods
and heroes of Greece and the prominent characters in ancient history.
It is therefore quite possible, in so far as they really enter into
the imaginative life of our own times, that we may find enjoyment in
the imaginative representation of such characters and interests. It
is further impossible to predict whether or no such an intimacy may
not be eventually carried equally as far in the case of the Indian,
Egyptian, and Scandinavian mythologies. We may further observe that
in the religious conceptions of all these peoples the Universal God
is presented. The determinate form, however, of such conceptions,
that is to say, the particular gods of Greece or India, are no longer
_true_ for us as so personified. We do not believe in their existence,
and the pleasure we take in them is derived from their appeal to our
imagination. For this reason they stand entirely apart from our deepest
emotional life, and we can imagine nothing more empty and cold than
such exclamations we hear only too often in opera: "O ye gods!" or "O
Jupiter!" or even "O Isis and Osiris!" And the folly of it all reaches
its height when we have the wretched saws of oracular wisdom thrown
in--and the opera can seldom get along without them--a position of
dignity which nowadays for the first time in tragic drama is occupied
by pure folly and clairvoyance.

The same criticism applies with equal truth to all other historical
material relating to national customs, laws, and the like. Such
historical fact is excellent in its way, but it belongs to the past;
and when it has once ceased to have anything in common with present
life it necessarily ceases, in spite of all our knowledge of it, to
belong to us. We have, in short, no interest[399] in what has passed
away on the mere ground that it once existed. What is historical can
only truly be said to belong to us when it is the possession of the
nation, to which we ourselves belong, or when we are able to regard
the present as in a general way casually connected with the events
in question, to whose continuous series the characters or actions
represented are united by a bond of essential membership. For if we
carefully consider the matter we shall find that the mere fact of
being formerly bound together with the same external environment and
people to which we ourselves belong is not sufficient--rather the very
part of our nation must present features in still closer relation
to the conditions, life, and existence of our own times. To take an
example of what we mean, we find ourselves in the Niebelungenlied
geographically on a soil that belongs to us still, but the Burgundians
and King Etzel are so absolutely cut off from all that touches our
present civilization and every interest which is now coincident with
patriotism that, without borrowing anything from the learning of the
subject, it is but simple truth to say we feel infinitely more at home
in the poems of Homer[400]. Klopstock, no doubt, in his enthusiasm for
everything that concerned the Fatherland, was prompted to substitute
his Scandinavian gods for those of Hellenic mythology; but, for all his
zeal, Wotan, Walhalla, and Freja remain mere names for us, which appeal
to our imaginations and patriotic emotions even less than Zeus and his
compeers of Olympus.

The point above all we desire to emphasize is this. Works of art are
not composed primarily for the mere student or the professor, but with
the express purpose that they shall be intelligible on their face,
and a source of enjoyment without any one having to undertake first a
circuitous route of extensive historical investigation. For Art is not
addressed to a small and select circle of the privileged few, but to
the nation at large. What, moreover, is generally valid for a work of
art applies also to the external form of the historical reality therein
portrayed. Such exposition also must express itself with clearness open
to the common apprehension requiring no considerable research to make
it intelligible, must be clear to ourselves as representations of our
century and our own people, so that we may be able to find ourselves
entirely at home in it, and not have before us a world foreign to that
we live in, if not actually unintelligible.

(_γ_) Considerations such as the foregoing have already brought us
within reach of the truer conception of the objective truth of art and
the mode under which it assimilates the material of past history. We
propose now to offer further illustrations in support of the same.

(_αα_) And we may start at once by drawing attention to a
characteristic which is common alike to the genuine national poetry
of all peoples and in every period of past history, namely, that the
historical and formal aspect of that poetry is entirely national,
that is to say, it retains nothing incongruous to the people for whom
it is composed. This is a feature shared alike by the great epics of
India, the Homeric poems and the Greek drama. Sophocles never made
his Philoctetes, Antigone, Ajax, Orestes, Œdipus, his choregi and
choruses speak in the speech and manner that would have been entirely
appropriate to their own times. The Spaniards have written their
romances of the Cid under the same guiding principle. Tasso in his
"Jerusalem Liberated" celebrated the universal interests of Catholic
Christendom. Camoens, the poet of Portugal, depicted the discovery of
the seaway to the East Indies round the Cape of Good Hope, and all the
infinitely various adventures of the sea heroes that made it possible;
and these acts of daring were the acts of his own people. Shakespeare
threw into dramatic form the tragic history of his own country and even
a Voltaire wrote his "Henriade." Far indeed have we Germans strayed
from the path thus marked for us when we hope to work up into national
epics histories remote from our own, which carry no longer with them
a national interest of any kind. Bodmer's "Noachide" and Kloptock's
"Messias" have started a new fashion of their own, ay, as they have
overturned that old one which taught us that it redounds to a nation's
glory to have its Homer, to say nothing of its Pindar and Sophocles.
Those biblical stories, it is true, present points of special affinity
with the national imagination owing to our close acquaintance with the
old and new Testaments; but the historical material in its association
with ancient custom and the like remains for all that only intelligible
to the savant, and all the most of us can pick up from such epics is
the prosaic interfusion of events and characters, which, in such a
process of translation, have merely some novel form of speech thrust
into their mouths, and the final result can only impress us as hollow
and artificial.

(_ββ_) At the same time art cannot be restricted wholly to material
borrowed from one nation. And as a matter of fact the more
nationalities have come into contact with one another, the more
their poets have looked abroad among all nations and times for the
subject-matter of their poems. But however this may be the case, it
is none the less an error to suppose that the mere fact that a poet
is able, so to speak, to live into times aloof from his own at once
stamps him as a man of creative genius. It is more to the point to
recollect that this historical framework must, in the co-ordination of
a poem, be retained only in strict subordination, and as a means of
expressing that which permanently belongs to our humanity. Precisely in
this way the Middle Ages long ago borrowed much from antiquity, but so
absolutely suffused it with the content of its own epoch that, in this
respect verging on the opposite extreme, we really get nothing from
that antiquity but the bare names of Alexander, Aeneas, and the emperor
Octavius.

First in importance, then, is this permanent condition of true art,
immediate intelligibility. It will be found an invariable truth that
all nations have emphasized precisely that in this life which was
most agreeable to their artistic sense, their desire being always to
find what was most intimate to themselves, their life and existence
in their art. It was this independent flavour of patriotism which
Calderon worked into such characters as his Zenobia and Semiramis; and
Shakespeare in the same way was able to imprint upon the most varied
subject-matter the hall-mark of his English ancestry, although he
knew how to preserve along with it the essential traits of historical
characters belonging to nations foreign to his own, the Roman for
example, in a far profounder degree than was possible to the Spanish
poets. Even the Greek tragedians had their eyes constantly directed to
the actual conditions of their times and the particular city in which
they lived. The "Œdipus Colonus" in its local references is not merely
in a peculiar way associated with Athens but, by virtue of the fact
that Œdipus dies in this locality, at once indicates him as the future
Preserver of that city. In somewhat other associations the "Eumenides"
of Aeschylus is, owing to the decisive sentence of the Areopagus,
marked by an interest of more vital interest to the Athenians[401].
On the other hand Greek mythology, despite all the varied and oft
repeated use that has been made of it since the revival of the arts
and learning, has never fully come home to the general sense of modern
emotions and in various degrees in the plastic arts and still more
in poetry, despite its very extensive influence here, has failed to
arouse real enthusiasm. No one thinks now of writing an ode to Venus,
Zeus, or Pallas[402]. Sculpture, it is true, can hardly get along even
in modern times without the assistance of the Greek Pantheon, but for
that very reason it is mainly only appreciated by and intelligible to a
select circle of cultivated men who are either connoisseurs or critics.
As one of these, Goethe spared no pains in his endeavour to arouse
in contemporary artists an enthusiasm which should go so far as to
imitate the pictures of Philostratus, but for the most part his pains
were thrown away. Such examples of the work of antiquity, on account
of the very flavour of past time and a life that has vanished, which
clings to them, remain as strange to contemporary art as they do to
the general public. As a contrary example of real success on the part
of Goethe we may instance the far profounder insight he has shown us
during the later period of his poetic activity in fusing by means of
his "Westöstlicher Divan" the colour of the East with the poetry that
really appeals to us to-day, giving to the Orient, in fact, its modern
embodiment. In this process of assimilation he has clearly shown
himself alive to the fact that he is a poet of the West and a German
as well, and consequently while preserving the fundamental key-note of
the Oriental spirit in his delineation of characters and situations to
which it was appropriate, was able at the same time fully to satisfy
the claims of the modern spirit and those of his own personality.
Subject to such reservations it is undoubtedly in the province of a
poet to borrow his material from remote regions, past centuries and
foreign nations, maintaining in their broad and most characteristic
outlines the historical form of ancient mythology, custom, and
institution. At the same time he will take care to utilize such forms
only as the external frame of his delineations, never permitting the
essential content of such productions to fall into any disharmony
with the profounder instincts of his own native world. As the most
extraordinary example of this Goethe's "Iphigenia" still stands without
a rival.

In their relation to such a transformation the several arts dispose of
their material very differently. In the love-poems of lyrical poetry
very little use is made of local associations depicted with historical
accuracy. The emotional situation and the movement of sentiment is
here the main thing. We receive, for example, in the sonnets of
Petrarch a very small substratum of natural fact relatively to Laura,
hardly anything more than her name, which might just as well have
been another. Of local interest we get the barest scraps, and that
entirely of general significance, such as the existence of the fountain
of Vaucluse and things of that kind. Epical poetry, on the contrary,
requires the greatest detail in its natural descriptions, and we are
most readily pleased with their historical truth, provided always that
the picture is both clear and intelligible. The use of the external
truth of historical facts presents the greatest pitfalls to dramatic
art, more particularly in reference to its theatrical presentation,
where everything is directly addressed to an audience, or purports to
strike upon sense with the vividness of life, so that we are willing
to recognize and entrust ourselves therein with equal directness. Here
the delineation of historical truth in its external aspects must for
the most part be of subsidiary importance, in fact retain little more
than the framework of it. It must, in short, remain true to that
natural relation we find in love-poetry, in which at the same time that
we are able completely to sympathize with the feelings expressed in
every way another name is given to the beloved than that of the lady
most loved by ourselves[403]. It does not here in the least signify
whether or no our critics fail to discover absolute precision in the
picture presented of the particular manners, culture, and emotional
expression of the time. In Shakespeare's historical dramas we find a
great deal that remains strange to us and of no considerable interest.
We are contented enough on a mere reading, but in the theatre our
enjoyment ceases. Critics and men of learning no doubt stick fast to
their idea that such exquisite scraps of genuine history should be
presented on the stage on their own merits and come down severely
upon the wretched taste of the public, when it lets us see how bored
it is over such things. Unfortunately a work of art and the direct
enjoyment we receive from it is in no sense particularly for critics
or savants, but for this very public. Critics have really no reason
to give themselves such airs. They are after all but units of this
public, and the mere attention to historical detail can be of as little
serious interest to them as any other members of it. For this reason
the English nowadays in their theatrical performances only include such
scenes from the Shakespearean drama which require nothing further to
make them clear and intelligible, being happily free from the pedantry
of our aesthetic professors who held that all that is most remote in
historical incident from the apprehension of an average audience should
be thrust before their eyes. It follows also from our view of the
matter that when foreign dramas are reproduced on the stage the public
is clearly entitled to have them considerably remodelled[404]. Even
that which is excellent in itself may require some alteration. No doubt
it will be contended that what is essentially first-rate art retains
its excellence for all times; but a work of art has also an aspect of
transitory worth, which yields to the years, and it is this of course
which requires remodelling. As people change so too the sense of beauty
alters; and it is important that the particular public, before whom any
work is represented, should feel themselves quite at home in the whole
of such a work including that aspect which derives all its significance
from external history.

It is this conditional acceptance of historical truth which at once
explains and justifies that which is generally known in Art as
_anachronism_, and which is usually attributed to artists as a serious
defect. Primarily such examples of anachronism will be found to attach
to matters of purely external interest. That a Falstaff should talk
about pistols is no matter of consequence whatever. The case is more
serious when we have a violin placed in the hands of Orpheus, for here
the association of such prehistorical times with an instrument so
essentially modern as the violin, one which everybody knows was not
invented in those days, presents too glaring a violation of truth.
For this reason it is now the fashion in theatrical circles to bestow
incredible pains and care upon the historical accuracy of details in
the matter of costume and the getting up of a piece, as, for example,
the infinite trouble lavished upon the historical procession in the
"Maid of Orleans."[405] Such efforts are in the majority of eases
lost labour, for the simple reason that they only concern matters of
relative interest or points that might be wholly passed over. The
more important type of anachronisms has nothing whatever to do with
stage costume and all that with which stage business is concerned,
but consists in making characters express their emotions and ideas,
venture upon soliloquies and actions in a form or of a substance which
absolutely contradicts the conditions of their times and culture,
their religious and general preconceptions. It is common to apply the
conception of natural truth to such examples of anachronism, in other
words, to say that it is unnatural for characters to speak or act
otherwise than they would have spoken and acted in their own days. If
we stick, however, too closely to the logic of this naturalism we shall
only land ourselves in further complications[406]. For an artist, in
depicting the emotional life with all that results from it, and the
fundamental passions that belong to it, being mainly interested in the
affirmation of individuality, ought not merely to repeat that life
under its ordinary daily dress; it is rather his business to show every
true manifestation of pathos in the particular light which best reveals
its real quality. The whole object of his attainment as an artist is
not merely to understand what is of vital significance in the truth
he faces, but to be able to give it the precise form which will best
direct our own eyes and ears and heart to his own discovery. To attain
this it is obvious that he must keep in view the particular culture of
his own time no less than all its various powers of expression. In the
time of the Trojan war the kind of speech in general use, and indeed
the whole fabric of social life, was as far removed from the type of
culture which is reflected on us from the pages of the "Iliad" as the
mass of the nation and the pre-eminent worthies of the royal houses
then reigning in Greece were separated from the fully developed form
of ideas and expression such as arouse our wonder when we read our
Aeschylus, or behold the perfected beauty of the style of Sophocles.
A violation of the so-called "path of Nature" of this kind is in art
an anachronism implied in her laws. The inward kernel of that which
she reveals remains unaffected, but the more developed power at the
artist's command, in revealing and disclosing this essential core
of his subject, renders some change in the mode of its expression
inevitable. It is a wholly different matter when a modification of this
kind proceeds so far as to impose ideas and conceptions of a later form
of the religious and moral consciousness on a century or a nation whose
entire spiritual outlook is opposed to such more recent conceptions.
The Christian religion has gathered in its train forms of the moral
life, which were entirely foreign to the moral consciousness of
ancient Greece. That inward introspection of conscience, for example,
ever on the alert to decide the ethical significance of action, with
its accompanying remorse and repentance, first appears in the moral
culture of a more modern date. The heroic character knows nothing of
a repentance which sets itself in hostility to its past. What it has
done it abides by. Orestes does not repent of his mother's murder. The
Furies that rise out of the shadow of his action pursue him, no doubt;
but the Eumenides are, at the same time, represented as universal
powers, and not as voices that cry out to him from his own conscience
simply. This very heart and substance of a given period of man's
history a poet must master, and only when we find him interfusing with
this central core of reality matter that directly contradicts it is he
guilty of any truly grave anachronism. In conclusion, then, we may say
that it is indeed part of the poet's function to live into the spirit
of past times and foreign peoples, for this substance of their life,
if it be truly such, remains a possession for all time; but to attempt
to reflect with every accuracy of detail all the definition of that
external show now buried beneath the rust of antiquity is merely the
effort of a learning essentially childish, intent on preserving what is
itself shadow rather than substance. No doubt even in this direction,
the truth of general outlines should be carefully respected, but never
to such lengths as would compel art to forfeit her claim of drawing
upon the fiction of her invention, and the truth of fact with equal
impartiality.

(_γγ_) We are now in a better condition to understand all that is
really implied in the assimilation by art of that which is strange in
the external features of remote history, and the true conception of the
_objective_ life of her creations. A work of art must primarily enclose
for us within its embrace the higher interests of spirit and volitional
power, all that is essentially human, and possesses real weight, the
depths, that is to say, of man's emotional life. The main thing of
all is that this embodied content[407] should transpierce all purely
external conditions of manifestation, should ring, as it were, through
all that is less vital in its significance[408] this fundamental
chord of truth. The real objectivity, therefore, unfolds as from a
sheath, the _pathos_, that is the substantive content of a situation,
unfolds, moreover, the rich and powerful personality in which the
essential phases of spirit are alive, and find their realization and
expression. For such embodiment all that is absolutely indispensable
is a definition and determination of the real, which is generally
suitable to the object thus defined, and which requires nothing further
to explain it. If we have once got hold of such a form unfolded in
strict accordance with our Ideal principle, then we have a work of art
essentially objective in the true sense, and the question whether each
and every historical detail is justified is of no further importance.
We have before us a work of art which appeals directly to our inner
life, and one which is our own possession. Once possessed of that, and
we may take as much as we please of that element of the form which lay
more closely to periods of life which have passed; but the eternal
foundation is that which appeals to all men in all places, which is
carried forward with a power that never wanes or fails to influence us,
and it does so because the objective life it reveals is the same that
abounds in and overflows our own souls. That which is merely historical
in the appearance is, on the contrary, the element that vanishes; and,
in dealing with works of art created in days remote from our own, we
must do our best to resolve the discordance, and, indeed, must be fully
prepared to blot out from our vision similar defects in works that
spring from our own times. Thus it is that the Psalms of David, with
their immortal celebration of the Lord in His goodness, and the wrath
of His almightiness, no less than the profound sorrows of the Hebrew
prophets as they face Babylon and Zion, touch men with the same force
to-day as they did of old time: nay, even a moral diatribe, such as
is sung by Sarastro in the "Zauberflöte," may come home to the hearts
of us all, including the sons of Egypt[409], owing to the soul and
vitality which rings through its melodies.

And we may add that every individual to whom a work of art objective
in this, the true sense, is presented, must on his part discard his
own false prepossessions, wherein he merely wishes to find his own
idiosyncrasies repeated. On the first reproduction of "William Tell,"
it appears, not a single Swiss among the audience was satisfied. In
much the same way, when the most beautiful love-songs have been sung,
many another, failing to find therein his own passions reflected, has
presumed to think the beauty untrue to life; just as so many more,
whose knowledge of love is confined to the perusal of romances, have
imagined that the love-god would only then be their immortal possession
when they found themselves face to face with precisely the same
emotions and situations their favourite studies had propounded.


C. THE ARTIST

We have, in this first part of our aesthetical philosophy, examined as
a first step the universal Idea of beauty; we then proceeded to inquire
in what respects it was defective in its existence as the beauty of
Nature, and after thus clearing the way we were in a position to grasp
the complete notion of the Ideal as the adequate realization of beauty.
We developed the Ideal, _first_, as conceived abstractly according to
the _general_ notion of it, and having determined that were assisted
thereby to elucidate the modes of its _particular_ manifestations.
Inasmuch, however, as a work of art has its origin in the human spirit
it requires the pregnant activity of an individual life from which it
proceeds, and as the creation of the same exists for others, that is,
a Public which is emotionally receptive. This spiritual and informing
activity is the imagination of the _artist_. We have consequently now,
and this is the _third_ and last aspect of the Ideal to which we shall
refer, to raise the question how it comes about that this product of
men's inner world is not the direct and native growth[410] of that
world, but receives its due form through the _creative impulse_ of
particular men, in other words, by virtue of the genius and talent
of the artist. At the same time we must admit that the question is
only raised that we may be able to add the statement that it really
is excluded from the sphere of scientific investigation, or, at the
most, we can only furnish a few general remarks towards its solution.
Yet it is undoubtedly a question frequently raised this, namely, from
what source an artist receives the gift and faculty of conception and
execution with which he creates his work. We should all of us like, no
doubt, to have a ready prescription, a recipe of what we must exactly
do, what conditions we must impose on ourselves to produce something as
wonderful. We would emulate Cardinal von Este when he asked Ariosto,
with reference to his raging Roland: "But, Master Louis, where in the
world did you get all this damned stuff from?" Raphael replied to a
similar question in a letter we still possess, that he was hunting
after a certain idea.

The more obvious aspects of artistic activity we propose to examine
under the following heads of discussion:

_First_, we will give our definition of the general conception of
artistic _genius_ and the inspiration it implies.

_Secondly_, we will make a few observations on the _objective_
character of this creative activity.

_Thirdly_, we will endeavour to ascertain in virtue of what real
artistic _originality_ consists.


1. IMAGINATION, GENIUS, AND INSPIRATION

Before inquiring more closely into the meaning of the term "genius"
we must obviously limit the field within which we propose to discuss
it. Genius is an expression of very wide connotation, and is used
not merely in its application to artists, but equally when we refer
to great generals and kings, as also to the heroic captains of
scientific discovery. For the sake of simplification we would once
more discuss the distinctions involved under a triple division of our
subject-matter.


_(a) The Imagination_[411]

The most conspicuous faculty of an artist which arrests our attention
when we direct it expressly upon the capacities implied in artistic
productivity is the _imagination._ And we must be careful here not
to confuse it with a _visionary fancy_ which is wholly passive. The
imagination creates.

(_α_) And, in the first place, we shall find that this creative
activity carries with it in possession and endowment a peculiar power
of _grasping reality_ and the forms it presents, all that through the
channels of alert eyes and ears imprints pictures of infinite variety
caught from the external world upon the mind, and further implies an
exceptionally retentive _memory_ wherein to store up this varied world
of innumerable reflections. The artist, therefore, in this initial
stage of our analysis is not merely thrown back upon images of his own
creation, but is rather compelled to turn aside from the dull level
of ideals falsely so called and to boldly enter the fields of Nature
and Life. To attempt art or poetry merely with fanciful ideas of our
own is always a suspicious way of starting on our journey; for the
artist must mould his creations from the abundance of his life and by
no means from the overplus of abstract generalities. It is not, as in
philosophy, thoughts, but the real external forms of what actually
exists which furnishes the material for artistic production. In contact
with this raw material to work upon the artist must feel thoroughly
at home. He must have seen much, heard much, and stored away a great
deal as well; and in illustration of this we almost invariably find
that a great personality is distinguished by a capacious memory. All
that interests mankind he will lay hold of, and the more profound his
spirit the more it will enlarge the field of its interests in countless
directions. This was the way in which we find the genius of Goethe
first opened its wings, and throughout his life the circle of his
spirit's restless horizon broadened and broadened. This peculiar gift
of receptiveness, this interest in the comprehension of facts after
their true definitions and colour, their steadfast adherence to the
truth of experience is the first thing we look for in a great artist.
And this accurate knowledge of the truth of form must be accompanied
in equal measure by a proved acquaintance with the souls of men, the
passions that rise in the heart, and everything that it yearns and
strives for. And, in addition to this twofold armory of knowledge, he
must understand yet further all the various ways that this world of the
human soul expresses itself on the face of the reality which confronts
his senses, transpiercing thus the outer veil.

(_β_) But, in the second place, this imaginative power is not exhausted
with merely receiving that which is presented to the senses, or is
inferred as the content of the human soul. The ideal work of art does
not merely embrace the outward semblance of the inward spirit as
clothed in the forms of its actual existence, but should rather succeed
in manifesting the essential truth and reason of the real itself. This
_element of reason_, as determined in the particular object the artist
has selected, must not merely be pressed in his own consciousness,
as an active influence, but must already have been reflected upon in
that essential and rich significance which brings it into relation
with the entire breadth and depth of reality. Without reflection no
man can grasp fully the wealth that is in him, and it is consequently
an inseparable feature of any great work of art that everything which
attaches to it both as a whole and in its detail has been long and
deeply weighed and thought out. No artistic work of real sterling value
can be thrown off with any mere imaginative _tour de force._[412] We
do not, of course, suggest that the artist must therefore comprehend
in the form of _philosophical_ thought this essential core of reason
in his experience; albeit such is the fundamental rock upon which
religion no less than philosophy and art is based. Philosophy is by
no means essential to his outfit; and, in fact, if he once begins to
think about things as a philosopher, he busies himself with modes of
thought which are diametrically opposed to that which should engage
an artist's attention. For what the imagination undertakes to do and
only to do is not to bring to consciousness this inner core of reason
in the form of general propositions and conceptions, but to apprehend
it clothed in the concrete form of actual existence and individuality.
All that ferments within his life the artist must reproduce in the
body and envisagement, whose connected picture and general outlines
he has already assimilated from the world outside, making such so
far subservient to his creative effort that they in their turn may
participate in the truth of his own substance and enable him to crown
it with complete expression. In this interfusion of an intelligible
content with an embodiment received from actual existence the artist
will avail himself of the ever wakeful circumspection of his reflective
faculties no less than the deep resources of emotional life which
leave the stamp of vitality on his work. It is consequently but one
more sample of critical aberration to imagine that poems such as the
Homeric were introduced to our poet in his sleep. Without intelligent
alertness, division, and distinctions of each part as related to the
whole, an artist will be unable to assert his mastery over any form
whatsoever that he may wish for; only fools are of the opinion that the
genuine artist does not in the least know what his hands and senses are
about.

Moreover, the concentration of the artist's emotional life on each
aspect of his work is also as necessary to its success as the
concentration of his mind. For it is mainly through the impression of
emotion, which permeates and gives a vital colour to the entire work,
that the artist asserts his claim to the substance and embodiment of
his creation as a part of his own spiritual substance, as something
he, a given personality, may peculiarly call his own. For the external
aspect of his work, the mere picture of it as we may say, tends rather
to place us outside it and apart; it is the emotional energy it
expresses which primarily unites it with affinity to our very souls.
Only when thus understood shall we be able to realize the truth that
an artist must not merely have much looked about him in the world and
assimilated a rich knowledge both of its outward show and the very
substance of its life, but, further, must himself have experienced many
things and great things, things that have moved him to the quick and
left their life-roots in his own heart and spirit--he must, as we say,
have "gone through much" and "lived abundantly"--before he will find
himself able to build from his stores in the concrete types of his art
something approaching Life's unsounded repletion. And this will at once
explain and justify the bluster and ferment of genius in its youth, as
amply reflected in the lives of Goethe and Schiller. But only the age
of maturity and gray hairs will bring us the perfect work of art in all
its rounded ripeness[413].

_(b) Talent and Genius_

This productive activity of the imagination by means of which the
artist gives, by a process of elaboration to that which is essentially
rational in its nature, a real embodiment, a creation more his own than
anything else--this is what is usually summarized as genius and talent.

(_α_) We have already drawn attention to those characteristics which
are most obviously referable to genius. Genius is the general capacity
of creating a genuine example of fine art no less than the energy
implied in the execution and elaboration of the same. Moreover, this
capability and the power which goes with it is essentially the property
of a human soul; that is to say, self-conscious individuality alone is
able to create in this sense that a spiritual creation of this quality
is just what it sets before itself to produce. Critics, intent on
closer definition, are wont to distinguish sharply between genius and
talent. And, in fact, they are not absolutely the same things, although
it is necessary to find them united in the artist who would give us
artistic work of the highest class. To be more exact, Art, in so far
as it generally becomes a _particular_ art, and is exemplified for us
in the real and definite appearance of its products, requires various
accomplishments appropriate to the peculiar modes of its realization.
Such forms of executive versatility we may call with propriety talent,
as we may say that anyone possesses a talent for perfect playing on
the violin, or anyone else for singing. But a mere talent for this or
that can only effect for us anything really good in the, so to speak,
insulated nooks and corners of art[414]; it moreover itself requires
for its true perfection something of more universal art-capacity as
also that soul-animation, something more which is essentially the
hall-mark of genius. Talent, in short, without the vital spark of
genius, never gets much beyond a purely mechanical facility.

(_β_) It is also an opinion very commonly held that superior talent and
genius are _inborn._ Here again we must distinguish; for if there is a
sense in which this is true, from another point of view it is equally
mistaken. No doubt every man, by virtue of his humanity, receives
at his birth the potential gifts of religion, thought, and science.
In other words he would not strictly be a man if he did not already
possess a capacity to grasp the idea of a Supreme Being, and generally
to become the subject of a thinking consciousness. All that he requires
to gain these things, in addition to the fact of his human birth, are
education, culture, and perseverance. With art, however, the matter
stands differently. Art requires _specific_ aptitude[415], in which
unquestionably natural endowment plays an essential part. As, that is
to say, beauty is itself the Idea realized in that which is apprehended
as real by the senses, and a work of art embodies the workings of
Spirit in a form of existence immediately cognized by the eye and the
ear, in the same way the artist must discover and embody the content of
his art not in the exclusively spiritual form of thought, but within
the sphere of sensuous perception and feeling, and indeed as creator
in actual relation to a given sensuous material and within the limits
of the same. This artistic creativeness consequently encloses within
itself, as art does throughout, the aspect of immediacy envisaged with
the directness of Nature's own creations, and it is this appearance,
which the individual is unable to evolve from himself, but has to find
it, if he finds it at all, as immediately presented to him. Herein lies
the significance of the statement, and herein alone, that genius and
talent are innate.

In much the same way the several arts adapt themselves as by a kind
of natural affinity to particular nations. Song and melody are, we may
almost say, the birth-gift of an Italian; with our northern peoples,
on the contrary, music[416] and the opera, though seriously cultivated
and with great success, are as far from being a real home growth as the
orange trees. The Greeks are conspicuous for the native and elaborate
beauty of their epic poetry, and most of all for the unique perfection
of their sculpture. The Romans never possessed an art that was in any
strict sense exclusively their own. All that grew into blossom on their
soil was transplanted from the gardens of Greece. The art whose growth
has the widest natural range is that of poetry; and the reason of this
is that in it we require least to draw upon a sensuous vehicle for its
expressed presentment. Within the province of poetry the folk-song is
most of all native to a people and inseparably yoked with their natural
conditions. For this very reason the folk-song breaks into blossom
even in times of the rudest culture and for the most part retains the
unconscious simplicity of Nature herself. Of this Goethe himself is an
example. Though he produced works in every type of poetical expression
his first songs still go deepest and carry least dust from the study.
In them, too, there is least the flavour of culture. The latter-day
Greek is still a living witness to a people whose native gift it is
both to write poetry and sing. Fauriel has published a collection of
modern Greek songs, taken for the most part just as women, nurses,
and school-girls were heard singing them, who could not for the world
understand what he found so wonderful in them. And this is a good
illustration of the way that we find Art and its specific appearance
associate itself with a particular national type. In the same way the
art of improvization is more than anywhere else the native growth
of Italy and exemplified there with quite extraordinary talent. An
Italian will even to-day improvize for you a five-act drama, and not a
word of it is committed to memory; all grows up out of his experience
of human passions and situations and the deeply-excited inspiration
of the moment. As an example we mention the fact that a certain poor
improvizer after rhapsodizing in this way for a considerable time, and
then finally trudging off on his round to collect his pence from the
bystanders in a battered hat, was still in such a fume of poetic frenzy
that he could not bring his declamations to a stop, waved about in fact
so lustily with his arms and hands that in the end all the money he had
begged was shaken to the winds.

(_γ_) It is, thirdly[417], a characteristic of genius that it should
possess, and indeed it is a part of this natural endowment[418],
facility in creating that which it is impelled to create, and in
adapting itself to the technical requirements of all the subsidiary
aspects of artistic work. We talk, for instance, of the fetters with
which the verse, measure, and rhyme shackle a poet; or, when referring
to a painter, of the endless difficulties that draughtsmanship,
knowledge of tints, chiaroscuro, and the rest fling in the way of
invention and execution. Unquestionably a long course of study is a
necessary condition of success in all the arts, a perseverance that
never tires, a facility that is continually assisted by repetition;
the greater the native strength, however, of the genius or superior
gift, and the richer its resources the less it will feel the weight of
its effort in securing all the necessary accomplishments involved in
creative excellence[419]. A really first-rate artist has the lust of
work _born in him_ and an imperative impulse akin to any other natural
want to give artistic form to his emotional and imaginative life that
is in him. His emotional life and his ideas irresistibly run into this
artistic mould; he finds as it were the instrument already within him
made to the hand, so fitted to express his soul-life that all the pains
it takes him to learn it are as nothing. A musician can thus unfold to
us in his melodies the depths of all that stirs and moves his soul and
only by this means. What he feels is at once wafted into melody, just
as the life of a painter is impressed upon form and colour, or that
of a poet is transmuted into the creations of his imagination, that
poetry which clothes his ideas in the beauty and music of the written
word. And this gift of vital form the artist does not merely possess
as an imaginative power, a phantasy, an emotional impulse "that leaves
not a wrack behind," but as a direct stimulus of feeling to active
enterprise, as a gift, that is, of real executive accomplishment. Both
of these aspects are united in the real artist. What springs to life in
his imagination is immediately alert upon his mobile fingers, precisely
as the sudden thought of our mind breaks into word from the tips, or
as our most intimate thoughts, ideas, and emotions are reflected on
the outward man and his demeanour. Genius of the real stamp, whenever
and wherever found, is easily quit of the difficulties presented by
the technical workshop; and indeed has found the most beggarly and
apparently impracticable material to accept and embody as it pleased
the inward shapes of imagination. No doubt the endowment which the
artist finds as a direct gift to himself must be kept alive and alert
by indefatigable recourse to it, but he must also possess naturally a
practical power of immediate execution. Without this all the facility
he may have acquired in imaginative conception will never produce an
essentially creative work of art. The very notion of art demands of us
that both things should go together hand in hand, the productive energy
of the soul and its technical realization in the forms of art.

_(c) Inspiration_

The activity of the imagination, then, and the power of technical
execution, taking both together as the inseparable antecedents of a
real artist, are commonly understood as _inspiration._[420]

(_α_) The first question that presents itself to us for solution with
regard to it is under what conditions it arises, as to which many
different views have been held.

(_αα_) There is, for instance, the strange notion, to some extent
arising from the general truth of the peculiar intimacy with which
genius attaches itself to the worlds of conscious life and Nature, that
inspiration can be conjured up through mere excitation of the senses.
But making our blood dance will not carry us far; we are still a long
way off from the Muses, despite the champagne bottle, Such, at least,
was the experience of Marmontel, for he tells us that he tried it in
a wine-cellar with six thousand bottles of champagne to choose from;
but not a breath of the Muses passed over him[421]. Ay, your genius
may be as great as he lists, and for all that stretch himself many a
time morning and evening on the green grass, while the fresh breeze
floats over him, and stare up into the sky, and not a whisper shall the
inspired Muses breathe in his ear.

(_ββ_) Just as little is it likely that we shall make the charmed gates
of inspiration spring open by merely presenting ourselves before them
with a desire to enter. Whoever fondly imagines that he is in the right
mood to compose a poem, or paint a picture, or run off a first-rate
melody without already possessing the stuff in him to quicken that
spark into vital form, and has first to hunt about for something to
say, despite all his talent, will find himself no better off for his
best intuitions, quite unable, at any rate, to conceive any complete
thing of beauty, or perfect a really sterling work of art. Neither the
mere tickling of our senses nor any act of will or determination can
father on us true inspiration. To attempt such things simply proves
that both the emotional life and the imagination have as yet no real
object of artistic interest. When once we have the artistic impulse of
the real kind, we may conclude the interest there has already its fixed
seal and object, a content that it intends to master.

(_γγ_) True inspiration consequently is fixed in the presence of a
specific content, which the imagination takes up in order to give
artistic expression to it. It is, in fact, the object of this active
process of giving form both as inwardly made visible to the mind, and
as outwardly reproduced in the execution of a work of art. Inspiration
is equally necessary for both these aspects of artistic activity. The
question once more presents itself to us, in what way such a material
will come to an artist, in order to bring about this inspiration. We
find many various opinions expressed on this head. On the one hand
it is frequently required of an artist that the material of his work
should be drawn up from the world within him. No doubt this may be so
when "the poet sings as a bird from the bough." His own cheerfulness
of spirit is then the incentive which enables him to represent a
particular mood of his own as the content of his production, and by
this very expression of it he gives vent to his enjoyment of the same.
A song of this kind, straight from the heart[422], is indeed a rich
reward. But quite as often, however, the greatest works of art are
created from the suggestion of objects wholly external to himself.
The odes of Pindar were frequently the result of direct commissions;
and, in the same way, the object and subject has times without number
been given to artists both for buildings and pictures, and they have
been able to arouse in themselves an enthusiasm for such. Indeed, it
is only too frequently the express complaint of artists that they have
not the subject-matter on which to work. Such a reference to things
outside, and its stimulus to artistic production, presents just that
relation of the artist to Nature and her immediacy which is essential
to the notion of superior executive gifts[423], and is at the same time
a condition to the appearance of genuine inspiration. If we consider
the artist from this point of view, we shall find that it is here that
this natural endowment relates itself immediately to a material already
found for him, and through the incentive thereby offered him, through
the inspiration of actual fact, or as, for example, was the case with
Shakespeare, through that which was presented by old tales, ballads,
romances, and chronicles, proceeds to embody such material in artistic
form, and thereby generally to express his own personality. The impulse
to production can therefore be given by something entirely outside the
artist's life, and the only condition essential to a successful result
is that the interest, which fixes the artist's attention should be of
real artistic significance, and that he is able to reproduce the same
in all its vitality. Such conditions virtually imply the presence of
rare inspiration. And an artist who is really alive and awake himself,
by reason of this very vitality of his own powers, discovers endless
opportunities for actively asserting the same, and feeling inspired
while doing so, opportunities which pass over other people without
similarly affecting them.

(_β_) If we ask further, viz., of what precisely this artistic
inspiration consists, we may perhaps best describe it by saying that
it is the capacity of being entirely absorbed in a given subject, a
capacity not merely wholly to realize it, but incapable of resting
until the same is completely minted anew, and rounded off in its
artistic form.

(_γ_) Moreover, when an artist has thus entirely appropriated his
subject, it is but saying the same thing the other way to affirm that
he must know how to forget his own individual idiosyncrasies, and all
that accidentally attaches to them; he must, in short, on his part lose
himself in the matter on hand. He must make his artistic personality
the pure form under which the content he has assimilated is clothed and
embodied. An inspiration in which the particular individual receives
too emphatic a predominance and assertion, rather than being the
vitally active instrument which displays the ideal significance of the
material worked upon, is an inferior type of inspiration. This truth
opens the way to a fuller consideration of what is generally understood
as the objective character of artistic production.


2. THE OBJECTIVE CHARACTER OF THE REPRESENTATION

(_a_) In the ordinary sense of the word we understand objectivity to
mean that the content in any work of art necessarily receives the
form of the reality already given, and in its artistic embodiment we
have the same clearly repeated. In this sense, that we desire to see
objective truth reproduced for us, we are entitled to call Kotzebue an
objective poet. In his work we undoubtedly find ordinary reality simply
as it is again. The object of art is, however, more precisely stated,
to strip away not merely the appearance, but the actual content of all
that meets us every day, and by means of the spiritual activity of the
artist most personal to himself, to work out that which is essentially
rational in that content in its really adequate external form. Indeed,
if we look at yet better examples of art than Kotzebue's, such as those
we have already glanced at in the youthful productions of Goethe,
we shall find that this realistic type of objectivity can be made
essentially living in its expression, and by virtue of this quality
prove highly attractive to ourselves, and yet, on account of the fact
that the artistic form remains defective, fail to arrive at the real
beauty of art. Purely external objectivity, therefore, which still
lacks the abiding and substantial significance, is not that for which
an artist should strive.

(_b_) A second type of objective realization presents itself to us in
the case where we find the external is not the artistic aim, but the
artist has seized hold of his subject with all the depth and strength
of his emotional life. This inward aspect of his work remains, however,
so entirely enclosed within itself and concentrated that it fails to
assert itself with a clearness thoroughly possessed, or to unfold
itself in its full truth. The eloquence of pathos simply restricts
itself by means of illustrations external to it, without possessing
either the power or the culture to be able to present the fulness of
that content in an explicit form. Folksongs pre-eminently belong to
such a mode of artistic production. Extremely simple as they are in
their form, they suggest an emotional life which lies at their root
of still wider range and depth, but which they are unable clearly to
express. Their art, in fact, is itself not sufficiently elaborate
or complete enough to carry into the light of day with transparent
reflection all that it would unfold, and is forced to rest satisfied
with suggesting to our sympathies the same by means of an external
symbolism. The heart remains thrown back and concentrated upon itself,
and in order to make its life intelligible to others, casts but a
fainter reflection of its world upon entirely finite and external
circumstances and phenomena, which, no doubt, are thus eloquent in a
degree, albeit we receive from them only a far-off echo of the emotions
and life they would bring home to us. Goethe has himself written many
quite exquisite songs of this kind. "The Shepherd's Lament" is one of
the most beautiful. In this refrain a heart that is broken with pain
and yearning still remains silent and reserved beneath the purely
external traits which would fain relieve it; and, despite of this, we
hear, as through an undertone, all the concentrated depth of emotion it
fails to express. In the "Erl-king," and many other of his songs, we
hear the same tone. This tone, however, we may also meet in degenerate
form right down to the most futile barbarism, unable to grasp either
the essential character of the facts or the situation, merely clinging
to their most finite aspects in all their crudeness and absence of
artistic taste. An example we may give from the "Drummer-comrade of the
boy Wunderhorn,"[424] such inanities as "O thou dwelling house of man,
O gallows," or "Adjutant sir corporal," expressions which are supposed
to move us deeply. When on the contrary Goethe sings:

     Der Strauss, den ich gepflücket,
     Grüsse Dich viel tausendmal,
     Ich habe mich oft gebücket
     Und ihn aus Herz gedrücket,
     Ach, wie viel tausendmal[425].

strong emotion is suggested in a very different way, which brings
before our mind nothing trivial or contrary to the main idea. What
however is, as a rule, defective in this particular type of poetical
realization is the expression of emotion in all its true intensity.
This, in the rarest art, should not be suffered to remain a depth shut
away, which merely reflects a distant echo through the external objects
presented: it should either break forth in its full character, or be
seen through the vehicle with complete transparency. Schiller, for
example, brings out his soul in its full strength in the pathos of his
work, withal a great soul, which penetrates to the very core of his
subject, and is able to express its very deepest significance in the
freest and most perspicuous way through the wealth and music of his
verse.

(_c_) In conformity, then, with the notion of the Ideal, we may
conclude that even when we are dealing with the mere expression of
emotional life, we shall never fully establish our title to truly
objective art so long as any part of all that is comprised in the
subject-matter, which stirs the artistic inspiration, remains still
wrapped up within the soul that seeks to express itself; rather all
that lies there should be completely unfolded, and unfolded in a way
which not merely shall reveal to us the essential soul and substance
of the content selected, but shall embody it in some completely
homogeneous type of individual art, through which, as through a
transparency, both soul and substance shall radiate. For that which is
highest and most excellent is not by any means that we are unable to
express, as though the poet contained in himself still greater depths
than those expressed on the face of his work. The work of an artist is
the consummate fruit of that artist, and reflects precisely what he is,
and only what he is, and all that remains behind in the temple of his
soul is a naught or nothing[426].


3. MANNER, STYLE, AND ORIGINALITY

However much it may be imperatively required of the artist that he
should give to his work an objective character such as we have above
indicated, this must not make us oblivious to the fact that the
artist's production is at the same time the work of _his_ inspiration;
it is he alone who has, by his entire identification of his personality
with the specific subject-matter and its artistic embodiment, brought
into being the entire creation out of the life of his _own_ emotional
nature and imagination. And it is this identity of the free personality
of the artist and the truly objective construction of his artistic
creation which constitutes the third fundamental aspect of his activity
as set forth above and which we must now shortly consider, in so far as
we may be thus enabled to unite that which we have hitherto separated
in our independent consideration of the conceptions of genius and
the objective presentment of a work of art. We may characterize such
a unity as the conception of true artistic _originality._ Before,
however, we come to close quarters with all that is implied in this
conception, it is necessary to clearly grasp two points of view already
related to it whose insufficiency we have to expose on the ground of
their one-sidedness before a true conception of originality can be
fully appreciated. These may be sufficiently indicated by the terms
"subjective _manner_"[427] and _style_.

_(a) The Subjective Manner_

The point of first importance in discussing the meaning of the
expression "artistic manner" is to differentiate it fundamentally from
artistic originality. The term "manner," in our view, is only used
in direct relation to the _specific_ and consequently _accidental
idiosyncrasies_ of the artist, that is, merely in so far as such
qualities assert themselves as effective in his work without being
called forth by the nature of the subject itself and its ideal
exposition.

(_α_) A manner thus interpreted has no connection with the universal
types of art, that is to say, types which require an essentially
different mode of representation, as, for instance, the landscape
painter necessarily treats the objects of Nature in quite a different
way from that under which a historical painter would so treat them; or
the epic poet would handle similar subject-matter in a different way
from that appropriate to the dramatic poet. On the contrary, "a manner"
is a form of artistic expression wholly emanating from a particular
individuality, an entirely supposititious idiosyncrasy of executive
ability which may be carried so far as to contradict absolutely the
true notion of the Ideal. As thus defined "manner" stands at the
bottom of the scale among the forms which may characterize an artist's
general handling. An artist who thus expresses his individuality simply
gives free rein to any chance notions of his own without testing them
as subject to the substantive claims of art. But it is a fundamental
principle of art that it should abolish precisely all that is merely
accidental to its content no less than to its artistic or rather
external mode of presentment. And this is only to say that it requires
of the artist that he should efface from his work all traces of purely
personal tastes and idiosyncrasies he shares with no one else[428].

(_β_) And for these reasons we would point out that "a manner"
of this kind is not so much to be contrasted directly with the true
exposition of art as to be considered in relation to the purely
external aspects of art where the individuality of the particular mode
of treatment comes into play. This kind of manner is most conspicuous
in the arts of painting and music for the reason that these arts[429]
present to the artist the widest variety of external characterization
for him to seize upon and reproduce. What we find here is a certain
artificial manner of general execution entirely peculiar to some
particular artist and the school of imitators or pupils who follow him,
which through constant repetition degenerates into mere habit.

(_αα_) And its tendency is to develop on one of two ways in which
we may regard the artistic work. First, there is the aspect of its
composition. To take painting, for example, we have all the variety
of ways under which the prevailing atmospheric tone, the arrangement
of foliage, the contrast of light and shade, in short the entire
scheme of colour may be treated. Most particularly in this feature
of the general scheme[430] of the colouring and lighting of a picture
we find that painters permit themselves the most varied freedom of
individual preference and distaste. Of course such a prevailing tone
may appear to us as that we do not find in Nature for the simple
reason that we have not had our attention directed to it although
it is really there. But we shall often find that such a scheme has
simply been adopted by this or that artist on grounds of personal
taste or convenience[431], and it becomes simply a habit in him to use
everything now as subject to that particular scheme. And what we have
observed with reference to colouring is equally true when applied to
the treatment of natural objects, their grouping, position, motion,
and general characterization. This inferior mode of treatment is
particularly to be observed in the works of the Dutch school. Take the
case of Van der Neer's night-scenes and his artificial presentation of
moonlight, or Van der Goyen's sand-hills in so many of his landscapes.
The ever-repeated reflections of light from satin and silk stuffs that
we find in so many pictures of other masters of the same school are
indications of the same artificial mode of handling.

(_ββ_) A manner of this type may be still further, traced in the
execution of other details, the handling of brush or pencil, the laying
on and blending of tints and many other features of executive work.

(_γγ_) The general conclusion we come to, after considering all such
examples of specialized handling and conception in which constant
repetition grows at last habitual to, and indeed becomes a second
nature of the artist, is this, that just in proportion as the manner
adopted is more specialized[432], there is an increasing and dangerous
tendency for it to degenerate into that which is nothing more than a
soulless and consequently arid repetition and mechanical exercise,
throughout which the artist is no longer present with the fulness of
his spiritual resources and the entire strength of his inspiration.
When this takes place his art necessarily sinks to the level of a
mere executive facility or accomplishment of his hands, and a manner,
otherwise innocent enough, may very readily grow starved and lifeless.

(_γ_) The more truly artistic "manner" has consequently to disengage
itself from such jejune peculiarities, to broaden out into a freer
atmosphere[433], so that no specialized mode of handling shall be
suffered to sterilize itself into what is simply a matter of habit. In
this way an artist will approach the facts of Nature with a breadth of
view more in keeping with her own, and will understand how to identify
his larger conceptions and the general technique of his craft with the
same ideal spirit. In something of the same sense we may describe it as
a peculiar manner of Goethe that he is particularly apt in concluding
not merely poems of society but also openings to works of a more
serious character with a sudden turn of pleasantry, in order to remove
the impression of or throw into the background the serious nature of
previous reflection or situation. We meet with the same characteristic
in the correspondence of Horace. It is, in fact, an application of the
art of conversation and general sociability, which, in order to avoid
following up any matter more deeply, comes to a stop, breaks off and
cleverly diverts the serious into more cheerful channels. Such a mode
of the literary art is undoubtedly part of the manner of the artist and
his individual style, but the individuality thus exemplified is based
upon a broader principle, and is asserted in a way wholly justified by
the artistic purpose of the work in hand. And this particular type of
an artistic manner will enable us to pass readily to the consideration
of "style" generally.


_(b) Style_

_Le style c'est l'homme même_ is a famous phrase of the French.
Style is here generally understood as the unique characterization of
personality, the particular mode of expression, however it may be
applied, which wholly reveals to us its substance. Herr von Rumohr,
on the other hand ("Italian Investigations," i, p. 87), endeavours
to interpret the expression as a mode habitual through its constant
repetition of bringing together the most vital characteristics of
the subject-matter artistically treated, by virtue of which the
sculptor informs his figures with reality, and the painter gives to
his the appearance of life. He further adds important observations
upon the appropriate form of representation which, in the case of
an art such as sculpture, the specific _sensuous_ material either
permits or proscribes. It is, however, not necessary to attach the
expression "style" solely to this aspect of sensuous material; we may
unquestionably extend it to all those determinations and rules of
artistic production which apply naturally to any particular type of
art, and in virtue of which an object is reproduced in the medium of
any one of them. We consequently distinguish in the art of music the
style of church music from that of opera, and in that of painting, the
historical style from the style of _genre_ painting. Style is therefore
a mode of artistic presentation, which not merely follows closely the
fundamental conditions of its material, but asserts itself as adequate
to all that any particular type of art demands for its composition and
execution and in strict conformity with the laws which apply to the
subject-matter on hand. Defect of style will then, in this extension
of the meaning, either imply an inability to present a composition
in accordance with such necessary conditions, or will amount to a
personal caprice which rather gives free rein to its own particular
predilections than accepts the conditions of composition which are
really proposed to it, in other words adopts an inferior "manner"
of its own. Consequently it is inadmissible, as Herr von Rumohr has
already pointed out, to apply principles peculiar to one type of art to
another, as Mengs has done in his famous museum in the villa Albani,
where both in the general conception and execution of his Apollo he
adopts the modes of colouring applicable only to sculpture. A defect
of the same kind may be traced in many of the pictures of Dürer, where
we see that even in painting, especially in the folding of his drapery,
he adopts the style of wood-cut in which he is so consummate a master.


_(c) Originality_

The final result, then, of our inquiry on this head is that true
originality does not consist in merely conforming to the paramount
conditions of style, but in a kind of inspired state[434] personal
to the artist which, instead of committing itself wholly to a
mere external manner of composition, seizes hold of a particular
subject-matter that is essentially rational, and by virtue of its own
resources and quality, re-clothes the same as from within the artist
himself and not merely in a way conformable to the essential notion of
the art adopted, but also in a form adequate to the universal notion of
the Ideal.

(_α_) True originality is consequently identical with true objectivity,
and combines that which is due to the personality of the artist and
the actual subject-matter of his work in such a way that both aspects
of his artistic product are held together in complete accord. Looked
at in one way, such a work appears to reveal to us the very essence
of the artist's personality, while regarded from another we only find
there the essence of the subject-matter artistically treated, so that
this very uniqueness of expression appears to arise from the unique
characteristics of the material to which it is applied; and we may
say with equal truth either that the expressed form is due to those
characteristics, or that this unique impression we obtain from them
proceeds from the creative unity of the artist.

(_β_) True originality must be entirely kept distinct from individual
caprice and every kind of personal expression that is due to fortuitous
causes. A common idea of originality is simply the stringing together
of so many curiosities, things which this particular individual and
no other could perpetuate or even faintly imagine. That is, however,
merely idiosyncracy gone mad. No people on earth are more original in
this meaning of the term than Englishmen, a country where every one
prides himself on committing some folly or other, which no man in his
senses is likely to repeat, and then fondly imagines his performance to
be original.

We may in this connection briefly refer to what has been so extolled,
and never more than in our own days as the originality of wit and
humour. An artist of this type of humour starts off from a point of
view or an experience wholly personal to himself, and constantly
recurs to the same so that the real object of his artistic production
is merely treated as the peg on which he may hang, or the field in
which he may give full play to, whatever wittiness, jest, quirks,
and sallies his mood may chance to light upon. In this way the real
object of his art and that which should render it vital in himself fall
entirely apart, and we have a capricious mode of artistic production,
in which the idiosyncrasy of the artist is made to appear as of first
importance. A humour of this kind is often replete with intellectual
brilliance and deep feeling, and in its general result is very apt to
impose on us; yet for all that it is not generally such a difficult
matter as is commonly believed. To constantly interrupt the rational
content of that which we are really dealing with, interrupting
all steady progress with a stream of capricious fresh starts and
conclusions, a sort of patchwork of whims and emotional excursions,
and thereby to create a caricature of imaginative vigour is far
easier than to develop and round off with completeness an artistic
whole of sterling quality throughout such as will testify to the real
Ideal. Moreover, our humour nowadays is only too ready to give us
the repulsive features of a talent for wit essentially crude, and is
constantly degenerating into coarse buffoonery and emptiness. We do
not often get from it real humour at all. The stalest trivialities are
wont to pass now for brilliancy and depth of soul provided they only
rig themselves out in the pretentious motley of humour. Shakespeare, on
the contrary, possessed a grand and profound sense of humour, but even
his works are by no means destitute of shallows. The humour of Jean
Paul too often surprises us with the depth of its wit and the beauty
of its sentiment, but we are quite as often repelled by the absurdly
eccentric way in which he hitches together his subjects, or rather
leaves them with the bare jointure to lie apart, and then floods all
he has to say with a kind of humour that leaves it almost impossible to
make head or tail of. No humourist, however great he may be, is likely
to find anything resembling it in his memory; and our main impression
is frequently, even in the case of Jean Paul's kaleidoscopic effects,
that they are rather the result of mechanical pasting together than
a spontaneous product from the crucible of genius. For this reason
Jean Paul finds it necessary, in order continually to present new
effects, to drag into books differing wholly in kind, botanical, legal
and philosophical disquisitions, no less than descriptions of travel;
whatever whim in fact may strike his fancy at the time is promptly
inserted. Even when his subject relates to scientific discovery he will
run together the most heterogeneous material such as a collection of
Brazilian plants and observations upon the old imperial chamber[435].
There are people who will praise a motley of this kind as original. But
it is really precisely the kind of caprice which originality of the
genuine stamp excludes.

While we are on this topic it will not be out of place to add some
further remarks upon irony, which particularly prides itself upon
presenting us with the very flower of originality on just those
occasions when it has ceased to treat any artistic material with
seriousness and converts the whole affair into a subject of witticism,
only worth notice for the sake of the wit it suggests. Looked at from
another point of view this irony rakes together a lot of things which
are quite foreign to the essence of the matter in hand, things the
deeper significance of which the poet keeps to himself, and his notion
seems to be that by this subtle exercise of his powers the imagination
will be enlarged. And it is just in external associations of this sort
that we get what we have already described as the poetry of a poetry,
wherein everything that is deepest and most excellent is concealed from
us for no other reason than this, that we must not be allowed to look
at it because it is so profound. And we really find in Friedrich von
Schlegel's poetry, more particularly when he became vain over his title
to the rank of poet, that which clearly is set forth as the aroma of
all is just that which is never expressed: no wonder this poetry of
poetry turns out to be the flattest prose.

(_γ_) A genuine work of art must consequently be held intact from all
originality of this perverse type. True originality will be asserted
throughout by this and this alone, that the work has the appearance
of being the unique creation of _one_ individual mind, which does
not go about picking up scraps from around it and then make thereof
a patchwork, but permits the material of that work, in complete
accordance with the unity most congenial to its own substance, to bind
itself together in a whole all parts of which are strictly related,
as truly stamped with one mint as the founder's cast. When we find
scenes and motives introduced upon grounds that are foreign to the
real artistic purpose, that is to say, which do not directly grow out
of the true subject, we must inevitably lose that subtle and necessary
connection of all the parts which create this unity, and what we thus
interpolate will unavoidably impress us as something fortuitously
attached by personal caprice. Much in this way it has been the fashion
to give exceptional praise to the "Götz von Berlichingen" of Goethe
on the grounds of its great originality. No doubt it is true enough,
as we have above remarked, that in this drama Goethe has with much
intrepidity given the lie direct to and turned his back upon all that
had been taken as the established principles of the aesthetic science
of his age; the execution of this work, however, does not bear the
stamp of genuine originality. One finds, on the contrary, in this
youthful production indications of the poverty of the material upon
which it is founded, so that many traits and entire scenes appear
to have been raked together and united by connections foreign to
the subject from material of an interest contemporary with that of
the artist's life instead of being the genuine elaboration of the
fundamental subject-matter. The scene, for example, between Götz and
brother Martin, where Martin Luther is clearly suggested, contains
ideas which Goethe could only have borrowed from a time such as his own
when people began once more to wail over the conditions of monastic
life, how they durst not drink wine, could only sleep off their meals,
were at the mercy of evil desires and generally must submit to the
three intolerable vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience. Brother
Martin, on the other hand, grows enthusiastic over the knightly life
of Götz, how he recalled to memory the load of booty he took from
his foe, whom he ran through with lance on horseback before he could
shoot, then tumbled over, horse and all, and finally returned to his
castle and wife. Whereupon the good monk drinks the health of the dame
Elizabeth, wiping his eyes the while. With mundane reflections of
this sort Luther never started on his journey, but rather as a pious
monk who had penetrated to their depths the religious conceptions
and convictions of Augustine, another source altogether. Subject to
precisely similar defects are the pedagogical references to that period
which occur in the following scene and for which Vasedow is mainly
responsible. We are informed that children of that age are taught much
that is unintelligible, that the true method of instruction should
rather educate their minds through the senses and experience. Karl, for
example, repeats phrases to his father by heart precisely similar to
those current in Goethe's own younger days: "Junthausen is a village
and castle on the Junt and for two hundred years has been the ancestral
property of the lords of Berlichingen." When Götz asks him if he knows
any lord of Berlichingen personally the lad stares blankly at him and
through sheer over-teaching does not know his own father. Götz declares
that he knew every path and road in the country before he knew the
names of a single river, village, or mountain. All this kind of thing
is mere literary stucco which has nothing to do with the actual subject
at all. And when an occasion does arise in which we ought to find some
really characteristic grip of the very marrow of the subject, as in the
conversations between Götz and Weisslingen, we get nothing more than
cold reflections upon the times.

We find much the same association of irrelevant matter in the same
poet's "Wahlverwandschaften."[436] The laying out of pleasure grounds,
the living pictures, the observations upon pendulum oscillations, the
testing of metals, the headaches, the entire description of elective
affinities, which is borrowed straight from chemical science, are all
of this category. It may, of course, be freely admitted that in a
romance, referring to an essentially prosaic age, such things are _prima
facie_ admissible, and more particularly so when we have a Goethe to
introduce them so cleverly and apply them so charmingly; moreover no
work of art of any kind can be kept wholly unaffected by the culture
of the artist's own age. It is one thing to allow the reflection of
contemporary culture to appear as part of the artistic whole, quite
another to bring together such material of research in a way that
places it as something wholly outside and independent of the genuine
substance of the composition. For the true originality of the artist no
less than that of his work consists exclusively in their being vitally
bound up with that which is only intelligible as part of the real
subject-matter treated. When the artist has fully Appropriated this
objective reason, without mixing up with it, to the detriment of its
clarity, details he may have borrowed from his personal experience or
other sources which do not strictly belong to it; in that case alone
will he stamp the material with the genuine mark of his own artistic
mintage. This personal effect upon his work merely serves him as a
bridge of Life over which he passes to secure a work of art wholly
complete in itself, just as in all genuine thought and action true
freedom consists in allowing that which is of essential significance to
assert itself without restraint, so that it becomes itself the force
which dominates both the particular thought and volition of the man
who thus appropriates it, and by so doing reconciles every vestige of
opposition. In this way the originality of art absorbs every accidental
trait peculiar to a given personality; but it only absorbs it that the
artist may follow without reserve the impulse and bent of his genius as
inspired through every fibre of the material he moulds, and instead of
reflecting a purely barren wilfulness and caprice of his own may give
an objective form to his true artistic individuality conjoined with
consummate accomplishment. To have no "manner" was ever the one great
"manner," and in this sense alone can we ascribe originality to Homer,
Sophocles, Rafael, and Shakespeare.

[Footnote 271: _Einer specifischen Seele._ We certainly should not in
ordinary speech say that inorganic objects possessed a soul. The phrase
indeed is difficult to follow, except as explained by the previous
technical discussion of _Einzelheit._]

[Footnote 272: The expression _in dieser der Allgemeinheit
entgegengehobenen Äusserlichkeit_ refers to the manifold in opposition
to which the principle of universality is posited as a test for the
selection of those aspects which manifest it as vital individuality.]

[Footnote 273: _Seligkeit._]

[Footnote 274: _Heiterkeit._ I cannot satisfy myself with one English
word. It seems to combine both _blithesomeness_ and _cheerfulness_ in
the literal meaning of the word.]

[Footnote 275: _In das einfache Beisichseyn._ Self-containedness would
be more literal.]

[Footnote 276: _Eine Versöhnung des Gemüths._ I think this refers
to the emotions of the spectators. The use of the word in the next
sentence points to this.]

[Footnote 277: _Diese Festigkeit_, _e.g._, such a religiously austere
mode of treatment, rather this than "rigorously true," is I think the
sense.]

[Footnote 278: Compare that wonderful poem of G. Meredith,
"Theodolinda."]

[Footnote 279: _Schönthuerei._]

[Footnote 280: See Introduction, pp. 86, 87.]

[Footnote 281: Such appears to me the sense of the above passage, but
it is not very clearly expressed. Hegel states the case of those who
contend that a picture must be a good one because the ideal element is
the main thing and to get that you have merely to borrow from poetry.
He then takes an example to show this is not so.]

[Footnote 282: Here commences the more thorough exposition of the
difficulty.]

[Footnote 283: _Vorstellung_, "world of ideas" would be perhaps better.]

[Footnote 284: Apart from an error in punctuation I think this sentence
is not as Hegel wrote it, certainly it is not as he would have left
it after revision; as it stands the grammatical construction is
entirely split into two discordant sections. I have at least made it
grammatical.]

[Footnote 285: _Die Vorstellung_, _i.e._, the imaginative conception.]

[Footnote 286: There is, however, the question of positive
characterization imposed on the work by the artist. The work of
Michelangelo is of course an extreme example. This is here rather
overlooked.]

[Footnote 287: That is to say, it remains the potency of many forms; it
is left in its abstract formality to be variously formed by limbs in
their motion and not cut into the forms devised by a tailor.]

[Footnote 288: Infinite, of course, not in the sense of extension,
but because it is a constituent of the universal medium of thought,
infinite as the judgment is so.]

[Footnote 289: This analysis of Dutch painting is remarkable for its
insight and impartiality, and may be contrasted in this respect with
the writings of Ruskin.]

[Footnote 290: _Die höhere Seele._ The ideal atmosphere throughout.]

[Footnote 291: It will be recalled that it was precisely this picture,
or one much resembling, that Ruskin, with less sympathy, criticized
severely.]

[Footnote 292: No doubt these were other pictures in the exhibition of
pictures contemporary with the date of Hegel's lecture.]

[Footnote 293: Ideal.]

[Footnote 294: _Auf willkürlich festgesetzten Zeichen_.]

[Footnote 295: Not a very lucid sentence. I presume the words _bei
deren Anblick_ refer, to the forms, not to the beauty which reposes on
them. The abstractness of such a point of view is obvious.]

[Footnote 296: I think _sein eigenes Wollen_ must practically amount to
this. But it is all very vague.]

[Footnote 297: _Handlung._ See below.]

[Footnote 298: _Vollbringen des Menschen._ The bringing up to fuller
content.]

[Footnote 299: Lit., "turned outside upon to confront, like a coat
turned inside out that the inside may face external facts."]

[Footnote 300: The German term is _Selbständigkeit._ It may often be
better translated by "independence."]

[Footnote 301: _Durchgreifende._ That which penetrates the whole as the
_causa efficiens._ The whole passage is difficult and technical.]

[Footnote 302: _Für sich selbst._ That is to say, a substance that is
not dependent on another for its reality but is explicit as such out of
its own resources.]

[Footnote 303: _Für das Allgemeine_.]

[Footnote 304: _In einer Nacht._ A condensed description of the true
story apparently.]

[Footnote 305: That is to say, it is made up of units all ready to pull
in different directions.]

[Footnote 306: A remarkable instance of the type in our own days was
General Gordon. A perusal of his correspondence from Khartoum makes it
sufficiently clear that he considered it his duty to remain despite all
orders to the contrary, so long as the garrison remained unwithdrawn;
no doubt he considered the reverse course dishonourable to England, but
first of all it was dishonourable to himself.]

[Footnote 307: _Fürsicheinsiehen._]

[Footnote 308: _Das Vornehme._ There is probably here a further
allusion to the respectability associated with grandeur. The same is
true of the compositions of the great Italian painters.]

[Footnote 309: _Ausgebildeten._ I have hesitated to translate this
"cultivated" as the context appears to suggest rather the kind of
_regime_ we find in the highly official centralization of such
a monarchy as that of Prussia in Hegel's time or the artificial
eighteenth century. But the whole passage rings rather strangely to
modern ideas, or at least to English notions of democracy.]

[Footnote 310: _Götz von Berlichengen_ was Goethe's first drama,
published in the year 1773, though the first version of it was written
in 1771.]

[Footnote 311: _Das Waltende_, _e.g._, a force which is predominant.]

[Footnote 312: _Gehalt_, content, that is, in its configurative energy.]

[Footnote 313: _Sichverwirklichen_, that is, objective
self-realization.]

[Footnote 314: The whole of this passage is difficult to follow and
translate, and has roots, no doubt, in some of the most disputed
positions in Hegelian philosophy, such as the independent reality of
Nature, and the use that Hegel makes of such conceptions as Chance
(_Zufälligkeit_) in his explanation of it. All that can be attempted
here is to give some kind of intelligible interpretation of the
expressions employed literally. The student will do well to consult
Professor A. C. Bradley's criticism of Hegel's Idea of tragedy in his
"Lectures on Poetry."]

[Footnote 315: The situation without defined situation.]

[Footnote 316: _Festigkeit._ Staunchness is perhaps better.]

[Footnote 317: _Harmlosigkeit_, _e.g._, its inability to cause
conflict.]

[Footnote 318: Such as painting and sculpture.]

[Footnote 319: By positive he means that in themselves they are not
actually discordant or negative but only render such discordance
possible in their relation to spirit.]

[Footnote 320: That is, where a collision depends upon natural causes.]

[Footnote 321: Positive, that is, relative to a particular concrete
condition.]

[Footnote 322: Perhaps _Erfindung_ would here be better translated with
"invention." Both processes are involved in the word.]

[Footnote 323: _Auf den natürlichen äusserlichen Verlauf._]

[Footnote 324: This must be implied, for it can only be asserted with
qualification of sculpture and it is not true of music.]

[Footnote 325: _In betreff seiner Besinnung._ _Besinnung_ suggests, no
doubt, something more of mind than _Gemüth._ It is the entire content
of self-consciousness on its sensuous side.]

[Footnote 326: _Die allgemeinen Mächte._ This phrase is explained in
the paragraph which follows.]

[Footnote 327: _Die Bethätigung._ The actualization would be a better
word perhaps.]

[Footnote 328: It may surprise some readers in such a context suddenly
to be confronted with such serious matters. But with Hegel such
surprises must be expected. With him the root of all spiritual activity
is never far absent, and the relation of the State is founded on the
same basis as that of the Church. And if we mean anything by the phrase
of the Divine Immanence we shall at least be able to follow him.]

[Footnote 329: _Die ewigen._ Eternal because essentially belonging to
the explication of reason.]

[Footnote 330: _Würde._ Worthiness of personal characteristics, _i.e._,
ethical character.]

[Footnote 331: _Das nur äuserlich Feststehende_. The organizations of
Spirit are the most permanent realities is, I think, the meaning.]

[Footnote 332: _Etwas bizarres oder widriges_, _i.e._, that which
is arbitrary and merely awakes curiosity or excites a feeling of
repulsion.]

[Footnote 333: There is obviously a symbolic meaning in this poem of
Hartmann which Hegel appears to have overlooked, the sacrifice which
the monks prescribed not necessarily involving a physical sacrifice,
but merely the gift of a love which would be equal to such a sacrifice.]

[Footnote 334: This passage is not easy to follow. I think _der innre
Begriff_ must mean the entire notion of the personality evolved in
the action as distinct from all particular aspects which are negative
and evil. The main difficulty of the passage consists in the abstract
conception of evil or the negative upon which Hegel centres the
attention.]

[Footnote 335: _Halt_, _i.e._, stable self-consistency.]

[Footnote 336: _Die innre haltlose Zerrissenkeit._]

[Footnote 337: _Abgeschlossenheit_, _i.e._, self-exclusive
individuality.]

[Footnote 338: _Zur subjektiven Innerlichkeit._ That is to say, the
entire self-concentration on the spiritual centre of conscious life.]

[Footnote 339: Lit., Their individuality remains rather external form,
in such a way that it fails to penetrate through to absolutely inward
subjectivity.]

[Footnote 340: _Noth_, the constraint of necessary conditions.]

[Footnote 341: _Mit der Bestimmten_, _i.e._, with the definite
subject-matter of temporal life.]

[Footnote 342: In the conception, that is to say, which is at the root
of the Greek idea of Divinity.]

[Footnote 343: I presume what Hegel means is as individual gods.]

[Footnote 344: _Er nicht mit seinem eigenen Selbst dabei ist._ He fails
to obtain the determinate freedom of the self-excluding subject.]

[Footnote 345: _I.e._, between gods and men.]

[Footnote 346: _Ganz prosaisch._ Viewed practically, that is to say,
rather than metaphysically. The examples explain the meaning.]

[Footnote 347: _Das Thun geht stets herüber und hinüber._ Is a skein in
which the threads run over and under one another.]

[Footnote 348: "_Iliad_," I, v, 190.]

[Footnote 349: This view may be well contrasted with the less vital
criticism of Schiller on this subject, which induced him actually to
exclude the feature from his amended edition of the play. In fact Hegel
shows more insight here than Coleridge.]

[Footnote 350: _Nicht über Hamlet haltlos verfügt._ It is also obvious,
I think, that such a passage need not necessarily be opposed to
Goethe's main conception. Such ideas may readily be explained as the
excuses of a man who inherently shrinks from forming a grave resolve of
vigorous action. No doubts are suggested when Hamlet sees the ghost.]

[Footnote 351: _Den eigentlichen Mittelpunkt._ Between what? I think
the examples show that it is both between a work of human art and
Nature and between the work of art itself and those to whom it is
addressed.]

[Footnote 352: Lit., Screws itself like a corkscrew into.]

[Footnote 353: _Ausmalung_. The metaphor is taken from the art of
painting and technically refers to the finish of the same in all its
details. It is here used generally.]

[Footnote 354: Vol. i, p. 153. I do not know the book.]

[Footnote 355: _Als bewegendes Pathos._ This may mean "as the motive
principle of pathos," but I incline to the interpretation "as the
pathos which affects others."]

[Footnote 356: This appears at first sight to be somewhat contrary to
the statement made above (p. 309) that "We cannot affirm pathos of
the gods." But if my translation in the above passage is the right
one _Die Götter werden zum menschlichen Pathos_, I think we must
understand _Die Götter_ here in a more universal sense of the Divine
than in the former passage, and find the emphasis here is laid upon the
word _menschlichen._ It is, in fact, but another way of stating the
incarnation of the Divine in humanity.]

[Footnote 357: _Als totale Individualität_, _i.e._, all that is
comprised in its essential notion.]

[Footnote 358: _Der handelnden Character_, _i.e._, Character manifest
in the action.]

[Footnote 359: _Ausser sich_, "goes to the dogs," as we say in vulgar
parlance, _i.e._, ceases to be character in the true sense at all.]

[Footnote 360: This example shows us that by the expression _früheren
Götter_ above Hegel must be referring to prehistoric times and quite
archaic conceptions of Greek godhead.]

[Footnote 361: _Eines in sick gebildeten Innern. Gebildet_ here used in
the sense of perfected, rounded to a co-ordinated content.]

[Footnote 362: _Hineingegraben_, lit., buried in.]

[Footnote 363: I am unable to express in two words the contrast
presented by the German _tragen_ and _ertragen._]

[Footnote 364: It is not easy to strike the exact interpretation of
such a word as _Quetschlichkeit._ Apparently this or the more usual
term _Quabbelig_ have the sense of "shaking." I believe there is a
synonym for quaker's grass, viz., quatch-grass.]

[Footnote 365: _Und durch sie sich hindurchziehen._ The most obvious
sense of these words would be: and (_i.e._, the threads) carry
themselves on through it (_i.e._, externality). Perhaps the meaning is
that the relations in question not merely unite the Ideal to the world
but are carried beyond (with the Ideal) the natural external world into
that higher plane of the objective spiritual world. In my translation
I have practically evaded the difficulty and assumed there is either
something missing, or we must understand, I admit, a very harsh change
of subject.]

[Footnote 366: Through self-consciousness he is both the individual
subject and the form of an infinite content.]

[Footnote 367: _Eine subjektive Totalität._]

[Footnote 368: I have amplified this sentence to make it quite clear
to which of the three worlds, viz., (_a_) the subjective world in its
abstraction, (_b_) the external world in its abstraction or, finally,
the world of reality, in which _a_ and _b_ are mutually related, the
writer here refers.]

[Footnote 369: _In welche die in sick totale Einheit des Ideals nicht
mehr ihrer konkreten Geistigkeit nach hineinzuscheinen befähigt ist._
Lit., Into which the self-complete unity of the Ideal is no longer
capable of penetrating by virtue of the concrete spirituality which it
essentially is.]

[Footnote 370: An obvious distinction between the arts of architecture
and garden-construction is that in the former all the materials used
have been already informed by human hands at least where building is in
any advanced stage.]

[Footnote 371: Hegel's actual words would seem to imply that the fact a
garden is created for use and enjoyment is detrimental to its beauty.]

[Footnote 372: It must be admitted that this summary treatment of
gardens is not very satisfactory. No doubt the best authorities concur
in the view that the formal garden is more artistic than the landscape,
but hardly on the main ground given here. Landscape gardening such as
we find it in our great English country houses has a real justification
of its own. And with regard to the reason given that a garden should be
entirely subordinate to the human object do we not strike here upon a
weakness which is to a certain extent apparent also in Hegel's theory
of the artistic purpose of architecture. I think it must be admitted
that though it is true the object of both these arts is not entirely
for their own beauty, and in certain cases, not even primarily so,
as in the case of a senate-house or ordinary garden, yet where the
artistic purpose is manifested throughout with great deliberation they
may be essentially an independent work of art; take the case,.of a
cathedral, for example, or a really beautiful and homogeneous formal
garden.]

[Footnote 373: _Element_, subject-matter would be really a better word.]

[Footnote 374: _Kein bloss quantatives._ They are not like a heap of
stones, for example, but they possess relations which qualify each
other, as of course the heap of stones will do in so far as it is
distinguished by diversity of colour.]

[Footnote 375: I think this must be the meaning of the words _noch ah
blass aufgelöste Gegensätze auftreten._]

[Footnote 376: _Grau_ is the word Hegel uses, but I think he must
use it in the sense I have translated it. Gray in itself is a very
beautiful compound, and the subtlety of its use is that which is one of
the distinguishing characteristics of the very greatest colourists such
as Turner and Velazquez.]

[Footnote 377: I am not quite sure that Hegel means this exactly, but
it is no doubt what an artist would mean and in water-colour especially
it is of the utmost importance. Compare the flesh colour of the artists
such as our Watts or Titian with that of Leighton. One of the most
marvellous examples I know is a small picture of Titian, the subject
of which is Herodias with the head of John the Baptist, in one of the
palaces at Rome. But a modern critic would, apart from the question of
dirtiness, about which there can be no doubt, say that Hegel insists
too much, precisely as Ruskin does, on the superiority of the pure
single colour.]

[Footnote 378: Hegel appears to be himself slightly incorrect here.
No doubt a string may ring false if it is not tightly fastened or if
too slack or too long it may produce sounds the human ear is unable
to appreciate. But primarily what musicians mean by a string ringing
false, with wolf notes and so on, is due to the bad material or false
composition of the string itself.]

[Footnote 379: _Disparat_, _i.e._, composed of different elements, not
merely separate in position.]

[Footnote 380: I think the expression _ein blosses an-sich_ must mean
this here. Of course the usual meaning is that of something potential,
unrealized, but here I think it rather signifies "not objectively or
really valid." No doubt in relation to the heads of discussion it is
potential also.]

[Footnote 381: _Die traurige Bünkelsängerei._ I think the adjective
must here rather refer to the contrast than to the nature of the
poetry. I presume the Minnesingers are referred to.]

[Footnote 382: I do not know what book this is, nor have I ever heard
of a hero with the name of _Otnith._]

[Footnote 383: Or rather by virtue both of its medium and object.
_Ihrer Natur nach_ are Hegel's words.]

[Footnote 384: _Jenem ersten Ansichseyenden._ That is to say, a
relation indefinite, but essentially implying a further realization.]

[Footnote 385: _Es nur eine unwahre Abstraction bezeigen würde._ "Lack
of comprehensiveness" would, of course, be more literal.]

[Footnote 386: _In ihrem abstracten Gehalt._ That is, regarded simply
as the opinions of a private individual, and apart from all that may be
implied in it under more universal relations.]

[Footnote 387: _Der Zustand der allgemeinen Bildung_, not an easy
phrase to translate: the "Culture-State" perhaps sums it up most
completely. "The state of universal education" is too indefinite or
goes too far.]

[Footnote 388: The whole spirit of this passage is a striking witness
to Hegel's admiration for classical art. Whether the arguments brought
forward are wholly sound when we consider them in connection with the
Elizabethan drama, for example, may readily admit of a question. At
the same time, as Hegel himself points out, Shakespeare unquestionably
throws the time back to what is practically a mythical age in at least
three of his greatest tragedies, "Hamlet," "Macbeth," and above all
"King Lear."]

[Footnote 389: For the element of beauty implied in ordinary
craftsmanship, and the modern view, pressed so strongly by William
Morris and others, of this aspect of art and its modern necessity, the
reader should peruse Professor Bosanquet's valuable "Three Lectures on
Aesthetic" (see particularly Lecture II, p. 61 _et seq._).]

[Footnote 390: Even an admirer of our author must admit, I think, here
that the argument is somewhat overstrained. That Hegel possessed real
humour and yet more irony few will deny who have studied him, but at
times "the man with a theory" rather tends, as is so frequently the
case with our German cousins, Goethe himself not excepted, to swallow
up such sanative juices altogether.]

[Footnote 391: I presume the meaning is that the poem in the shape we
now have it dates some 400 years after the Trojan war. But it is not
very clear from Hegel's language whether he regards Homer as the poet
who, as in the case of his example of the poet of the Niebelungenlied,
fused that together or no. For if he did how could he have lived
through the poems, an expression itself which is rather vague, more
particularly as the better opinion is that they represent a different
age themselves.]

[Footnote 392: _Vernürnbergert._ A word of course coined by Hegel. Made
them, that is to say, at home in the Nuremberg of Hans Sachs.]

[Footnote 393: "Best of all things water." Compare Meredith's exquisite
poem "Phoebus with Admetus," "Water, first of singers o'er rocky mount
and mead," etc., stanza 3.]

[Footnote 394: The drama of Racine.]

[Footnote 395: What this word means I do not know--possibly
quill-feathers.]

[Footnote 396: _Eine grosse Genialität._ "First-rate genius" is rather
too strong, "talents of the highest rank" would be more literal. We
have no word that expresses _Genialität._ As the passage is ironical I
have allowed "genius" to pass.]

[Footnote 397: _Wir haben schlecht gestanden._ Literally, "there is
some mistake between us." But the idiomatic sense I presume is, "You've
made a bad shot this time."]

[Footnote 398: What would Hegel have said of the first scene in the
"Merchant of Venice"? No doubt Shakespeare's play contains very much
more than such scenes, and there is a profound significance in that
opening scene, for it at once emphasizes the collision of families upon
which the entire tragedy turns. But is such a defence needed? There
appears to be indubitably a certain deficiency in the above criticism.
There is no reason that a scene in which a couple of peasants and two
troopers are the _dramatis personae_ should not be infinitely amusing
provided a Shakespeare, or even a Goethe, when he is not in one of his
dull moods, performs the office of teaching them how to speak.]

[Footnote 399: This surely goes too far unless "interest" is taken
strictly to mean artistic interest which would appear to be so from
the context. Everything that has once interested or affected mankind,
however remote, has at heart an historical and antiquarian interest,
and I am not sure that we should not be right in adding a general human
interest. At least such is almost a dogma with a poet of the type of
Browning.]

[Footnote 400: I do not know the Teutonic poem here referred to. But
what about Wagner's famous tetralogy? The above arguments, though
containing much that is true, appear to overlook for one thing the
symbolic significance of mythological history, and in a certain
sense to be lacking in sympathy for everything that is not modern or
Hellenic. How very differently Carlyle, for example, referred to this
very mythology, and his learning was not profound in the German sense.]

[Footnote 401: The intention of Aeschylus went, of course, much
farther than this, and the entire play is essentially one written by a
staunch conservative against modern innovation.]

[Footnote 402: It is strange that Hegel should have ventured such a
generalization in the face of his old friend Holderlein's poetry.
In England some fine poems have been written such as Lady Margaret
Sackville's hymn to Dionysus and Swinburne's to Proserpine. But for
a good essay in support of the main contention I know none equal to
Russell Lowell's Essay on Swinburne's "Atalanta." I think that both
our author and the critic who supports him somewhat fail to recognize
the permanent reality, whether symbolical or directly spiritual, that
an increasing number of men find in these Hellenic personalities, as
illustrated in the poetry of Meredith, to take the finest flavour of
the type.]

[Footnote 403: I presume this is the meaning of _unserer eigenen
Geliebten_, but from the example given of Petrarch's Laura one would
rather have expected that it was the poet's beloved whose name was not
given. In any case the sense is rather obscure.]

[Footnote 404: I think it must be admitted that Hegel goes too far
in the other extreme. The best tendency of our times is to reproduce
Shakespeare as near to the best authenticated text as possible.
No doubt our adaptation of French plays is in a certain sense an
illustration of Hegel's contention; but generally it is recognized that
where a work is great, as for example in the case of our Greek plays,
it is far better to let them speak for themselves, and attempt no
botching.]

[Footnote 405: Schiller's play.]

[Footnote 406: _Schiefheiten_, errors that divert truth from its path.]

[Footnote 407: We should rather have expected _Erhalt_ than _Gehalt_
here. _Gehalt_ means, therefore, the essential part of the entire
manifestation.]

[Footnote 408: _Durch all das anderweitige Getriebe_, _i.e._, through
all that is otherwise mechanical.]

[Footnote 409: I am not certain whether there is a definite allusion
here to anything in particular, or whether the Egyptian is taken
to signify any folk outside Western culture, with possibly some
subtle suggestion of those who held the favoured people in bondage,
Philistines in short.]

[Footnote 410: _Herausgeboren ist_, cast forth, that is to say, as the
natural growth of it--as Minerva from the head of Zeus.]

[Footnote 411: Imagination appears to me the best translation of
_Phantasie._ Our English word, however, seems rather to lie between
it and _Vorstellung_. Practically Hegel means here what we mean when
we distinguish it from fancy (_Einbildungskraft_), though in Ruskin's
original and most suggestive analysis of the terms, "fancy" of course
implied a limited power of creative activity or at least associative
activity.]

[Footnote 412: _Leichtfertigkeit der Phantasie_, _i.e._, a careless
facility of imaginative activity.]

[Footnote 413: It must not be overlooked, however, that, especially
in the arts of music and painting, genius may have reached maturity
at a very early period, as was the case with Mozart, Rafael, and many
another.]

[Footnote 414: _Ganz vereinzelten Seite._ It is a little strange to
find such an expression applied to the arts of violin-playing or
singing. But the emphasis is not so much on the art as a whole as to
the technical aspect of execution.]

[Footnote 415: _Anlage_, lit., a laying to, an impulse in a certain
direction.]

[Footnote 416: This statement is rather surprising from a fellow
countryman of Bach, Handel, Mozart, etc., down to Wagner and Strauss.
The explanation appears _first_ to be due to the distinction between
a national impulse toward popular singing which the Italian no doubt
possesses, and a deep-rooted emotional life which finally discovers
its supreme mode of expression in the art of instrumental music as
developed by the Teuton stock. _Secondly_, it is quite clear, I think,
from Hegel's correspondence that he had no real sympathy for orchestral
music though an enthusiastic admirer of opera, particularly Italian
opera.]

[Footnote 417: The other two aspects were: (_a_) That genius is a
spiritual activity and in its operation offers a contrast to talent,
where the personal initiative is not so prominent, (_b_) It has a
certain aspect which may be called innate.]

[Footnote 418: It is a little surprising to find Hegel tracing
technical accomplishment to the native gift. At least all technical
accomplishment has to be learned.]

[Footnote 419: This is the real point. Whatever ignoramuses may say of
the "shackles" of verse poets know only too well that they supply a
supreme stimulus to imaginative powers both in virtue of the atmosphere
of music into which they are thus carried and the suggestiveness of
the words themselves. What Hegel's analysis appears rather to fail in
is his perception of the unconscious work in the greatest men when
working in most inspired moments whether in painting or poetry--the
extraordinary power of their intuition.]

[Footnote 420: No doubt Hegel does not use our word "inspiration" in
quite the sense it is usually used, and I should have said even less
so the German word. At the same time we do apply the word inspiration
to the technical execution and most justly where it is used as a
distinction.]

[Footnote 421: Meredith in a letter to a correspondent expresses the
same conviction. He even adds that he thinks Schiller's compositions
were by no means improved by artificial stimulants.]

[Footnote 422: The Germans say, a song which "rings straight from the
throat," _der aus der Kehle dringt._]

[Footnote 423: _Welche zum Begriff des Talente gehört._ Talent no
doubt to some extent includes genius here, but mainly in its aspect of
productive power.]

[Footnote 424: I do not know the composition and cannot make much
of the quotations. For all I know _Tamboure-gesellen_ may be the
drummer-boy himself.]

[Footnote 425: This translation may pass perhaps:

    "This little nosegay plucked by me
     A thousand times may it greet thee!
     How many thousand times have I
     Bowed over it; how many times
     Pressed it to heart; how many times!"

[Footnote 426: Or, as Hegel puts it, "_that_ he is not."]

[Footnote 427: We should rather say a personal or individual manner
perhaps.]

[Footnote 428: I have translated _Zufälligen_ here with the words "he
shares with no one else." The suggestion is that there is no warrant or
principle to support them.]

[Footnote 429: It is rather surprising to find Hegel including music
here rather than sculpture or architecture, especially the latter,
which seems peculiarly adapted to illustrate what I understand to be
his general point of view. His own illustrations throw no light on the
matter as they are borrowed from painting or poetry.]

[Footnote 430: I presume the difference here alluded to is such as we
may see if we contrast the tone of a Correggio, for instance, with that
of a Titian or a Rembrandt.]

[Footnote 431: _Er hat ihn sich angeeignet._ Lack of artistic power is
the main factor in an artificial style. Though there are doubtless many
examples of men forced to paint in a way much below their true powers
to obtain a living. But it must be admitted Hegel does not express
himself very clearly. Individuality of handling is essential to a great
master. The real point is that it should not crystallize into a _mere_
habit, as in the Bologna school of painters.]

[Footnote 432: "Artificial" would perhaps come closer to the mark.]

[Footnote 433: _In sich selbst zu erweitern._ The phrase at once
suggests by contrast that expression so frequently used by painters
of "tightness," incapacity to enlarge, which is such a characteristic
of artificial handling, and indeed of most academic work, and so
frequently gives to the original sketch of an artist a greater artistic
value than to the highly finished work.]

[Footnote 434: _In der subjektiven Begeistrung._]

[Footnote 435: The chamber at Wetzlar.]

[Footnote 436: Elective Affinities.]


END OF VOL. I






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Philosophy of Fine Art, volume 1
(of 4), by G. W. F. Hegel

