
THE PHILOSOPHY OF

FINE ART

BY

G. W. F. HEGEL

TRANSLATED, WITH NOTES, BY

F. P. B. OSMASTON, B.A.

AUTHOR OF "THE ART AND GENIUS OF TINTORET," "AN ESSAY
ON THE FUTURE OF POETRY," AND OTHER WORKS

VOL. I

LONDON

G. BELL AND SONS, LTD.

1920




TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE


The translation of Hegel's "Aesthetik" or "Philosophy of Fine Art,"
which is contained in the four volumes of the present work, is the
first complete translation in English of the three volumes devoted to
this subject in the collected edition (Berlin, 1835). I know of four
partial translations in English of this work and one in French. These
are Mr. W. M. Bryant's translation of Part II[1], Mr. Kedney's short
analysis of the entire work[2], Mr. Hastie's translation of Michelet's
short "Philosophy of Art[3]," prefaced by Hegel's Introduction, partly
translated and partly summarized and lastly Professor B. Bosanquet's
complete translation of Hegel's first Introduction with notes[4].

The French translation of M. Bénard purports to be more or less
a reproduction of the entire work and runs into two large-sized
volumes. It also is, however, so far as Hegel's Introduction and the
first two Parts are concerned, merely a compressed summary, and only
in particular passages is the translation anything but a very free
rendering of the original, though there is a far closer approach to
this in Part III.

I have not seen Mr. Bryant's translation. As any approach to an
adequate reproduction of Hegel's writing Mr. Hastie's translation of
Michelet's work and Mr. Kedney's analysis are of very little value[5].
Professor Bosanquet's translation is admirable within the limits
imposed. To that extent I have merely followed, as I was able, in
my friend's footsteps; but this advance covers little more than one
sixteenth part of the entire work of 1,600 pages.

With regard to all such analyses I entirely concur with Professor
Bosanquet's view stated in his preface, that such merely mislead if
regarded as in any way a reflex of either Hegel himself or the German
text. It is true that this work is--as are in their degree other
volumes of the collected edition, the "Outlines of the Philosophy
of Right" for example--a heterogeneous product, in our own instance
not merely lacking the final revision of the author, but rather put
together as such a connected treatise by the editor responsible (i)
from several autograph MSS. of Hegel[6], some of which were little
more than fragmentary notes for lectures, (ii) supplemented further
from notes[7] taken by pupils who attended such lectures, the entire
conglomerate being (iii) finally dovetailed together with connecting
links by the editorial hand much as, to cite his own illustration, a
careful picture restorer might do in order to secure the impression of
a unified work, the unity aimed at by himself being rather that of a
connected literary treatise than a series of lectures.

It is obvious that a product of this nature will vary considerably
throughout in the degree that the personality and unique flavour of
Hegel himself, whether viewed as writer or thinker, asserts itself.

The introductions[8] have been, it would appear, taken almost
exclusively from Hegel's own MSS.; but even these remained unrevised
for the press, owing to the premature and sudden death of their author.

Of the greater portion of the work we can merely form our judgment of
the nature of its authenticity from the content itself. On the whole I
should myself say that the result was more favourable than might under
such conditions have been expected. The editor assures us expressly
that so far as all illustrations and the substantive content of the
work is concerned no attempt has been made whatever to supplement the
same. Hegel is throughout here entirely responsible. I think, further,
that the endeavour claimed by the editor to preserve the general
character and tone (_Kolorit_) of Hegel's own diction has attained a
degree of success that could only have been within the reach of devoted
pupils and friends of the man himself, who for many years both attended
his lectures and studied his published works. Whatever opinion,
however, we may arrive at on this head there can hardly be two opinions
as to the sources in which the main interest consists for a modern
reader.

First, I should lay particular stress on the forceful and
characteristic manner in which the fundamental philosophical
conceptions which underlie the entire fabric are worked into and
elaborated explicitly, throughout its detail. The very nature of this
unwearied and insistent interfusion (_Durchdringung_) of positive
fact, whether historical, scientific, or aesthetic, with the dialectic
movement of the Idea is here as essentially the method of Hegel as it
is elsewhere. And this is so despite the fact that it is here presented
for the most part in a form less repellent to the ordinary reader and
less provocative of hostile criticism. Translators therefore, who,
following the example of the French translator[9], deliberately seek
to lighten the burden of their cargo by throwing overboard what they
choose to call the "injurious dialectic," or the "dark labyrinth" of
this aspect of our work may reproduce much that is of instruction or
interest, but most certainly do not reproduce either the main strength
of Hegel as a thinker, or the most characteristic impression--to say
nothing of the repetitions--of such style or absence of literary style
that he possessed.

Secondly, if there is one feature more striking than any other in this
work, which is bound at least to surprise anyone who still harbours
the obsolete notion that this philosopher moved in an exclusively
abstract region of idea remote from the concrete experience of life and
scientific or artistic knowledge, it is the wealth and extraordinary
range of the illustrations in these volumes no less than the vigour and
freshness of their application. In this respect two translations which
merely amount to a summary of theoretical content simply omit the vital
or at least the most attractive heart of the interest.

As to the present claim of this laborious work to recognition and
study, its historical significance is, I think, admitted by the most
acknowledged authorities on the subject. As Schasler has called it,
it is the first complete system of a philosophy of Art. The nature
of its importance to our own most able and learned historian of the
Philosophy of Fine Art may not only be deduced from his own summary of
its contents and significance in his invaluable historical survey[10],
but is further illustrated by the fact that he has reproduced the
concluding portion of Hegel's Introduction _in extenso_ in an Appendix
to this work.

Other writers have been less judicious both as hostile critics and in
the degree of their praise or enthusiasm. One German authority has
called it Hegel's masterpiece. Such a title is, apart from any other
ground, sufficiently excluded by its history alone. Whether Hegel might
have made it his masterpiece had he lived is of course another question.

Other admirers, such as the late Professor Caird[11], have more
legitimately accepted such a distinction for the "Phenomenologie des
Geistes." Mr. Hastie will even have it that throughout "All is clear,
radiant, harmonious and dim with the things that are a joy for ever."
Such an effusive display of abstract _Vorstellung_ reminds one little
of either the dour temper of the Swabian philosopher, or the concrete
intelligence which most distinguishes him from his rivals now and in
his lifetime. I can promise no such garden of Hesperides, or even
Platonic banquet, to any of my readers. It is true that we have here,
the work being primarily built upon lectures intended to instruct
the ordinary student, no such parade of the dialectic method in its
formal structure such as constitutes the root of offence in some other
works of Hegel. But if we approach it with the belief that all is
therefore the plain sailing we meet with in the world of journalistic
art criticism and the commonsense conceptions of everyday life, or
with the assurance that the work is, or can be, intelligible without
some real attempt to grapple with the fundamental ideas of Hegelian
metaphysic, we may find our disappointment very considerable. As a
humble translator I am bound to say that in a very large number of
passages I have by no means discovered immediacy of intelligibility
or radiance to be a conspicuous feature of the original. Radiance is
indeed, I should say, not an attribute emphatically characteristic of
any kind of Teutonic literature, and least of all of its scientific and
philosophical literature. The present work is certainly no exception.
With its untiring, not to say remorseless, effort to press home in
repeated expression, often but slightly varied, the same fundamental
points, its dogged and endless persistence in the careful explication
through rational definition of every kind of positive material
that presents itself from the nature of the divine in man, or the
soul of living beast to the accurate determination in the terms of
expressed thought of a musical sound or an epigram or simile, with
its well-nigh total disregard of the beauty of literary style, and
its by no means unfrequent disregard of all principle of proportion
in the co-ordination of its varied subject-matter--whatever else
such a product may be it is most assuredly not, at least to English
apprehension, reminiscent of the radiance either of Homer or Apollo.

But though even sincere admiration may smile over such a description,
it does unquestionably reflect to a remarkable extent the thoroughness,
tenacity of purpose, the absence of superficial rhetoric, the wide
range, the extraordinary combination of constructive idea and detailed
knowledge and research we rightly associate with the most valued works
of German science and philosophy. It has never been more needful
than at this time of day to draw attention to such qualities, when
the national bias is to ignore or belittle their presence. It is,
moreover, not without passages which attain to a very real elevation of
eloquence, eloquence marked by the profoundest earnestness and entirely
free from the least flavour of bombast or sentimentalism. To the right
kind of reader it can hardly fail to convey a certain fascination
which is not merely due to the presence of a powerful and original
intellect, but is equally inseparable from the product of a human soul
intent upon getting at the heart of its subject, and keeping its vision
throughout fixed on that. Nor is the mere breadth of the canvas and the
depth of its content its only attraction. The work is indeed full of
digressions of exceptional interest to the general reader, and as such
bears the indelible stamp of Hegel's manner as a lecturer, which his
editor maintains stood out in such marked contrast to his more concise
style as an author, drawing as he did when lecturing so largely on his
encyclopaedic stores of knowledge.

To treat all the text as we now have it with the same respect may
very possibly betoken to some an excess of zeal on the part of the
translator; but after all the most important thing for an English
reader is to know what the volumes actually contain. In dealing with
Hegel the outlined sketch, whether secured through a process of
distillation or adulteration, is by no means any compensation for the
loss of the complete picture. If we are impatient over many aspects of
this philosopher's particularity, we had much better dispense with him
altogether.

Sympathetically studied it is hardly too much to say that this
monumental work is an education in itself. It is at any rate one which
cannot fail to enlarge our conceptions of the significance and dignity
of human art. Nor is this by any means impossible, even though we are
unable to concur in, or indeed remain insufficiently qualified to
express a judgment upon all or even a few of the most important of
its conclusions. But it is perhaps not wholly unnecessary to observe
that before venturing upon a verdict in our wisdom we must, as Robert
Browning submitted in reference to the criticism passed upon his
poetry, have awakened both our senses and intelligence "that they may
the better judge." It is the modest aim of the present translation to
make that preparatory process more easy for the English reader, to
assist that intelligent assimilation of the truth as it appears to a
great and world-famous thinker, which is the necessary condition of
any criticism meriting respectful attention at all. Such assimilation
is perhaps impossible in the case of Hegel without effort, and indeed
something of sympathy with his general outlook and temper, making as
he does little or no appeal whatever to the lover of literature as
such, who had consequently far better leave him austerely alone to the
consideration of others who are more attracted.

I do not propose in these prefatory remarks to enlarge further on the
actual content of the work, or on the nature of the criticism which has
been directed either to fundamental positions or matters of detail.
Some of these I have referred to in my notes on the text where they are
most obviously pertinent. The general reader will find a very useful
introduction to some of the more primary difficulties in the study of
Hegel in Professor Bosanquet's prefatory essay to his translation.
The more serious student can hardly dispense with the perusal of a
considerable portion of the same writer's history of Aesthetik, at
least that portion which directly deals with the writings of Kant,
Schiller, Goethe, Schelling, and Hegel himself on the subject[12].

I hold my translation to be as literal as is possible consistently with
an endeavour to render or interpret German philosophical language in
the language or idiom of really expressive and intelligible English. It
is now generally admitted that all translation is in the nature of an
interpretation. However much I may have fallen short of my aim, that
aim has been throughout to express the actual ideal content of the
German, not merely with all the force and directness I could muster,
but with as near an approach to the formal structure of the German text
as was consistent with the like condition of really readable English.
Above all I have striven to avoid the lassitude of mere paraphrase,
that vague generalization of content which conceives itself to possess
the right to eliminate from the text pretty much what it pleases.

The Index attached to the final volume is limited in its reference
to proper names, and pre-eminently to illustrations in the text of
works either of general literature, or other products of art, which I
considered of use or interest to the general reader.

In the table of contents to the several volumes I have notified with
brackets my own contributions to the German original. In all other
respects I have retained the divisions of subject-matter as I found
them recorded by Hegel or his editor.

F. P. O.


[Footnote 1: New York, Appleton and Co.]

[Footnote 2: Chicago, Griggs and Co., 1885.]

[Footnote 3: Edinburgh, Oliver and Boyd, 1886. The translation is
literal and of good quality for a little over thirty pages. After that
it is a mere summary.]

[Footnote 4: Kegan Paul, Trench and Co., 1886.]

[Footnote 5: Mr. Kedney's volume only amounts to about three hundred
small-sized pages altogether.]

[Footnote 6: The most important source were MSS. for lectures given
in 1820. This formed the basis of further lectures in 1823, 1826, and
1829.]

[Footnote 7: The notes to which our editor had access referred to the
lectures given in 1823 and 1826, with others of those in 1826 and 1829.]

[Footnote 8: The first Introduction is obviously taken from Hegel's
MS., the editor not even venturing in this case to obliterate its form
as an address in the lecture room. It represents perhaps the nearest
approach we possess to the revised MS.]

[Footnote 9: An almost inevitable defect of such a translation is that
criticism may be offered without supplying the material necessary for
any satisfactory verdict upon its sufficiency. Thus M. Bénard cites
with approval an adverse criticism passed upon what is called Hegel's
inadequate treatment of the Idea of Beauty as a partial manifestation
of the absolute Idea, but barely includes any of the passages which
refer to this in his translation (note, p. 36). Such can lead to no
conclusion whatever, though it obviously may entirely mislead his
readers.]

[Footnote 10: "History of Aesthetik," by Bernard Bosanquet
(Sonnenschein, 1892). See in particular pp. 333-362. With regard to the
comparative value of the work of Schelling and Hegel on this subject
the author says (p. 334): "It may be said that while we prefer Hegel
to Schelling this is partly because Schelling is best represented in
Hegel." I can claim but a very limited firsthand knowledge of modern
German works on Aesthetik. But I may observe that the section of
Lötze's history of German works on the subject devoted to Hegel's
"Philosophy of Fine Art" appears to me by no means equal in ability to
other portions of the work. The aim of the author appears rather that
of proving that his own researches occupy a ground wholly unoccupied
by Hegel than of defining with any completeness the ground actually
appropriated by Hegel.]

[Footnote 11: "Life of Hegel," p. 110.]

[Footnote 12: The most authoritative introduction to the study of
the Hegelian standpoint for English readers is, of course, the late
Professor Wallace's Prolegomena to his translation of the lesser Logic,
and the introduction to his translation of the Philosophy of Mind.]




CONTENTS OF VOL. I


TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE

INTRODUCTION

I.  The Limits of Aesthetic defined, and certain Objections
against the Philosophy of Art refuted

[(_a_) Aesthetic confined to Beauty of Art

(_b_)  Is Art unworthy of scientific consideration?

(_c_)  Or at least is it incapable of truly philosophical
exposition? Negative answer to both these questions]

II.  Scientific Methods which apply to the Beautiful and Art

[1.  The Empirical Method

2.   Abstract Reflection

3.   The Philosophical Idea of artistic Beauty, that is,
the notional concept thereof, provisionally defined]

III. The Notion of the Beauty of Art

Observations upon the ordinary ideas about Art

1.  The art-work is a creation of human activity

[(_a_) Theory of imitation of Art by rule

(_b_) Art as direct inspiration

(_c_) The rank of Art relatively to Nature

(_d_) The nature of the human Art-impulse]

2.  The art-work is addressed to human sense

[(_a_) Theory that its object is to excite feeling

(_b_) The nature of artistic taste

(_c_) The nature of art-scholarship as contrasted
with artistic taste

(_d_) The more philosophical consequences of the
fact that Art appeals to sense and requires
a sensuous medium  for its expression]

3.  The End or Interest of Art

[(_a_) Is it imitation of Nature?

(_b_)  Is the end or content identical with the dictum,
"Humani nihil a me alienum," etc.

(_c_)  How far it is a mitigation or purification of
the passions

(_d_)  The higher object of Art which consists in
its revelation of truth in itself]

IV.  Historical Deduction of the true Notion of Art

1. The philosophy of Kant

[(_a_) Feeling of aesthetic satisfaction not appetitive

(_b_)  Beauty an object of universal satisfaction

(_c_)  Teleological aspect of the Beautiful

(_d_)  Pleasure in the Beautiful necessary, though
felt

2.  Schiller, Winckelmann, and Schelling

3.  Irony]

V.  Division of the Subject

[1. Inquiry as to the mode under which the divisions
of the subject arise from the notional concept
of Beauty

2.  Part I. The Ideal

3.  Part II. The particular general types of Beauty

(_a_)  The Symbolic type of Art

(_b_)  The Classical type of Art

(_c_)  The Romantic type of Art

4.  Part III. The specific arts

(_a_)  Architecture

(_b_)  Sculpture

(_c_)  Romantic art, which includes

(_α_)  Painting

(_β_)  Music

(_γ_)  Poetry

5.   Conclusion]


FIRST PART

THE IDEA OF THE BEAUTY OF ART OR THE IDEAL

The Position of Art relatively to finite Reality, Religion,
and Philosophy

[(_a_) Theory that the Beautiful is no intelligible object
of thought

(_b_) The relation of the human reason to Nature both
empirically and speculatively

(_c_) The realm of Fine Art that of the Absolute Spirit

(_d_) How far Art responds to a genuine spiritual want in
man

(_e_) The truth which forms the content of art, religion,
and philosophy differs only in the modes under
which it is presented]


CHAPTER I

THE NOTION OF THE BEAUTIFUL IN GENERAL

1. The Idea

[(_a_) The Idea is concrete, not abstract

(_b_) Objectivity is the real existence of the notion, and
the means whereby it is actualized

(_c_) The Idea is the harmonized totality of the two aspects]

2. The Determinate Existence of the Idea

3.  The Idea of the Beautiful

[(_a_) Not apprehended alone by the faculty of the understanding,
or the finite categories

(_b_) The nature of finite or abstract apprehension and
practical volition considered

(_c_) The object of beauty resolves and the one-sidedness
of both standpoints in a free and infinite totality]


