CHAPTER IV. THE EVOLUTION OF THE WORLD AND MAN


From the foregoing observations it will be seen that man’s being is built
up of four principles: the physical body, the etheric body, the astral
body, and the vehicle of the ego. The ego works within the three other
principles, and transforms them. By means of this transformation, are
formed on a lower level, the sentient-soul, the rational- or
intellectual-soul, and the consciousness-soul: on a higher level of human
existence, are formed the Spirit-Self, the Life-Spirit, and Spirit-Man.
The relations existing between these human principles and the whole
universe are of a most varied character and their evolution is related to
that of the universe. By studying this evolution an insight is obtained
into the deeper mysteries of man’s being.

It is clear that human life is related in the most varied ways to the
environment or dwelling place in which it evolves. Physical science,
through the facts presented to it, has already been driven to the opinion
that the earth itself, man’s dwelling place in the broadest sense of the
word, has undergone evolution. Science points to former conditions of the
earth when man, in his present form, did not yet exist on our planet and
it shows how man has slowly and gradually evolved to his present condition
from primitive states of civilization. Physical science, therefore, comes
also to the conclusion that there is a connection between man’s evolution
and that of the heavenly body on which he lives—the earth.

Occult science traces this connection by means of a knowledge which
obtains its data from observation quickened by spiritual organs of
perception. It traces man backwards in his course of development, and the
fact becomes evident to occult science that the real inner spiritual being
of man has progressed through a series of lives on this earth. Occult
research arrives in this way at an epoch far back in the remote past, when
for the first time that inner being of man made its entry into “external
life” as we understand it. It was in this first earthly incarnation that
the ego began to function in the three bodies—the astral body, the etheric
or vital body, and the physical body; and it then carried over the results
of that activity into its next life.

If in our investigation we proceed backwards, in the manner indicated, as
far as that epoch, we discover that the ego finds an earth condition in
which the three bodies, physical, etheric, and astral, are already
developed and in which they bear a certain relation to each other. The ego
is, for the first time, united with the being composed of these three
bodies; and henceforth takes part in the further evolution of the three
bodies. Hitherto, up to the stage at which that ego came in touch with
them, they had evolved without a human ego.

Occult science must now go back still farther in its researches if it is
to answer the questions, “How did the three bodies reach that stage of
evolution at which they were able to receive an ego within them?” and “How
did that ego itself come into being and acquire the capacity for working
within these bodies?”

It is possible to answer these questions only when the gradual development
of the earth-planet itself is studied from the occult point of view. By
such investigation we arrive at a beginning of the earth-planet. That
method of examination which is based only on the facts of the physical
senses cannot arrive at conclusions concerning the beginning of the earth.
A certain point of view which avails itself of such conclusions arrives at
the result that everything material on the earth was formed out of a
primeval essence, or vapour. It is not the purpose of this work to enter
more fully into such conceptions of our planet’s origin; for in occult
science the important matter is not merely to inquire into the material
processes of the earth’s evolution, but first and foremost to discover the
spiritual causes lying behind what is material.

If we see before us a man raising his hand, we may consider his action in
two different ways: we may examine the mechanism of the arm and the rest
of the organism, in order to describe the process as it takes place from
the purely physical standpoint, or we may direct the spiritual vision to
what takes place in the man’s soul and there discover what constitutes the
inner motive for raising the hand. In this way an investigator, trained in
occult research, sees spiritual processes behind all the events of the
physical sense-world. In his eyes all transformations of the material part
of the earth-planet are manifestations of spiritual forces lying behind
what is material.

But if occult observation of this kind goes farther and farther back in
the life of the earth it comes to that point in evolution at which
material things first came into being. The material element is evolved out
of the spiritual. Up to this point the spiritual element was the only one
existing. By occult investigation the spiritual element is perceived, and
the observer can see how it becomes partly condensed, as it were, into
matter. We have before us a process which is taking place—on a higher
level—much as though we were observing a lump of ice being formed by
artificial means in a vessel of water. Just as we see the ice being
condensed out of what was previously only water, so may we, by means of
occult observation, watch the condensation of what was previously entirely
spiritual, so to speak, into material things, processes, and beings. In
this way the physical earth-planet was evolved out of a cosmic spiritual
essence; and everything that is combined materially with the earth-planet
has been condensed out of what was previously united with it spiritually.
We must not, however, think that _everything_ spiritual was at any one
time changed into material form; but, in the latter we have before us
merely the transformed portions of what was originally spiritual. Thus,
even during the period of material evolution, it is always Spirit that is
really the guiding and ruling principle.

It is obvious that the mode of thought which restricts itself to the
processes of physical sense—and to what reason is able to infer from
them—is incapable of expressing an opinion about the spiritual element of
which we are speaking. Let us assume that a being might exist to whose
senses ice would be perceptible, but not the finer condition of water,
from which ice is detached by refrigeration. For such a being, water would
be non-existent, and could become visible only when parts of it had been
transformed into ice. In the same way, the spiritual element behind
earthly processes remains hidden from one who only admits the existence of
what is perceptible to his physical senses. And if, from the physical
facts which he now perceives, he draws correct conclusions about earlier
conditions of the earth-planet, he can penetrate only as far as that point
in evolution at which the previous spiritual element was partially
condensed into material substance. Such a method of observation no more
discovers the spirit previously existing, than it perceives the spirit
which even now rules unseen behind the world of matter.

Not until we come to the last chapters of this work can we deal with those
methods by which man acquires the faculty of looking back, by means of
occult perception, upon those earlier conditions of the earth which are
now under discussion. For the present we shall merely intimate that the
facts concerning the primeval past have not passed beyond the reach of
occult research. If a being comes into corporeal existence his material
part perishes after physical death. But the spiritual forces, which from
out their own depth gave existence to the body, do not “disappear in this
way.” They leave their traces, their exact images behind them impressed
upon the spiritual ground-work of the world. Any one who is able to raise
his perceptive faculty through the visible to the invisible world, attains
at length a level on which he may see before him what may be compared to a
vast spiritual panorama, in which are recorded all the past events of the
world’s history. These imperishable traces of everything immaterial are
called in occult science the “Akashic Records.”

Here it must once more be repeated that investigations of the
supersensible realms of existence can be carried on only with the aid of
spiritual perception, and consequently can be instituted in the sphere now
under consideration, only by reading the Akashic Records above-mentioned.
Nevertheless, what was said earlier in this book in a similar instance
holds good here. Supersensible facts are only to be investigated by
supersensible perceptions; but once investigated and communicated by
occult science, they may be grasped by the ordinary powers of thought, if
these are honestly exercised without bias. In the following pages the
various conditions of the earth’s evolution, as given by occult science,
will be detailed. The transformation of our planet will be traced down to
the conditions of life in which we now find it. Any one who surveys what
comes before him at the present time merely through the evidence of his
senses, and then lends an ear to what occult science has to say on the
subject, namely:—how that which now lies before him has been evolved from
a far distant past,—will be able, if his thought is genuinely unbiased, to
say to himself: “In the first place, what occult science reports is quite
logical; in the second place, I can, if I assume the reports of occult
investigation to be correct, understand how things have become as they now
appear.” By “logical” is not meant, in this connection, of course, that
errors might not be made from a logical standpoint in some description
given by occult research. We are here speaking of “logic” as it is
understood in the ordinary life of the physical world. Just as a logical
demonstration is accepted there as it is in physical research, even though
a single investigator, in a certain domain of facts, may make illogical
statements, so is it also with regard to occult science. It may even
happen that an investigator who possesses the power of vision in
supersensible spheres may make mistakes in a logical presentment of them,
and may be corrected by another who has no supersensible perception, but
has, none the less, a capacity for sound thinking. In reality, nothing of
any weight can be said against the logical deductions of occult science.
And it ought to be unnecessary to insist that nothing can be adduced, on
purely logical grounds, against the facts themselves. In the domain of the
physical world it can never be proved by logic, but only by ocular
demonstration, whether or no there is such an animal as a whale;
similarly, supersensible facts can be known only through occult
perception.

But it cannot be sufficiently emphasized that an obligation is laid upon
the explorer of supersensible regions, before he determines to approach
the invisible worlds with his own power of perception, to acquire first of
all the aforementioned logical faculty, and this is none the less
essential if he recognizes that the world, manifest to his senses, will
become comprehensible if he accepts the communications of occult science
as correct. All experiences in the supersensible world are nothing but an
uncertain—nay, a dangerous—groping in the dark if we despise the method of
preparation which has been described. Therefore in this book the facts
concerning the supersensible processes of the earth’s evolution will first
be given, before the path leading to the attainment of supersensible
knowledge is dealt with.

We have also, it is true, to take into account that the man who, by sheer
thinking, comes to accept what supersensible research has to impart, is by
no means in the same position as one who listens to the account of a
physical occurrence which he is unable to see. For thinking is in itself a
supersensible activity. Materialistic thinking cannot of itself lead to
supersensible phenomena. But if thought is directed to supersensible
matters through the accounts given of them by occult science, it grows by
its own activity into the supersensible world. What is more, one of the
very best ways of acquiring supersensible perception is to grow into the
higher worlds by meditation upon what has been communicated by occult
science. For such a mode of entry insures great clearness of perception.
For this reason such thinking is regarded by a certain school of occult
investigation as a most valuable first step to take in occult training.

It will be readily understood that it is impossible to mention in this
book all the details of the earth’s evolution, as it has been spiritually
perceived by occultists, in order to illustrate the way in which the
supersensible world is reflected in the manifested. Nor was this what was
intended when it was said that the unseen may everywhere be demonstrated
by its manifest effects. It was meant rather that everything that man
encounters may, step by step, become clear and comprehensible if he brings
manifested events under the illumination of occult science. Only in a few
characteristic instances will reference be made in the following pages to
confirmations of the invisible by the manifest, in order to show how this
may be done everywhere in the course of practical life, if desired.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

Pursuing the evolution of the earth backward according to the above method
of scientific spiritual investigations we arrive at a spiritual condition
of our planet. But if we go farther back along this path of research we
find that everything spiritual had previously passed through a kind of
physical incarnation. Thus we come upon a bygone physical planetary
condition, which was afterwards spiritualized, and subsequently
transformed into our earth by repeated materialization. Our earth is
therefore presented to us as the reincarnation of a very ancient planet.
But occult science can go back still farther; and it then finds the whole
process twice repeated. Thus, our earth has passed through three previous
planetary conditions separated by intermediate spiritual conditions of
rest. The physical substance, however, proves to be finer and finer the
farther back we follow the incarnations.

Now man, in the form in which he is at present evolving, makes his first
appearance upon the fourth of the planetary incarnations which have been
described, the Earth proper. And the essential characteristic of his form
is that it is composed of four principles, the physical, etheric, and
astral bodies and the ego. But that form could not have appeared if it had
not been prepared by the preceding events of evolution. The method of
preparation was that, in the earlier planetary incarnation, beings were
evolved who already had three of the present four principles of man: the
physical, etheric, and astral bodies. These beings who, in a certain
sense, may be called man’s ancestors, had as yet no ego, but they
developed the three other principles and their mutual relationship to such
a point that they became sufficiently mature to receive an ego. Thus man’s
ancestor attained to a certain degree of maturity of his three principles
during the earlier planetary incarnation. This condition became
spiritualized; and out of it a new planetary condition was formed in which
man’s matured ancestors were contained, as it were, in embryo. Because the
whole planet had passed through a process of spiritualization and had
appeared in a new form, it offered those embryos, with their physical,
etheric, and astral bodies, which were contained therein, not only the
opportunity of again evolving up to the level on which they had previously
stood, but the further possibility, after having arrived at that level, of
reaching out beyond themselves through receiving the ego.

The evolution of the Earth divides itself, therefore, into two parts.
During the first period the Earth itself appears as a reincarnation of the
previous planetary state. But that recurring state is a higher one than
that of the previous incarnation, in consequence of the intervening period
of spiritualization. And the Earth contains within itself the germs of
man’s ancestors belonging to the earlier planet. These were first
developed up to the level they had previously reached. The attainment of
this level marks the end of the first period. But now, owing to its own
higher stage of evolution, the Earth is able to carry the germs still
higher, that is, to qualify them for receiving the ego. The second period
of the Earth’s evolution is that of the development of the ego in the
physical, etheric, and astral bodies.

In the same way that man had been thus carried a stage farther by the
evolution of the Earth, so also had this been the case during the earlier
planetary incarnations. For man had in some measure existed as early as
the first of these. Light is therefore thrown on the present constitution
of man if his evolution is followed back to the far-remote past of the
first of the planetary incarnations mentioned above.

In occult science the first of these is called _Saturn_; the second is
termed _Sun_; the third, _Moon_; and the fourth is the _Earth_. It must be
distinctly understood that these occult terms are not to be in any way
associated with the names used to designate the members of the present
solar system.(8) In occult science Saturn, Sun, and Moon are merely names
for bygone forms of evolution through which the Earth has passed. In the
course of the following account it will be shown what relation these
worlds of remote antiquity bear to the celestial bodies composing the
present solar system.

The relationship of the four planetary incarnations previously mentioned,
can here be only briefly sketched; for the events, the beings and their
destiny on Saturn, Sun and Moon were in truth, just as varied as they are
on the Earth itself. Therefore only a few characteristics of these
conditions can be chosen to illustrate just how these earth conditions
have evolved out of earlier ones. In this connection, one should bear in
mind that the further back we go the more dissimilar to the present ones
do these conditions become. And yet they can only be described by making
use of ideas borrowed from existing conditions of the earth. If, for
instance, light, heat, etc., are mentioned in connection with these
earlier conditions, it must not be overlooked that they are not exactly
the same as that which we now term light and heat. And yet such
terminology is accurate, for the clairvoyant observer of earlier stages of
evolution perceives something that has developed into the light and heat
of the present time. And one who follows the descriptions thus given by
occult science will, from the inner relation of these things, easily be
able to form such perceptions as correspond to those events which have
taken place in a primeval past.

Of course there will be considerable difficulty in treating of those
planetary conditions which preceded the Moon incarnation. For during the
latter, conditions prevailed which bore, at least to a degree, some
resemblance still to earthly conditions. When one attempts to describe
these conditions one finds that such resemblances to the present time form
a certain basis on which may be expressed in clear concepts the
observations made through clairvoyance. It is quite different when the
Saturn and Sun evolutions are to be described. In that case, what lies
before clairvoyant observation is utterly different from the objects and
beings now belonging to the sphere of human life. And this difference
makes it exceedingly difficult to bring the corresponding facts of
primeval times within the scope of clairvoyant consciousness at all.

Since however the present constitution of man cannot be understood without
going back to the Saturn state, the description therefore must be given.
And surely no one will misunderstand such a description who keeps in view
the existence of the difficulty, and the fact that owing to it much that
is said must be in the nature of a suggestion or hint of the facts in
question, rather than an exact description of them.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

The physical body is the oldest of the present four principles of man’s
being. It is also the one, which, in its way, has attained the greatest
perfection. Occult research shows that this part of man already existed
during the Saturn evolution. It will be shown in the following account
that the form taken by the physical body on Saturn was, of course,
something quite different from the present physical body of man. The
earthly physical human body, from its nature, can only exist by being in
connection with the etheric and astral bodies and the ego, in the manner
described earlier in this book. Such a condition did not as yet exist on
Saturn. The physical body was then passing through the first stage of its
evolution, without having a human etheric body, an astral body, or an ego
incorporated in it.

During the Saturn evolution it was growing ripe for the reception of an
etheric body. For that purpose Saturn had eventually to pass into a
spiritual condition, and then to be reincarnated as the Sun. During the
Sun incarnation the physical body developed again to the stage it had
reached on Saturn as from a germ brought over and only then could it be
inter-penetrated by an etheric body. By means of this incorporation of an
etheric body, a change took place in the nature of the physical body; it
was raised to a second stage of perfection. A similar thing took place
during the Moon evolution. Man’s ancestor, as he had developed himself
when passing from the Sun to the Moon, incorporated in himself the astral
body. As a result, the physical body was changed for the second time, and
thus raised to its third stage of perfection; at the same time the etheric
body was likewise changed, and passed to its second stage of perfection.
On the earth the ego was incorporated in man’s ancestor, now composed of
the physical, etheric, and astral bodies. Thereby the physical body
reached its fourth stage of perfection, the etheric body its third, and
the astral body its second stage; the ego is only now at the first stage
of its existence.

If we give ourselves up to an unprejudiced examination of man’s nature,
there will be no difficulty in acquiring a correct idea of these different
stages of perfection of his separate principles. For this purpose we have
merely to compare the physical with the astral body. It is true, the
astral body, as a psychic principle, stands on a higher level of evolution
than the physical body. And in future ages, when the former has been
perfected, it will be of very much more consequence to man’s complete
being than the present physical body. Yet, in its own way, the latter has
reached a certain high degree of perfection. Consider the marvelous wisdom
with which the structure of the heart is planned, the amazing structure of
the brain—nay, even of part of a single bone, such as the upper end of the
thigh bone. In the end of this bone we find a net-work or scaffolding,
wonderfully constructed and composed of delicate spicules and lamellæ. The
whole is so arranged that with the least expenditure of material the most
effective action on the joint-surfaces is obtained—hence the most
efficient distribution of friction and a proper freedom of movement. Thus
wise arrangements are found in the parts of the physical body. And if we
go on to observe the harmonious co-operation of the part with the whole,
we shall find that it is certainly true that this principle of man’s being
is perfect and it does not affect the question that in certain parts
something apparently useless appears, or that disturbances of structure or
functions may take place. It will even be found that such disturbances are
in a way only the necessary shadows of the wisdom-filled light which is
poured out over the whole physical organism.

Now compare with this the astral body as the medium or vehicle of pleasure
and pain, desires and passions. What uncertainty rules in it with regard
to pleasure and pain; how the desires and passions, of which it is the
scene, run counter to the higher goal of man; how senseless they often
are. The astral body is only now on its way to attain the harmony and
inner poise already possessed by the physical body. Similarly it might be
shown that the etheric body is certainly more perfect in its own way than
the astral but less perfect than the physical body. And it will equally
result from a corresponding study of the ego that this, the real kernel of
man’s being, is now only at the beginning of its evolution. For how much
has already been accomplished of its mission, that of transforming the
other principles of man’s being in order that they may become a revelation
of the ego’s own nature?

The result of an outer examination of this kind is intensified for the
occult student by something else. It might be pointed out that the
physical body is attacked by diseases. Now occult science is in a position
to show that a large proportion of all diseases owe their origin to the
fact that the perverse actions and mistakes of the astral body are
transmitted to the etheric body, and indirectly through the etheric,
destroy the perfect harmony of the physical body. The deeper connection,
which can here be only hinted at, and the true cause of many of the
conditions of disease, elude that kind of scientific observation which
confines itself solely to the facts obtained by means of the physical
senses. The connection in most cases comes about in such a way that an
injury to the astral body does not cause manifestations of disease in the
physical body in the same incarnation in which the injury takes place, but
in a later one. Hence the laws now under consideration have a meaning only
for one who is able to admit that human earth-life is repeated again and
again. But even if deeper knowledge of this kind is rejected, ordinary
observation of life makes it plain that human beings indulge in far too
many pleasures and desires which undermine the harmony of the physical
body. And the seat of pleasure, desire, passion, is not in the physical
but in the astral body. The latter is still so imperfect, in many
respects, that it is able to destroy the harmony of the physical body.

It should also be mentioned here that such explanations as these are by no
means intended as proofs of the assertions of occult science about the
evolution of the four principles of man’s being. The proofs are drawn from
spiritual research, which shows that the physical body has behind it a
transformation, enacted four times, into higher degrees of perfection, and
that man’s other principles have been perfected to a lesser degree, as has
been described. It is desired merely to indicate here that these
communications made by spiritual research relate to facts which are
visible in their effects even to ordinary observation, in the degrees of
perfection reached by the physical body, etheric body, and so forth.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

If we wish to draw an approximately true picture of the conditions
prevailing during the Saturn evolution, we must take into account the fact
that while it lasted, there were virtually, as yet, none of the things and
creatures existing which now belong to the earth and are included in the
mineral, vegetable, and animal kingdoms. The beings of these three
kingdoms were formed during later periods of evolution. Of all the earthly
beings physically perceptible today, man alone existed at that time and of
him only the physical body existed as described. But there are at present
belonging to the earth not only the denizens of the mineral, vegetable,
animal and human kingdoms, but other beings as well, not manifesting in a
physical embodiment. Such entities were also present during the Saturn
evolution, and their activity on the Saturn scene of action brought about
the subsequent evolution of man.

If the organs of spiritual perception are directed, not to the beginning
and end, but to the middle period of evolution of this Saturn incarnation,
we find there a condition which consists principally of heat. Nothing is
to be found composed of gaseous, fluid, or even solid constituents. All
these states appear only in later incarnations. Let us assume that a human
being, with the present organs of sense, were to approach the Saturn
condition as a spectator. None of the sense-impressions possible to him
would confront him there except the feeling of warmth, or heat. Suppose
such a being approached this Saturn; he would only sense, upon entering
the space occupied by it, that it was in a different degree of heat from
the rest of surrounding space. But he would not find that portion of space
by any means equally warm throughout, for warmer and colder parts would
alternate in the most complicated manner. Radiating heat would be felt
along certain lines. And not only straight lines, but regular figures
would be formed by the variation in heat. Something like a cosmic being,
organically constructed in itself would be discerned, appearing in
changing conditions, and consisting only of heat.

It is difficult for a man of the present day to form an idea of anything
consisting only of heat, for he is not accustomed to think of heat as
something self-existent, but as a perceptible quality of warm or cold
gaseous, liquid, or solid bodies. To one who has adopted the physical
conceptions of our time it will seem particularly absurd to speak of heat
in the foregoing manner. He will, perhaps, say: “There are solid, liquid,
and gaseous bodies; but heat only denotes a condition assumed by one of
these three bodily forms. If the smallest particles of gas are in motion,
the movement will be felt by heat. Where there is no gas, there can be no
movement, consequently no heat.”

To an occult investigator the fact appears differently. To him heat is
something of which he speaks in the same sense as he speaks of gases, of
liquids, or of solid bodies. To him it is simply a still finer substance
than gas. And gas to him is nothing but condensed heat, in the same sense
that liquid is condensed vapour, or a solid body condensed liquid. Thus
the occultist speaks of heat bodies just as he does of bodies formed of
gas and vapour.

If we are to follow the spiritual investigator into this region, it is
however necessary to admit that there is such a thing as psychic
perception. In the world, as it presents itself to the physical senses,
heat appears entirely as a condition of solid, liquid, or gaseous bodies;
but that condition is merely the outward appearance of heat, or the effect
of it. Physicists speak only of this effect of heat, not of its inner
nature. Just let us try then to leave entirely out of consideration any
effect of heat received through external bodies, and to realize merely the
inner experience which comes from saying the words: “I feel warm,” “I feel
cold.” That inner experience is the only thing capable of giving an idea
of what Saturn was during its period of evolution described above. It
would have been possible to pass right through the portion of space it
occupied; no gas would have been there to exercise pressure, no solid or
liquid body from which light-impressions could have come; but at every
point of space occupied, one would have felt inwardly, without any
external impression: “Here there is such and such a degree of heat.”

In a cosmic body of this character there are no conditions for the animal,
vegetable, and mineral organisms of to-day.(9) The beings whose sphere of
action was this Saturn, were at quite a different stage of evolution from
that of the present inhabitants of the earth who are perceptible to the
senses. In the first place there were beings there who had no physical
body like that of contemporary man. We must also guard against thinking of
man’s present physical embodiment, when mention is made of a “physical
body” in this connection. We should instead carefully distinguish between
the physical and the mineral body. A physical body is one governed by the
physical laws which are now observable in the mineral kingdom. Now man’s
present physical body is not only ruled by those physical laws, but is
also permeated with mineral matter. There can be no question as yet on
Saturn of a physical-mineral body of this kind. There is only a physical
bodily form, governed by physical laws; but these laws are manifested only
through the agency of heat.

Therefore the physical body is a fine, subtle, ethereal heat body; and the
whole of Saturn consists of such heat bodies. They are the beginnings of
the present physical-mineral human body. The latter has been formed out of
the former, because there have become incorporated with the original body
the more recently formed gaseous, liquid, and solid substances.

Among the beings of which we are now speaking, who, besides man, were
inhabitants of Saturn, there were, for instance, some which did not need a
physical body at all. The lowest principle of their nature was an etheric
or vital body. On the other hand, they had one principle higher than the
human principles. Man’s highest principle is the Spirit-Man (Atma); these
beings have one still higher. And between the etheric body and the
Spirit-Man they have all the principles described in this treatise which
are also found in man: the astral body, ego, Spirit-Self, and Life-Spirit.
Just as our earth is surrounded by an atmosphere, so too was Saturn; only
in this case the “atmosphere” was of a spiritual nature. It really
consisted of the beings just named and some others. Now there was constant
reciprocal action between the heat bodies of Saturn and the beings we have
described. The latter projected the principles of their being down into
the physical heat bodies of Saturn. And while there was no life in those
heat bodies themselves, the life of their neighbours was expressed in
them. They might be compared to mirrors; only there were reflected in
them, not the images of the living beings mentioned above, but their
conditions of life. Therefore, although nothing living could have been
discovered in Saturn itself, yet it had a vivifying effect on its
environment in celestial space, because it reflected back into space, like
an echo, the life which had been sent down into it. The whole of Saturn
appeared as a mirror of celestial life. The very high beings, whose life
was reflected by Saturn, are called in occult science “Lords of
Wisdom.”(10) Their activity on Saturn was not just beginning in the middle
period of that evolution, which has been described; in a certain way it
had even then already ceased. Before they could be in a position to
rejoice in the reflection of their own life from Saturn’s heat bodies they
had to make those bodies capable of producing such a reflection. Therefore
their activity began soon after the beginning of the Saturn evolution.
When this happened, the body of Saturn was still chaotic material, which
could not have reflected anything.

And in contemplating this chaotic matter, one has transferred himself, by
spiritual observation, to the beginning of the Saturn evolution. What is
to be observed there does not as yet bear anything of the later character
of heat. If we wish to describe it, we can only speak of a quality which
may be compared with the human will. From first to last it is nothing but
“Will.” Therefore it is an entirely spiritual condition that meets us
here. If we ask whence came this “Will,” we see it proceeding from the
effluence of exalted beings, who brought their evolution, by steps only to
be dimly conceived, up to such a height that when the Saturn evolution
began they were able to pour forth “Will” from their own being. When this
effluence had lasted a certain time, the activity of the Lords of Wisdom
described above was combined with this Will. Through this means the will,
which had hitherto had no attributes, gradually received the quality of
reflecting life back into celestial space. In occult science the beings
who found their happiness in pouring forth will, at the beginning of the
Saturn evolution are called the “Lords of Will.”(11)

After a certain stage of the Saturn evolution had been reached, through
the co-operation of will and life, begins the influence of other beings,
who are also within Saturn’s environment. These are the “Lords of
Motion.”(12) They have no physical or etheric body. Their lowest principle
is the astral body. When the Saturn bodies have acquired the capacity for
reflecting life, the qualities which have their seat in the astral bodies
of the Lords of Motion interpenetrate that reflected life. In consequence
of this, it appears as though expressions of feelings, emotions, and
similar psychic forces had been cast out of Saturn into celestial space.
The whole of Saturn appears like one animated being, manifesting
sympathies and antipathies. These psychic manifestations, however, are by
no means its own, but merely the activity of the Lords of Motion reflected
back.

This also having lasted for a certain period, there begins the activity of
yet other beings, that is, of the “Lords of Form.”(13) Their lowest
principle, too, is an astral body; but that body is at a different stage
of evolution from that of the Lords of Motion; whereas the latter
communicate only general manifestations of feeling to the reflected life,
the astral body of the Lords of Form operates in such a way that the
manifestations of feeling are flung out into cosmic space as if they came
from individual beings. It might be said that the Lords of Motion make the
whole of Saturn appear as an animated being. The Lords of Form separate
that life into individual living beings, so that Saturn now appears as a
conglomerate of such psychic beings.

Let us imagine, for the sake of illustration, a mulberry or blackberry,
made up, as it is, of small individual berries. In a similar manner, to
clairvoyant vision, Saturn, during the period of evolution now being
described, is made up of individual Saturn beings, which of course have
neither life nor soul of their own, but reflect the life and soul of its
denizens. Into this condition of Saturn now come beings whose astral body
is also their lowest principle, but who have brought it to such a high
stage of development that it operates in the same way as the present human
ego. Through these beings, the ego in the environment of Saturn looks down
on that planet, and imparts its nature to Saturn’s individual living
beings. Thus something is sent out from Saturn into cosmic space, which
has an effect similar to that of human personality in the present
conditions of life. The beings causing that effect are designated “Sons of
Personality.”(14) They confer on the Saturn bodies the appearance of
personality. Personality itself, however, is not present on Saturn, but
only, as it were, its reflected image, the shell or husk of personality.
The real personality of these spirits is in the environment of Saturn. As
a result of these Sons of Personality letting their essence stream back
from the Saturn bodies in the manner described, that fine substance is
bestowed on those bodies which has previously been described as heat. In
the whole of Saturn there is no subjectivity; but the Sons of Personality
recognize the image of their own subjectivity, when it streams out to them
from Saturn as heat.

When all this is taking place, the Sons of Personality are on the same
level on which man now stands. They are then passing through their “human”
period. In order to look at this fact with an unprejudiced eye, we must
imagine it possible for a being to be human without being in the exact
form in which man now exists. The Sons of Personality are “human beings”
on Saturn. They have as their lowest principle not the physical body, but
the astral body with the ego. Hence they cannot express the experiences of
their astral body in such physical and etheric bodies as those of
contemporary man; they not only _have_ an ego, however, but _are aware_ of
the fact, because the heat of Saturn brings that ego streaming back into
their consciousness. In fact, they are human beings under different
circumstances from those of earth.

As the Saturn evolution progressed, facts follow of a different kind from
those already related. Whereas everything hitherto was a reflection of
outer life and feeling, there now begins a kind of inner life. In the
Saturn world a life of light begins flickering here and there, and growing
dim again. A quivering glimmer is seen in some places, something like
flashes of lightning in others. The Saturn heat bodies begin to glimmer,
to sparkle, and even to emit rays. This stage of evolution having been
reached, there again arises the possibility for certain beings to develop
their activity. They are those known to occult science as “Sons of
Fire.”(15) Although these beings have an astral body, they are unable at
his particular stage of their existence to stir their own astral bodies;
they would not be capable of any feeling or emotion unless they could act
upon the Saturn heat bodies which have attained the stage of evolution
described. That action affords them the possibility of recognizing their
own existence from the effect which they produce. They cannot say to
themselves, “I am here”; but rather, “My environment causes me to be
here.” They have perceptions, and what they perceive is the light-effects
in Saturn which have been described. These are, in a certain manner, their
ego. This gives them a peculiar kind of consciousness. It is designated
“picture-consciousness.” It may be represented as having the nature of
human dream-consciousness, except that the degree of activity it enjoys
must be imagined as being very much greater than it is in human dreams,
and also that it is not a question of shadowy dream-pictures floating
hither and thither, but of pictures that have a real connection with the
play of light on Saturn.

During this reciprocal action between the Sons of Fire and the Saturn heat
bodies, the germs of the human sense organs begin their evolution. The
organs, by means of which contemporary man becomes cognizant of the
physical world, begin to shine in their first delicate ethereal outlines.
Human phantoms, displaying as yet nothing but the primeval light pictures
of the sense-organs, become discernible within Saturn to the clairvoyant
faculty of perception. Thus these sense-organs are the result of the
activity of the Sons of Fire; but they are not the only spirits who shared
in their creation. Other beings come upon the scene of Saturn at the same
time as these Sons of Fire,—beings so far advanced in their evolution that
they are able to make use of the germs of the human sense-organs for
beholding the cosmic events taking place in the Saturn life. They are the
“Lords of Love.”(16) If they were not there, the Sons of Fire could not
have the consciousness described above. They behold the events on Saturn
with a consciousness which makes it possible for them to convey these
events as pictures to the Sons of Fire. They themselves forego all the
advantages which might accrue to them from contemplating events on Saturn;
they renounce all joys and pleasures; they give up all these in order that
the Sons of Fire may come into possession of them.

A new period of Saturn’s existence succeeds these occurrences. Something
else is added to the play of light. If what here presents itself to
clairvoyant perception be reported, it may seem an absurdity to many.
Within Saturn, intermingled sensations of taste seem to be surging. Sweet,
bitter, sour, etc., are perceived throughout the interior of Saturn; while
without, in cosmic space, all this expresses itself as tone, as a kind of
music.

In the course of these processes there are again certain beings who find
it possible to develop activity on Saturn. These are the “Sons of
Twilight, or Life.”(17) They enter into reciprocal action with the forces
of taste surging up and down within Saturn. By this means their etheric or
vital body attains a state of such activity that it may be called a kind
of metabolism. They bring life into the interior of Saturn. Hence
processes of nutrition and excretion take place. This inner life makes it
possible for yet other beings to come into the planet, the “Lords of
Harmony.”(18) They bestow a dim kind of consciousness on the Sons of Life,
which is even more vague and dim than the dream-consciousness of
contemporary man. It is of the kind that now comes to man in dreamless
sleep, and is, indeed, of such a low order that it does not, so to speak,
“enter into his consciousness.” Yet it is there. It differs from waking
consciousness in degree and also in its nature. Plants, too, have this
dreamless-sleep consciousness at the present time. Even though it does not
bring about any perceptions of an external world, in the human sense of
the word, yet it regulates the life processes and brings them into harmony
with the processes of the outer world.

This adjustment cannot be perceived by the Sons of Life at the stage of
Saturn’s evolution now being described; but the Lords of Harmony perceive
it, and therefore it is they who really do the adjusting. All this life is
enacted within the human phantoms already described. To clairvoyant vision
they consequently appear animated; yet their life is only a semblance of
life. It is the life of the “Sons of Life,” who, so to speak, make use of
the human phantoms in order to manifest themselves.

Let us now turn our attention to the human phantoms with their semblance
of life. During the Saturn period described, their form is constantly
changing. Sometimes they bear one aspect, sometimes another. In the
further course of evolution, their forms become more definite, and
occasionally permanent. This is due to their becoming interpenetrated by
the action of the Spirits described at the beginning of the Saturn
evolution,—the Lords of Will (the Thrones). The consequence is that the
human phantom itself is endowed with the simplest, dullest form of
consciousness. This must be thought of as still duller than the
consciousness of dreamless sleep. Under present conditions, minerals have
that consciousness. It brings the inner being into harmony with the outer
physical world. On Saturn it is the Lords of Will who regulate that
harmony. And thus man appears as a copy of the Saturn life itself. That
life which is on a large scale on Saturn, is at this stage on a small
scale in man. Thus the first germ is prepared for that which is still only
a germ in contemporary man the “Spirit-Man” (Atma). This dull human will
(within Saturn) is manifested to clairvoyant faculty by effects which may
be compared with odours. Outside in celestial space, there is a
manifestation like that of a personality, which however is not directed by
an inner ego but is regulated from without, like a machine. Those who
regulate it are the Lords of Will.

It will become evident, from a survey of the foregoing, that starting from
the previously described middle period of the Saturn evolution, the
following steps of that evolution can be characterized by comparing their
effects with the sense-perceptions of the present time. It might be said
that the Saturn evolution manifests as heat; then a play of light is
added; then an appearance of taste and sound; finally something emerges
which manifests within the interior of Saturn as sensations of smell, and
without, as a human ego acting mechanically.

What have the Saturn revelations to say about what preceded the heat
condition? Now this is something that cannot be compared with anything
accessible to outer sense-perception. A state of things precedes the heat
condition, which contemporary man experiences only in his inner being.
When he gives himself up to ideas which he forms in his own soul, without
having any inducement brought to bear on him by an external impression,
then he has something within himself which cannot be perceived by any
physical sense, but is only accessible to the perception of the higher
clairvoyant vision. Manifestations precede the heat condition of Saturn,
which can only be perceived by a clairvoyant. Three such conditions may be
mentioned: pure psychic warmth, not outwardly perceptible; pure spiritual
light, which is outward darkness; and lastly, something of a spiritual
essence which is complete in itself, and needs no outer being in order to
become self-conscious. Pure, inner heat accompanies the appearance of the
Lords of Motion; pure, spiritual light, that of the Lords of Wisdom; pure
inner being is linked with the first emanation of the Lords of Will.

Thus, with the appearance of heat on Saturn, our evolution comes forth out
of the inner life of pure spirituality into outwardly manifested
existence. It will be particularly difficult for present-day consciousness
to accept this, if it must be said in addition that at the same time, with
the advent of the Saturn heat condition, what we call “Time” also makes
its first appearance. That is to say, the previous conditions have nothing
to do with time. They belong to that sphere which may be called, in occult
science, “duration.” Consequently, everything that is said in this book
about the conditions existing in the “Sphere of Duration” must be
understood in such a way that when expressions referring to time
conditions are used, they are only to be accepted for the sake of
comparison and explanation. That which, in a certain sense, precedes
“time,” can be expressed in human language only by terms which imply the
idea of time. Even if we are aware that the first, second, and third
Saturn conditions were not enacted “one after the other,” in the present
sense of the word, yet we cannot do otherwise than describe them one after
the other. Indeed, in spite of their duration or coexistence in time, they
are so dependent on one another that this very dependence may be compared
with sequence, in time.

This indication of the first conditions of evolution on Saturn also throws
light on any further questions that may be asked as to the origin of those
conditions. From the purely intellectual point of view, it is, of course,
quite possible, when dealing with the source of anything, to inquire after
“the source of the source.” But in the face of facts, this is not
possible. A comparison, however, will help us to realize this. If we find
ruts on a road we may ask, “To what are they due?” And the reply may be,
“To a carriage.” It may further be asked: “Whence did the carriage come?
Whither is it going?” An answer founded on fact is again possible. We may
then proceed to ask, “Who occupied the carriage? What purpose had the
person in using it? What was he, or she, doing?” At last, however, we
shall reach a point at which inquiry by means of facts finds its natural
limit; and on inquiring further we get away from the original questions.
We only continue the inquiry mechanically, as it were.

In such matters as the one brought forward as a comparison, it is easy to
see where facts demand the end of the inquiry. It is not so evident when
we are face to face with great cosmic questions. But as the result of
really exact observation, it will nevertheless be seen that all inquiry as
to origins must come to an end at the Saturn condition portrayed above.
For we have reached a region in which beings and events are no longer
justified by that from which they proceed, but by themselves.

As a result of the Saturn evolution it appears that the human germ
developed up to a certain point. It attained the low, dim state of
consciousness described above. We must not imagine that its evolution does
not begin until the last of the Saturn stages. The Lords of Will carry on
their work through all conditions. Only the result is most striking to
clairvoyant perception in the last period. There is nothing like a fixed
boundary between the activities of the several groups of beings. If it is
said that the Lords of Will work first, then the Lords of Wisdom, and so
on, it is not meant that they are working only at that time. They are
working all through the Saturn evolution; only their activity can best be
observed during the periods specified. The several groups have, as it
were, the leadership at those times.

Thus the whole Saturn evolution appears as a working out of what streamed
forth from the Lords of Will through the Lords of Wisdom, Motion, Form,
and the rest. Through this process those spiritual beings themselves
experience evolution. For instance, after they have received their life
reflected back from Saturn, the Lords of Wisdom stand on a different level
than before. The result of that activity exalts the faculties of their own
being. The consequence is that, on the completion of such activity,
something similar to human sleep comes upon them. To their periods of
activity in connection with Saturn succeed other periods, during which
they live, as it were, in other worlds. At these times their activity is
withdrawn from Saturn. On this account clairvoyant perception sees an
ascent and a descent in the Saturn evolution that has been described. The
ascent lasts until the formation of the heat condition. Then, with the
play of light, the ebb-tide sets in. When the human phantoms have assumed
form through the Lords of Will, the spiritual beings have also gradually
withdrawn themselves. The Saturn evolution dies away; as a phase of
evolution, it disappears. A kind of resting pause occurs.

The human germ at the same time enters upon a state of dissolution; not,
however, a state in which it passes away, but one like that of a plant
seed, resting in the earth in order that it may ripen into a new plant.
Thus the human germ reposes, until a new awakening, in the depth of the
cosmos. And by the time the moment of awakening has arrived, the spiritual
beings described above have acquired, under other conditions, the
faculties by means of which they can further advance the human germ. The
Lords of Wisdom have, in their etheric body, gained the faculty not only
of enjoying the reflection of life as they did on Saturn, but of pouring
life forth from themselves, and endowing other beings with it. The Lords
of Motion are now as far advanced as were the Lords of Wisdom on Saturn.
Then the lowest principle of their being was the astral body; they now
possess an etheric, or vital body; and in a corresponding degree the other
spiritual beings have reached a further stage of evolution. All these
spiritual beings are therefore able to work at the further evolution of
the human germ in a different way than on Saturn.

But the human germ was dissolved at the end of the Saturn evolution. In
order that the more highly evolved spirit-beings might resume their work
where they had left it off, the human germ must once more briefly
recapitulate the stages through which it had passed on Saturn. This, in
fact, is what appears to clairvoyant faculties of perception. The human
germ comes forth out of its retirement and begins to develop by its own
ability, by means of the forces which had been implanted within it on
Saturn. It comes forth out of the darkness as a “being of Will,” and
assumes the appearance of life, of soul qualities, etc., up to that
mechanical manifestation of personality which it possessed at the end of
the Saturn evolution.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

The second of the great periods of evolution that have been mentioned, the
“Sun period,” effects the raising of man’s being to a higher stage of
consciousness than that which it had attained on Saturn. Compared with
man’s present state of consciousness, the Sun condition might certainly be
termed “unconsciousness.” For it is approximately that condition which
contemporary man experiences during absolutely dreamless sleep. Or it
might be compared to the low degree of consciousness in which our
vegetable world now slumbers. For occult science there is no such thing as
unconsciousness, but only different degrees of consciousness. Everything
in the world is conscious.

In the course of the Sun evolution, the human being attains a higher
degree of consciousness through the incorporation within it of the
etheric, or vital body. Before this can take place the Saturn conditions
must be recapitulated in the manner described above. This recapitulation
has quite a definite meaning. That is to say, when the period of rest
which was spoken of in the foregoing statement has come to an end, that
which was formerly Saturn issues forth, out of “cosmic sleep,” as a new
celestial body, the Sun. But the conditions of evolution have meanwhile
changed. The spiritual beings, whose activity on behalf of Saturn we have
portrayed, have progressed onward into different conditions. Yet at first
the human germ appears on the newly formed Sun in the form it possessed on
Saturn. It has first of all so to transform the various stages of
evolution through which it has passed on Saturn that they may suit the new
conditions on the Sun. Consequently, the sun epoch begins with a
recapitulation of the occurrences on Saturn, adjusted to the changed
conditions of Sun life. Now when the human being has advanced so far that
the stage of evolution it reached on Saturn has been adapted to the Sun
conditions, the Lords of Wisdom already mentioned, begin to let the
etheric, or vital body, pour into the physical body. The higher stage
which man reaches on the Sun may therefore be characterized in this way:
the physical body, already formed in the germ-state on Saturn, is raised
to a second stage of perfection by becoming the vehicle of an etheric or
vital body. This last-named etheric body attains its first degree of
perfection on its own account during the Sun evolution. In order, however,
that the second degree of perfection for the physical and the first for
the etheric body may be reached, the intervention of still other
spirit-beings is necessary during the further course of the Sun life, in a
similar manner to that which has been described as taking place during the
Saturn stage.

When the Lords of Wisdom begin to stream forth their etheric body, the
Sun, previously dark, begins to shine. At the same time the first
appearances of inner activity are seen in the human germ; life has begun.
What had to be described as a semblance of life on Saturn now becomes
actual life. The influx lasts for a certain time, at the end of which an
important change for the human germ sets in—that is to say, it organizes
itself into two parts. Whereas up to this point the physical and etheric
bodies formed an intimately connected whole, the physical body now begins
to detach itself as a separate part. Yet even that separated physical body
is still pervaded by the etheric body. Therefore we have now to do with a
human being composed of two principles. One portion is a physical body
permeated by an etheric body; the other is an etheric body and nothing
else. This separation comes to pass, however, during a period of rest in
the Sun life. During this pause the shining, which had begun to appear,
dies away. The separation takes place during a “cosmic night,” as it were.
Yet this interval of rest is much shorter than the one between the Saturn
and Sun evolutions mentioned above. At the expiration of the rest period
the Lords of Wisdom work for a while on the two-fold being of man, just as
they had previously done on the undivided being. Then the Lords of Motion
begin their activity. They cause their own astral body to stream through
the human etheric body. By this means man acquires the capacity for
executing certain inner movements in the physical body. These movements
may be compared with those of sap in a plant of our own time.

The Saturn body consisted exclusively of heat substance. During the Sun
evolution that heat substance is condensed into a state which may be
compared with that of our present-day gas or steam. In occult science
“air” is the name ordinarily used for this condition. The first beginnings
of such a state are seen after the Lords of Motion have begun their
activity. The following spectacle is presented to clairvoyant
consciousness. Within the heat substance there appears something like
delicate formations which are set in rythmic motion by the forces of the
etheric body. These formations represent the human physical body at the
stage of evolution now attained by it. They are permeated through and
through with heat, and are also wrapped, as it were, in a heat envelope.
From a physical point of view, man’s nature may now be said to be composed
of heat structures with air forms embedded in them—the latter in regular
motion. Hence, if we wish to retain the foregoing comparison with a plant
of the present day, we must remember that it is not a solid plant organism
which we have to consider, but an air or gas form,(19) the movements of
which may be compared with the circulation of the sap in plants of to-day.

The evolution thus indicated continues. After a certain time another
interval of rest sets in; after this the Lords of Motion go on working
until their activity is supplemented by that of the Lords of Form. The
effect of the latter is that the gas structures, which before were
constantly changing, now assume lasting form. This, too, happens because
the Lords of Form cause their forces to flow in and out of the human
etheric body. When the Lords of Motion alone were acting on the gaseous
organisms, these were in perpetual motion, not keeping their form for an
instant. Now, however, they temporarily assume distinguishable shapes.
Again, after a certain period, there occurs a time of rest; and then once
more the Lords of Form continue their activity. But the conditions within
the Sun evolution are now entirely changed. For the point has been reached
when the Sun evolution has attained its zenith. This is the time at which
the Lords of Personality, who attained their human stage on Saturn, ascend
to a higher degree of perfection. They advance beyond the human stage;
they attain a form of consciousness which contemporary man does not yet
possess in his normal course of development on the earth. He will acquire
it when the earth—the fourth of the planetary stages of evolution—has
reached its goal and has entered upon the next planetary period. Then man
will not only perceive around him what his present physical senses enable
him to apprehend, but he will be able to see in images the inner psychic
conditions of the beings surrounding him. He will have a (clairvoyant)
picture-consciousness, although retaining complete self-consciousness.
There will be nothing dream-like or vague in his clairvoyance, but he will
perceive what is psychic, in pictures certainly, but in such a way that
these images will be the expression of realities, as physical colours and
sounds are now. Man, at present, can attain to this degree of clairvoyance
only through occult training, which will be treated later in this book.

Now this clairvoyance is attained by the Sons of Personality, as a gift of
their normal evolution, midway in the Sun period; and it is just on this
account that they become capable of acting on the newly formed etheric
body of man during the Sun evolution, in a way similar to that in which
they acted on the physical body on Saturn. Just as there the heat
reflected their own personality back to them, so do the gaseous organisms
now reflect back to them, in gleams of light, the images of their
clairvoyant consciousness. They clairvoyantly behold what is taking place
on the Sun. And this vision is by no means mere observation; it is as
though something of the force which mortals call love made itself felt in
the images which stream forth from the Sun. If a clairvoyant looks more
closely, he will find the cause of this phenomenon. Exalted beings have
blended their activity with the light that is being radiated from the Sun.
They are the Lords of Love (the Christian Seraphim) already mentioned.
Henceforth they act, together with the Sons of Personality, on the human
etheric, or vital body. By means of that activity the etheric body
advances a step farther along its path of evolution. It acquires the
capacity not only of transforming the gaseous forms within it, but of so
elaborating them that the first indications of a propagation of living
human beings appear. Emanations, so to speak, are driven out (as though
exuded) from the gaseous organisms that take on shapes resembling their
mother-forms.

In order to describe the further course of the Sun evolution, reference
must be made to a fact in the formation of worlds which is of the greatest
possible significance. It is this,—that by no means every being attains
the goal of its evolution in the course of one epoch; there are some that
fall short of that goal. Thus, during the Saturn evolution, not all of the
Sons of Personality actually reached the human stage for which, as
described above, they were destined; and just as little did all the
physical human bodies, developed on Saturn, attain the degree of maturity
which qualifies them to become vehicles of an independent etheric body on
the Sun. The consequence is that beings and organisms are present on the
Sun which are not in harmony with their environment. These must now make
up, during the Sun evolution, for what they failed to attain on Saturn.
The following may, therefore, be clairvoyantly observed during the Sun
period. When the Lords of Wisdom begin their pouring in of the etheric
body, the Sun body is to some extent darkened. Structures are mingled with
it which, properly speaking, belong to Saturn. They are heat organisms
which are not able to condense themselves into air in the proper manner.
These are the human beings left behind in the Saturn stage. They are not
able to become vehicles of a normally developed etheric body.

Now the heat substance of Saturn, which has thus been left behind, splits
into two parts on the Sun. One part is absorbed, as it were, by human
bodies, and henceforward forms a kind of lower nature within man’s being.
Thus something, which really corresponds to the Saturn stage, is
incorporated in the bodily part of man on the Sun. Now just as the Saturn
body of man made it possible for the Sons of Personality to raise
themselves to the human stage, the Saturn part of man performs the same
office on the Sun for the Sons of Fire. They raise themselves to the human
stage by letting their forces flow in and out of the Saturn part of man,
as did the Sons of Personality on Saturn.

This also happens during the middle period of the Sun evolution. The
Saturn part of the human being is then so far matured that with its help
the Sons of Fire (Archangeloi) are able to pass through their human stage.
Another part of the Saturnian heat substance becomes detached and attains
an independent existence alongside of and among the human beings on the
Sun. This forms a second kingdom by the side of the human kingdom, a
kingdom which develops on the Sun only a perfectly independent physical
body, like a heat body. In consequence of this, the fully evolved Sons of
Personality are not able to direct their activity toward any independent
etheric body in the manner before described. But there were also certain
Sons of Personality left behind at the Saturn stage who fell short of the
human stage. A bond of attraction exists between them and the second Sun
kingdom which has become independent. They must now act toward the
backward kingdom on the Sun as their advanced brethren did on Saturn in
regard to human beings. The latter had only their physical body perfected
here. But there is no possibility on the Sun for such a work on the part
of the backward Sons of Personality. They therefore separate themselves
from the Sun body, and form an independent celestial body outside it. This
body, accordingly, withdraws from the Sun, and from it the backward Sons
of Personality act on the beings of the second Sun kingdom which have been
described. In this way two world-organisms have been formed out of the one
which was previously Saturn. The Sun has now in its environment a second
celestial body, one which exhibits a kind of re-birth of Saturn, a new
Saturn. From this Saturn the character of personality is conferred on the
second Sun kingdom. Therefore within this kingdom we have to do with
beings which have no personality on the Sun itself. Yet they reflect back
to the Sons of Personality on the new Saturn the special personality of
those spirits. Clairvoyant consciousness is able to observe among the
human beings on the Sun, heat forces which act upon the regular course of
Sun evolution, and in which the sway of the spirits described as belonging
to the new Saturn is to be seen.

We notice the following facts about man’s being during the middle period
of the Sun evolution. It is divided into a physical body and an etheric
body. Within these the activity of the advanced Sons of Personality plays,
conjointly with that of the Lords of Love. Now part of the backward Saturn
nature is mingled with the physical body. In this plays the activity of
the Sons of Fire. We now see in everything which the Sons of Fire effect
on the backward Saturn nature, the forerunners of the present human
sense-organs. It has been shown how these Sons of Fire were already at
work on the elaboration of the sense-germs in the heat substance on
Saturn. The first outline of the present human glands is to be recognized
in what is accomplished by the Sons of Personality conjointly with the
Lords of Love (Seraphim).

But the above described is not the whole of the activity of the Sons of
Personality dwelling on the new Saturn. They not only extend their
activity to the second Sun kingdom mentioned above, but they also
establish a kind of connection between that kingdom and the human senses.
The heat substances of this kingdom flow in and out of the germs of the
human sense-organs. By this means the human being on the Sun acquires a
kind of perception of the lower kingdom situated outside him. That
perception is naturally a dim one, closely corresponding to the dull
Saturn-consciousness previously described. And it consists essentially of
varied heat effects.

Everything here described as taking place in the middle of the Sun
evolution continues for a certain definite period. Then a time of rest
again occurs. After that, things continue for a while in the same manner
up to a certain point of evolution, at which the human etheric body is so
far matured that a united action of the Sons of Life (Angeloi) and the
Lords of Harmony (Cherubim) can set in. To clairvoyant consciousness,
certain manifestations now appear within man’s being, which may be
compared with perceptions of taste, and which are made known externally as
sounds. A similar thing has already been stated about the Saturn
evolution. But here on the Sun the processes relating to human beings are
more from within and are full of more independent life.

The Sons of Life thereby acquire that dim picture-consciousness which the
Sons of Fire had already attained on Saturn. In this the Lords of Harmony
are their helpers. They really behold clairvoyantly what is now being
enacted within the Sun evolution; only they give up all the results of
that contemplation, and the enjoyment of those revelations of Wisdom that
arise from it, and allow them to stream, like splendid visions of
enchantment, into the dream-like consciousness of the Sons of Life. The
latter again work these pictures of their visions into the etheric body of
man, so that it attains higher and higher stages of development.

Again an interval of rest ensues, again everything is awakened from
“cosmic sleep”; and after further lapse of time the human being is
sufficiently advanced to use its own forces. These forces are the same
that were poured forth into man’s being by the “Thrones” during the latter
part of the Saturn period. This human being now evolves an inner life,
which, in its manifestation to clairvoyant consciousness, may be compared
with an inner perception of smell. But outside, in the direction of
celestial space, man’s being is manifested as a personality, though not
one directed by an inner ego. It appears more like a plant with the
character of a personality. It has been stated that at the end of the
Saturn evolution personality is manifested somewhat machine like. And just
as then, the first germ was developed of that which still remains a germ
in contemporary man,—the Spirit-Man (Atma),—so at this point there is
formed a similar first germ of the Life-Spirit (Budhi).

When all this has continued for some time, an interval of rest again
occurs. Following this, as in previous instances, the activity of the
human being is resumed for a while. Then conditions commence, which mark a
new intervention of the Lords of Wisdom. By its means human nature becomes
capable of feeling the first traces of sympathy and antipathy for its
environment. In all this there is still no real sensation but only a
premonition of sensation. For the inner life-activity, which might be
characterized in its manifestation as perception of smell, is revealed
externally as a kind of primitive language. If the human being is inwardly
conscious of a useful smell—or taste, or glitter,—it is manifested
outwardly by a sound; and the same thing happens, in a corresponding way,
with an inwardly uncongenial perception. Through all the events described,
the real meaning of the Sun evolution for the human being is indicated.
The human being has reached a higher stage of consciousness than that of
the Saturn period. It is the consciousness of sleep.

After a time, the point of evolution is also reached at which the higher
beings connected with the Sun stage must pass into other spheres in order
to work out that with which they have endowed themselves by their work on
the human being. A long period of rest sets in, one similar to that
between the Saturn and Sun evolutions. Everything that has been perfected
on the Sun passes into a condition which may be compared with that of a
plant when its powers of growth are resting in the seed. But just as those
powers of growth appear again in a new plant, so does everything that was
living on the Sun come forth again, after the period of rest, from the
cosmic depths, to begin a new planetary existence.

The meaning of such a term of rest, or “cosmic sleep,” will readily be
understood if we will only direct our spiritual vision to one of the
orders of beings already mentioned, for instance, to the Lords of Wisdom.
They were not far enough evolved on Saturn to be able to ray forth an
etheric body from themselves. They were only prepared for this after they
had gone through their experiences on Saturn. During the rest (Pralaya)
they transform into actual capacity what has been previously only prepared
within them. Thus on the Sun they are evolved far enough to pour forth
life from themselves, and to endow the human being with an etheric body of
its own.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

After the interval of rest, that which had previously been the Sun comes
forth again out of the “cosmic sleep.” That is, it again becomes
perceptible to the clairvoyant faculties which had been able to observe it
before, but had lost sight of it during the resting period. There are now
two points to be observed with regard to the newly appearing planetary
organism, which may, in occult science, be denoted the “Moon” (and this
must not be confused with that portion of it which is now the earth’s
moon). In the first place, that which had detached itself during the Sun
period as a “new Saturn” is once more within the new planetary body. This
Saturn has therefore been again united with the Sun during the term of
rest. Everything which was in the original Saturn reappears at first as
one world-organism. Secondly, the human etheric bodies which had been
formed on the Sun have been absorbed, during the resting period, by that
which constitutes the spiritual sheath of the planet. At this point of
time, therefore, they do not make their appearance united with the
corresponding physical human bodies, but these latter at first appear
separately. They contain everything which had been gained for them on
Saturn and the Sun, but they are without the etheric, or vital body.
Indeed, they cannot incorporate that etheric body within themselves
immediately, for it has also been passing, during the period of rest,
through an evolution with which they are not yet harmonized.

What occurs at the beginning of the Moon evolution, in order to bring
about this adjustment, is, first of all, another recapitulation of the
Saturnian events. The physical part of man passes once more through the
stages of the Saturn evolution, but under greatly altered circumstances.
On Saturn there were only the forces of a heat body at work within him;
now there are also those of the gas body that has been elaborated. These
latter forces do not, however, appear quite at the beginning of the Moon
evolution. Then everything appears as though man’s being were composed
only of heat substance, and as though the gas forces were lying dormant
within that substance. Then comes a time when the first indications of
these forces make their appearance; and lastly, in the latest period of
the Saturn recapitulation, man’s being has the same appearance as during
the animated period of his Sun existence. Yet, all life still proves to be
but a semblance of life.

Next occurs a period of rest similar to the short periods of rest of the
Sun evolution. Then the pouring in of the etheric body, for which the
physical body has now become ripe, begins anew. As in the case of the
recapitulation of Saturn, this influx takes place in three distinct
periods. During the second of these, man’s being is so far adjusted to the
new Moon conditions that the Lords of Motion are able to bring into play
the faculty they have acquired. This faculty consists in pouring the
astral body out of their own being into man’s being. They prepared
themselves for this work during the Sun evolution, and during the time of
rest between the Sun and Moon they transformed what had been prepared into
the faculty alluded to. This influx lasts for a while, then one of the
shorter intervals of rest sets in. After that the influx continues until
the Lords of Form begin their activity. In consequence of this pouring of
the astral body into the human being by the Lords of Motion, man acquires
his first psychic qualities. He begins to develop sensations in connection
with the processes which take place within, through the possession of an
etheric body, and which during the Sun evolution were still of a
plant-like nature; these processes now give him sensations of pleasure and
displeasure. But it is nothing more than a constant inner ebb and flow of
such pleasure and displeasure, until the Lords of Form intervene. Then
these changing feelings are so transformed that there appear in man’s
being what may be regarded as the first signs of wish or desire. The human
being strives after a repetition of what has once caused pleasure, and
tries to avoid what has been felt as antipathetic. However, since the
Lords of Form do not give up their own nature to the human being, but
merely let their forces stream in and out, desire is wanting in depth of
feeling and independence. It is directed by the Lords of Form, and has an
instinctive character.

The human physical body on Saturn was a heat body; on the Sun a
condensation into the gaseous state, or into “air,” has taken place. Now,
as during the Moon evolution, the astral element is rayed into the
physical part, which at a definite moment attains a further degree of
condensation and arrives at a state which may be compared with that of a
liquid substance of today. In accordance with the usage of occult science
this state may be called “water.” By water, is not meant only the water we
now have, but this term applies to every liquid form in existence. The
physical human body now gradually assumes a form composed of three kinds
of material structures. The densest is a “water body”; through this flow
air currents; and all of this again is permeated by manifestations of
warmth.

Now all the organisms do not attain full, adequate maturity during the Sun
stage. Therefore there are organisms to be found on the Moon which are
only at the Saturn stage, and others which have only reached the Sun
stage. In this way two other kingdoms arise by the side of the normally
evolved human kingdom. One consists of beings which have stopped short at
the Saturn stage, and therefore have only a physical body, which even on
the Moon is not yet able to become the vehicle of an independent etheric
body. This is the lowest of the Moon kingdoms. A second consists of beings
which have been left behind at the Sun stage, and which therefore do not
mature sufficiently on the Moon to take on an independent astral body.
These form a kingdom between the one just mentioned and the regularly
developed human kingdom.

But there is still something else taking place: The substances containing
only heat forces and those containing only air forces, permeate these
human beings. Thus it happens that the latter have within them on the Moon
both a Saturnian and a solar nature. In this way a kind of cleavage has
taken place in human nature; and by means of this cleavage, something very
momentous is called forth within the Moon evolution after the activity of
the Lords of Form has begun. The first evidences of a cleavage in the
cosmic body of the Moon becomes then apparent. One part of its substances
and beings separates from the other; two heavenly bodies are formed out of
one. One of these becomes the abode of certain higher beings who were
previously more closely connected with the undivided celestial body; while
the other is occupied by human beings, the two lower kingdoms described
above, and certain higher beings who did not pass over to the first
celestial body.

The first heavenly body, with the higher beings, appears like a reborn but
refined Sun; the other is really the new formation, the “old Moon.” The
regenerated Sun, on going out, takes with it only “heat” and “air” from
the substances which have been formed on the Moon; on what is left as the
Moon there is the liquid condition as well as the other two substances. As
a result of this separation the beings which have withdrawn with the
newborn Sun are not, in the first place, hampered in their further
evolution by the denser Moon beings. Thus they are able to continue their
own progress without hindrance. But thus they attain just that much more
power to act now upon the Moon beings from their Sun. And they in turn
also acquire thereby new possibilities of evolution. Most important of
all, the Lords of Form are still in union with them. These accentuate the
passions and the desire-nature, and this expresses itself gradually also
in a further condensation of the physical human body. What was previously
nothing but liquid in that body assumes a densely viscous form; and the
air-like and heat-like formations are correspondingly condensed. Similar
processes take place in the two lower kingdoms.

The result of the separation of the Moon-body from the Sun-body is that
the former bears the same relation to the latter as the Saturn-body once
did to the whole cosmic evolution surrounding it. The Saturn-sphere was
formed out of the body of the “Lords of Will” (the Thrones). From out its
substance emanated back into cosmic space everything which the
above-mentioned spiritual beings in the environment of Saturn experienced.
And this radiation by degrees awakened independent life, by means of the
subsequent processes. All evolution is due to the fact that independent
beings differentiate themselves from their environment, then this
environment like a reflection stamps itself upon those differentiated
beings who then evolve further independently. The Moon-body, having
likewise separated from the Sun-body, reflects at first the life of the
latter. If nothing further had then happened, the following cosmic process
would have taken place: There would have been a Sun-body in which
spiritual beings adapted to that body would have lived through their
experiences in the elements of heat and air.

Set over against this Sun-body would have been a Moon-body, in which other
beings of like nature with the Sun-beings would have undergone their
experiences in the conditions of heat, air, and water. The progress from
the Sun-incarnation to that of the Moon would have consisted in the
Sun-beings seeing their own life, as in a reflection of the events on the
Moon. They would have thus been able to enjoy it, something which they
were still incapable of doing during the Sun incarnation. But evolution
did not remain at this stage. Something occurred which was of the deepest
significance for all future evolution. Certain beings adapted to the
Moon-body, take possession of the element of will (the heritage of the
Thrones) which was at their disposal, and by its means develop a life of
their own, which takes shape independently of the Sun-life. Alongside of
those Moon experiences which are entirely under the influence of the Sun,
there arise independent Moon experiences, and, at the same time, states of
rebellion or mutiny against the Sun-beings. And the various kingdoms which
had arisen on the Sun and Moon, first and foremost of which was the
kingdom of man’s ancestors, are drawn into these conditions. In this way
the Moon-body contains within it, spiritually and materially, two kinds of
life: one that is in inner union with the Sun-life, and another which has
“fallen away” from it and goes its own way independently. This division
into a twofold life appears in all subsequent events of the Moon
incarnation.

What presents itself to clairvoyant consciousness in this period of
evolution may be realized from the following pictures. The whole basic
mass of the Moon is formed of a semi-animated substance which at one time
moves sluggishly, at another quickly. This is not yet a mineral mass like
the rocks and constituents of the earth upon which present day humanity
walks. We might call it a kingdom of plant-minerals, only we have to
imagine that the main body of the Moon consists wholly of this
plant-mineral substance, as the earth today consists of rock, soil and
other substances. Just as now we have towering masses of rock, so there
were then harder portions embedded in the Moon’s bulk; these may be
compared with hard wooden structures or formations of horn; and as plants
now arise out of mineral soil, so the surface of the Moon was covered and
penetrated by the second kingdom, consisting of a kind of plant-animal.
Their substance was softer than the general mass of the Moon, and more
mobile. This kingdom extended over the other, like a viscous sea.

Man himself at that time may be called animal-man. He had in his nature
the component parts of the other two kingdoms; but his being was
thoroughly interpenetrated by an etheric and an astral body, upon which
the forces of higher beings worked, issuing from the severed Sun. His form
was thus brought to greater perfection. While the Lords of Form were
giving him a form which adapted him to Moon life, the Sun-Spirits were
giving him a nature which lifted him beyond that life. He had the power of
ennobling his own nature with the faculties given him by these Spirits,—in
fact, of raising what was akin to the lower kingdoms to a higher level.

Seen spiritually, the events now under consideration may be described in
the following way. Man’s ancestor had been brought to greater perfection
by beings who had fallen away from the Sun kingdom. This improvement
extended especially to everything that could be experienced in the element
of water. Over that element the Sun-beings, who were rulers in the
elements of heat and air, had less influence. The consequence of this was
that in the organism of man’s ancestor two kinds of beings manifested
themselves. One part of the organism was wholly interpenetrated by the
influences of the Sun-beings. In the other part, the rebellious
Moon-beings were operative. Owing to this, the latter part was more
independent than the former. In the former there could only arise states
of consciousness in which the Sun-beings lived; in the latter there lived
a kind of cosmic consciousness, such as was typical on Saturn, only now
upon a higher level.

Man’s ancestor consequently felt himself to be an “image of the universe,”
whereas his “Sun-part” felt itself to be only an “image of the Sun.” The
two beings now came to a kind of conflict in man’s nature. A settlement of
this conflict was brought about by the influence of the Sun-beings,
through which the material organism which made the independent universal
consciousness possible, was rendered frail and perishable. From time to
time this part of the organism had to be thrown off. During and also some
time after the separation, man’s ancestor was a being wholly dependent on
the Sun influence. His consciousness became less independent; he lived
within it, entirely surrendered to Sun-life. Then the independent portion
of the Moon was once more renewed. After some time this process was
repeated. Thus man’s ancestor lived on the Moon in alternating conditions
of clearer and duller consciousness; and the alternation was accompanied
by a change of his being in a material respect. From time to time he laid
aside his Moon-body and resumed it later. Seen physically, great variety
appears in the kingdoms of the Moon above mentioned. The mineral-plants,
plant-animals and animal-men are differentiated into groups. This will be
understood when it is borne in mind that as a result of certain organisms
having been left behind at each of the earlier stages of evolution, forms
possessing most varied qualities took physical shape. There are formations
still retaining the qualities of the early Saturn period, others showing
those of the middle period and again others of the closing period of
Saturn. A similar statement is true of all the stages of the Sun
evolution.

As organisms belonging to the evolving planet are left behind, so is it
also with certain beings connected with that evolution. Through the
progress of evolution up to the Moon period, different grades of such
beings have already arisen. There are the Sons of Personality who not even
on the Sun have attained their human stage; but there are also others who
then caught up with evolving humanity. A number of the Sons of Fire, who
should have attained humanity on the Sun, fell behind. Now, just as during
the Sun evolution certain of the Sons of Personality withdrew from the Sun
and caused the reappearance of Saturn as a separate body, so it also
happens that in the course of the Moon evolution the beings described
above separate and form individual celestial bodies. So far we have
mentioned only the separation into Sun and Moon; but for the reasons
already given, other world-organisms detached themselves from the
Moon-body, which made its appearance after the great interval between the
Sun and Moon.

After a certain time we have a system of cosmic bodies the most advanced
of which, as can easily be seen, must be called the New Sun. And just such
a bond of attraction as was described above for the evolution as existing
between the backward Saturn kingdom and the Sons of Personality on the new
Saturn, is formed between each of these bodies and the corresponding
Moon-beings. It would take us much too far to follow up in detail all the
celestial bodies that come into existence. It must suffice to have pointed
out the reason why a succession of them arises by degrees from the
undivided world-organism which appears as Saturn at the beginning of human
evolution.

After the intervention of the Lords of Form, on the Moon, evolution
proceeds for a while in the manner described. At the end of this time
there is again a pause. While it lasts, the coarser portions of the three
Moon kingdoms are in a sort of resting state, but the finer parts, in
particular the human astral body, extricate themselves from those coarser
organisms. They reach a condition in which the higher forces of exalted
Sun-beings are able to act upon them very powerfully. After the interval
of rest they again interpenetrate those parts of man’s being which are
composed of the coarser substances. Because they received such powerful
forces during the pause—in a free state—they are able to make those
coarser substances ripe for the influence, after a certain time, of the
Sons of Personality and the Sons of Fire, who have progressed normally.

In the meantime these Sons of Personality have raised themselves to a
level upon which they possess the “consciousness of inspiration.” Here
they are not only able—as was the case with clairvoyant
picture-consciousness—to observe the inner state of other beings in
images, but to apprehend the inner nature itself of those beings, as
though in a spiritual tone-language. But the Sons of Fire have risen to
that height of consciousness possessed on the Sun by the Sons of
Personality. Thus both kinds of spirits are able to influence the now more
developed life of the human being. The Sons of Personality act on the
astral body, the Sons of Fire on the etheric body of this human being. The
astral body thereby acquires the character of personality. It now not only
experiences pleasure and pain, but relates them to itself. It has not
arrived at a complete ego-consciousness, that says to itself, “I am here”;
but it feels itself upheld and protected by other beings in its
environment. When looking, as it were, up to these, it is able to say,
“This, my environment, keeps me alive.”

The Sons of Fire now work upon the etheric body. Under their influence the
movement of forces in that body becomes more and more an inner function of
life. What then results finds physical expression in a circulation of
fluids and in phenomena of growth. The gaseous substances have become
condensed into liquid substances; we may speak of a kind of nutritive
process, in the sense that what is received from without becomes
transformed and elaborated within. Perhaps if we think of something
intermediate between nutrition and respiration in the present meaning of
the terms, we may get an idea of what then happened in this respect. The
nutritive matter was drawn from the animal-plant kingdom by the human
being. We must think of those animal-plants as floating or swimming—or
even lightly attached in an element surrounding them, as the lower animals
of the present time live in water, or land animals in air. Yet the element
is neither water nor air in the present sense, but something midway
between the two, a kind of thick vapour in which most heterogeneous
substances move hither and thither, as though dissolved in currents
flowing in all directions.

The animal-plants appear only as condensed regular forms of this element,
often differing little physically from their environment. The process of
respiration exists alongside of the process of nutrition. It is not as it
is upon the earth, but like a drawing in and a streaming out of heat. To
clairvoyant observation it is as though during those processes, organs
opened and closed, through which a warming current passed in and out, and
through which airy and watery substances were also carried in and out. And
since man’s nature at this stage of evolution already possesses an astral
body, respiration and nutrition are accompanied by feelings, so that a
sort of pleasure ensues when materials which promote the upbuilding of
man’s nature are taken in from without. Aversion is caused if injurious
substances flow in, or even if they merely approach.

Just as during the Moon evolution the respiratory and the nutritive
processes were closely connected, as has been described, so was the
process of perception in close connection with reproduction. No immediate
effect was produced on any of the senses by the things and beings in the
environment of Moon humanity. Perception was, on the contrary, of such a
nature that the presence of things and beings called up pictures in the
dull, dreamy consciousness. These pictures were much more closely
connected with the real nature of the environment than the present
sense-perceptions, which record in colour, sounds, smell etc., so to
speak, only the outside of things and beings.

In order to get a clearer idea of the human consciousness on the Moon, let
us imagine human beings immersed in the vaporous environment described
above. Most varied processes take place in this vapour-element. Materials
unite, substances break asunder one from the other; some parts become
condensed, others rarified. All this happens in such a way that human
beings do not see or hear anything of it directly, but it calls up
pictures in their consciousness. These may be compared with the images of
our present dream-consciousness, as for instance when an object falls to
the ground, and a sleeping man does not discern what has really happened
but perceives it in the form of a picture; let us say he thinks that a
shot has been fired. However, the pictures in the Moon-consciousness are
not arbitrary, as is the case with such dream-pictures; although they are
symbols, not representations, yet they correspond with outer events. A
definite outer event can call up only one definite picture. The Moon-being
is therefore in a position to regulate his conduct by means of these
pictures, as present-day man does by means of his perceptions. We must
nevertheless be careful to notice that conduct, regulated by perception,
is governed by choice whereas action, under the influence of the pictures
we have described, takes place as if prompted by some dim instinct.

It is by no means as though only outer physical processes become
perceptible through this picture-consciousness, but it is through the
pictures that the spiritual beings, who rule behind the physical facts
together with their activities, become likewise perceptible. Thus the
Lords of Personality become visible, so to speak, in the phenomena of the
animal-plant kingdom; the Sons of Fire appear behind and in the
mineral-plant beings; and the Sons of Life appear as beings whom man is
able to imagine unconnected with anything physical,—whom he sees, as it
were, as etheric-psychic organisms.

Though these pictures of the Moon-consciousness were not representations,
only symbols of outer things, they nevertheless had a much more important
effect on the inner nature of man than the images now caused by
perception. They were able to set the whole inner being into motion and
activity. The inner processes were moulded in conformity with them. They
were genuine formative forces. Man’s being became what those formative
forces made it; it became, to a certain extent, a representation of the
events of its consciousness.

The further evolution progresses in this manner, the more it results in a
deeply incisive change in man’s being. The power issuing from the pictures
in the consciousness gradually becomes unable to extend over the whole
human bodily frame, which divides into two parts, or two natures. Members
are formed subject to the shaping influence of the picture-consciousness,
and they become to a great extent a copy of that life of imagination in
the way just described. Other organs escape such an influence. They are,
as it were, too dense, too much determined by other laws, to conform
themselves to the picture-consciousness. These organs withdraw from the
human influence; but they come under another, that of the exalted
Sun-beings themselves. A period of rest, however, is first seen to precede
this stage of evolution. During this pause, the Sun-Spirits are gathering
force to influence the Moon-beings under quite new circumstances.

After this term of rest, man’s being is distinctly divided into two
natures. One of these is withdrawn from the independent action of the
picture-consciousness; it assumes a more definite form, and comes under
the influence of forces which, though issuing from the Moon body, are only
called forth there through the influence of the Sun-beings. This part of
the human being shares more and more in the life which is stimulated by
the Sun: the other part rises, like a kind of head, out of the first one.
It is flexible, can move itself, and takes shape in conformity with the
life of dull human consciousness. Yet the two parts are closely connected
with each other; they send one another their vital fluids, and members
extend from one into the other.

An important harmony is now attained by the working out, during the time
in which all this happened, of such a relation between the Sun and Moon as
is in keeping with the aim of this evolution. It has already been
intimated in a former passage how the advancing beings throughout their
stages of evolution, shape their celestial bodies from out the general
cosmic mass. They emanate, as it were, the forces which govern the
aggregation of the substances. The Sun and Moon have thus separated from
each other, as was necessary for the preparation of the right abodes for
their respective beings. But this regulation of material and its forces by
the spirit is carried very much farther. The beings themselves condition
as well, certain movements of the heavenly bodies, and the definite
revolutions of them around each other. In consequence, those bodies occupy
changing positions with regard to each other. And if the position or
situation of one body relative to another is altered, the effects of their
respective inhabitants upon each other also change. So it is with the Sun
and Moon. Through the movement of the Moon around the Sun, which by this
time had come about, the human beings come alternately at one time more
into the sphere of the Sun’s influence, at another they are turned away
from it and are then thrown back more on their own resources. The movement
is a consequence of the “fall” of certain Moon-beings, as already
described, and of the settlement of the conflict which was thereby brought
about. It is the physical expression of the new relation of spiritual
forces created by this falling away. As a consequence of the rotation of
the one sphere round the other the beings inhabiting these heavenly bodies
experience the alternating conditions of consciousness above described. We
may put it thus, that the Moon alternately turns its life toward the Sun
and away from it. There is a Sun time and a planetary time and during this
latter, the Moon-beings develop on the side of the Moon which is turned
away from the Sun.

It is true however, that so far as the Moon is concerned, in addition to
the movement of the celestial bodies, still something else must be
considered. That is to say, clairvoyant consciousness, on looking back,
can plainly see the Moon-beings wandering around their own planet, at
quite regular periods of time. Thus at certain times they seek localities
where they can give themselves up to the Sun influence; at other periods
they wander to places where they are not subject to that influence, and
where they can, as it were, reflect upon their own being.

In order to complete the picture of these events, we must further notice
that the Sons of Life attain their human stage during this period. Man’s
senses, the beginnings of which already existed on Saturn, cannot even
yet, on the Moon, be used for his own perception of external objects. But
at the Moon stage those senses become the instruments of the Sons of Life,
who make use of them in order to perceive through them. These senses,
belonging to the physical human body, enter thereby into reciprocal
relations with the Sons of Life, by whom they are not only used but
improved.

Through the changing relations of the Sun, there appears now in the human
being himself, as has been already indicated, a change in the conditions
of life. Things so shape themselves that when the human being is dominated
by the Sun influence, he devotes himself more to the Sun life and its
phenomena than to himself. At such times he feels the greatness and glory
of the universe; he, so to speak, absorbs them. Those very exalted beings
who dwell on the Sun then influence the Moon, which again influences human
beings. This influence, however, does not extend to the whole of man, but
chiefly to those parts which have thrown off the influence of their own
picture-consciousness. It is then that especially the physical and the
etheric bodies attain a definite size and form. On the other hand, the
phenomena of consciousness retire into the background. But when the human
being is turned away from the Sun, it is occupied with its own nature; an
inner activity begins, especially in the astral body while the outer form,
on the contrary, becomes more insignificant, and less perfect in form.

Thus during the Moon evolution there are two states of consciousness to be
clearly distinguished, alternating with each other; duller during the Sun
period and clearer during the time when life is left more to its own
resources. The first state though duller, is on the other hand more
unselfish; man then lives a life more devoted to the outer world, to the
universe. It is an alternation of states of consciousness, which on one
hand may be compared with the alternation of sleeping and waking in
present day humanity, as well as with his life between birth and death, on
the other hand with the more spiritual existence between death and a new
birth. The awakening on the Moon, when the Sun period gradually ceases,
might be described as something intermediate between the awakening of
contemporary man each morning, and his being born. And in the same way the
gradual dulling of consciousness at the approach of the Sun period
resembles a condition midway between falling asleep and dying. For on the
old Moon there was not yet such a consciousness of birth and death as man
now possesses. Man gave himself up to the enjoyment of the universe in a
kind of Sun life. During this period he was carried beyond his own life;
he lived more spiritually. We can only attempt an approximate description,
by way of comparison, of what man experienced during such times. He felt
as though the forces of the universe were streaming into him, pulsing
through him. He felt as though intoxicated with the harmonies of the
universe which he thus experienced.

As such times his astral body was as though set free from the physical
body; also part of the etheric body went with it out of the physical body.
This organism, consisting of the astral and etheric bodies, was like a
delicate, wonderful musical instrument, from the strings of which the
mysteries of the universe reverberated. And the members of that part of
the human being on which consciousness had but slight influence were
shaped in accordance with the harmonies of the universe. For the
Sun-beings worked in those harmonies. Thus this part of man was given its
form by the spiritual sounds of the universe; and at the same time the
alternation between the clearer state of consciousness during the Sun
period, and the duller one, was not so abrupt as was that between the
waking state and that of absolutely dreamless sleep in contemporary man.
The picture-consciousness was not so clear as the present waking
consciousness; but on the other hand, the other consciousness was not so
dull as the dreamless sleep of the present day.

Thus the human being had a conception, even though dim, of the play of the
cosmic harmonies in his physical body and in that part of his etheric body
which had remained united with the physical body. During the time when, so
to speak, the Sun did not shine on humanity, the picture-concepts replaced
these harmonies in man’s consciousness. There was then a revival
particularly of those parts of the physical and etheric bodies which were
under the immediate power of consciousness. On the other hand, other parts
of the human being, now not exposed to the formative forces streaming from
the Sun, underwent a kind of hardening and drying up process. When the Sun
period again drew near, the old bodies decayed; they fell away from the
human being, and as though from the grave of his old bodily form, the
rejuvenated human being appeared, who even in this new form, was still
uncomely.

A renewal of the life-process had taken place. By the operation of the
Sun-beings and their harmonies, the new-born body shaped itself again in
its perfection, and the process described above was repeated. Man felt
that renewal as if it were the putting on of new garments. The kernel of
his being had not passed through an actual birth or death; it had only
passed from a spiritual tone-consciousness, in which it was given over to
the outer world, to one of a more inner nature. It had sloughed off its
skin. The old body had become useless; it was thrown off and renewed. This
then more clearly describes what has been characterized above as a kind of
reproduction, and which as has been said, is closely connected with
perception. Man’s being has brought forth his likeness with respect to
certain parts of the physical and etheric bodies. However a being totally
different from the parent being does not come into existence, but the
kernel of the parent-being passes over into the offspring. No new being
arises, but the same one in a new form.

Thus the Moon human being experiences a change of consciousness. When the
Sun period draws near, his pictured images become dimmer and dimmer, and
blissful devotion takes possession of him; the harmonies of the universe
resound in his peaceful inner being. Toward the end of this time the
images of the astral body begin to be animated; he begins to be more
conscious of himself and able to experience sensation. Man experiences
something like an awakening from the bliss and tranquility in which he was
wrapped during the sun period.

At the same time another important experience begins. With this new
clearing up of the picture-consciousness the human being sees himself as
though enveloped in a cloud, which has descended upon him like a being
from the cosmos.

And he feels that being as something belonging to him, as a completion of
his own nature; he feels it as that which gives him existence, as his
“ego.” That being is one of the Sons of Life. Man feels toward him
somewhat like this: “I have lived in this being, even when I was given up
to the glory of the universe in the Sun period,—only then he was not
visible to me; now he is.” And it is also this Son of Life from whom
proceeds the force which, during the Sunless period, acts upon the body of
man. Then when the Sun period again approaches, man feels as though he
himself became one with the Son of Life. Even if man does not see him, he
nevertheless feels closely united with him.

Now the connection with the Sons of Life was such that not every
individual human being had a Son of Life to himself, but an entire group
of people felt such a being belonging to them. Thus people on the Moon
lived segregated into groups, and each group felt in one of the Sons of
Life its common “group-ego.” The etheric body of each particular group had
a specific form, in this way these groups differed from each other. But as
the physical bodies shaped themselves in conformity with the etheric
bodies, the differences of the latter were also stamped upon the former;
and the individual groups of human beings appeared as so many species of
people. As the Sons of Life looked down on the human groups belonging to
them, they saw themselves to a certain extent reproduced in manifold
individual human beings. And therein they felt their own egohood. They, so
to speak, mirrored themselves in man. This was indeed the mission of the
human senses at that time. It has already been shown that the senses did
not as yet transmit objective perceptions. But they reflected the nature
of the Sons of Life. What those Sons of Life perceived through reflection,
gave them their “ego-consciousness.” What was aroused in the human astral
body by this reflection was the dull dim pictures of the
Moon-consciousness. By thus acting conjointly and reciprocally with the
Sons of Life, the human beings laid the foundations of the nervous system
within their physical bodies. The nerves appear, one might say, as
continuations of the senses, directed inwardly into the human body.

It is evident, from this description, in what manner the three kinds of
Spirits, those of Personality, of Fire, and of Life, act upon
Moon-humanity. If we look back upon the most important, namely the middle
period of the Moon evolution, we may say that the Sons of Personality are
at that time implanting in the human astral body independence and the
character of personality. It is owing to this fact that man can turn his
attention inwards and work upon himself during those times when the Sun is
not shining upon him.

The Sons of Fire act upon the etheric body in so far as the independent
formation of the human being becomes imprinted upon it. Through their
means it comes to pass that human beings are again conscious of
themselves, as such, every time the body is renewed. Thus a kind of memory
is bestowed on the etheric body through the Sons of Fire.

The Sons of Life act on the physical body in such a way that it is able to
become the expression of the astral body which has now become independent.
They thus make it possible for the physical body to become a physiognomic
copy of its astral body. On the other hand, higher spiritual beings, in
particular the Lords of Form and of Motion, reach down into the physical
and etheric bodies, as far as these are developing during the Sun periods,
regardless of the independent astral body. Their intervention comes from
the Sun, in the manner described above.

Under the influence of such facts, the human being gradually matures to a
point where it can develop within itself the germ of the Spirit-Self just
as during the second half of the Saturn evolution it developed the germ of
the Spirit-Man and on the Sun that of the Life-Spirit. Thereby all the
Moon conditions are changed. Human beings have not only become more noble
and refined through successive transformations and renewals, but they have
also gained in power. For this reason the picture-consciousness was more
and more maintained during the Sun periods. It also gained influence in
the formation of the physical and etheric bodies, which hitherto had been
formed entirely by the action of the Sun-beings.

What took place on the Moon through human beings and the Spirits connected
with them became more and more like that which had formerly been effected
by the Sun with its higher beings. The consequence was that those
Sun-beings were able more and more to concentrate their forces on their
own evolution. By this means the Moon became, after a time, mature enough
to be again re-united with the Sun. To spiritual vision, these occurrences
take place as follows: The “rebellious Moon-beings” had been gradually
overcome by the Sun-beings and compelled to submit to them in such a
manner, that their activities became a part of and subordinate to the
activities of the Sun-beings. It is true that this happened only after the
lapse of long ages during which the Moon periods had become shorter and
shorter, and the Sun periods longer and longer. Now there again comes an
evolution during which the Sun and Moon form one world-organism. By this
time the physical human body has become quite etheric.

When it is said that the physical body has become etheric, it must not be
imagined that under such circumstances there is no existing physical body.
What was formed as a physical body during the Saturn, Sun, and Moon
periods, still exists. It is important to recognize the physical element
even where it is not externally and physically manifested. It may also be
present in such a way that it shows outwardly an etheric or even an astral
form. We must distinguish between the outward appearance and the inner
law. What is physical may become etheric and astral, at the same time
retain in itself the physical law. That is the case when the physical body
of man has attained a certain degree of perfection on the Moon. It becomes
etheric in form.

But when clairvoyant observation, which can perceive such things, is
directed toward an etheric body of this kind, that body is seen to be
ruled by physical, not etheric, laws. The physical element has in this
case been taken into the etheric world, there to rest and to be nurtured
as though in a mother’s tender care. Later it again emerges in a physical
form, but at a higher stage. If Moon-humanity had kept its physical body
in its coarse physical form, the Moon would never have been able to unite
itself with the Sun. By accepting the etheric form, the physical body
becomes more closely related to the etheric body, and by this means can
again be more closely interpenetrated with those parts of the etheric and
astral bodies which had been forced to withdraw from it during the Sun
periods of the Moon evolution. Man, who appeared as a being with a
two-fold nature during the separation of Sun and Moon, again becomes an
undivided being. The physical becomes more psychic. Therefore the psychic
also becomes more closely connected with the physical.

Now the Sun-Spirits, into whose immediate sphere this undivided human
being has entered, are able to act upon it in quite a different manner
from their previous influence from without on the Moon. Man is now in a
more psycho-spiritual environment. Owing to this, the Lords of Wisdom are
able to effect something momentous. They imbue and inspire him with
wisdom. He thereby becomes in a certain sense an independent soul. And to
the influence of these beings is added that of the Lords of Motion. They
act principally on the astral body, so that under their influence it
produces psychic activity, and an etheric body filled with wisdom. The
latter is the foundation of that which has been described above as the
rational or intellectual soul in contemporary man, whereas the astral
body, inspired by the Lords of Motion, is the germ of the sentient soul.
And because all this is effected in man’s being in his progressed
condition of independence, these germs of the rational and sentient soul
appear as the expression of the Spirit-Self. In this connection the
mistake must not be made of thinking that at this period of evolution the
Spirit-Self was something separate from the intellectual and sentient
souls. The latter are only the expression of the Spirit-Self, which
signifies their higher unity and harmony.

It is especially significant that the Lords of Wisdom intervene at this
period in the manner described. For they do this not only with regard to
humanity but also for the benefit of the other kingdoms which have been
elaborated on the Moon. Upon the reunion of Sun and Moon these lower
kingdoms are drawn into the Sun sphere. Everything in them which was
physical becomes etheric. There are, therefore, minela-plants and
plant-animals now in the Sun, just as there is humanity there. But those
other creatures are still endowed with their own laws of being. They
therefore feel like strangers in their environment. They came upon the
scene with a nature but little in harmony with their surroundings. But as
they have become etheric, the activity of the Lords of Wisdom may also
extend to them. Everything which has come from the Moon into the Sun now
becomes pervaded with the forces of the Lords of Wisdom. Hence what is
developed out of the Sun-Moon organism during this period of evolution may
be called in occult science the “Cosmos of Wisdom.”

When, therefore, after an interval of rest, our Earth system appears as
the successor of this Cosmos of Wisdom, all the beings newly emerging on
the earth, developing out of their Moon-germs, prove to be filled with
wisdom. And this is the reason why earthly man when contemplating the
things around him, is able to discover the wisdom concealed in their inner
nature. The wisdom in each leaf of a plant, in every bone in animal and
man, in the marvelous structure of the brain and heart, fills us with
admiration. If man requires wisdom to understand things, and therefore
gathers wisdom from them, this shows that there is wisdom in the things
themselves. For however much man might have striven to understand things
by means of wise perceptions, he could not draw wisdom from them unless it
had first been put into them. He who tries by means of wisdom to
understand things, assuming at the same time that wisdom had not first
been concealed within them, may just as reasonably believe that he can
empty water out of a glass into which it has not first been poured. As
will be shown later in this book, the Earth is the “old Moon” risen again.
And it appears as an organism full of wisdom, because it was permeated by
the Lords of Wisdom and their forces during the epoch that has been
described.

It will easily be understood that this description of the Moon condition
could take account only of certain temporary forms of evolution. It was
necessary to pause at certain things in the progress of events, and single
them out for delineation. It is true that this kind of description gives
only isolated pictures, and it may be deplored for this reason, that in
the foregoing account the evolutionary scheme was not brought down to a
system of precise and definite concepts. But in the face of such an
objection it may be well to point out that the description was
intentionally given in less clearly defined outlines. For it is not of so
much consequence here to give speculative ideas and to construct theories
as to represent what really passes before the spiritual eyes of
clairvoyant consciousness, when looking back upon these events. With
regard to the Moon evolution this cannot be done in such sharp and
definite outlines as are characteristic of earthly perceptions. In the
Moon period we are mainly concerned with variable, changing impressions,
with shifting, moving pictures and their transitory stages. We have,
moreover, to bear in mind that we are contemplating an evolution
continuing through long, long periods of time, and that out of all that
presents itself, it is possible to seize upon only momentary pictures and
fix them for delineation.

The Moon period actually reached its highest point at the time when the
astral body, implanted in man, had brought him so far along the
evolutionary path that his physical body afforded the Sons of Life the
possibility of attaining their human stage. Man had then attained all that
this epoch could give him for himself, for his inner nature on the upward
path. The following, or second half of the Moon evolution may therefore be
termed the “ebb-tide,” or wane. But even during this ebb-tide one sees a
most important thing taking place with regard to man’s environment, and
even with regard to himself. It is now that wisdom is implanted in the
Sun-Moon body. It has been shown that during the ebb-tide the germs of the
intellectual and sentient souls are implanted. But the development of
these, as well as of the consciousness-soul and with it the birth of the
“Ego”—the free self consciousness—does not ensue until the Earth period.

At the Moon stage the intellectual- and sentient-souls have as yet no
appearance of being used by human beings as a means of expression; they
appear rather as instruments of those Sons of Life who belong to humanity.
Were we to describe the feeling of the human dweller on the Moon in this
respect, we should have to say that he experiences the following: “The Son
of Life lives in and through me; he surveys through me the environment of
the Moon; in me he reflects upon the things and beings of that
environment.” The Moon human being feels himself overshadowed by the Son
of Life, and looks upon himself as the instrument of that higher being.
During the time of the separation of Sun and Moon he felt a greater
measure of independence when the Sun was turned away from him; but at the
same time he also felt as though the ego belonging to him, which had
disappeared from the picture-consciousness during the Sun period, now
became visible. It was, for Moon-humanity, what may be described as a
change in the states of consciousness, so that the Moon-being had this
feeling: “In the Sun period my ego wafts me away into higher regions, into
the presence of exalted beings, and when the Sun disappears it descends
with me into lower worlds.”

The actual Moon evolution was preceded by a preparatory stage. In a
certain way the Saturn and Sun evolutions were recapitulated. Now, after
the reunion of Sun and Moon, during what we have termed the ebb-tide, two
epochs may be distinguished one from the other. In the course of these,
even physical condensation occurs to a certain degree. Therefore
psycho-spiritual conditions of the Sun-Moon organism alternate with others
of a more physical nature. In such physical epochs human beings and those
of the lower kingdoms appear as though they were preparing, in stiff not
yet self-reliant forms, the type of what they were to become in a more
independent manner during the Earth period. We may therefore speak of two
preparatory epochs in the Moon evolution, and of two others during the
ebb-tide. In occult science such epochs may be termed cycles.(20) In that
period which follows the two preparatory epochs, and precedes those of the
ebb-tide—that is to say, during the time of the separation of the
Moon—three epochs can again be distinguished. The middle period is the
time when the Sons of Life reached the human level. It is preceded by a
period in which all conditions lead up to that crowning event; and it is
followed by one which may be called a time of adaptation and of perfecting
the new creations.

In this way the middle period of the Moon evolution is again divided into
three epochs, which, with the two preparatory periods and the two during
the ebb-tide make up seven Moon cycles, or rounds. It may therefore be
said that the whole Moon evolution passes through seven cycles, or rounds.
Between them are intervals of rest, which have been mentioned repeatedly
in the above description. Yet we can approach a true concept of these
facts only if we do not think of the changes between the periods of
activity and those of rest, as sudden ones. For instance, the Sun-beings
little by little withdraw their activity from the Moon. A time begins for
them which, viewed from without, appears to be their resting period,
whereas in reality an intense, independent activity still continues on the
Moon itself. Thus the active period of one kind of being repeatedly
extends into the resting time of another. If we take account of such
things we may speak of a rhythmic ascent and descent of forces in cycles.
Indeed, similar divisions are to be recognized even within the seven Moon
cycles mentioned. We may then call the whole Moon evolution one great
cycle, and the seven divisions, or rounds, within it, “small” cycles; and
again, the separate parts of these, “smaller” cycles. This systematic
arrangement into seven times seven divisions is also noticeable in the Sun
evolution and can be indicated during the Saturn period. Yet we must bear
in mind that the boundaries between the divisions are somewhat obliterated
even in the Sun, and still more so in Saturn. These boundaries become more
and more defined the nearer evolution advances to the Earth period.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

At the close of the Moon evolution, which has been sketched in the
foregoing pages, all the beings and forces connected with it enter upon a
more spiritual form of existence. This is on quite a different plane from
that of the Moon period, and also from that of the Earth evolution which
follows. A being possessed of faculties so highly developed as to enable
him to perceive all the details of the Moon and Earth evolutions need not
necessarily be able to see what happens during the interval between the
two periods. For one possessing such vision, beings and forces would, at
the end of the Moon period, disappear, as it were, into nothingness; and
after an interval they would issue forth again from the dusky twilight of
the cosmic depths. Only a being endowed with considerably higher faculties
would be capable of following up the spiritual events which take place
during this interval.

When this interval is over, the beings who took part in the evolutionary
processes on Saturn, Sun, and Moon reappear endowed with new faculties.
Beings of a higher order than man have, by their former achievements, won
the power of bringing man’s evolution forward to a point at which he would
be able to unfold in himself, during the Earth period, a form of
consciousness which stands a step higher than the picture-consciousness he
had possessed during the Moon period. But man must first be prepared to
receive this gift.

During the Saturn, Sun, and Moon evolutions, he incorporated within his
being the physical, etheric, and astral bodies. But those bodies were only
endowed with such faculties and powers as enabled them to have a
picture-consciousness; the organs and forms by means of which they could
attain to a cognizance of a world of outer sense-objects, such as is
requisite for the Earth stage, were still wanting. Just as the new plant
unfolds only what is concealed in the seed originating from the old plant,
so do the three principles of man’s nature appear, at the beginning of the
new stage of evolution, with such forms and organs as will enable them to
develop only a picture-consciousness. It is necessary first to prepare
them for the unfolding of a higher state of consciousness.

This takes place in three preliminary stages. During the first, the
physical body is raised to a level at which it becomes able to undergo the
necessary remodeling which is to serve as a basis for consciousness of
outer objects. This is one of the preliminary stages of the actual earth
evolution, and may be called a recapitulation of the Saturn period on a
higher level. For during this period, as during the Saturn period, higher
beings are working only on the physical body. When the latter has
progressed far enough in its evolution, all beings must first again pass
into a higher form of existence before the etheric body can also progress.
The physical body must, as it were, be recast, in order to be able, in its
remodeled state, to receive the more highly constituted etheric body.
After this interval devoted to a higher form of existence, a kind of
recapitulation of the Sun evolution on a higher level, occurs for the
purpose of shaping the etheric body. And after another interval, a similar
thing occurs for the astral body, by means of a recapitulation of the Moon
evolution.

Let us now turn our attention to the evolutionary processes taking place
after the close of the third recapitulation described. All beings and
forces have passed again into a state of spiritualization. During that
state they ascended into higher worlds. The lowest of the worlds, in which
something of them is still to be perceived during this spiritualizing
epoch, are the same in which contemporary man sojourns between death and a
new birth. These are the regions of the spirit-world. Thence the beings
and forces gradually descend again into lower worlds. Before the physical
Earth evolution begins they have so far descended that their lowest
manifestations are to be seen in the astral or psychic world.

Everything human existing at that period is still in its astral form. In
order to understand this condition of humanity, attention should be paid
especially to the fact that though man has within him the physical,
etheric and astral bodies, yet the physical and etheric bodies are not
present in their own forms but in astral form. It is not physical form
that makes the physical body physical, but the fact that it embodies
physical laws, although possessing an astral form. It is a being in a
psychic form with a physical law of existence. The etheric body is in a
similar position.

To spiritual vision the Earth at this stage of evolution appears at first
as a heavenly body all soul and spirit, in which, therefore, even physical
and life forces appear in a psychic form. In this world-organism
everything which will subsequently be moulded into the creatures of the
physical earth is contained in a germinal state. The globe is luminous;
but its light is not yet such as could be seen by physical eyes, supposing
even that they had then existed. The globe shines only in psychic light to
the opened vision of the seer.

A process now takes place on this globe which may be designated
“condensation.” The result of this is that after a time a fiery form
appears in the midst of the psychic globe; this condition was similar to
that of Saturn in its densest state. This fiery form is interpenetrated by
the action of the various beings who are taking part in the evolution. The
reciprocal action which is to be observed between those beings and the
planetary body is like a rising out of and a diving into the earth’s fiery
globe. Hence the earth’s globe is by no means a homogeneous substance, but
has somewhat the character of an ensouled and spiritualized organism. The
beings destined to become human on the earth in man’s present form are as
yet in a condition which renders them the least capable of sharing in the
activity of plunging into the fiery globe. They remain almost entirely in
the uncondensed environment. They are still living in the bosom of the
higher spiritual beings. At this stage they come in contact with the fiery
earth at only one point of their psychic form, and this causes one part of
their astral form to be densified by the heat. Thus earth-life is
enkindled in them. They therefore still belong to psycho-spiritual worlds
with regard to the greater part of their nature, but by coming in contact
with the earth’s fire, vital heat plays around them.

If we wish to draw a material, yet supersensible, picture of these human
beings in the very beginning of the earth’s evolution, we must imagine a
psychic ovoid, or egg, contained within the circumference of the earth,
and enclosed on its lower surface, as an acorn is by its cup. The
substance of the cup, however, consists solely of heat or fire. The
process of being enveloped by heat not only causes the kindling of life in
the human being, but a change appears simultaneously in the astral body.
In this body becomes incorporated the first germ of what afterwards
becomes the sentient-soul. We may therefore say that man at this stage of
his existence consists of the sentient-soul, the astral body, the etheric
body, and the physical body, which latter is formed out of fire. Those
spiritual beings who participate in human existence surge through the
astral body. Man feels himself bound to the earth body by the
sentient-soul. He has therefore at this time a preponderating
picture-consciousness, in which are manifested those spiritual beings in
whose bosom he reposes; and the feeling of his own body seems to be merely
a point within that consciousness. He looks down, so to speak, from the
spiritual world upon earthly possession, which he feels belongs to him.

Further and further the condensation of the earth now proceeds and at the
same time the differentiation of the various parts of man, as has been
described, becomes more and more defined. From a definite point of
evolution onward, the earth is so far condensed that only part of it is
fiery; another part has assumed a substantial shape, which may be termed
“gas” or “air.” A change also takes place now in man. He is not only
brought into contact with the heat of the earth, but the air substance is
incorporated in his fire-body. And as heat kindled life in him, the air
playing around him creates an effect within him which may be called
(spiritual) sound. His etheric body begins to resound. Simultaneously, a
part of the astral body becomes separated from the remainder; this part is
the germ of the intellectual-soul which appears later.

In order to bring before our eyes what takes place in the human soul at
this time, we must notice that the beings superior to man are surging
through the airy-fiery body of the earth. In the fire-earth it is at first
the Sons of Personality who are of importance to man, and when man is
stirred into life by the heat of the earth his sentient soul says to
itself, “These are the Sons of Personality.” In the same way the beings
called “Archangels” earlier in this book (in accordance with Christian
esotericism) appear in the air-sphere. It is their influences which man
feels within him as sound, when the air plays around him. And the
intellectual-soul then says to itself, “These are the Archangels.” Thus
what man at this stage perceives, through his connection with the earth,
is not as yet a collection of physical objects, but he lives in sensations
of heat which rise up to him, and in sounds; in those heat currents and
sound waves, however, he feels the Sons of Personality and the Archangels.
It is true that he cannot perceive those beings directly, only, as it
were, through a veil of heat and sound. While these perceptions are
penetrating from the earth into his soul, there continue to ascend and
descend within it the images of those higher beings in whose tender care
he feels himself to be.

Now evolution takes a further step, which is once more expressed in
condensation. Watery substance is incorporated into the Earth-body, so
that now the latter consists of three parts,—igneous, aeriform, and
aqueous. Before this happens, something of great importance takes place.
An independent celestial body is split off from the fiery-aeriform earth;
this new body becomes in its later development our present sun.(21)
Previously, earth and sun had formed one body. After the sun had been
split off, the earth still has at first everything within it which is in
and on the present moon. The separation of the sun takes place because
higher beings could no longer carry on their own evolution as well as
their task on Earth within this atmosphere, now densified to the
consistency of water. They separate from the general mass of the Earth the
only substances useful to them, and fare forth to make a new abode for
themselves in the sun. They now influence the earth from the sun, from
outside. Man, however, needs for his further evolution an environment in
which matter becomes still more condensed.

With the incorporation of watery substance in the earth-body a change also
takes place in man. Henceforth not only does fire stream into him and air
play around him, but watery substance is incorporated into his physical
body. At the same time his etheric part changes: that is, it is now
perceived by man as a fine light-body. Previous to this, man had felt
currents of heat rising up to him from the earth: he had felt air
surrounding him through tones; now, the watery element also penetrates his
fire-air body, and he sees its ebb and flow as the alternate flaring up
and dimming of light. But a change has also taken place in his soul. To
the germs of the sentient and intellectual souls is added that of the
consciousness-soul. The “Angels” work in the element of water; they are
also the real producers of light. It was as though they appeared to man in
light.

The higher beings who were previously in the Earth-planet itself, now
influence it from the sun. On this account all effects produced on the
earth are changed. The human being chained to earth would no longer be
able to feel the influence of the sun-beings within him, if his soul were
unceasingly turned toward the earth, from which his physical body is
taken. A change now appears in the conditions of human consciousness. At
certain times the sun-beings wrest the soul of man from his physical body,
so that man is now alternately purely psychic, in the bosom of the
sun-beings, and, when united with the body, in a condition in which he
receives earth influences. When in the physical body, heat currents stream
up to him; a sea of air is sounding round him and water pours into and out
of him. When man is out of his body the images of the higher beings in
whose care he is, float through his soul.

The earth passes through two periods at this stage of its evolution.
During one of these it allows its substances to circulate around the human
souls and clothe them with bodies; during the other, the souls have
withdrawn from it, and only the bodies are left and the human beings are
in a condition of sleep. It is speaking quite in conformity with facts to
say that in those times of a remote past the earth passed through a day
and a night time. (Expressed in terms of physical space this means that
through the reciprocal action of the sun-beings and the earth-beings, the
earth is brought into a movement in relation with the sun; thus there is
brought about the alternation of day and night periods described above.
The day period is when the surface of the earth, on which man is evolving,
is turned toward the sun; the night period, the time when man leads a
purely psychic existence, is when the earth’s surface is turned away from
the sun. Now it must not, of course, be imagined that in that far-off time
the earth’s motion around the sun was like its present motion. The
conditions were still utterly different. But even at this early point it
is helpful to realize that the motions of the celestial bodies are a
consequence of the mutual relations of the spiritual beings inhabiting
them. Spiritual-psychic causes produce in the celestial bodies positions
and motions which permit the manifestation of spiritual conditions on the
physical plane.)

If our gaze were turned upon the earth during its night period, its body
would appear like a corpse. For it consists to a great extent of the
decaying bodies of those human beings whose souls are in another state of
existence. The organized watery and aeriform structures of which human
bodies were formed become disintegrated, and dissolve into the rest of the
earth’s substance. Only that part of man’s body which was formed from the
very beginning of the earth evolution by the co-operation of fire and the
human soul, and which subsequently became denser and denser, continues to
exist as an insignificant looking embryo. Now when the day period begins,
the earth once more participates directly in the sun influence, and human
souls press forward into the sphere of physical life. They come in contact
with the embryos, and cause them to spring up and assume an external form,
which appears like an image of man’s psychic being. Something like a
delicate fertilization then takes place between the human soul and the
bodily embryo.

The souls thus embodied now begin once more to attract the aeriform and
watery substances and incorporate them in their own bodies. Air is
expelled and absorbed by the organized body,—the first beginning of that
which later appears as the respiratory process. Water too is absorbed and
expelled; the nutritive process in its original form has begun. But these
processes are not yet perceived as external ones. A kind of external
perception takes place in the soul only by means of the already
characterized kind of fertilization. Here the soul vaguely feels its
awakening to physical existence when it comes in contact with the embryo
which is held toward it from the earth. It then feels something which may
be put into words thus: “This is my form.” And such a feeling, which might
even be called a dawning consciousness of self, abides within the soul
through this union with the physical body. But the soul still feels the
process of absorbing air in an absolutely psycho-spiritual way, as an
image, which appears in the form of tone-pictures surging up and down;
these give form to the embryo which is being incorporated within them. The
soul everywhere feels itself in the midst of sound waves, and that it is
fashioning the body in accordance with those tone forces. Thus are human
forms developed at that stage of evolution. They cannot be observed in any
external world by our present consciousness. They evolve like vegetable or
flower forms of fine substance, therefore appear like flowers waving in
the wind.

During his Earth period, man experiences the blissful feeling of being
fashioned into such forms. The absorption of the watery parts is felt in
the soul as an accession of force, or inner strength. From without it
appears as growth of the physical human structure. As the direct influence
of the sun decreases, the human soul also loses the power of controlling
these processes. By degrees they are cast aside. Only those parts are left
which allow the embryo, above described, to mature. But man leaves his
body, and returns to the spiritual form of existence. (As not all parts of
the earth’s body are employed in building up human bodies, we must not
imagine that during the earth’s night period, it is composed exclusively
of disintegrating corpses and embryos waiting to be awakened. All these
are imbedded in other structures, which are formed out of the earth’s
substances. The status of those structures will be explained later.)

Now, however, the process of condensing the earth’s substance continues.
To the watery element is added the solid or “earthly” substance (“earthly”
in the sense of occult science). And when this happens man also, during
his earth period, begins to incorporate the earthly element in his body.
As soon as this incorporation begins, the forces which the soul brings
with it out of the disembodied state, no longer have the same power as
before. Previously, the soul had fashioned its body out of the igneous,
aeriform, and watery elements, in accordance with the tones which
resounded and the light-pictures which played around it. The soul cannot
do this with regard to the solidified form. Other forces now interpose to
shape it. What is left behind of man, when the soul withdraws from the
body, is not only an embryo to be fanned into life by the returning soul,
but a structure containing in itself reanimating power. The soul, at its
departure, not only leaves its image behind on earth but sends down some
of its animating power into that image.

Now on its reappearance on earth the soul alone no longer suffices to
awaken the image to life; reanimation must take place in the image itself.
The spiritual beings influencing the earth from the sun now uphold the
reanimating force that is in the human body, even though man himself is
not upon the earth. Thus, during its incarnation, the soul is not only
sensible of the sounds and light-pictures floating around, in which it
feels the beings next above it, but, through receiving the earthly
element, it comes under the influence of those still higher beings who
have taken up their abode on the sun. Previously, man felt that he
belonged to the psycho-spiritual beings with whom he was united when free
from the body. His ego was still within them. Now that ego confronts him
during physical incarnation, quite as much as everything else which is
around him during that period. Independent images of the psycho-spiritual
being of man were henceforth on the earth. These structures, in comparison
with the present human body, were of a finer material. For the earthly
part mixed with them only in its finest state, much in the same way as
when man of the present day absorbs the finely distributed substances of
an object through his organ of smell. Human bodies were like shadows. But
as they were distributed over the whole earth they came under earth
influences, which varied in their nature on different parts of the earth’s
surface. Whereas formerly bodily images corresponded to the human soul
animating them, and on that account were essentially alike over the whole
earth, differences now appeared between human forms. In this manner the
way was prepared for what appeared later as differences of race.

When the human body became independent, the previous close union of the
earth-man with the psycho-spiritual world was to a certain extent
dissolved. Henceforth, when the soul left the body, the latter, in a way,
continued to live. If evolution had gone on advancing in this manner, the
earth would have hardened under the influence of its solid elements. To
the eyes of the seer who looks back on those conditions, human bodies,
when abandoned by their souls, appear to become more and more solidified.
And after a time the human souls returning to earth would have found no
available material with which to combine. All the substances available for
man would have been used up in filling the earth with the hardened,
wood-like remains of incarnations.

Then an event took place which gave a new turn to the whole evolution.
Everything in the solid earthly substance which could contribute to
permanent induration was eliminated. At this point our present moon left
the earth. And what had previously directly conduced to a moulding of
permanent forms, now operated from the moon indirectly and in a diminished
degree. The higher beings, on whom that moulding of forms depended, had
resolved to exercise their influences upon their earth no longer from its
interior, but from without. By this means there was brought about in the
bodily structure of man a difference which must be called the beginning of
the separation into a male and a female sex.

The finely constituted human forms which formerly inhabited the earth, had
produced through cooperation of the two forces within themselves, that of
the embryo and that of the animating force, the new human form, their
descendant. These descendants are now transformed. In one group the
animating power of the psycho-spiritual element was paramount; in another
the animating germinal force. This was caused by the weakening of the
power of the solid element in consequence of the moon’s leaving the earth.
The reciprocal action of these two forces now became more delicate than it
had been before—when it occurred within one single body, consequently the
descendant also became more delicate and fine. He entered the earth in a
delicate condition, and only gradually incorporated more solid parts
within him. In this way the possibility of union with the body was once
more given to the human soul returning to earth. It no longer animated the
body from without, because that animation took place on the earth itself;
but it became united with the body, and enabled it to grow. Of course a
certain limit was set to that growth. Through the separation of the moon,
the human body had for a time become supple; but the more it continued to
grow on the earth, the more the solidifying forces got the upper hand. At
length the share borne by the soul in the organization of the body grew
less and less, and the body disintegrated when the soul ascended to
psycho-spiritual modes of existence. One can trace how the forces
gradually acquired by man during the Saturn, Sun, and Moon evolutions take
part more and more in the progress of man during the described formative
periods of the earth. The first part to be kindled by the earth’s fire is
the astral body, still containing within it the etheric and physical
bodies in a state of solution. Then the astral body is organized into a
more subtle astral part, the sentient soul, and into a grosser etheric
part, which henceforth is in contact with the earth-element; when this
occurs, the etheric or vital body, already fore-shadowed, makes its
appearance. And while the intellectual and consciousness-souls are being
evolved in the astral man, there are incorporated into the etheric body
those coarser parts which are susceptible to sound and light.

At the time when the etheric body still further densifies and changes from
a light-body into a fire or heat-body, the stage of evolution has been
reached at which, as described above, parts of the solid earth-element are
incorporated into man. Because the etheric body has condensed to the
consistency of fire, it is now able, by means of the forces of the
physical body previously implanted in it, to combine with those substances
of the physical earth attenuated as far as the fire-state. But by itself
it would no longer be able to introduce air substances into the body which
has meanwhile become more solidified. Then, as indicated above, the higher
beings dwelling on the sun interpose, breathing air into the body. While
man, by virtue of his past, is able of himself to become permeated with
earthly fire, higher beings direct the breath of air into his body.
Heretofore the etheric body of man, as a receiver of sound, had been the
director of the air current. It permeated man’s physical body with life.
Now the physical body gets life from without. The result is that this life
becomes independent of the soul part of man. On departing from the earth,
the soul leaves behind not only the seed of its form, but also a living
image of itself. The Lords of Form now remain united with that image, and
the life they have bestowed, they transfer to man’s descendants, when his
soul has left the body. Thus comes about what may be called heredity, and
when the human soul once more appears on earth it feels that it is in a
body animated by the life of its ancestors. It feels itself especially
attracted to just that kind of a body. In this way something like a
_memory_ is formed of the ancestor with whom the soul feels itself to be
at one. This memory passes through the line of descendants in the form of
a consciousness possessed in common. The ego thus flows down through the
generations.

At this stage of evolution man, during his life on earth, was conscious of
himself as an independent being. He felt the inner fire of his etheric
body to be combined with the external fire of the earth. He could feel the
heat that was streaming through him as his own ego. In those heat
currents, interwoven with life, are to be found the first beginnings of
the circulation of the blood. But in what flowed into him as air, he did
not exactly feel as his own being. Indeed, it was the forces of the higher
beings we have described that were working in that air. But still there
was left to him, within the air that flowed through him, that part of the
active forces which belonged to him by virtue of his previously formed
etheric powers. He was master in one part of those air currents. And to
that extent, it was not only the higher beings who were shaping him, but
he himself. He formed the air parts of his being in accordance with the
images of his astral body. While air was thus flowing into his body from
without, a process which became the basis of respiration, part of the air
was formed within him into an organism which became fixed and was the
basis of the subsequent nervous system. Thus man at this period was
connected with the external earth by heat and air.

On the other hand, he was not conscious of the introduction within himself
of the solid element of the earth. Although it contributed to his own
embodiment, he could not perceive directly what was being supplied but
could only do so through a dim consciousness in the image of the higher
beings who were active in the process. In the same kind of picture-form,
as an expression of the beings above him, man had previously perceived the
introduction of the fluid element into the earth. Through the
densification of his earthly form the pictures have now undergone a change
in his consciousness. The solid element has been mixed with the fluid.
This incoming of the solid element must also be seen to be the work of
higher beings operated from without. It is no longer possible for the
human soul to have the power of directing the supply for that supply has
now to serve his body, which is being built up from without. He would
spoil its form if he were to direct the influx himself.

What, therefore, reaches him from without appears to him to be directed by
authoritative orders issuing from the higher beings who are at work on the
shaping of his body. Man feels himself to be an ego; he has within him, as
part of his astral body, his intellectual-soul, through which he inwardly
perceives, in the form of pictures, what is happening externally, and by
means of which he permeates his delicate nervous system. He feels himself
to be descended from ancestors, by virtue of the life flowing down through
the generations. He breathes, and feels it to be the effect of the higher
beings who have been described as the Lords of Form. He is likewise
subject to their impulses in all that which comes to him from the outside
(as his food). What he finds most obscure is his origin as an individual.
As to that, he only knows that he has been under the influence of the
Lords of Form expressing themselves in earth-forces. In his relations with
the outer world, man was guided and ruled. This finds expression through
the fact that man has a consciousness of the psycho-spiritual activities
operating behind his physical environment. It is true that he does not see
the spiritual beings in their own form, but he is conscious in his soul of
sounds and colors. He knows, however, that it is the actions of spiritual
beings that are realized through that world of images. What those beings
communicate to him, reaches him as sound; their manifestations appear to
him in light-pictures.

The innermost concepts, of which earthly man becomes conscious, are those
conveyed to him by the element of fire or warmth. He can already
distinguish between his own inner heat and the heat currents of the
earth’s periphery. In these latter are manifested the Sons of Personality.
But man has only a dim consciousness of what is behind the currents of
external heat. It is in those very currents that he feels the influence of
the Lords of Form. When powerful effects of heat are produced in man’s
environment, the soul feels that spiritual beings are now heating the
earth’s circumference—beings, from whom a spark has been detached, which
warms his inner being.

In the effect of light, however, man does not yet distinguish in quite the
same manner between the outer and the inner. When light-pictures appear
around him, they do not always produce the same feeling in the soul of the
earth-man. There were times when he felt them as external images. This was
during the period when he had just descended from the disembodied state
into incarnation. It was the period of his growth on earth. As the time
approached for the embryo to be developed those images faded, and man only
retained something like inner memory-pictures of them. The actions of the
Sons of Fire (Archangels) were contained in those light-pictures, which
appeared to man to be the servitors of the Fire-spirits who sent down a
spark into his own inner being. When their outer manifestations died away,
man felt them inwardly in the form of images (memories). He felt himself
united with their forces. And so indeed he was. For by means of what he
had received from them, he was able to work upon his surrounding
atmosphere. This, under his influence, began to emit light.

At that time nature forces and human forces were not as yet separated from
each other as they subsequently became. What happened on earth still
emanated to a great extent from human forces. Viewing nature processes on
the earth from the outside, one would then have seen in them not only
something independent of man, but also the effect of human activity within
those processes. Sound-perceptions assumed a still more different form to
the earth-man. From the beginning of earth-life they had been perceived as
outer tones. Whereas the external air pictures were perceived up to the
middle of earth existence, the external tones could be heard even after
that middle period. And only toward the end of his life did the earth-man
become insensible to them. But the memory-pictures of those sounds
remained. In them were contained the manifestations of the Sons of Life
(Angels). When, toward the end of his life, man felt himself inwardly
united with those forces, he was able, by imitating them, to produce
mighty effects in the earth’s watery element. The waters surged in and
above the earth under his influence. Man had perceptions of taste only
during the first quarter of his earth-life, and even then they seemed to
the soul like a memory of the experience of his disembodied state. As long
as they lasted, his body continued to grow more and more solid by
assimilating external substances. In the second quarter of earth life
growth still continued, but the form was already fully developed. At this
time man could perceive other living beings near him only through their
heat, light, and sound effects; for he was not as yet capable of imagining
the solid element. During the first quarter of his life he received the
taste-impressions described, only through the watery element.

Man’s external bodily form was an image of this inner psychic condition.
Those parts were most fully developed which contained the first
fore-shadowing of the later form of the head. The other organs appeared
only as appendages. These were shadowy and indistinct. Yet earth-beings
varied with regard to form. There were some in whom the appendages were
more or less developed, according to the earth-conditions under which they
lived. This varied with people’s different dwelling places on the earth.
Where they were more involved in the things of earth, the appendages
became more prominent. Those human beings who at the beginning of physical
development on earth were the ripest, owing to their previous evolution,
having come in contact with the fire-element at the very beginning before
the earth had been condensed into air, were those now able to develop the
first beginnings of the head most completely. They were those persons
possessing most inner harmony.

Others were ready for contact with the fire-element only when the earth
had already evolved air within it. They were more dependent upon outer
conditions than the first mentioned, who distinctly felt the Lords of Form
through heat, and during their earth-life felt as though they retained a
memory of having belonged to those spirits and of having been connected
with them in the disembodied state. The second species of human beings
only had the memory of the disembodied state to a more limited degree;
they were conscious of their fellowship with the spiritual world chiefly
through the light-influences of the Sons of Fire (Archangels). A third
type of human beings was still more entangled in earthly existence. It was
they who were unable to come in contact with the fire-element until the
earth was separated from the sun and had absorbed the watery element
within itself. Their feeling of fellowship with the spiritual world was
especially slight at the beginning of earth-life. Only when the activities
of the Archangels, and more especially of the Angels, influenced the inner
imaginative life, did they feel this connection to any degree. On the
other hand, at the beginning of the earth-period they were full of active
impulses for performing deeds which can be accomplished under earthly
conditions only. In them the extremities were particularly strongly
developed.

When the Moon-forces, before the separation of the moon from the earth,
tended more and more to harden the latter, it happened that among the
descendants of the embryos left behind upon the earth by man, there were
some in whom human souls returning from the disembodied state could no
longer incarnate in consequence of the Moon-forces. The form of these
descendants was too much solidified and through the Moon-forces, had
become too unlike the human form to be able to reassume it. Consequently
certain human souls no longer found it possible, under these
circumstances, to return to earth. Only the ripest and strongest of these
souls felt competent to transform the earth-body during its growth, so
that it could blossom into a human form. Only a portion of the bodily
descendants of man became the vehicles of earthly human beings. Another
part, because of its solidified form, was able to receive only souls on a
lower level than those of men. But there was one group of human souls,
however, which was prevented from participating in the earth-evolution of
that time. In this way they were driven to embark on another course.

There were souls who, as far back as the separation of the sun from the
earth, found no place on the latter. For their further evolution they were
removed to a planet which, under the guidance of cosmic beings, was
detached from the universal world-substance,—that substance of which the
earth formed a part at the beginning of its physical evolution, and from
which the sun had separated. This planet, in its physical expression, is
the one known to outer science as “Jupiter.” (Here we are speaking of
celestial bodies, planets, and their names exactly in the sense of a more
ancient science, and as is in harmony with occult science. Just as the
physical earth is only the physical expression of a great psycho-spiritual
organism, so is every other celestial body. And as the seer does not
denote only the physical planet by the word “earth,” nor only the physical
fixed star by “sun,” so when speaking of “Jupiter,” “Mars,” and the other
planets, he signifies far-reaching spiritual relationships. The form and
mission of the heavenly bodies have, in the nature of things, been
essentially changed since the times of which we are here speaking,—in a
certain respect even their position in celestial space has been changed.
It is possible only for one who follows with the seer’s vision the
evolution of those celestial bodies back to remote ages of the past, to
apprehend the connection of contemporary planets with their predecessors.)
On Jupiter the souls that have been described continued their evolution.

And later, when the earth was tending more and more toward solidification,
still another abode had to be prepared for souls who even though they were
able to occupy the solidified bodies for a time, could no longer do so
when this solidification had progressed too far. An appropriate place for
their further evolution was prepared on “Mars.” Even as far back as the
time when the soul was still united with the sun, and was incorporating
the sun’s air elements within itself, certain souls were proving unfit to
participate in the earth’s evolution. They were too powerfully affected by
the earthly bodily form. Accordingly, even at that time, they had to be
withdrawn from the direct influence of the Sun-forces. These had to
influence them from without. The planet Saturn became the scene of their
further evolution.

Thus, in the course of the earth’s evolution, the number of human forms
decreased, and forms appeared which had not embodied human souls. These
were able to receive only astral bodies as the human physical and etheric
bodies on the old Moon had done. While the earth was becoming depopulated
as far as human beings were concerned, these other beings were colonizing
it. Eventually all human souls would have been compelled to leave the
earth if, by detaching the Moon from it, a way had not been provided to
preserve those human bodies which at that time could still harbor human
souls. It was made possible for these, during their earth life, to
withdraw the human ego from the effects of the Moon-forces coming directly
from the earth, thus allowing it to mature sufficiently within themselves
until it could be exposed directly to those forces. As long as the embryo
was developing within man, it was under the influence of those beings who,
under the leadership of the mightiest of their number, had detached the
moon from the earth in order to conduct the evolution of the latter over a
critical point.

When the earth had developed the air element within it, astral beings were
present as described above, who had belonged to the old Moon and who had
been left behind. They had fallen short even of the lowest human souls in
their evolution. They became the souls of those forms which already before
the separation of the Sun had to be abandoned by man. These beings are the
ancestors of the animal kingdom. As time went on, they developed
especially those organs which in man thus far only existed as appendages.
Their astral body had to work on the physical and etheric bodies in the
same way as did the human astral body during the old Moon-period. Now the
animals which had thus come into existence had souls which could not dwell
in the individual animals. The soul extended its being also to the
descendant. Virtually, animals descended from one form have a soul in
common. Only when the descendant diverges from the ancestral type through
special influences, does a new animal soul become incarnated. In this
sense, in accordance with occult science, we can speak of a species or
group-soul, in animals.

Something of a similar nature took place at the time of the separation of
sun and earth. There came forth from the watery element, forms no further
evolved than man was before the old Moon-evolution. They could only
receive an impression from anything of an astral nature when the latter
influenced them from without. This could not happen until after the
departure of the sun from the earth. Whenever the sun-period of the earth
set in, the astral element in the sun stimulated these forms in such a way
that they formed their vital body out of the etheric part of the earth.
When the sun turned away from the earth, that etheric body was again
dissolved into the common earth-life. And as a result of the co-operation
of the astral part of the sun with the etheric part of the earth, there
emerged from the watery element those physical forms which became the
ancestors of the present vegetable kingdom.

Man became an individualized soul-being on earth. His astral body, which
had been poured into him on the Moon through the Lords of Motion, now
became organized on earth into the sentient-intellectual-and
consciousness-souls. And when the consciousness-soul had progressed so far
that it was able to form for itself during earth-life, a body adapted to
that life, the Lords of Form endowed that body with a spark from their
fire. The “ego” was enkindled within it. Every time man left the physical
body he was in the spiritual world, in which he met the beings who, during
the Saturn, Sun, and Moon evolutions, had given him his physical, etheric,
and astral bodies, and who had developed them as far as the earth-stage.
Since the spark of ego had been enkindled during earth-life, there had
also come about a change in the disembodied life. Up to this point of
evolution, man had had no independence in the spiritual world. Within that
world he did not feel himself a separate being, but as though he were a
member of the exalted organism which was composed of the beings superior
to him. The “ego experience” on earth now takes effect also in the
spiritual world. Henceforth man feels himself to be, to a certain degree,
a unit in that world. But he feels also that he is unceasingly linked with
it. In the disembodied state he again finds the Lords of Form, in a higher
aspect, and this aspect he had perceived in their manifestation on earth
by means of the spark of his ego.

At the separation of the moon from the earth, the disembodied soul began
to have experiences in the spiritual world which were connected with that
separation. To develop such human forms upon earth which could receive
soul individuality, only became possible through the fact that a part of
the shaping forces passed over from the Earth to the Moon. Thus human
individuality came within the sphere of the Moon-beings. And in the
disembodied state the reminiscence of earthly individuality could only
operate because, even in that state, the soul remained within the sphere
of those mighty spirits who had brought about the separation of the moon.
The process worked in such a manner that immediately after leaving the
earth-body the soul could only see the exalted Sun-beings as though in a
lustre reflected from the Moon-beings. And it was only when sufficiently
prepared by gazing at that reflected splendor, that the soul attained to
the vision of the exalted Sun-beings themselves.

The mineral kingdom of the earth also arose out of what was ejected from
human evolution in general. Its structures are what remained solidified
after the moon was detached from the earth. The only soul-element which
felt attracted to those structures was that which had been left behind at
the Saturn stage, and was therefore only adapted for developing physical
forms. All the occurrences treated of here and in what follows were
enacted in the course of exceedingly long periods. But the question of
chronology cannot be entered into here.

The events described, present the evolution of the earth from without.
Seen spiritually from within, the facts present themselves as follows: The
spiritual beings who drew the moon out of the earth and incorporated their
own existence with the moon,—thus becoming earth-moon beings,—brought
about a certain formation of the human organism by means of the forces
which they sent to the earth from the moon. Their influence affected the
“ego” which man had acquired, and made itself felt in the interplay of
that “ego” with the astral, etheric, and physical bodies. They made it
possible for man to reflect within himself consciously and to reproduce
within his cognition, the wisdom revealed in the cosmos. It will be
remembered that during the old Moon-period man, owing to the separation
from the sun at the time, acquired a certain independence in his organism,
a more unfettered stage of consciousness than that which he had been able
to derive directly from the Sun-spirits. This free, independent
consciousness—a heritage from the old Moon-evolution—appeared again during
the earth-period in question. But it was just this consciousness which,
through the influence of the described earth-moon beings, could again be
brought into union and harmony with the universe and be made a reflection
of it. This would have happened if no other influence had asserted itself.
Without that influence, man would have become a being whose consciousness
would not have reflected the world in pictures of cognition, through his
own free volition, but through natural necessity. But things did not
happen in this way. At the time when the moon split off, certain spiritual
beings interposed in human evolution who had retained so much of their
Moon nature that they could not take part in the exodus of the sun from
the earth, and were shut out from the influence of the spirits who from
the earth-moon had exerted their activity upon the earth. These spirits
with the old Moon nature were, so to say, banished to the earth, but with
an irregular development. In their Moon-nature was that which had rebelled
against the Sun-spirits during the old Moon-evolution, and which had so
far been a blessing to man that it had led him to a free, independent
state of consciousness. The consequences of the peculiar development of
these spirits during the earth-period entailed their becoming adversaries
of the spirits who, acting from the moon, desired to make human
consciousness an automatic reflector of the universe. What had helped man
to a higher state of development of the old Moon, proved to be in
opposition to the possibilities which had arisen through the evolution of
the earth. The opposing forces had brought with them from their Moon
nature the power of working upon the human astral body, namely,—as above
indicated,—the power of making it independent. They exercised that power
by giving the astral body a certain degree of independence—even throughout
the earth-period—compared with the automatic (involuntary) state of
consciousness which had been brought about by the spirits of the
earth-moon.

It is difficult to express in the language of to-day the effects on man,
in that far-off time of the spiritual beings referred to. They must not be
thought of as analogous to natural influences of the present time, nor yet
as similar to the influence of one human being on another, when the first
awakens in the second inner powers of consciousness by words which help
the second person to understand something, or which stimulate him to
virtue or vice. The effect referred to as operative in that primeval age
was not a force of nature but a spiritual influence, conveyed in a
spiritual way, which descended upon man as a spiritual influx from higher
spirits, conformable with man’s state of consciousness at that time. If we
think of this influence as a force of nature we altogether miss its
essential reality. If we say that the spirits with the old Moon nature
tempted man in order to lead him astray for their own ends, we are using a
symbolical expression, which is good as long as we remember that it is but
a symbol and are at the same time clear in our minds that a spiritual fact
underlies the symbol.

The influence brought to bear on man by the spirits who had remained
behind during the Moon-evolution had a two-fold result. Man’s
consciousness was divested of the character of being merely a mirror of
the universe, because the possibility was aroused in the human astral body
of regulating and controlling, by means of this astral body, the images in
the consciousness. Man became the ruler of his own knowledge. But on the
other hand it was the astral body that was the starting point of that
rulership, and consequently the ego set over the astral body came to be
continually dependent upon it. Hence man was from this time forth exposed
to the lasting influences of a lower element in his nature. It was
possible for him in his life to sink below the height on which he had been
placed by the spirits of the earth-moon in the course of the world’s
progress. And subsequently he was open to the lasting influence on his
nature of the irregularly evolved Moon-spirits. We may call these
Moon-spirits Luciferian, to distinguish them from the other spirits who,
from the earth-moon, made consciousness into a mirror of the universe,
without bestowing free will. The Luciferian spirits endowed man with the
possibility of developing free activity in his consciousness, and at the
same time created the possibility of error and evil.

As a result of these events man was brought into a different connection
with the Sun-spirits from that which had been destined for him by the
spirits of the earth-moon. These wished to develop the reflecting human
consciousness in such a manner that within the whole life of the human
soul, the influence of the Sun-spirits would have become dominant. These
purposes were thwarted, and an opposition was thus created in human nature
between the influence of the Sun-Spirits and that of the spirits who were
irregularly developed on the old Moon. Owing to this opposition, the
inability to recognize the physical Sun-influences as such also arose in
man; they were hidden by the earthly impressions of the outer world.
Filled with these impressions, the astral part of man was drawn into the
sphere of the ego. This ego,—which otherwise would have felt only the
spark of fire bestowed on it by the Lords of Form, and which would have
submitted to the bidding of those spirits in everything that had to do
with external fire,—henceforth worked upon external heat phenomena through
the element with which it had itself been inoculated. A bond of attraction
was thereby established between the ego and the earth-fire.

In this way man became more involved in earthly materiality than had been
ordained for him, which was effected through the earth-moon spirits in
man’s body. The real individual ego was thereby set free from the mere
earth-ego so that although man during earth-life only partially felt
himself to be an ego, he at the same time felt his earth-ego to be a
continuation of that of his ancestors through the generations. The soul
was conscious of a kind of “group-ego” in earth-life, dating back to
remote ancestors; man felt himself to be a member of this group. Only in
the disembodied state could the individual ego be conscious of itself as a
separate being. But this state of isolation was impaired because the ego
was still burdened with a memory of the earth-consciousness (earth-ego.)
This memory clouded its vision of the spiritual world, which began to be
covered as with a veil between death and birth just as it is hidden from
physical vision upon earth.

The many changes which took place in the spiritual world while human
evolution was passing through the conditions just described, found
physical expression in the gradual adjustment of the mutual relations
existing between the sun, moon, and earth (and, moreover, between other
celestial bodies).

The alternation of day and night stands out as one result of those
relations. (The motions of celestial bodies are regulated by the beings
who inhabit them. The earth’s motion, of which day and night are the
result, was induced by the mutual relations of various spirits superior to
man. The moon’s motion had been brought about in the same way, in order
that after the separation of the moon from the earth, the Lords of Form
might, by means of the revolution of the former around the latter, work
upon the human physical body in the right way, and with the right rhythm.)
The ego and astral body of man now worked within the physical and etheric
bodies by day; at night that activity ceased: for the ego and the astral
body then left the physical and etheric bodies and came wholly within the
sphere of the Sons of Life or Angels, the Sons of Fire or Archangels, the
Sons of Personality, and the Lords of Form. Besides the Lords of Form, the
Lords of Motion, of Wisdom and the Thrones also included the physical and
etheric bodies in their sphere of influence at this time. The injurious
effects produced on man by the errors of his astral body during the day,
could thus be counter-balanced.

As people upon Earth now again multiplied there was no reason why human
souls should not incarnate in their descendants. The earth moon-forces now
acted in such a way that under their influence the human bodies became
entirely capable of incarnating human souls. The souls who had previously
removed to Mars, Jupiter and the other planets were now guided to earth,
and there was thus a soul ready for each human being born in the physical
line of descent. This went on through long periods so that the immigration
of souls to earth corresponded to the increase of human beings. Souls now
leaving their bodies at physical death retained the echo of their earthly
individuality as a memory in the disembodied state. This memory acted in
such a way that whenever a body was born on earth suitable for them, they
again incarnated it. Consequently there were among the human descendants
some whose souls came from without and who appeared on earth for the first
time since its very earliest periods, and there were others whose souls
had continually incarnated on the earth. In subsequent periods of earthly
evolution the number of young souls appearing for the first time grows
ever smaller and smaller, and the reincarnated souls become more and more
numerous; yet for long ages the human race was composed of the two types
of beings conditioned by these facts.

Henceforth man on earth felt himself united with his forefathers through
the group-ego which he had in common with them. On the other hand, the
experience of the individual ego was all the stronger in the disembodied
state between death and a new birth. The souls which entered human bodies
from celestial space were in a different position from those which had one
or more earthly lives behind them. The former, as souls entering upon the
physical earth-life, brought with them only the conditions to which the
higher spiritual world and their experiences outside the sphere of earth
had subjected them. The others had, by their actions in former lives,
added conditions of their own. The fate of the first was determined only
by facts lying outside of the new earth-conditions; that of the
reincarnate souls is also determined by what they themselves have done in
former lives under earthly conditions. Individual human Karma makes its
first appearance simultaneously with reincarnation.

Because the human etheric body was withdrawn from the influence of the
astral body in the manner above indicated, the generative faculty was not
included in the sphere of human consciousness, but was under the sway of
the spiritual world. When the time had come for a soul to descend to
earth, procreative impulses arose in the human being. The entire process,
to a certain degree was veiled in mysterious obscurity as far as earthly
consciousness was concerned. The consequences of this partial separation
of the etheric from the physical body were felt during earthly life also.
The qualities of the etheric body were capable of being especially
heightened by spiritual influence. In the life of the soul this expressed
itself through a special perfection of memory. Independent logical thought
was at this period only in its most rudimentary stage in man; on the other
hand, the faculty of memory was almost unlimited. Externally it appeared
as though man had direct knowledge of the working forces of every living
being. He had at his disposal the vital and generative forces of the
animal and, more especially, of the vegetable kingdom. He was able, for
instance, to draw out of a plant the force which impels it to grow, and to
use that force, just as we now use the forces of inanimate nature; for
example, the power dormant in coal which is extricated and used for
propelling engines.(22)

The inner soul life of man was also transformed in many different ways by
the Lucifer influence. Many kinds of feelings and emotions due to it might
be instanced. Of these only one can be mentioned. Previous to this
influence, the human soul acted, in that which it had to shape and to do,
according to the purposes of higher spiritual beings. The plan of
everything that was to be carried out was determined from the beginning.
And in proportion to the degree to which human consciousness was evolved,
it was able to foresee how things must develop in the future in accordance
with that preconceived plan. That consciousness of the future was lost
when the veil of earthly perceptions was woven across the manifestations
of higher spiritual beings and in these the real forces of the Sun-spirits
were hidden. Henceforth the future became uncertain, and in consequence of
this the possibility of fear was implanted in the soul. Fear is a direct
result of error.

It is however evident that through the Luciferian influence, man became
independent of certain definite forces to which he had previously
submitted without the exercise of his will. Henceforth he was able to form
resolutions of his own. Freedom is the result of the Luciferian influence,
and fear and similar feelings are only the phenomena attendant on the
evolution of human freedom.

Spiritually seen, fear makes its appearance in this way. Within the
earth-forces, under whose influence man had come by means of the
Luciferian powers, other beings were operating, which had developed
irregularly much earlier in the course of evolution than the Luciferian
powers. With the earth-forces man admitted into his nature the influence
of these other beings. They gave the quality of fear to feelings, which
without them would have operated quite differently. They may be called
Ahrimanic beings. They are the same that Goethe calls Mephistophelian.

Although the Luciferian influence manifested itself at first only in the
most advanced individuals, it soon spread to others. The descendants of
the advanced individuals intermingled with the less progressive described
above, and in this way the Luciferian force was conveyed to the latter.
But the etheric body of these souls returning from the different planets
could not be protected to the same extent as that of the descendants of
those who remained on earth. The protection of the etheric body of these
descendants emanated from an exalted Being in Whom was vested the
leadership of the cosmic when the separation of the sun from the earth
took place. That Being is the Ruler of the Kingdom of the Sun. With him
those lofty spirits, whose cosmic development was sufficiently matured,
departed for their dwelling-place in the Sun. But there were other beings
who had not reached such a height at the separation of the sun; these were
obliged to seek other spheres. It was through their instrumentality that
Jupiter and other planets became detached from that general cosmic
substance of which, at the outset, the earthly physical organism
consisted. Jupiter now became the abode of those beings who were not
highly enough developed to live on the sun, and the most advanced of these
became the leader. As the Leader of the Sun evolution became the “higher
ego” which worked in the etheric body of the descendants of those who had
remained on earth, so the Jupiter leader became that “higher ego” which
manifested as a common consciousness in certain other human beings. Those
were the human beings descending from the intermixing of those who had
only appeared on earth at the time of the air-element and had gone over to
Jupiter. These human beings may be called, in conformity with occult
science, “Jupiter-humanity.” They were scions of the human race which had
adopted human souls far back in that ancient time; but who, at the
beginning of earthly evolution, were not yet mature enough to take part in
the first contact with fire. They were souls midway between the human and
animal soul-kingdoms.

Now there were other beings who, under the leadership of the greatest one
among them had detached Mars from the general cosmic substance, to make it
their dwelling place. Under their influence there arose a third kind of
humanity, formed by interbreeding,—the “Mars-humanity.” (This knowledge
throws light upon the origin of the formation of the planets of our solar
system; for all the members of that system originated through the various
stages of maturity reached by the beings inhabiting them. But of course it
is not possible to enter into all the details of cosmic differentiation
here.) Those people who felt in their etheric body the influence of the
exalted Sun-being Himself may be called “Sun-humanity.” The Being Who
lived in them as the Higher Ego—of course only in the race, not in the
individual,—is the same to Whom various names were given in later times,
when man had gained conscious knowledge of Him. It is he Who appears to
the human race today as the Christ.

“Saturn-humanity” is also to be distinguished at that time. The “higher
ego” of this race appeared as a being who, with his associates, had been
forced to leave the general cosmic substance before the separation of the
Sun. In these individuals not only the etheric body but also the physical
body was partly exempt from the Luciferian influence. But the etheric body
was nevertheless not well enough protected in the less developed races of
mankind to be able to sufficiently resist the influences of the Luciferian
beings. These individuals could arbitrarily use the spark of the ego
within them to such a degree that they were able to call forth mighty and
destructive effects of fire around them. The result was a mighty
terrestrial catastrophe. A large part of the inhabited earth was wrecked
by fiery storms, and with it the human beings that had fallen into sin.
Only a very small part of those who had remained untouched by sin, were
able to take refuge in a region which had so far been shielded from the
fatal human influence.

The country occupying that part of the earth now covered by the Atlantic
Ocean proved to be peculiarly well fitted for the abode of the new human
race. Thither that part of humanity repaired which had preserved purity.
Only stray groups of humanity inhabited other regions. Occult science
gives the name of “Atlantis” to that part of the earth which once existed
between the present continents of Europe, Africa, and America. (This
particular stage of human evolution has its special nomenclature in
theosophical literature. The period preceding the Atlantean is called the
Lemurian age, whereas that during which the Moon-forces had not yet fully
developed is called the Hyperborean age. This is preceded by yet another,
which coincides with the earliest period of the evolution of the physical
earth. Biblical tradition describes the period before the influence of the
Lucifer-beings came into play as the Paradise time, and the descent to
earth, or entanglement of humanity in the sense-world, as the expulsion
from Paradise.)

The Atlantean period of evolution was the real time of separation into the
Saturn, Sun, Jupiter, and Mars humanities. Up to that time only
predispositions for this separation had been developed. The division
between the state of waking and sleeping had special consequences, which
appeared particularly in the Atlantean race. During the night the human
astral body and ego were in the sphere of the beings superior to man, as
far up as the Sons of Personality. Man could perceive the Sons of Life
(the Angels) and the Sons of Fire (the Archangels) through that part of
his etheric body which was not united with the physical body. For he was
able to remain united, during sleep, with that part of his etheric body
which was not interpenetrated by the physical body. It is true, his
perception of the Sons of Personality was vague, owing to the Luciferian
influence; but not only the Angels and Archangels became visible to man in
this condition but also those beings who were not able to enter upon
earthly existence because they had lagged behind on the Sun or Moon, and
were therefore obliged to remain in the psycho-spiritual world. But man,
by means of the Luciferian influence, drew them into his soul which was
separated from his physical body during sleep. Thus he came in contact
with beings whose influence was highly corrupting. They increased in his
soul the propensity for error; especially the tendency to misuse the
powers of growth and reproduction, which since the separation of the
physical and etheric bodies were now under his control.

Certain human beings of the Atlantean period however became entangled in
the sense world only to a very limited degree. Through them, the
Luciferian influence became, instead of a hindrance to human evolution, a
means of further progress. It enabled them to develop knowledge of earthly
matters sooner than would otherwise have been possible. They sought to
expel error from their imaginative life and to interpret, by means of
cosmic phenomena, the original purposes of spiritual beings. They kept
themselves free from those impulses and desires of the astral body which
were directed merely toward the sense-world. Hence they became more and
more free from the errors of the astral body. This resulted in a condition
through which they were able to confine their perceptions to that part of
the etheric body which was separated from the physical body in the manner
described above. Under these conditions the capacity of the physical body
for perception was practically extinguished and the physical body itself
was as though dead. For through the etheric body, these individuals were
wholly united with the kingdom of the Lords of Form, and were able to
learn from them how they were being guided and directed by that exalted
Being the “Christ,” who was the Leader at the time of the separation of
sun and earth. These people were Initiates. But since human individuality
had been brought into the sphere of the Moon-beings, as described above,
these Initiates could not as a rule come into direct contact with the
Christ-Being, they could only see it as a reflection, shown them by the
Moon-beings. Thus they did not see the Christ-Being directly, but only the
reflection of its glory.

They became leaders of the rest of humanity, to whom they were able to
impart the mysteries they had seen. They attracted disciples, to whom they
communicated the methods for attaining the condition which leads to
Initiation. Only those could attain knowledge of the Christ who belonged
to the Sun-humanity mentioned above. They cultivated their mystic
learning, and the occupations which promoted it, at a particular spot
which, in occult science terminology may be called the Christ oracle, or
Sun oracle, the term “oracle” being used to denote a place where the
purposes of spiritual beings are unveiled.

Other oracles were called into being by the members of the Saturn, Mars,
and Jupiter humanities. The intuitive vision of their Initiates was
confined to seeing those beings who were revealed to them in their etheric
bodies as their respective “higher egos.” Thus adherents of the Saturn,
Jupiter, and Mars wisdom arose. Besides these methods of Initiation, there
were others for those who had assimilated too much of the Luciferian
spirit to allow as large a part of the etheric body to be separated from
the physical body as was the case with the Sun humanity. Nor could they be
brought to the revelation of the Christ through these conditions. Because
their astral body was more influenced by the Lucifer principle, they were
obliged to undergo a more difficult preparation, and then, in a less
disembodied state than the others, they were able to receive the
revelation, not indeed of the Christ Himself, but of other exalted beings.

There were beings who, although they had left the earth at the separation
of the sun, did not stand on such a high level that they were able to
continue taking part in the Sun evolution. They formed an abode for
themselves away from the sun, after its separation from the earth: this
was Venus. Their leader was the being who now became a “higher ego” to
these Initiates and their adherents. A similar thing happened with the
leading spirit of Mercury for another group of people. In this way the
Venus and Mercury oracles arose. One kind of human beings, who had most
completely absorbed the Luciferian influence, could reach only one of the
higher beings who, with his associates, had been the first to be expelled
from the Sun evolution. This being has no particular planet in cosmic
space, but still lives within the periphery of the earth, with which he
was once more united after the return from the sun. The group of people,
to whom this being was revealed as its “higher ego” may be called the
followers of the Vulcan oracle. Their attention was more directed to
earthly phenomena than that of the other Initiates. They laid the first
foundations of what afterwards became the human arts and sciences. On the
other hand, the Mercury Initiates established the study of the more
super-sensible things; and the Venus Initiates did this to a still greater
extent.

The Vulcan, Mercury, and Venus Initiates differed from those of Saturn,
Jupiter, and Mars in the manner of receiving their Mysteries; the latter
received them more as a revelation from above, and in a more finished
state; whereas the former gained their knowledge more in the form of their
own thoughts—in the form of ideas. The Christ Initiates occupied a middle
position. While having a direct revelation, they acquired the capacity for
clothing their Mysteries in a human form of conception. The Saturn,
Jupiter, and Mars Initiates were obliged to express themselves more in
symbols; the Christ, Venus, Mercury, and Vulcan Initiates were able to
impart their knowledge more through ideas or concepts.

Whatever knowledge of this kind reached Atlantean humanity came indirectly
through the Initiates. But the rest of mankind also received special
faculties through the Lucifer principle; for, through the intervention of
lofty cosmic beings, what otherwise might have wrought ruin was
transformed into good. One of these faculties was that of speech. This was
brought about by the condensation of man’s physical body and by the
separation of part of his etheric from his physical body. For some time
after the separations of the moon, man felt himself connected with his
physical ancestors through the group-ego. But this common consciousness,
linking posterity with its ancestors, was gradually lost in the course of
generations. Later descendants had an inner memory of only their more
recent ancestors, no longer of their earlier forefathers. It was only in
conditions akin to sleep, during which mankind came in contact with the
spiritual world, that the remembrance of one ancestor or another again
emerged. Then people thought of themselves as one with that ancestor whom
they believed to be reappearing in them. This was an erroneous idea of
reincarnation, which arose especially in the later Atlantean period. The
true doctrine of reincarnation could be learned only in the schools of the
Initiates. They could see how the human soul passes through the
disembodied state on its way from one incarnation to another, and they
alone were able to impart the real truth of the matter to their disciples.

In the remote past which is now under consideration, man’s physical form
was very different from his present form. It was still, to a great extent,
the expression of the qualities of his soul. Man was composed of a softer
and more delicate substance than that which he has since acquired. That
which is now solidified in the limbs was then soft, flexible, and plastic.
The bodily structure of the more psychic and spiritual human beings was
delicate, supple, and expressive. These less evolved spiritually possessed
coarser, heavier, less mobile bodily structures. A high degree of psychic
maturity contracted the extremities, and the Stature remained small;
backwardness of the soul and entanglement in sensuality were outwardly
expressed by gigantic size. While man was growing to maturity his body was
being formed in accordance with what was developing in his soul, in a way
which would appear incredible and fabulous to contemporary ideas. Depraved
passions, impulses, and instincts brought in their train a colossal
increase of matter. Man’s present physical form has come about through a
contraction, thickening, and consolidation of the Atlantean human form.
And whereas man, before the Atlantean period, had been an exact image of
his soul-nature the events of the Atlantean evolution bore within them the
causes which lead to the formation of post-Atlantean man, whose physical
form is solid and comparatively independent of the qualities of the soul.
(The forms of the animal kingdom had solidified during far more remote
Earth periods than those of man.) The laws now governing the shaping of
forms in the kingdom of nature certainly did not prevail in the remote
past.

Toward the middle of the Atlantean evolution a calamity gradually befell
humanity. The Mysteries of the Initiates had to be carefully kept secret
from those who had not purified their astral bodies from sin. Had they
gained insight into that hidden knowledge, into the laws by means of which
higher beings directed the forces of nature, they would have employed
those forces thus placed at their disposal for their own perverted needs
and passions. The danger was all the greater because mankind was coming,
as has been described, into the sphere of lower spiritual beings, who
could not take part in the regular evolution of the earth and were
therefore working against it. These persistently influenced humanity in
such a way as to instil into it interests which were actually directed
against human welfare. But mankind still had the power to employ the
forces of growth and reproduction belonging to animal and human nature in
their own service.

Not only humanity in general, but even some of the Initiates yielded to
temptation from low spiritual beings. They were induced to employ the
supersensible forces mentioned above for a purpose which ran counter to
human evolution. And for this purpose they sought out associates who were
not initiated, and who made use of the secrets of the supersensible forces
of nature for low ends. The result was a great corruption of human nature.
The evil spread further and further; and since the forces of growth and
generation, if torn from their original sphere and used independently,
have a mysterious connection with certain forces working in air and water,
there were thus unchained, through human action, mighty, destructive
natural forces which led to the gradual ruin of the Atlantean territory by
the agency of air and water catastrophes. Atlantean humanity was obliged
to migrate—i. e., that portion of it which did not perish in the storms.

In consequence of these storms the surface of the earth was altered. On
one side, Europe, Asia, and Africa gradually assumed their present shape;
on the other, America appeared. Great migrations took place to these
countries. Those migrations which were directed eastward from Atlantis are
especially important for us of today. Europe, Asia, and Africa were
gradually colonized by the descendants of the Atlanteans. Various peoples
fixed their abode in these continents. They were at different stages of
development, and also at different levels of corruption. And with them
came the Initiates, guardians of the oracle-Mysteries. They established
sanctuaries in various parts, in which the cults of Jupiter, Venus, etc.,
were cultivated sometimes in a good, sometimes in an evil manner. The
betrayal of the Vulcan Mysteries exercised an especially unfavourable
influence, for the attention of their adherents was mostly centered on
earthly matters. By this betrayal, mankind was made dependent on spiritual
beings who, as a result of their past evolution, rejected everything
emanating from the spiritual world which had been evolved through the
separation of the earth from the sun. In accordance with the tendency they
had thus developed, they worked upon just that element in man which was
formed through his having perceptions of the sense-world, behind which the
spiritual world lies hidden. Henceforth beings acquired great influence
over many of the human inhabitants of the earth, and indeed their
influence asserted itself more and more by depriving mankind of the
feeling for spiritual things.

Since the size, form, and flexibility of the physical human body were
still largely affected by the qualities of the soul, the consequence of
the betrayal of the Mysteries also appeared in changes of the human race
in these respects. Wherever the corruption of humanity manifested itself
especially in the abuse of supersensible powers for the satisfaction of
lower inclinations, desires and passions, unsightly human shapes,
grotesque in form and size were the result. These were not able to survive
the Atlantean period, and became extinct. Post-Atlantean humanity was
formed physically from those Atlantean ancestors in whom such a
solidification of the bodily form had taken place that it no longer
yielded to those powers of the soul which had now become perverted.

There was a certain period in the Atlantean evolution during which, by
means of the law ruling in and around the earth, just those conditions
prevailed which tended to solidify man’s bodily form. Those human racial
types which had been solidified before this period could, it is true,
reproduce themselves for a long time, yet the souls incarnating in them
gradually became so cramped that they had to die out. It is true that some
of these race-types survived into the post-Atlantean times; those which
had remained sufficiently agile lasted even for a very long time in
modified form. Human forms which had remained flexible, after the period
just described, became bodies for such souls as had, in a large measure,
undergone the pernicious influence of the betrayal described above. These
forms were destined to speedy extinction.

In consequence of what had thus happened, beings had brought their
influence to bear upon human evolution, since the middle of the Atlantean
period, beings whose influence tended to make mankind live in the physical
sense world in an unspiritual manner. This went so far that, instead of
man’s seeing the real form of that world, phantoms, hallucinations, and
illusions of every kind appeared to him. Mankind was exposed not merely to
the Luciferian influence but to that of those other beings mentioned
above, whose leader may be called Ahriman, according to the appellation
given him later in the Persian civilization. (He is the same as
Mephistopheles.) Through this influence man was subject, after death, to
powers which made him appear even then as a being adhering only to
material earthly conditions. He lost more and more the unobstructed vision
of the events of the spiritual world. He was forced to feel himself in
Ahriman’s power, and to a certain extent shut out from intercourse with
the spiritual world.

There was one oracle-sanctuary of special importance, which in the
universal decline had preserved the ancient cult in its purest form. It
was one of the Christ oracles, and on that account it was able to preserve
not only the Christ Mystery itself but those of the other oracles as well.
For in the manifestation of the loftiest of the Sun-spirits, were also
revealed the regents of Saturn, Jupiter, and the other planets. In the Sun
oracle the secret of producing in some particular human being, such human
etheric bodies as had been possessed by the best of the Jupiter, Mercury,
and other Initiates was known. By means of the methods used for this
purpose, which cannot be further dealt with here, impressions of the best
etheric bodies of the ancient Initiates were preserved, in order that they
might subsequently be stamped upon suitable individuals. The same process
could be employed with the astral bodies of the Venus, Mercury, and Vulcan
Initiates.

At a certain time the Leader of the Christ Initiates found Himself
isolated with a few associates, to whom He was able to impart, to a very
limited extent only, the mysteries of the cosmos. For those associates
were individuals who were endowed with the natural ability to permit the
least possible degree of separation between the physical and etheric
bodies. They were altogether, at that time, the best possible individuals
for promoting the further progress of humanity. Their experiences in the
realm of sleep had become rarer and rarer. The spiritual world was more
and more closed to them. Therefore they were also lacking in the
comprehension of all that had been revealed to man in ancient times when
he was not in his physical, but only in his etheric body. Those
immediately surrounding the leader of the Christ oracle were the farthest
advanced with regard to the union of the physical body with that part of
the etheric body which had previously been separated from it. This union
came about in the human being little by little, as a result of the
transformation which had taken place in the Atlantean continent and the
earth in general.

The physical and etheric bodies of man fitted more and more into each
other. Hence the memory lost its former unlimited capacity, and the human
life of thought began. That part of the etheric which was united with the
physical body transformed the physical brain into an actual instrument of
thought, and man from this time, first really felt his “ego” within his
physical body. Self-consciousness awoke. This was at first the case with
only a limited number of the human race, pre-eminently with the associates
of the leader of the Christ oracle. The bulk of humanity, scattered over
Europe, Asia, and Africa, retained in varying degrees the remnant of the
old conditions of consciousness. Hence they had direct experience of the
supersensible world.

The associates of the Christ Initiate were people of highly developed
intelligence but of less experience in supersensible spheres than any of
their contemporaries. The Initiate journeyed with them to a country in
central Asia. He wished them to be guarded as much as possible from
contact with those of less developed consciousness. He instructed his
followers along the lines of the mysteries which had been revealed to him
and especially did he do this with their descendants. Thus he gathered
round him a people who had received into their hearts the impulses
corresponding to the Mysteries of the Christ Initiation. Out of this
company he chose the seven best, that they might be endowed with the
etheric and astral bodies which bore the impress of the etheric bodies of
the seven best Atlantean Initiates. Thus he educated a successor to each
of the Christ, Saturn, Jupiter, etc., Initiates. These seven Initiates
became the teachers and leaders of the people who, in the post-Atlantean
period, had colonized the south of Asia, especially ancient India. Since
these great teachers were endowed with the etheric bodies of their
spiritual ancestors, the contents of their astral body, that is, the
science and knowledge they themselves had worked out, was far below what
was revealed to them through their etheric body. Therefore if these
revelations were to speak within them, they were obliged to impose silence
on their own science and knowledge. Then the exalted beings who had also
spoken to their spiritual ancestors spoke out of and through them. Except
during the times when these beings were speaking through them, they were
simple people, endowed with the measure of intelligence and feeling which
they had cultivated and worked out for themselves.

There lived at this time in India a race of people who had retained a
particularly vivid remembrance of the ancient soul-condition of the
Atlanteans, which permitted experiences in the spiritual world. Moreover,
the heart and soul of a great number of these people were powerfully
attracted by such experiences. By a wise decree of fate, the majority of
the race had come to southern Asia from among the best portions of the
Atlantean population. Besides this majority, other Atlanteans had migrated
thither at different times. The Christ Initiate, referred to above,
appointed his seven great disciples to be the teachers of this association
of people, to whom they imparted their wisdom and precepts. Many of these
ancient Indians needed but little preparation for reviving within them the
scarcely extinct faculties leading to observation of the supersensible
world. For longing after that world was really a fundamental quality of
the Indian soul. It was felt that man’s original home was in that world.
He is transplanted out of it into this one, which offers only outer
sense-observation and the intelligence connected with it.

The supersensible world was felt to be the _real_ world, and the
sense-world to be a deception of the human power of observation, an
illusion (Maya). By every possible means these people strove to open up a
view of the real world. They could take no interest in the illusory
sense-world, or at any rate only so far as it proved to be a veil for the
supersensible. The power going out from the Seven Great Teachers to such
people as these, was a mighty one. What they were able to reveal entered
deeply into the Indian soul; and since the possession of the transmitted
etheric and astral bodies invested the teachers with lofty powers, they
were also able to work magically on their disciples. They did not really
teach; they worked as though by magic power from one personality to
another. Thus there arose a civilization completely saturated with
supersensible wisdom. The contents of the books of wisdom of the Hindus,
the Vedas, do not give the original form of the lofty wisdom imparted by
the great teachers of most ancient times, only a feeble echo of it. Only
the seer’s eye, looking backward is able to find unwritten primeval wisdom
behind the written words.

A particularly prominent feature of this ancient wisdom is the harmonious
accord of the various wisdom oracles of the Atlantean time. For each of
the Great Teachers was able to unveil the wisdom of one of these oracles,
and these different aspects were in complete harmony, because behind them
all was the fundamental wisdom of the Christ Initiation. It is true the
teacher who was the successor of the Christ Initiate did not impart to his
disciples what the Christ Initiate himself was able to reveal. The latter
had remained in the background during this period of evolution. At first
he was unable to entrust his high office to any post-Atlantean. The
difference between him and the Christ Initiate of the Seven Great Indian
Teachers was that the former was able to work his vision of the Christ
Mystery completely into the form of human ideas, whereas the Indian Christ
Initiate could only offer a reflection of the Mystery in signs and
symbols; for his humanly cultivated power of conception did not suffice
for such a Mystery. However, from the union of the Seven Teachers there
resulted a knowledge of the supersensible world, presented in one great
wisdom-panorama, of which only separate portions could be imparted in the
ancient Atlantean oracles. The great Regents of the cosmos were revealed,
and the One great Sun-spirit, the Hidden One, ruling over those who were
manifested through the seven teachers, was delicately indicated.

What is here meant by “ancient Indians” is not the same as what is usually
understood by that term. No outer documents exist of the period in
question. The people usually known as “Indians” belong to a stage of
historical evolution which was developed long after the time spoken of
here. We have to distinguish a first post-Atlantean period of the earth,
in which the Indian civilization now described was the predominant one;
then came a second post-Atlantean period in which the prevailing
civilization was that which later in this work is called the “ancient
Persian,” and still later was developed the Egypto-Chaldean civilization,
also to be described. During the evolution of these second and third
post-Atlantean epochs, “ancient” India also went through a second and
third epoch, and to this third epoch belongs what is usually related of
ancient India. What is described here must therefore not be applied to the
“ancient India” mentioned elsewhere.

Another feature of this ancient Indian civilization is that which
afterward led to the division of the race into castes. The inhabitants of
India were descendants of Atlanteans who belonged to the various types of
Saturn and Jupiter humanities, etc. By means of supersensible teachings it
was seen that it is not by chance that a soul is incarnated in a
particular caste, but that the soul itself has determined its lot. Such an
understanding of supersensible teachings was made much easier, because it
was possible to revive in many people the inner remembrance of their
ancestors which has been described above; this, of course, might also
easily lead to an erroneous idea of reincarnation. Just as, in the
Atlantean age, it was only through the Initiates that the true idea of
reincarnation could be realized, so in India, in most ancient times, it
was possible only through direct contact with the great teachers. It is
true that the erroneous idea of reincarnation mentioned above found the
widest acceptance imaginable among the bands of people who were dispersed
over Europe, Asia and Africa in consequence of the Atlantean catastrophe.
And because the Initiates who had gone astray during the Atlantean
evolution had imparted the mystery of reincarnation to immature souls,
mankind began to confuse more and more the true with the false ideas. Many
of these people indeed retained a kind of dim clairvoyance, as a heritage
from the Atlantean period. Just as the Atlanteans had entered the
spiritual world during sleep, their descendants had experience of it in
abnormal states, intermediate between sleeping and waking. Then there
arose in these people the images of the ancient times of their
forefathers. They believed themselves to be reincarnations of people who
had lived in those times. Teachings about reincarnation, which were at
variance with the true ideas of the Initiates, were widely spread over the
earth.

As a result of the long-continued migrations which had taken place from
west to east since the beginning of the Atlantean catastrophe, a group of
people settled in western Asia whose posterity is known to history as the
Persian race and the tribes related thereto. Here we look back to a much
earlier period than the historical times of these peoples. Next after the
Indian period, we have first to do with the very early ancestors of the
later Persians, among whom arose the second great civilization of
post-Atlantean evolution. The peoples of this second era had a different
mission from that of the Indians. Their longings and inclinations were not
fixed on the supersensible world alone; they were also directed toward the
physical sense-world, and the earth became dear to them. They valued what
man is able to acquire on it, and what he is able to win by means of its
forces. Their achievements as a warlike people, and the methods which they
discovered of acquiring the earth’s treasures, are connected with this
peculiarity of their nature. There was no danger of their turning their
backs upon the “illusion” of the physical senses in their yearning after
the supersensible, but rather of their entirely severing the connection of
their souls with the supersensible world, through their appreciation for
the physical world.

The oracle-sanctuaries, which had been transferred hither from the ancient
Atlantean territory, also reflected, in their own way, the general
character of the people. In them forces were present which it had formerly
been possible to acquire through experiences in the supersensible world,
and which could still be controlled in certain lower forms; these forces
were used in the sanctuaries to direct the phenomena of nature in such a
way as to make them subservient to man’s personal interests. This ancient
people still had a great mastery over those forces of nature which
subsequently withdrew from the influence of the human will. The guardians
of the oracles mastered certain inner forces connected with fire and other
elements. They can be called magicians. What supersensible knowledge and
force they had retained as a heritage from ancient times was certainly
slight in comparison with man’s powers in the remote past. But it
nevertheless took all kinds of forms, from the noble arts, the only object
of which was the welfare of humanity,—down to the most reprehensible
transactions.

The Luciferian influence held sway over these people in a peculiar manner.
It had brought them into connection with everything which diverts mankind
from the purposes of those exalted beings who alone would have guided
human evolution, had not the Luciferian influence interposed. Even those
members of this race who were still gifted with some remnant of the old
clairvoyant condition, described above as a state intermediate between
sleeping and waking, felt themselves powerfully attracted by the lower
beings of the spiritual world. In order to counteract these characteristic
qualities it was necessary that a spiritual impulse should be given to
this people. A leadership was established among them by the guardian of
the Mysteries of the Sun oracle, from the same source from which the
spiritual life of ancient India proceeded.

The leader of ancient Persian civilization, who was sent by the guardian
of the Sun oracle to the people now under consideration, may be designated
by the same name as the historical Zarathustra, or Zoroaster. Only the
fact must be emphasized that the personality indicated belongs to a much
earlier period than the historical possessor of the name. In this
connection it is not a question of outer historical research, but of
spiritual knowledge. And any one who instinctively thinks of a later time
in connection with the bearer of the name Zarathustra may reconcile this
idea with occult science on learning that the historical character
represents himself as a successor of the first great Zarathustra, whose
name he took, and in the spirit of whose teaching he worked.

The impulse which Zarathustra had to give to his people was to show them
that the physical world of sense is not merely the lifeless material,
devoid of spirit, which it appears to a man who gives himself up
exclusively to the influence of the Luciferian being. To this being man
owes his personal independence and sense of freedom; but it should work
within him in harmony with the opposite spiritual being. With the
pre-historic Persians it was a question of keeping alive the sense of this
last-named spiritual-being. Through their inclination toward the physical
sense world they ran the risk of complete amalgamation with the Luciferian
beings. Now Zarathustra, through the guardian of the Sun oracle, had
received an Initiation that enabled him to receive the revelations of the
great Sun-spirits. In particular states of consciousness, brought about by
his training, he was able to see the Regent of the Sun-spirits, who, as
described above, had taken under His protection the human etheric body.

Zarathustra knew that This Spirit directs the course of human evolution,
but that He must first, at a certain time, descend to earth out of cosmic
space. For this purpose it was necessary that He should be able to live in
a human astral body, just as in man. He had worked in the etheric body
since the entrance of the Luciferic nature. It was therefore necessary
that a man should appear who had retransformed the astral body to the same
level that it would have reached in the middle of the Atlantean evolution,
had there been no Luciferian influence. Had Lucifer not appeared, mankind
would certainly have attained this level before, but without personal
independence or the possibility of freedom. Now, however, in spite of
those qualities he should again arise to this height. Zarathustra, endowed
with prophetic vision, could see that in the future it would be possible,
within human evolution for a personality to exist, who would have a
suitable astral body for that purpose. But he also knew that the great
Sun-spirit could not appear on earth before that time, though He could be
perceived by a seer in the spiritual part of the Sun. When as a seer he
turned his attention to the Sun, Zarathustra was able to see This Spirit,
whom he proclaimed to his people. He announced that the Sun-spirit was at
first to be found only in the spiritual world, but that later He would
descend to earth. This was the great Sun-spirit, or Spirit of Light (the
Aura of the Sun, Ahura-mazdao, or Ormuzd). He was revealed to Zarathustra
and his followers as the Spirit who, for the time being, was turning the
light of His countenance on man from the spiritual world, and that it was
He Who might be expected to appear in a human body amongst men in the
future. It was the Christ, before his appearance on earth, whom
Zarathustra proclaimed as the Spirit of Light. On the other hand he
represented Ahriman (Angra mainju) as a power working injuriously on the
life of the human soul, when it engrosses that soul completely. This power
is none other than the one previously described, which had acquired
special dominion over the earth since the betrayal of the Vulcan
Mysteries. Together with the message concerning the Light God, Zarathustra
proclaimed teachings about those spiritual beings who were revealed to the
seer’s purified perception as associates of the Spirit of Light. These
were in strong contrast to the tempters who appeared to that unpurified
clairvoyance which was left over from the Atlantean period. It had to be
made clear to the ancient Persians that in man’s soul, so far as it is
engaged in work and endeavor in the physical sense world, a conflict is
going on between the power of the Light God and his adversary. It had also
to be shown them how man must act so as not to be engulfed by Ahriman, and
how to turn his influence to good through the power of the Light God.

The third era of post-Atlantean civilization began among the peoples who
finally gathered together in western Asia and northern Africa after the
migrations. This civilization was developed among the Chaldeans,
Babylonians, and Assyrians on the one hand, and among the Egyptians on the
other. In these peoples the taste for the physical world of sense
developed in a different form from that which it had taken among the
Persians. The former had acquired the quality of mind lying at the root of
the faculty of thought which has arisen since Atlantean times, that is,
the gift of reason. Indeed, it was the mission of post-Atlantean humanity
to develop within itself those faculties of the soul which it was possible
to acquire through the newly awakened powers of thought and feeling. These
powers cannot be directly stimulated from the spiritual world, but result
from man’s observing the sense-world, becoming familiar with it, and
working upon it. The conquest of the physical world of sense by these
human faculties must be regarded as the mission of post-Atlantean
humanity. Step by step that conquest proceeded. It is true that even in
ancient India, man, through the condition of his soul, was already turned
toward that world; but he still looked upon it as illusion, and his spirit
turned to the supersensible world. In the Persian race, on the contrary,
there sprang up the endeavour to conquer the physical world of sense, but
the attempt was still largely made with those powers of the soul which had
been left over as an inheritance from the time when man could still reach
the spiritual world directly. Among the peoples of the third epoch of
civilization, the soul had for the most part lost the supersensible
faculties. It was obliged to seek manifestations of the spiritual in the
surrounding world of sense, and to continue its development by discovering
the means of civilization existing in that world. Men sought to
investigate, through the physical world, the spiritual laws underlying it,
and in this way human sciences arose. Human technical skill, artistic
work, and their tools and means came about through the recognition and use
of the forces of the physical world. To a man of the Chaldaic-Babylonian
race the sense-world was no longer an illusion but a manifestation, in its
different kingdoms, in mountains and seas, in air and water, of the
spiritual activity of powers existing behind it, whose laws man was
striving to learn.

To the Egyptian, the earth was a field of work, given to him in a
condition which he must, by his own powers of intelligence, so transform
that it should bear the impress of human power. From Atlantis,
oracle-sanctuaries, originating chiefly from the Mercury oracle, had been
transplanted to Egypt. Yet there were others as well,—for example, Venus
oracles.

In that which was fostered, in their oracle-sanctuaries, among the
Egyptian peoples, the germ of a new culture was planted. This germ
proceeded from a great leader who had received his training in the Persian
Zarathustra Mysteries, who was the reincarnated individuality of a
disciple of the great Zarathustra himself. Let us call him “Hermes.”
Through acceptance of the Zarathustra Mysteries he was able to find the
right way to guide the Egyptian people. This people had so turned its
attention to the physical sense-world, during earthly life between birth
and death that it was able only to a limited extent to directly behold the
spiritual world behind the physical phenomena, although it recognized the
spiritual laws of the world. Thus it could not think of the spiritual
world as the one in which it could live while on earth, but on the other
hand, it could be shown how man will live, in the disembodied state after
death in the world of those spirits who, during earthly life, appear
through their impressions upon the sense-world.

Hermes taught that man qualifies himself for union with spiritual forces
after death, in proportion as he uses his powers on earth for furthering
the purposes of those spiritual forces. Those especially, who had worked
most zealously in this way between birth and death would be united with
the lofty Sun-God Osiris. On the Chaldaic-Babylonian side of this stream
of civilization the direction of the human mind toward the physical
sense-world was more conspicuous than on the Egyptian side. The laws of
that world were being investigated and from its reflection in the
sense-world these people looked up to the corresponding spiritual
prototypes. Yet in many respects the nation remained wedded to physical
things. Instead of the star-spirit, the star was put first, and instead of
other spiritual beings their earthly counterparts were made prominent.
Only the leaders attained to really deep knowledge concerning the laws of
the supersensible world and its connection with the physical. The contrast
between the knowledge of the Initiates and the perverted beliefs of the
people became more apparent in these nations than anywhere else.

Very different conditions existed in those parts of Southern Europe and
western Asia where the fourth epoch of post-Atlantean civilization was
unfolded. In occult science, it is called the Greco-Roman period.
Descendants of peoples inhabiting widely distant parts of the older world
had met together in these countries. Here were oracle-sanctuaries which
conformed to the various Atlantean oracles; here were people with the
heritage of ancient clairvoyance as a natural gift, and others who were
able to acquire it, with comparative ease, by training. The traditions of
the ancient Initiates were not only preserved in special places, but
worthy successors to them arose, who attracted disciples capable of rising
to lofty levels of spiritual vision. Moreover, these races had within them
the impulse to create a domain within the sense-world which expresses the
spiritual in perfect form through the physical.

Greek art is, among other things, a result of this impulse. It is only
necessary to gaze with the eye of the spirit upon a Greek temple, in order
to see that in this marvel of art, material substance is so worked upon by
man that it appears in every detail as the expression of spirit. The Greek
temple is the “House of the Spirit.” One sees in its form what otherwise
only The Spiritual eye of the seer perceives. The temple of Zeus-(or
Jupiter) is so constructed as to present to the physical eye a fitting
shrine for what the guardian of the Zeus-(or Jupiter) Initiation saw with
spiritual vision. And it is the same with all Greek art. The wisdom of the
Initiates flowed in mysterious ways into poets, artists, and thinkers. The
Mysteries of the Initiates are found again, in the form of conceptions and
ideas, in the systems of thought by which ancient Greek philosophers
interpreted the universe. The influences of the spiritual life, the
Mysteries of the Asiatic and African sanctuaries of Initiation, flowed
into these nations and to their leaders. The great Indian teachers, the
associates of Zarathustra, and the followers of Hermes had attracted
disciples. These, or their successors, thereupon founded sanctuaries for
Initiation, in which the ancient wisdom was revived in a new form. These
were the Mysteries of antiquity. Here disciples were prepared to be
brought into the condition of consciousness through which they might
attain vision of the spiritual world.(23) From these sanctuaries of
Initiation the Mysteries flowed forth to those who cultivated Spiritual
Mysteries in Asia Minor, Greece, and Italy. (Important centres of
Initiation were formed in the Greek world in the Orphic and Eleusinian
Mysteries. In the Pythagorean School of wisdom, lingered the effects of
the great wisdom-teachings and methods of past ages. On his distant
travels, Pythagoras had been initiated into the secrets of the most varied
kinds of Mysteries.)

But human life between birth and death in the post-Atlantean period had
also an influence on the disembodied state after death. The more man’s
interests were fixed on the physical sense-world, the greater was the
possibility of Ahriman gaining a hold upon the soul during earthly life
and retaining his power of it after death. This danger was least among the
peoples of ancient India, for during earthly life they had felt the
physical sense-world to be an illusion, and thus had eluded the power of
Ahriman after death. The danger for the primitive Persian peoples, who
between birth and death had fixed their attention, with great interest,
upon the physical sense-world was much greater. They would have largely
fallen a prey to Ahriman’s wiles had not Zarathustra pointed out,
emphatically through his teaching concerning the Light of God, that behind
the physical sense-world there exists the world of the Spirits of Light.
In proportion to the ability of the people of this civilization to receive
something into their souls out of the world of thought thus created, were
they able to escape Ahriman’s clutches during earthly life, and thereby
elude him in the life after death, during which they were to be prepared
for a new earth-life. The power of Ahriman in earthly life tends to make
the physical sense-existence appear to be the only one, and thus to bar
the way to any vista of a spiritual world. His power in the spiritual
world leads man to complete isolation, and to the concentration of all his
interest upon himself. Those who, at the time of death, are in Ahriman’s
power, are born again as egoists.

It is now possible for occult science to describe life between death and a
new birth as it is, provided the Ahrimanic influence has, to a certain
degree, been overcome. It is in this sense that it has been described by
the author in the first chapter of this book as well as in other writings.
And it must be described in this way if that which can be experienced by
man during this form of existence is to be visualized and if he has
attained to purely spiritual perception for that which really exists. The
degree to which the individual experiences this, depends upon the extent
to which he has overcome the Ahrimanic influence.

Man is approaching nearer and nearer to what it is possible for him to
become in the spiritual world. How this progress is thwarted by other
influences must however be clearly brought out in our consideration of the
course of human evolution.

During the Egyptian period Hermes taught the people to prepare themselves
during earth-life, for communion with the Spirit of Light. But because at
that time human interests, between birth and death, were already so
constituted that it was only possible to a slight degree to see through
the veil of the physical sense-world, therefore the spiritual vision of
the soul after death was also clouded and the perception of the world of
light remained dim.

The obscuration of the spiritual world after death reached a climax in the
souls who passed into the disembodied state out of a body belonging to the
Greco-Roman civilization. During their earthly life they had brought to
perfection the cultivation of physical sense-existence, and had thus
condemned themselves to a shadowy existence after death. Hence the Greek
felt life after death to be a shadowy existence, and it is not mere
rhetoric but the realization of truth when the hero of that time, who is
given up to the life of the senses, says, “Better a beggar on earth than a
king in the realm of shades.” All this was still more marked in those
Asiatic peoples who had fixed their attention with veneration and worship
on material images instead of on their spiritual archetypes. A large
proportion of mankind was in this condition at the time of the Greco-Roman
era of civilization. It can be seen how man’s mission in post-Atlantean
times, which consisted in the conquest of the physical sense-world, must
necessarily lead to estrangement from the spiritual world. Thus greatness
in one respect necessarily involves deterioration in another.

Man’s connection with the spiritual world was kept alive in the Mysteries.
Through these the Initiates, in special states of the soul, were able to
receive revelations from that world. They were more or less the successors
of the guardians of the Atlantean oracles. To them was revealed what had
been hidden through the influence of Lucifer and Ahriman. Lucifer
concealed from man what had flowed from the spiritual world into the human
astral body, without his co-operation, up to the middle of the Atlantean
period. Had the etheric body not been partially separated from the
physical body, man would have been able to experience within himself this
part of the spiritual world as an inner revelation to his soul. As a
result of Lucifer’s encroachment, this could be done only in special
states of the soul. At those times a spiritual world appeared to man in
the guise of the astral. The corresponding spiritual beings manifested
themselves in forms which embodied only the higher principles of the human
being, and in those principles the symbols of their particular spiritual
forces were astrally visible. Superhuman forms were manifested in this
way.

After the encroachment of Ahriman, still another kind of Initiation was
added to this one. Ahriman concealed from man everything out of the
spiritual world which would have appeared behind physical
sense-perception, had he not interfered in human affairs from the middle
of the Atlantean period onward. The Initiates of the Mysteries owed the
revelation of what he had thus kept hidden, to the fact that they had
developed within their souls all those faculties which man had attained
since that time, beyond the degree necessary for physical
sense-impressions. Thus there were revealed to them the spiritual powers
lying behind the forces of nature. They could speak of the spiritual
beings behind nature. The creative might of those forces acting in nature
below man, was revealed to them. That which had been active since Saturn,
Sun and the old Moon and had shaped man’s physical, etheric and astral
body as well as the mineral, plant and animal kingdoms, formed the
contents of a certain kind of mystery-secrets,—namely those over which
Ahriman held his hand. That which had formed the sentient-, rational-and
consciousness-souls and which had been concealed from man by Lucifer, was
revealed in a second kind of Mystery-secrets.

But what the Mysteries could only prophesy was, that in time a man would
appear possessing an astral body which, despite Lucifer, could become
conscious of the light-world of the Sun-spirit through the etheric body,
apart from any special condition of the soul. And the physical body of
that human being must be of such a nature, that everything in the
spiritual world would be revealed to him, which Ahriman is able to conceal
from man up to the time of physical death. Physical death could bring no
change into the life of such a being, that is to say, could have no power
over it. The “Ego” so manifests in such a human being that the entire
spiritual life is at the same time contained in his physical life. Such a
being is the vehicle of the Spirit of Light, to whom the Initiate ascends
from two directions, being led, under special conditions of the soul,
either to the Superhuman Spirit or to the Being of the forces of nature.
When the Initiates of the Mysteries foretold the appearance in the course
of time, of such a human being, they were prophets of the Christ.

A personality arose, as the special prophet of this coming manifestation,
within a nation which possessed through natural inheritance the qualities
of the peoples of western Asia, and through education the learning of the
Egyptians—the Hebrew nation. This prophet was Moses. The influences of
Initiation had entered so deeply into his soul that in certain states of
consciousness the being who had undertaken in the regular course of the
earth evolution to shape human consciousness from the Moon, was revealed
to him. In thunder and lightning Moses realized not merely physical
phenomena, but manifestations of this Spirit. At the same time the other
kind of Mysteries had influenced his soul, so that he was able to
distinguish, in astral vision, how the superhuman becomes human by means
of the ego. Thus, from two directions, He Who was to come, was revealed to
Moses as the highest form of the Ego.

And in Christ the lofty Sun-spirit appeared in human form as the great
ideal for human life on earth. At His coming, all mystery-wisdom had in
some respects to take a new form. Up to that time this wisdom had existed
exclusively for the purpose of enabling man to put himself into such a
condition of soul in which he would be able to view the kingdom of the
Sun-spirit as something _outside_ of earthly evolution. Henceforth it was
the mission of Mystery-wisdom to make man capable of recognizing in the
incarnated Christ the Primordial Being. From this Primordial Being man was
enabled to understand the natural and spiritual worlds.(24)

At the point in His life at which the astral body of Christ Jesus
contained everything which it is possible for the Luciferian influence to
conceal, He came forward as the Teacher of humanity. From that moment, the
faculty was implanted in human earthly evolution for assimilating that
wisdom whereby the physical goal of the earth may gradually be reached. At
the moment when the Event of Golgotha was accomplished, human nature was
endowed with another faculty, that by which Ahriman’s influence may be
turned into good. Henceforth man was able to take with him through the
gate of death that which saves him from isolation in the spiritual world.
What happened in Palestine was the central point, not only of human
physical evolution but also of the other worlds to which man belongs; and
when the “Mystery of Golgotha” had been accomplished, when the “death on
the cross” had been suffered, Christ appeared in that world where souls
sojourn after death, and set limits to the power of Ahriman. From that
moment the region which the Greeks had called the “realm of shades” was
illuminated by that flash of the Spirit indicating to its dwellers that
light was to return. What had been gained for the physical world by the
“Mystery of Golgotha” cast light also into the spiritual world.

Up to this event post-Atlantean human evolution had been a time of ascent
in the physical sense-world, but of descent as far as the spiritual world
was concerned. Everything which flowed into the sense-world proceeded from
what had been in the spiritual world from remote ages. Since the coming of
Christ, those who attain to the Mystery of Christ are able to take with
them into the spiritual world what they have won in the physical. And from
the spiritual world it then flows back again into the earthly sense-world,
since reincarnated souls, on re-entering earth-life, bring with them what
the Christ-impulse between death and a new birth, has bestowed.

What flowed into human evolution with the appearance of the Christ, acted
in it like a seed. Only slowly can this seed mature. Only the smallest
part of these profound new wisdom teachings, up to the present time, has
reached down into physical existence. Christian evolution has just barely
begun. During the successive periods of time following the appearance of
the Christ, this Christian Evolution was able to reveal only so much of
its inner essential nature as the humanity, the peoples of that time, were
capable of receiving; only as much as they could grasp with their
faculties of comprehension. The first form into which this essence of
Christianity could be poured may be described as a comprehensive ideal of
life. As such it was opposed to those forms of life which had been
developed in post-Atlantean humanity. The conditions operating in human
evolution since the repopulation of the earth in the Lemurian period have
been described above. Accordingly, humanity can be traced back to
different beings who, coming from other worlds, incarnated in the bodily
descendants of the ancient Lemurians. The various races of man are a
consequence of this, and the most diverse vital interests appeared in
these reincarnated souls, as a result of their Karma. As long as all this
was being worked out, there could be no ideal of “universal humanity.”
Human nature originated in unity, but earthly evolution up to the present
time has led to division. In the figure of the Christ, we see an ideal
which opposes all division, for in the man who bears the name of Christ
there lives the lofty Sun-being from Whom every human ego is descended.
The Hebrew nation still felt itself to be a nation, and each individual a
member of that nation. When once the idea was grasped that in Christ-Jesus
there lives the ideal Man who stands above all that tends to divide
humanity, Christianity became the Ideal of an all-Embracing brotherhood.
Above all individual interests and relations, the feeling arose in some
that the innermost ego of all human beings is of the same origin. (In
addition to all the earthly forefathers, the great common Father of all
humanity appears. “I and the Father are one.”)

In the fourth, fifth, and sixth centuries after Christ, the era in which
we are still living was being prepared in Europe. It was gradually to
replace the fourth, or Greco-Roman civilization. It is the fifth
post-Atlantean period. The races which, after many wanderings and varied
fortunes, became the vehicles of this new civilization were descendants of
those Atlanteans who had remained less affected than others by what had
been going on meanwhile during the four preceding periods of civilization.
They had not penetrated into the countries in which those respective
civilizations took root. On the contrary, they had, in their way, handed
on Atlantean forms of civilization. There were many among them who had
retained in a high degree the inheritance of the ancient dim clairvoyance,
the state described above as intermediate between sleeping and waking.
Such people knew the spiritual world from their own experience, and could
reveal to their fellow-men what takes place there. Thus there sprang up a
great number of narratives of spiritual beings and events, and the
national treasures of legends and sagas had their origin in spiritual
experiences of this kind. For the dim clairvoyance lasted on, in many
people, into times not far removed from the present. There were other
people who, although they had lost clairvoyance, nevertheless developed
the faculties they acquired for use in the physical sense-world in
accordance with feelings and emotions which corresponded to clairvoyant
experiences. And even the Atlantean oracles had their successors in the
new civilization.

There were everywhere Mysteries, but in them that Mystery of Initiation
was most cultivated, which leads to the unveiling of that part of the
spirit-world which Ahriman keeps hidden. The spiritual powers existing
behind the forces of nature were here revealed. In the mythologies of
European nations are contained the remnants of what the Initiates of these
Mysteries were able to disclose to men. It is true that these mythologies
also contain the other kind of mystery, although in a more imperfect form
than that possessed by the Southern and Eastern Mysteries. Superhuman
beings were also known in Europe, but they were seen to be in perpetual
conflict with the associates of Lucifer. And the Light-God too was
proclaimed, but in such a form that it was doubtful whether he would
overcome Lucifer. On the other hand, these Mysteries were illuminated by
the figure of the coming Christ. It was announced of Him that His kingdom
would replace that of the other Light-God.(25)

From such influences as these, there came about a cleavage in the soul of
the people of the fifth epoch of civilization which still continues, and
is manifest in most diverse phenomena. The soul had not retained, from
ancient times a sufficiently strong attraction for spiritual things to
enable it to hold fast the connection between the worlds of spirit and
sense. The attraction existed only as a training of feeling and emotion,
not as direct vision of the spiritual world. On the other hand, man’s
attention was more and more directed toward the world of the senses and
its conquest; and the intellectual powers which had been awakened in the
latter part of the Atlantean period, all those human powers of which the
physical brain is the instrument, were concentrated upon the sense-world,
and upon gaining knowledge of and mastery over it. Two worlds, so to
speak, were developed within man: the one directed toward the life of
physical sense; the other susceptible to the revelation of the spirit in
such a way as to permeate with feeling and emotion even though lacking
clairvoyant vision. The tendency to this cleavage of soul already existed
when the teaching concerning the Christ was introduced into Europe.

This message from the spiritual world was received into men’s hearts, and
permeated feeling and emotion; but it was not possible to bridge the gulf
between this state of devotion and what human intelligence, concentrated
on the sense-world, was learning in the sphere of physical existence. What
is now known as the contradiction between external science and spiritual
knowledge is simply a consequence of this fact. The Christian mysticism
(of Eckhart, Tauler and others) is the result of Christianity becoming
permeated with feeling and emotion. Science, occupied as it is exclusively
with the world of sense and its results in life, is the consequence of the
other tendency of the soul, and all achievements in the sphere of outer
material civilization are entirely due to this divergence of tendencies.
Since those human faculties, of which the brain is the instrument, were
concentrated exclusively on physical life, they were able to reach that
pitch of perfection which makes contemporary science, technical skill, and
other forms of mental activity possible. Such a material civilization
could originate only among the nations of Europe, for they are those
descendants of Atlantean ancestors who converted their natural inclination
toward the physical sense-world into faculties only when it had reached a
certain degree of maturity. Previously they had allowed it to lie dormant,
and had lived on what remained in them of the Atlantean clairvoyance and
on the communications of their Initiates. While mental culture was
outwardly almost entirely given up to these influences, in them ripened
slowly the desire for the material conquest of the world.

Now, however, the dawn of the sixth post-Atlantean era of civilization is
already at hand. What is to arise at a certain time in human evolution has
ripened slowly in the preceding age. The first beginnings of that which
can even now be developed, is to be discovered in the thread which binds
together the two tendencies of the human breast, material civilization and
life in the spiritual world. To this end it is necessary, on the one hand,
that the results of spiritual vision should be understood; and on the
other, that in the observations and experiences of of the sense-world the
revelations of the Spirit be recognized. The sixth civilization-epoch will
bring to full development the harmony between the two.

Herewith the studies in this book have reached a point where we may turn
from the perspectives of the past to those of the future. But it will be
better to precede the latter by a study of the Knowledge of Higher Worlds
and of Initiation. Then, after this study and in connection with it, we
shall be able to indicate in brief the outlook for the future, in so far
as that can be done within the framework of this book.





