CHAPTER VII. DETAILS FROM THE DOMAIN OF OCCULT SCIENCE MAN’S ETHERIC BODY


When the higher principles of man are observed with clairvoyant vision,
the mode of perception is never precisely the same as that which comes
from the outer senses. If we touch an object, and experience a sensation
of warmth, we must distinguish between that which comes from the object,
that which, as it were, streams out from it, and our own psychic
experience. The inner psychic experience of perceiving warmth is something
distinct from the heat which streams from the object. Now let us imagine
this psychic experience quite by itself without the outer object. Let us
call up the experience of a sensation of heat in our soul, without the
presence of any external physical object to cause it. If such a sensation
simply existed _without_ cause, it would be mere fancy. The student of
occult science experiences such inner perceptions without any physical
cause. But at a certain stage of development they present themselves in
such a manner that he knows (it has been shown that by the very nature of
the experience he can know) that the inner perception is not fancy, but is
caused by a psycho-spiritual being belonging to a supersensible world,
just as the ordinary sensation of heat, for example, is caused by an
external physical-sense object.

It is the same with the perception of colour in the supersensible world.
Here we must distinguish between the colour associated with the outer
object, and the inner colour-sensation in the soul. Let us call up the
soul’s inner sensation when it perceives a _red_ object in the physical,
outer world of the senses. Let us imagine that we retain a very vivid
recollection of the impression, but that we are looking away from the
object. Let us imagine what we still retain as a memory-picture of the
colour, to be an inner experience. We shall then distinguish between that
which is an inner experience of the colour, and the external colour
itself. These inner experiences differ entirely in their content from
impressions of the outer senses. They bear much more the impress of what
is felt as joy and sorrow than that of normal physical sensation. Now let
us imagine an inner experience of this kind arising in the soul, without
any suggestion from an outer sense object. A clairvoyant may have an
experience of this kind, and may know too, in that case, that it is no
fancy, but the expression of a psycho-spiritual being. Now if this
psycho-spiritual being excites the same impression as does a red object of
the physical-sense world, then that being is red. There will, however,
always be the external impression first, and then the inner experience of
colour, in the case of the physical-sense object; in that of the genuine
clairvoyance of a man of to-day, it _must_ be the contrary,—first the
inner experience, shadowy, like a mere recollection of colour, and then a
picture, growing more and more vivid. The less heed we pay to this
necessary sequence of events the less we are able to distinguish between
actual, spiritual perception and the delusions of fancy (illusion,
hallucination, etc.).

The vividness of the picture in a psycho-spiritual perception of this
kind, whether it remains quite shadowy, like a dim concept, or whether it
impresses us as intensively as an outer object, depends altogether upon
the clairvoyant’s stage of development. Now, the general impression
obtained by the clairvoyant of the etheric body, may be thus described.
When the clairvoyant has strengthened his will power to such a degree
that, in spite of the fact that an individual stands before him in a
physical body, he can abstract his attention from what the physical eye
sees,—he is then able to see clairvoyantly into the space occupied by the
man’s physical body. Of course, a great increase of will power is
necessary, in order to withdraw the attention not only from something in
the mind, but from something standing before one, in such a way that the
physical impression is quite extinguished. But this increase of will is
possible, and is brought about by exercises for the attainment of
supersensible cognition. The clairvoyant can then first have a general
impression of the etheric body. Within his soul there arises the same
inner sensation which he has, let us say, at the sight of a peach blossom;
then this becomes vivid, so that he is able to say that the etheric body
has the colour of peach blossoms. He next perceives the separate organs
and currents of the etheric body. A further description of the etheric
body may be given by relating the psychic experiences which correspond to
sensations of heat or of sound-impressions, etc., for this etheric body is
not merely a colour phenomenon. The astral body and the other principles
of the human being, may also be described in like manner. He who takes
this into consideration will understand just how descriptions should be
taken which are given by occult science.

The Astral World

As long as we observe the physical world only, the earth, as man’s
dwelling place, appears like a separate cosmic body. But when
supersensible cognition rises to higher spheres, this separation ceases.
Thus one can say that the imagination, when beholding the earth, at the
same time also perceives the Moon condition as it has developed up to the
present time.

Now that world which is entered in this way is one to which not only the
supersensible part of the Earth belongs, but is one in which also other
cosmic bodies are imbedded, which in a physical sense are entirely
separate from the earth. Therefore, the observer of supersensible worlds
thus beholds not only the supersensible part of the earth, but also the
supersensible part of other cosmic beings. If one should be impelled to
ask why clairvoyants do not describe the appearance of Mars, etc., he
should bear in mind that it is primarily a question of observing
supersensible conditions of other planetary bodies, whereas the questioner
is thinking of physical sense conditions. Therefore in this work it was
possible to speak of certain relations of the earth’s evolution to the
simultaneous evolution on Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, etc. Now when the human
astral body has been drawn away by sleep, it belongs not only to the
earth, but to worlds of which still other regions of the universe (stellar
worlds) are a part. Indeed, these worlds extend their influence to man’s
astral body even when he is awake. For this reason the name “astral body”
appears to be justified.

Of Man’s Life After Death

Mention has been made, in the course of this book, of the time during
which the astral body still remains joined to the etheric body of man
after death. During this time there exists a slowly paleing recollection
of the whole earth life just ended. The duration of this time varies in
different individuals. It depends upon the strength with which the astral
body clings to the etheric body, on the power which the former has over
the latter. Supersensible cognition can gain an idea of this power by
observing a person who, judging from his degree of fatigue, must of
necessity fall asleep, but, by sheer inner force, keeps awake. It then
appears that different people can keep awake for different lengths of time
without being overpowered by sleep. The memory of the past life, in other
words the connection with the etheric body, lasts about as long after
death as the length of time a man can keep awake when, in the most extreme
case, he is compelled to.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

When the etheric body is detached from the individual after death,
something of it nevertheless remains for man’s whole subsequent
development; this may be described as an extract, or the essence of it.
This extract contains the result of the past life, and is the vehicle of
all that which, during man’s spiritual development between death and a new
birth, unfolds like a germ for the following life.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

The duration of time between death and a new birth is determined by the
fact that the ego, as a rule, returns to the physical sense-world only
when that world has been so transformed that the ego can experience
something new. During its sojourn in spiritual regions, its dwelling place
on earth undergoes a change. But this change is connected with the great
changes in the universe, with changes in the constellation of the earth,
sun and so forth. These are changes in which certain repetitions take
place, in connection with new conditions. They find an external expression
in the fact, for example, that the point in the vault of heaven at which
the sun rises at the beginning of spring makes a complete circuit in the
course of about twenty-six thousand years. Hence this vernal point, in the
course of the period mentioned, moves from one region of the heavens to
another. In the course of the twelfth part of that time, that is to say,
in about twenty-one hundred years, conditions on the earth have changed
sufficiently for the human soul to experience something new upon it since
its previous incarnation. However, since the experiences of an individual
vary according to whether he is incarnated as a woman or as a man, there
are, as a rule, two incarnations within the time stated, one as a man and
one as a woman. But these things are also dependent upon the nature of the
forces which man carries with him from his earthly existence through
death. Therefore all the statements given here are to be taken only in a
general sense, but can be subject to the greatest variations in special
cases.

The Course Of Human Life

Man’s life, as it manifests itself in the sequence of events between birth
and death, can be fully understood only by taking into account both the
physical body with its senses and the changes undergone by man’s
supersensible principles. Occult science views those changes in the
following manner. Physical birth is seen to be the detachment of the human
being from its maternal covering. Forces which before birth the embryo
shared in common with its mother’s body, are present independently in the
child after birth. But in later life supersensible events, similar to
those of the sense-world at physical birth, become perceptible to
supersensible observation. That is, the etheric body of the human being up
to the change of teeth (the sixth or seventh year) is still enveloped in
an etheric sheath. The etheric sheath falls away at that period, and then
the “birth” of the etheric body occurs. But man is still surrounded by an
astral sheath, which falls away between its twelfth and sixteenth year (at
the time of puberty). This is the “birth” of the astral body; and at a
still later period the real ego is born.(33)

Now after the birth of the ego, man lives in such a way that he adapts
himself to the conditions of the world and of life, and occupies himself
within them, in accordance with the principles active through his ego,—the
sentient,- the intellectual- and the consciousness-soul. Then there comes
a time in which the etheric body retraces the process of its development
from the seventh year onward, in reverse order. At first the astral body
has so developed itself that it unfolds that which was present within it
at birth as a germ. After the birth of the ego, this astral body enriches
itself by experiencing the outer world. Finally, at a definite time, it
begins to nourish itself spiritually by consuming its own etheric body; it
actually lives upon the etheric body. The decay of the physical body in
old age is a consequence of this.

The course of human life therefore falls into three divisions: a time of
unfoldment for the physical and etheric bodies, then one in which the
astral body and the ego develop, and lastly that in which the etheric and
physical bodies are changed back again. But the astral body plays a part
in all the events that take place between birth and death. Since it is
really born in a spiritual sense only between the twelfth and sixteenth
years and must, during man’s declining years, draw upon the forces of the
etheric and physical bodies, that which it is able to perform by its own
powers will develop more slowly than if it were not within a physical and
an etheric body. After death, when the physical and etheric bodies have
fallen away, evolution, during the time of purification, proceeds in such
a manner that it occupies about one-third of the duration of life between
birth and death.

The Higher Regions Of The Spiritual World

By imagination, inspiration, and intuition, supersensible cognition
gradually ascends into those regions of the spiritual world within which
it can reach the beings who have to do with human and cosmic evolution.
And thus it also becomes possible to trace human evolution between death
and a new birth in such a way that it becomes comprehensible. Now there
are still higher regions of existence, which can only be briefly indicated
here. When supersensible cognition has risen to intuition, it lives in a
world of spiritual beings. These too, are evolving. That which concerns
humanity of the present day extends upward, in a certain sense, as far as
the world of intuition. True, man receives impulses from yet higher worlds
in the course of his evolution between death and re-birth. But he does not
experience these impulses directly; they are brought to him by beings
belonging to the spiritual world. And if these are considered, everything
that happens reveals itself to man. But the special conditions of these
beings, that which they themselves require in order to guide human
evolution, can only be observed by means of a cognition that transcends
intuition. We thus have a glimpse of worlds which we must so picture that
within them the most highly spiritual features of the earth are there
among the lowest. Logical decisions, for example, count among the highest
things within the earthly sphere; while the activities of the mineral
kingdom are among the lowest. Now in those higher spheres, logical
decisions correspond to about what the mineral activities are on earth.
Above the domain of intuition, lies the region in which the cosmic plan is
woven out of spiritual causes.

The Principles Of Man

When it is said that the ego works on the human principles, on the
physical, etheric, and astral bodies, and transforms them in reverse order
into Spirit-Self, Life-Spirit, and Spirit-Man, this statement relates to
the work of the ego on the human being by means of the highest faculties,
the development of which was begun only under earthly conditions. But this
transformation is preceded at a lower level by another change, giving rise
to the sentient-, the intellectual- or rational-, and the
consciousness-soul. For while, in the course of human evolution, the
sentient-soul is being formed, changes are taking place in the astral
body; the growth of the intellectual-soul expresses itself in
transformations in the etheric body; and that of the consciousness-soul in
similar transformations in the physical body. Fuller information on this
subject has been given in this book in the accounts of the evolution of
the earth. Thus in a certain sense we may say that the sentient-soul
itself is the result of a transformed astral body, the intellectual- or
rational-soul of a transformed etheric body, and the consciousness-soul of
a transformed physical body. But we may also say that these three
divisions of the soul are parts of the astral body; for example, the
consciousness-soul is only possible because it is an astral entity
existing in a physical body suited to it. It lives an astral life within a
physical body fashioned to be its dwelling place.

The Dream State

A description of the dream state has been given in another chapter of this
book. On the one hand it is to be regarded as a relic of the old
picture-consciousness peculiar to man during the Moon evolution, and also
during a great part of the evolution of the Earth. Evolution goes forward
in such a way that earlier conditions resolve themselves into later ones.
And so, in the dream state, there now appears in man a relic of what was
once his normal condition. But at the same time this condition from
another aspect is different from the old picture-consciousness. For since
its development, the ego also has taken part in those activities of the
astral body which are carried on during sleep in the dream life. Thus
through the presence of the ego there arises in dreams a transformed
picture-consciousness. But since the ego does not consciously exercise its
authority over the astral body during dream life, nothing belonging to the
sphere of that life can be regarded as being really able to lead to a
knowledge of higher worlds in an occult sense. Something similar holds
good with regard to what is often called vision, premonition, or “second
sight.” These arise through silencing the ego and the consequent
appearance of remnants of the old condition of consciousness. In spiritual
science these are of no value. What may be observed in them cannot in any
real sense be regarded as a result of it.

The Attainment Of Supersensible Knowledge

The path to the attainment of knowledge of the higher worlds, which has
been more fully described in this book, may also be called the “direct
path of knowledge.” In addition to this path there is another, which we
may designate as the “path of feeling.” It would be quite a mistake,
however, to believe that the former had nothing to do with the development
of feeling. On the contrary, it leads to the greatest possible deepening
of the life of feeling. But the “path of feeling” addresses itself
directly and solely to the feelings, and seeks from this point to rise to
knowledge. It rests on the fact that when the soul entirely surrenders
itself to a feeling for a certain length of time, the latter is
transformed into knowledge, into imaginative perception. When, for
example, the soul is filled for weeks or months, or even longer, with the
feeling of humility, the content of the feeling becomes transformed into a
perception. Now a path leading to supersensible regions may be found by
devoting oneself to such feelings one by one; but for the man of today,
bound by the ordinary circumstances of life, this is not easily carried
out. Solitude, retirement from the life of the present day, is almost
indispensable. For the impressions of everyday life disturb the soul
especially at the beginning of development, through absorption in certain
feelings. On the other hand, the path of knowledge described in this book
can be pursued in every situation of present-day life.

Observation Of Special Events And Beings In The Spiritual World

The question may be asked whether inner concentration and the other means
described for the attainment of supersensible cognition permit us to
observe only in a general way what happens between death and a new birth
or other spiritual events; or whether they furnish the possibility of
observing quite definite events and beings, as, for example, any given
deceased person. To this we must answer that one who has acquired the
ability to see in the spiritual world by the methods explained, can also
perceive particular events which occur there; he acquires the power of
putting himself in communication with individuals living in the spiritual
world between death and a new birth. It must be observed, however, that in
an occult sense this ought to take place only after the proper training
required for supersensible cognition has been undergone. For not until
then is it possible to distinguish between illusion and reality, in regard
to certain events and beings. A man who tries to observe particular cases
without due instruction, may fall a victim to innumerable deceptions. The
training which leads to the observation in higher worlds of what has been
described in this book, also leads to the ability to trace the post-mortem
life of any special individual, and no less does it lead to the
observation and comprehension of all psycho-spiritual beings who, from the
hidden worlds, work upon the visible ones. Correct observation of
individual cases is only possible, however, on the basis of a knowledge of
the universal great facts of the spiritual world,—facts regarding the
world and humanity which concern every human being. The desire for the one
without the other, leads one into error.






FOOTNOTES


    1 We may also say, it could only live the life of a plant in the
      physical body.

    2 Explanations such as those given in this book regarding the faculty
      of memory may very easily be misunderstood. For one who observes
      external events only would not at first sight notice the difference
      between what happens in the animal, or even in the plant, when
      something appears in them resembling memory, and what is here
      characterized as actual recollection in man. Of course, when an
      animal has performed an action for a third or fourth time it may
      perform it in such a way that the outer process gives the impression
      that memory and the training associated with it are present. Nay, we
      may even extend our conception of memory or of recollection as far
      as some naturalists and their disciples, when they point out that
      the chicken begins to pick up grain as soon as it comes out of the
      shell; that it even knows the proper movements of head and body for
      gaining its end. It could not have learned this in the eggshell;
      hence it must have done so through the thousands and thousands of
      creatures from which it is descended (so says Hering, for example).
      We may call the phenomenon before us something resembling memory,
      but we shall never arrive at a real comprehension of human nature if
      we do not take into account that every distinctive element which
      shows itself in the human being as an inner process, as an actual
      perception of earlier experiences at a later date, is not merely the
      working of earlier conditions in later ones. In this book it is this
      perception of what is past that is called memory, not alone the
      reappearance (even though transformed) of what once existed, in a
      later form. Were we to use the word memory for the corresponding
      processes in the vegetable and animal kingdoms, we should be
      required to use a different word in speaking of man. In the
      description given here the important thing is not the particular
      word used, but rather that in attempting to understand human beings
      this distinction should be recognized. Just as little do the
      apparently very intelligent actions of animals have any relation to
      what is _here_ called memory.

    3 The term “Verstandesseele” is sometimes translated by “rational
      soul.” From a certain point of view one might prefer the term
      “intellectual soul,” because it expresses better the activity of the
      soul than does “rational soul.” In the latter one thinks of the
      knowledge about a perception; in intellectuality, one thinks of the
      actual possibility of forming this knowledge through inward
      activity. In German the expression “emotional soul” only coincides
      as it should with the second member of the soul when the inward
      activity is kept in view.

    4 No hard and fast line can be drawn between the changes which are
      accomplished in the astral body through the activity of the ego and
      those taking place in the etheric body. The one merges into the
      other. When a man learns something, and thereby gains a certain
      capacity for judgment, a change takes place in his astral body; but
      when this judgment changes his natural disposition, so that he
      habituates himself to _feel_ differently, in consequence of his
      learning, from what he did before, this means a change in his
      etheric body. Everything that becomes so much a man’s own that he
      can always recall it, is based on the transformation of the etheric
      body. That which little by little becomes an abiding possession of
      the memory has its foundation in the transmission to the etheric
      body of the work of the astral body.

    5 As a matter of fact, it is always very profitable for any one who is
      taking up the study of occult science to acquaint himself with the
      statements of those who regard this science as merely fanciful. Such
      statements cannot be so easily branded as due to partiality on the
      part of the observer. Let occultists learn as much as possible from
      those who regard their efforts as nonsense. They need not be
      disturbed if in this respect their love is not reciprocated. Occult
      observation assuredly does not require such things for the
      verification of its results, nor are these allusions intended as
      proofs but as illustrations.

    6 In current theosophical literature, the condition of the ego from
      death to the end of purification is called “Kamaloca.”

    7 The assertion that a man’s personal talents, if governed purely by
      the law of “heredity,” must show themselves at the beginning of a
      line of descent, not at its end, might of course easily be
      misunderstood. It might be said, indeed, that they could not show
      themselves then, for they must first be developed. But this is no
      objection; for if we wish to prove that something has been inherited
      from an ancestor, we must show how that which was there formerly is
      repeated in a descendant. Now if it were demonstrated that something
      existed at the beginning of a genealogical line which reappeared in
      its further course, we might speak of heredity. We cannot do so when
      something appears at the end of it which was not there before. The
      reversal of the above proposition is only to show that the belief in
      heredity is impossible.

    8 In different chapters of this book it has been shown how the world
      of humanity, and man himself, pass, in their progressive evolution,
      through conditions which have been named Saturn, Sun, Moon, Earth,
      Jupiter, Venus, and Vulcan. The relationship has also been indicated
      in which human evolution stands with regard to the celestial bodies
      which exist besides the earth and which are called saturn, jupiter,
      mars, and so on. These latter planets are also passing through their
      evolution in the natural way. At the present period they have
      reached such a stage that their physical portions are seen as those
      bodies which physical astronomy calls saturn, jupiter, mars, and so
      forth. Now when the saturn of the present day is observed by
      occultism it is seen to be, in a certain sense, a reincarnation of
      the old Saturn. It has come into existence because of the presence
      of certain beings, who before the separation of the sun from the
      earth were unable, like the others, to leave with the sun. The
      reason of this was that they had gained so many qualities which are
      suitable for a saturn existence, that their place could not be where
      the qualities of the sun were specially unfolded. The present
      jupiter, however, arose in consequence of the presence of beings
      possessed of qualities which can only be matured on the future
      jupiter of the whole evolution. A dwelling place appeared for them
      on which they can already begin in anticipation of this later
      evolution.

      In the same way mars is a planetary body on which dwell beings whose
      lunar evolution was such that further progress on the earth could
      bring them nothing. Mars is a reincarnation of the old Moon at a
      higher stage. The present mercury is the dwelling place of beings
      who are beyond the evolution of the earth; but this is just because
      they have developed certain qualities in a higher way than is
      possible on the earth itself. The present venus is a prophetic
      anticipation of the future Venus condition of a similar kind. It is
      consequently justifiable to give to the conditions preceding and
      following the Earth the names of their corresponding representatives
      in the universe.

    9 Therefore it is perhaps scarcely necessary to remark that what has
      been described above could never actually happen. A contemporary
      man, as he is, could not have approached ancient Saturn as a
      spectator. The account was given merely for the sake of
      illustration.

   10 In Christian spiritual science they bear the name of “Kyriotetes,”
      that is, “Dominions.”

   11 In Christian esoteric science they are called “Thrones.”

   12 The Christian “Dynamis,” or “Powers.”

   13 The Christian “Exusiai,” or “Authorities.”

   14 The Christian “Archai,” or “Principalities.”

   15 The Christian “Archangeloi,” or “Archangels.”

   16 The Christian “Seraphim.”

   17 The Christian “Angeloi,” or “Angels.”

   18 The Christian “Cherubim.”

   19 The gas appears to clairvoyant consciousness through the effect of
      light which emanates from it. We might therefore speak also of light
      forms, which are apparent to spiritual vision.

   20 In current theosophical literature they are called "rounds." Yet, if
      we bear in mind the more graphic description already given, we shall
      guard against a too schematic concept of such matters.

   21 In the next few pages, Sun and Moon are printed with capital letters
      when the _old_ evolutions are referred to, but are printed “sun” and
      “moon” when the Earth period is indicated.—_Translator_.

   22 Further particulars on this subject will be found in my book,
      _Atlantis and Lemuria_, which deals with man’s ancestors.

   23 More detailed information about these Mysteries of antiquity is to
      be found in my book, “Christianity as Mystical Fact.” More
      particulars will be given in the last chapter of the present work.

   24 What is to be said further on this subject will be given in a later
      chapter dealing with supersensible knowledge.

   25 All sagas concerning the twilight of the gods, and similar
      traditions, had their origin in this knowledge of the Mysteries in
      Europe.

   26 It is a matter of no moment whatever whether the above thoughts are
      warranted or not by any of the views held by natural science. For
      the object is to develop such thoughts about the plant and man as
      may—irrespective of all theories—be gained by means of simple and
      direct contemplation. Such thoughts are of importance side by side
      with no less significant theoretical presentments of things in the
      external world; and here the thoughts are not adduced in order to
      prove a fact scientifically, but to construct a symbol that shall
      prove effective, irrespective of whatever objections may be raised
      by this or that person against its construction.

   27 In my explanations of “How to attain Knowledge of the Higher
      Worlds,” translated under the title of _The Way of Initiation_ and
      beginning at Chapter II, several other examples of methods of
      meditation are given, and especially efficacious will be found one
      which deals with the coming into being and fading away of a plant;
      also another may be particularly recommended, based on the dormant
      formative power dwelling in the seed of a plant, and others on the
      form and structure of crystals, and other substances. But the
      purpose in this book was only to show in one instance, the nature of
      meditation.

   28 Special exercises going into greater detail on this subject may be
      found in my book entitled _The Way of Initiation_.

   29 It must of course be clearly understood that such an appellation as
      “lotus flower” has no more bearing on the matter than has the
      expression “wing,” if applied to the lobe of a lung.

   30 In my books, entitled “_The Way of Initiation_” and “_Initiation and
      Its Results_,” some of these methods of meditation and exercises for
      acting upon these different organs are set forth.

   31 The appellation “two-petalled” or “sixteen-petalled,” and so on, is
      used because the organs in question may be likened to flowers having
      a corresponding number of petals.

   32 Intuition is in everyday life a much-abused word, which is made to
      stand for a vague and uncertain view of a matter; for some sort of
      “notion,” which, while it may possibly “hit” the truth, can
      nevertheless give no immediate proof of it. It is needless to say
      that this kind of intuition is not meant here. Intuition, in this
      case, stands for knowledge of the highest and most luminous
      clearness, of the justification of which the possessor is, in the
      fullest sense, conscious.

   33 The suggestive points of view for the conduct of education resulting
      from a knowledge of these supersensible facts are presented in my
      little book, _The Education of Children from the Standpoint of
      Spiritual Science_, in which will be found fuller details of what
      can here only be hinted at.





***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN OUTLINE OF OCCULT SCIENCE***



CREDITS


December  20, 2009

            Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1
            Produced by Juliet Sutherland, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at <http://www.pgdp.net/>.



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 30718‐0.txt or 30718‐0.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/0/7/1/30718/


Updated editions will replace the previous one — the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
— you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you
share it without charge with others.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation.”

    - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

    - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES — Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND — If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY — You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.






***FINIS***

