CHAPTER IX. Reflections on the Life and Character of St. Paul

Such is in a few words the life of St. Paul whom we are justly entitled
to regard as the principal founder of the Christian Religion. In fact
it appears that without him, the ignorant and rude disciples of Jesus,
would never have been able to spread their sect. In order to succeed
they required a man of greater information and activity, more
enterprising and enthusiastic, and possessing more dexterity than any of
those, who composed the apostolic college, before it was joined by Paul.
In him we see all those qualities united, which made him of all others,
the most fitted to lay the foundation of a new sect. He knew how to
profit by the lessons he had received from Gamaliel; from him he had
acquired a profound knowledge of the Jewish Scriptures, and learnt the
art of explaining them in an allegorical sense, or, in other words, the
Cabala by which we may find in these books whatever we desire.

It can hardly be doubted that our Apostle, possessed much energy and
ambition. We first see him persecuting the disciples of Jesus with
ardour; and with the view of gaining his ends, and making court to the
priests, stoop to the trade of informer and spy. Apparently he expected
by these means to advance himself, but seeing the futility of these
ambitious hopes, and probably despised and neglected even by those whom
he had thus zealously served; he changes his batteries, threw himself
upon the enemies side, and seeing the abilities of those whom he found
at the head of the new sect, he felt how easily he could eclipse them,
and constitute himself the chief.

There is reason to believe that these were the true motives of Paul's
conversion; a mind of his stamp in declaring itself on the side of the
new sect, at once satisfied its vengeance and ambition. It was then very
easy for Ananias to make him listen to reason. The apostles were
not slow in discovering the value of their new acquisition; they
acknowledged the superiority of such a man; they foresaw the advantages
the rising sect would derive from his knowledge, his active and
persevering genius and intrepidity of character. Thus we see the new
Apostle, from the moment that he was enrolled in the Apostolic College,
perform the principal part, and throw his coadjutors completely in
the shade. These contented with preaching at Jerusalem, seldom showed
themselves at a distance from this city, whilst our hero, continually
traversed the provinces, made spiritual conquests, and strengthened in a
hundred places the cause of the disciples of Christ, now become his own.
In a word Paul now becomes the soul of his sect; his enthusiasm extends
itself; he braves danger when it is necessary to increase the number
of his partizans; his ambition is flattered by the empire that he has
gained; crosses, fatigues, imprisonments, and blows are not capable
of abating his ardour; determined to succeed at any cost he sacrifices
every thing to the desire that he has of extending those opinions, which
give him the power of reigning over the minds of men. He knew well that
no-empire upon earth is more grateful or stronger than that of opinion.

Nothing appears that ought to induce us to regard the activity,
obstinate constancy, and courage of Paul as miraculous or supernatural
effects. We find the same zeal, and frequently the same intrepidity
and obstinacy in all those strongly animated by ambition or any other
passion. Obstacles but serve generally to irritate energetic minds, more
and more, they make a merit of braving dangers; torture, and even death,
cannot restrain those who are thoroughly enamoured with any object in
which they have placed their happiness.

St. Paul has been held up to us as a man divested of all personal views.
His humility, constancy, disinterestedness, and patience, have been
advanced, as undoubted proofs of his sincerity, and pure zeal for his
religion. But we say that all these things prove nothing but his violent
desire for success. The preachers of an infant and oppressed sect,
destitute of power, must always announce themselves with much
suppleness, mildness and humility; an ambitious man must in order to
gain men's hearts, effect much moderation and appear disinterested;
besides he is sure of losing nothing, when he shall succeed in
establishing his empire over the mind. Do devotees ever neglect their
spiritual guides? In short patience and constancy are necessary in all
enterprises; every man who would crown a great adventure with success,
ought to avoid hastiness. Nevertheless if we turn to the history of St.
Paul, we shall see that patience was not always his ruling virtue;
he very often spoiled his plans by his eagerness, and especially he
alienated the minds of the Jews, rather than converted them to his
opinions. He would perhaps have succeeded much better with them, had he
kept a better government over his impetuous temper, at which it appears
his coadjutors often revolted. Devotees generally mistake that for
zeal, which is but a vice in their character, and an imprudence in their
conduct. The bitter reply that Paul made to the High Priest, proves that
our Apostle was not excessively enduring, and forgot, at least, on some
occasions his Christian patience.




CHAPTER X. Of the Enthusiasm of St. Paul

It appears certain that this apostle was filled with enthusiasm and
zeal. It will perhaps be asked whether we have a right to regard him
as an impostor? a thousand examples prove to us, that nothing is more
common, than to witness enthusiasm, zeal and imposture united in the
same person. The most sincere enthusiast is generally a man whose
passions are turbulent, and capable of blinding him; he takes his
passions for divine impulses, be deludes himself, and if we may be
allowed the expression, gets intoxicated with his own wine. A man who
at first engages in a particular cause from motives of interest, or
ambition, very frequently finishes by attaching himself to it with
sincerity and with strength proportioned to the sacrifices he may have
made for it. If he succeed in persuading himself, that the cause of his
passions is the cause of God, he will make no scruple of supporting
it by all sorts of means, he will sometimes allow the use of artifice,
deceit, and oblique ways of maintaining the opinions of which he happens
to be convinced. It is thus we daily see very zealous devotees, employ
deception, fraud, and sometimes crime, in support of the interests of
religion, i. e. of the cause they have embraced.

Thus although in the first instance the desire of being revenged on the
priests, or ambitious views, may have determined St. Paul to join the
sect of Christians, he might have been able by degrees to attach himself
strongly to it, to persuade himself that it was preferable to the
religion of the Jews, and to employ objectionable means, in order to
make it succeed in the world.

The examination that now remains for us to make of some features in the
conduct of our apostle, and of some passages in the writings which are
attributed to him, will serve better than any reasoning to determine the
judgment, we ought to come to respecting this person. Let us then hear
what he has to say for himself. This analysis will shew us whether
Paul was so sincere, disinterested, humble, mild, and upright as his
partizans, maintain him to have been.

St. Paul in speaking of himself says: "That he knew a man who was caught
up into the third heaven, and that there he heard unspeakable words,
which it was not lawful for man to utter*." It appears in the first
place that no one but a man of a very heated imagination could with
sincerity pretend to have been caught up into the third Heaven; and no
one but an impostor, could assert such a fact without being persuaded
of it. In the second place we may ask of what use could it be to mankind
that St. Paul should hear in the third heaven, unspeakable words, that
is to say, such as it was unlawful for man to utter? What should we
think of a man who should come and assure us, that he possessed a secret
most important to our happiness, but yet one which he was not permitted
to divulge? Thus the voyage of St. Paul is either a chimera engendered
by a sickly brain, or a fable, contrived by a cheat, who sought to make
himself respected by boasting of the peculiar favours of the almighty.
This voyage then was perfectly useless, since it was not permitted him
who made it to relate that which he learnt from it. In short there is
malice in St. Paul thus irritating the curiosity of his hearers and
refusing to satisfy it. Under whatever point of view then we behold this
history or tale of Paul's ravishment into the third heaven, it can be of
no utility to us, and reflects but little honour upon himself.

     * 2 Corinthians, chap. xii. ver. 2, 3, 4.




