CHAPTER XXIV. General reflections on the foundations of Christian Faith,
and on the Causes of Credulity

These then are the only foundations of faith! Christians are obliged to
believe that St. Paul was neither an enthusiast nor a cheat, because the
church has decided that he was divinely inspired: the church has decided
this important point of belief, according to the Acts of the Apostles
and epistles, which, as we have shown, were both rejected by many sects
of the primitive Christians, and which, as we have proved in the course
of this work, are filled with contradictions and absurdities.

Nevertheless no Christian now dares to doubt of the authenticity of
these books. These works are regarded as sacred by the universal church,
by Christians of all sects, who with the exception notwithstanding of
some considerable and important variations, read them in the same manner
and entertain for them the same veneration. What can we oppose to this
unanimity? The example of Mahomet. This prophet who is at this day
equally revered by all sects of Mussulmen, was at first regarded as an
impostor at Mecca, whence he was compelled to fly. His Koran now
become the rule and code of a clergy, supported by princes and powerful
nations, was at first considered as a tissue of fables compiled by
imposture. This unanimity of the Mahometans, in acknowledging the
sanctity of Mahomet, and the divinity of the Koran proves no more in
their favour, than the agreement of all sects of Christians in admitting
the Saintship of Paul, and the inspiration of his writings, proves in
favour of the Apostle and his wonderful epistles.

It is the property of habit to change the appearance of things, men by
degrees become familiar with that which at first disgusted them; time is
able to confound truth and falsehood; clearly proved deceptions, finish
by becoming undoubted facts to the ignorant, the idle, and those either
too much occupied, or involved in dissipation to examine, and these are
the majority of mankind. The most palpable imposture when it has existed
a length of time, acquires a solidity which nothing can shake: that
which has been believed by many for ages appears to have a real
foundation, and to have at least a claim to probability. When once time
has obliterated the traces of imposture, they are difficult to detect,
and most men find it easier to stick to received opinions than to
undergo the painful task of examining what they ought to think.

Such are the true causes of the indolence that men generally show,
as often as they are called upon to give a reason for their religious
notions, they are contented to follow the current. Besides when
prejudice is supported by force, and becomes necessary to the interests
of a powerful body, it is dangerous to combat it, and few men have the
courage to oppose deceptions, approved by the world, and authorised by
the governing powers.

On the other hand error, when habitual passes for truth, and is equally
agreeable. We hold fast to our vices and prejudices, the virtues and
opinions which are opposed to them, appear ridiculous or disagreeable.
It is this natural disposition of the human, species, which, by little
and little, imbue nations with the most extravagant opinions, absurd
fables, and ill-digested systems.

No, artifice was; ever better imagined, nor trick was ever more
calculated to deceive the vulgar than that of divine inspiration. Upon
this is founded all the religions in the world; it is to this marvellous
invention that the priests of the whole earth are indebted for their
authority, their riches, and their existence. When a man tells us,
that he is divinely inspired, it is difficult for most men to ascertain
whether he lie, or speak the truth. God never contradicts those who
make him speak, on the contrary those impostors who deceive in his
name generally perform miracles and prodigies, and these miracles and
prodigies, are to the short sighted multitude undoubted signs of divine
favor.

Shall we then judge those who are inspired by their conduct? They
generally take care to impose on us by their disinterestedness,
patience, and mildness of behaviour, and it can hardly be supposed that
such moderate men could have formed the design of deceiving or gaining
power. It is only when they have gently insinuated themselves into men's
minds, that we find ambition, avarice, and passions of the missionary
develope themselves: it is after having won over the multitude, that
their empire discovers itself; and they exact with pride, the tribute
and respect due to the organs of heaven, and the messengers of the most
high.

These are the means by which Christianity has been established, the
manoeuvres have been practised by our great Apostle, and all those who
have assisted in disseminating his doctrine. His own experience
often made Paul sensible, that his pride and fiery disposition, were
frequently obstacles to his mission; thus we see him sometimes doa
violence to his character, take the air of mildness and humility, so
much better suited, to insinuate into mens good opinions than arrogance
and pride. He only assumes the tone of the master, when he knows his
ground; then he threatens, thunders, and displays his authority. Does
a dispute arise between himself and an associate? He resists him to his
face; he makes the church feel how necessary he is to the cause; and
avails himself of it, to exhibit his authority, His example has been at
all times faithfully followed by the heads of the Christian religion.
Humble, mild, patient, tolerant, and disinterested whenever they have
been weak, they become haughty, quarrelsome, intolerant, avaricious,
and rebellious subjects to princes whenever they were certain of their
empire over the people. It was then that they prescribed laws, crushed
their enemies, plundered the people, and caused kings to tremble at the
name of the God whose interpreters they declared themselves to be.

The heads of the Christian religion have at all times made those
opinions, most comfortable to their own interest pass for divine
oracles. The Holy Ghost has had no other function, than to serve for a
cloak to their intrigues, passions, and pretensions. The works of our
Apostle furnished quarrelsome priests with arguments for injuring
each other; his disjointed reveries, his obscure mysteries, and his
ambiguous oracles, were an arsenal whence the most opposite parties
procured arms to combat incessantly. In short the writings inspired by a
God who was desirous of instructing mankind, have only served to plunge
nations in darkness. Guides enlightened by the Holy Ghost saw no clearer
than the ignorant, into mysteries, they continually presented to them by
an unintelligible system. These great doctors were agreed upon nothing,
each one sought to gain adherents whom he excited against the enemies
of his own opinions, which he regarded as those only approved by heaven.
Thence arose animosities, hatred, persecutions, and wars, which have
a thousand times spread trouble and desolation among Christians, blind
enough to follow men who pretended to be led by the Holy Ghost, while
it was evident, that the only spirit which inspired them, was that of
pride, ambition, obstinacy, vengeance, avarice, and rebellion.




CONCLUSION.

Let us then be careful, oh! my friends, of allowing ourselves to be
guided by inspired persons. Deceivers, or enthusiasts, they will only
lead us into errors destructive of our peace. Let us consult reason, so
decried by men, whose interest it is to extinguish a light which is able
to show us the plots of their dark policy, this reason will inform us
that contradictory works do not merit our belief; that a turbulent,
ambitious and enthusiastic Apostle, may have been a very useful Saint to
the church, and a very bad citizen. This reason will convince us, that
a God filled with wisdom could never inspire men with systems, in which
folly is the most prominent feature; that a God who is the author of
reason could never have called for its immolation, before the shrine of
fable, and pretended mystery incapable of producing any thing but evil
and dissension upon the earth. Let us be just, benevolent, peaceable,
let us leave to St. Paul, and to those who take him for a model, their
lofty ambition, their turbulent fanaticism, their obstinate vanity,
their persecuting spirit, and above all things their bitter zeal, which
they term an interest for the salvation of souls. Let us show to all men
not an evangelic charity which is converted into fury and hatred, but
a real charity which inspires us with love, peace, indulgence, and
humanity. May this charity so much boasted of, and so little practised,
by St. Paul and his successors, be the rule of our conduct, and the
standard of our judgments on men and their opinions. Examine all
things, and hold fast that which is good. Let us not be blinded by the
prejudices, of infancy, of habit, or of authority. Let us not be imposed
upon by the pompous names of Paul, of Cephas, or of Apollos; but let
us seek the truth and follow reason, which can never lead astray, nor
render us troublesome members of society.

FINIS.









