II.

THE Christian religion rests on miracles. There are no miracles in the
realm of science. The real philosopher does not seek to excite wonder,
but to make that plain which was wonderful. He does not endeavor to
astonish, but to enlighten. He is perfectly confident that there are
no miracles in nature. He knows that the mathematical expression of the
same relations, contents, areas, numbers and proportions must forever
remain the same. He knows that there are no miracles in chemistry; that
the attractions and repulsions, the loves and hatreds, of atoms are
constant. Under like conditions, he is certain that like will always
happen; that the product ever has been and forever will be the
same; that the atoms or particles unite in definite, unvarying
proportions,--so many of one kind mix, mingle, and harmonize with just
so many of another, and the surplus will be forever cast out. There are
no exceptions. Substances are always true to their natures. They have no
caprices, no prejudices, that can vary or control their action. They are
"the same yesterday, to-day, and forever."

In this fixedness, this constancy, this eternal integrity, the
intelligent man has absolute confidence. It is useless to tell him that
there was a time when fire would not consume the combustible, when water
would not flow in obedience to the attraction of gravitation, or that
there ever was a fragment of a moment during which substance had no
weight.

Credulity should be the servant of intelligence. The ignorant have not
credulity enough to believe the actual, because the actual appears to be
contrary to the evidence of their senses. To them it is plain that the
sun rises and sets, and they have not credulity enough to believe in the
rotary motion of the earth--that is to say, they have not intelligence
enough to comprehend the absurdities involved in their belief, and the
perfect harmony between the rotation of the earth and all known facts.
They trust their eyes, not their reason. Ignorance has always been
and always will be at the mercy of appearance. Credulity, as a rule,
believes everything except the truth. The semi-civilized believe in
astrology, but who could convince them of the vastness of astronomical
spaces, the speed of light, or the magnitude and number of suns and
constellations? If Hermann, the magician, and Humboldt, the philosopher,
could have appeared before savages, which would have been regarded as a
god?

When men knew nothing of mechanics, nothing of the correlation of force,
and of its indestructibility, they were believers in perpetual motion.
So when chemistry was a kind of sleight-of-hand, or necromancy,
something accomplished by the aid of the supernatural, people talked
about the transmutation of metals, the universal solvent, and the
philosopher's stone. Perpetual motion would be a mechanical miracle; and
the transmutation of metals would be a miracle in chemistry; and if we
could make the result of multiplying two by two five, that would be a
miracle in mathematics. No one expects to find a circle the diameter of
which is just one fourth of the circumference. If one could find such a
circle, then there would be a miracle in geometry.

In other words, there are no miracles in any science. The moment we
understand a question or subject, the miraculous necessarily disappears.
If anything actually happens in the chemical world, it will, under like
conditions, happen again.

No one need take an account of this result from the mouths of others:
all can try the experiment for themselves. There is no caprice, and no
accident.

It is admitted, at least by the Protestant world, that the age of
miracles has passed away, and, consequently, miracles cannot at present
be established by miracles; they must be substantiated by the testimony
of witnesses who are said by certain writers--or, rather, by uncertain
writers--to have lived several centuries ago; and this testimony is
given to us, not by the witnesses themselves, not by persons who say
that they talked with those witnesses, but by unknown persons who did
not give the sources of their information.

The question is: Can miracles be established except by miracles? We know
that the writers may have been mistaken. It is possible that they may
have manufactured these accounts themselves. The witnesses may have told
what they knew to be untrue, or they may have been honestly deceived,
or the stories may have been true as at first told. Imagination may have
added greatly to them, so that after several centuries of accretion a
very simple truth was changed to a miracle.

We must admit that all probabilities must be against miracles, for
the reason that that which is probable cannot by any possibility be
a miracle. Neither the probable nor the possible, so far as man is
concerned, can be miraculous. The probability therefore says that the
writers and witnesses were either mistaken or dishonest.

We must admit that we have never seen a miracle ourselves, and we must
admit that, according to our experience, there are no miracles. If we
have mingled with the world, we are compelled to say that we have known
a vast number of persons--including ourselves--to be mistaken, and many
others who have failed to tell the exact truth. The probabilities are on
the side of our experience, and, consequently, against the miraculous;
and it is a necessity that the free mind moves along the path of least
resistance.

The effect of testimony depends on the intelligence and honesty of
the witness and the intelligence of him who weighs. A man living in a
community where the supernatural is expected, where the miraculous is
supposed to be of almost daily occurrence, will, as a rule, believe that
all wonderful things are the result of supernatural agencies. He will
expect providential interference, and, as a consequence, his mind will
pursue the path of least resistance, and will account for all phenomena
by what to him is the easiest method. Such people, with the best
intentions, honestly bear false witness. They have been imposed upon by
appearances, and are victims of delusion and illusion.

In an age when reading and writing were substantially unknown, and when
history itself was but the vaguest hearsay handed down from dotage to
infancy, nothing was rescued from oblivion except the wonderful, the
miraculous. The more marvelous the story, the greater the interest
excited. Narrators and hearers were alike ignorant and alike honest. At
that time nothing was known, nothing suspected, of the orderly course of
nature--of the unbroken and unbreakable chain of causes and effects. The
world was governed by caprice. Everything was at the mercy of a being,
or beings, who were themselves controlled by the same passions that
dominated man. Fragments of facts were taken for the whole, and the
deductions drawn were honest and monstrous.

It is probably certain that all of the religions of the world have been
believed, and that all the miracles have found credence in countless
brains; otherwise they could not have been perpetuated. They were not
all born of cunning. Those who told were as honest as those who heard.
This being so, nothing has been too absurd for human credence.

All religions, so far as I know, claim to have been miraculously
founded, miraculously preserved, and miraculously propagated. The
priests of all claimed to have messages from God, and claimed to have
a certain authority, and the miraculous has always been appealed to for
the purpose of substantiating the message and the authority.

If men believe in the supernatural, they will account for all phenomena
by an appeal to supernatural means or power. We know that formerly
everything was accounted for in this way except some few simple things
with which man thought he was perfectly acquainted. After a time men
found that under like conditions like would happen, and as to those
things the supposition of supernatural interference was abandoned; but
that interference was still active as to all the unknown world. In other
words, as the circle of man's knowledge grew, supernatural interference
withdrew and was active only just beyond the horizon of the known.

Now, there are some believers in universal special providence--that is,
men who believe in perpetual interference by a supernatural power,
this interference being for the purpose of punishing or rewarding, of
destroying or preserving, individuals and nations.

Others have abandoned the idea of providence in ordinary matters, but
still believe that God interferes on great occasions and at critical
moments, especially in the affairs of nations, and that his presence
is manifest in great disasters. This is the compromise position. These
people believe that an infinite being made the universe and impressed
upon it what they are pleased to call "laws," and then left it to run in
accordance with those laws and forces; that as a rule it works well,
and that the divine maker interferes only in cases of accident, or at
moments when the machine fails to accomplish the original design.

There are others who take the ground that all is natural; that there
never has been, never will be, never can be any interference from
without, for the reason that nature embraces all, and that there can be
no without or beyond.

The first class are Theists pure and simple; the second are Theists
as to the unknown, Naturalists as to the known; and the third are
Naturalists without a touch or taint of superstition.

What can the evidence of the first class be worth? This question
is answered by reading the history of those nations that believed
thoroughly and implicitly in the supernatural. There is no conceivable
absurdity that was not established by their testimony. Every law or
every fact in nature was violated. Children were bom without parents;
men lived for thousands of years; others subsisted without food,
without sleep; thousands and thousands were possessed with evil spirits
controlled by ghosts and ghouls; thousands confessed themselves guilty
of impossible offences, and in courts, with the most solemn forms,
impossibilities were substantiated by the oaths, affirmations, and
confessions of men, women, and children.

These delusions were not confined to ascetics and peasants, but they
took possession of nobles and kings; of people who were at that time
called intelligent; of the then educated. No one denied these wonders,
for the reason that denial was a crime punishable generally with death.
Societies, nations, became insane--victims of ignorance, of dreams, and,
above all, of fears. Under these conditions human testimony is not and
cannot be of the slightest value. We now know that nearly all of the
history of the world is false, and we know this because we have arrived
at that phase or point of intellectual development where and when
we know that effects must have causes, that everything is naturally
produced, and that, consequently, no nation could ever have been great,
powerful, and rich unless it had the soil, the people, the intelligence,
and the commerce. Weighed in these scales, nearly all histories are
found to be fictions.

The same is true of religions. Every intelligent American is satisfied
that the religions of India, of Egypt, of Greece and Rome, of the
Aztecs, were and are false, and that all the miracles on which they rest
are mistakes. Our religion alone is excepted. Every intelligent Hindoo
discards all religions and all miracles except his own. The question
is: When will people see the defects in their own theology as clearly as
they perceive the same defects in every other?

All the so-called false religions were substantiated by miracles, by
signs and wonders, by prophets and martyrs, precisely as our own. Our
witnesses are no better than theirs, and our success is no greater. If
their miracles were false, ours cannot be true. Nature was the same in
India and in Palestine.

One of the corner-stones of Christianity is the miracle of inspiration,
and this same miracle lies at the foundation of all religions. How can
the fact of inspiration be established? How could even the inspired man
know that he was inspired? If he was influenced to write, and did write,
and did express thoughts and facts that to him were absolutely new, on
subjects about which he had previously known nothing, how could he know
that he had been influenced by an infinite being? And if he could know,
how could he convince others?

What is meant by inspiration? Did the one inspired set down only the
thoughts of a supernatural being? Was he simply an instrument, or did
his personality color the message received and given? Did he mix his
ignorance with the divine information, his prejudices and hatreds with
the love and justice of the Deity? If God told him not to eat the flesh
of any beast that dieth of itself, did the same infinite being also tell
him to sell this meat to the stranger within his gates?

A man says that he is inspired--that God appeared to him in a dream, and
told him certain things. Now, the things said to have been communicated
may have been good and wise; but will the fact that the communication
is good or wise establish the inspiration? If, on the other hand, the
communication is absurd or wicked, will that conclusively show that the
man was not inspired? Must we judge from the communication? In other
words, is our reason to be the final standard?

How could the inspired man know that the communication was received from
God? If God in reality should appear to a human being, how could this
human being know who had appeared? By what standard would he judge? Upon
this question man has no experience; he is not familiar enough with the
supernatural to know gods even if they exist. Although thousands have
pretended to receive messages, there has been no message in which there
was, or is, anything above the invention of man. There are just as
wonderful things in the uninspired as in the inspired books, and the
prophecies of the heathen have been fulfilled equally with those of the
Judean prophets. If, then, even the inspired man cannot certainly know
that he is inspired, how is it possible for him to demonstrate his
inspiration to others? The last solution of this question is that
inspiration is a miracle about which only the inspired can have the
least knowledge, or the least evidence, and this knowledge and this
evidence not of a character to absolutely convince even the inspired.

There is certainly nothing in the Old or the New Testament that could
not have been written by uninspired human beings. To me there is nothing
of any particular value in the Pentateuch. I do not know of a solitary
scientific truth contained in the five books commonly attributed to
Moses. There is not, as far as I know, a line in the book of Genesis
calculated to make a human being better. The laws contained in Exodus,
Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy are for the most part puerile and
cruel. Surely there is nothing in any of these books that could not have
been produced by uninspired men. Certainly there is nothing calculated
to excite intellectual admiration in the book of Judges or in the wars
of Joshua; and the same may be said of Samuel, Chronicles, and Kings.
The history is extremely childish, full of repetitions of useless
details, without the slightest philosophy, without a generalization bom
of a wide survey. Nothing is known of other nations; nothing imparted of
the slightest value; nothing about education, discovery, or invention.
And these idle and stupid annals are interspersed with myth and miracle,
with flattery for kings who supported priests, and with curses and
denunciations for those who would not hearken to the voice of the
prophets. If all the historic books of the Bible were blotted from the
memory of mankind, nothing of value would be lost.

Is it possible that the writer or writers of First and Second Kings
were inspired, and that Gibbon wrote "The Decline and Fall of the Roman
Empire" without supernatural assistance? Is it possible that the author
of Judges was simply the instrument of an infinite God, while John W.
Draper wrote "The Intellectual Development of Europe" without one ray
of light from the other world? Can we believe that the author of Genesis
had to be inspired, while Darwin experimented, ascertained, and reached
conclusions for himself.

Ought not the work of a God to be vastly superior to that of a man? And
if the writers of the Bible were in reality inspired, ought not that
book to be the greatest of books? For instance, if it were contended
that certain statues had been chiselled by inspired men, such statues
should be superior to any that uninspired man has made. As long as it is
admitted that the Venus de Milo is the work of man, no one will believe
in inspired sculptors--at least until a superior statue has been found.
So in the world of painting. We admit that Corot was uninspired. Nobody
claims that Angelo had supernatural assistance. Now, if some one should
claim that a certain painter was simply the instrumentality of God,
certainly the pictures produced by that painter should be superior to
all others.

I do not see how it is possible for an intelligent human being to
conclude that the Song of Solomon is the work of God, and that the
tragedy of Lear was the work of an uninspired man. We are all liable to
be mistaken, but the Iliad seems to me a greater work than the Book of
Esther, and I prefer it to the writings of Haggai and Hosea. AEschylus is
superior to Jeremiah, and Shakespeare rises immeasurably above all the
sacred books of the world.

It does not seem possible that any human being ever tried to establish a
truth--anything that really happened--by what is called a miracle. It
is easy to understand how that which was common became wonderful by
accretion,--by things added, and by things forgotten,--and it is easy
to conceive how that which was wonderful became by accretion what was
called supernatural. But it does not seem possible that any intelligent,
honest man ever endeavored to prove anything by a miracle.

As a matter of fact, miracles could only satisfy people who demanded no
evidence; else how could they have believed the miracle? It also appears
to be certain that, even if miracles had been performed, it would be
impossible to establish that fact by human testimony. In other words,
miracles can only be established by miracles, and in no event could
miracles be evidence except to those who were actually present; and in
order for miracles to be of any value, they would have to be perpetual.
It must also be remembered that a miracle actually performed could by
no possibility shed any light on any moral truth, or add to any human
obligation.

If any man has, ever been inspired, this is a secret miracle, known to
no person, and suspected only by the man claiming to be inspired. It
would not be in the power of the inspired to give satisfactory evidence
of that fact to anybody else.

The testimony of man is insufficient to establish the supernatural.
Neither the evidence of one man nor of twelve can stand when
contradicted by the experience of the intelligent world. If a book
sought to be proved by miracles is true, then it makes no difference
whether it was inspired or not; and if it is not true, inspiration
cannot add to its value.

The truth is that the church has always--unconsciously, perhaps--offered
rewards for falsehood. It was founded upon the supernatural, the
miraculous, and it welcomed all statements calculated to support
the foundation. It rewarded the traveller who found evidences of the
miraculous, who had seen the pillar of salt into which the wife of Lot
had been changed, and the tracks of Pharaoh's chariots on the sands of
the Red Sea. It heaped honors on the historian who filled his pages with
the absurd and impossible. It had geologists and astronomers of its own
who constructed the earth and the constellations in accordance with the
Bible. With sword and flame it destroyed the brave and thoughtful men
who told the truth. It was the enemy of investigation and of reason.
Faith and fiction were in partnership.

To-day the intelligence of the world denies the miraculous. Ignorance
is the soil of the supernatural. The foundation of Christianity has
crumbled, has disappeared, and the entire fabric must fall. The natural
is true. The miraculous is false.

North American Review, March, 1890.




HUXLEY AND AGNOSTICISM.


PROFESSOR HUXLEY AND AGNOSTICISM.

IN the February number of the Nineteenth Century, 1889, is an article
by Professor Huxley, entitled "Agnosticism." It seems that a church
congress was held at Manchester in October, 1888, and that the Principal
of King's College brought the topic of Agnosticism before the assembly
and made the following statement:

"But if this be so, for a man to urge as an escape from this article
of belief that he has no means of a scientific knowledge of an unseen
world, or of the future, is irrelevant. His difference from Christians
lies, not in the fact that he has no knowledge of these things, but
that he does not believe the authority on which they are stated. He
may prefer to call himself an Agnostic, but his real name is an older
one--he is an infidel; that is to say, an unbeliever. The word infidel,
perhaps, carries an unpleasant significance. Perhaps it is right that it
should. It is, and it ought to be, an unpleasant thing for a man to have
to say plainly that he does not believe in Jesus Christ."

Let us examine this statement, putting it in language that is easily
understood; and for that purpose we will divide it into several
paragraphs.

First.--"For a man to urge that he has no means of a scientific
knowledge of the unseen world, or of the future, is irrelevant."

Is there any other knowledge than a scientific knowledge? Are there
several kinds of knowing? Is there such a thing as scientific ignorance?
If a man says, "I know nothing of the unseen world because I have no
knowledge upon that subject," is the fact that he has no knowledge
absolutely irrelevant? Will the Principal of King's College say that
having no knowledge is the reason he knows? When asked to give your
opinion upon any subject, can it be said that your ignorance of that
subject is irrelevant? If this be true, then your knowledge of the
subject is also irrelevant?

Is it possible to put in ordinary English a more perfect absurdity? How
can a man obtain any knowledge of the unseen world? He certainly cannot
obtain it through the medium of the senses. It is not a world that he
can visit. He cannot stand upon its shores, nor can he view them from
the ocean of imagination. The Principal of King's College, however,
insists that these impossibilities are irrelevant.

No person has come back from the unseen world. No authentic message has
been delivered. Through all the centuries, not one whisper has broken
the silence that lies beyond the grave. Countless millions have sought
for some evidence, have listened in vain for some word.

It is most cheerfully admitted that all this does not prove the
non-existence of another world--all this does not demonstrate that death
ends all. But it is the justification of the Agnostic, who candidly
says, "I do not know."

Second.--The Principal of King's College states that the difference
between an Agnostic and a Christian "lies, not in the fact that he has
no knowledge of these things, but that he does not believe the authority
on which they are stated."

Is this a difference in knowledge, or a difference in belief--that is to
say, a difference in credulity?

The Christian believes the Mosaic account. He reverently hears and
admits the truth of all that he finds within the Scriptures. Is this
knowledge? How is it possible to know whether the reputed authors of the
books of the Old Testament were the real ones? The witnesses are dead.
The lips that could testify are dust. Between these shores roll the
waves of many centuries. Who knows whether such a man as Moses existed
or not? Who knows the author of Kings and Chronicles? By what testimony
can we substantiate the authenticity of the prophets, or of the
prophecies, or of the fulfillments? Is there any difference between the
knowledge of the Christian and of the Agnostic? Does the Principal of
King's College know any more as to the truth of the Old Testament than
the man who modestly calls for evidence? Has not a mistake been made? Is
not the difference one of belief instead of knowledge? And is not
this difference founded on the difference in credulity? Would not
an infinitely wise and good being--where belief is a condition to
salvation--supply the evidence? Certainly the Creator of man--if such
exist--knows the exact nature of the human mind--knows the evidence
necessary to convince; and, consequently, such a being would act in
accordance with such conditions.

There is a relation between evidence and belief. The mind is so
constituted that certain things, being in accordance with its nature,
are regarded as reasonable, as probable.

There is also this fact that must not be overlooked: that is, that just
in the proportion that the brain is developed it requires more evidence,
and becomes less and less credulous. Ignorance and credulity go hand in
hand. Intelligence understands something of the law of average, has an
idea of probability. It is not swayed by prejudice, neither is it driven
to extremes by suspicion. It takes into consideration personal motives.
It examines the character of the witnesses, makes allowance for the
ignorance of the time,--for enthusiasm, for fear,--and comes to its
conclusion without fear and without passion.

What knowledge has the Christian of another world? The senses of the
Christian are the same as those of the Agnostic.

He hears, sees, and feels substantially the same. His vision is limited.
He sees no other shore and hears nothing from another world.

Knowledge is something that can be imparted. It has a foundation
in fact. It comes within the domain of the senses. It can be told,
described, analyzed, and, in addition to all this, it can be classified.
Whenever a fact becomes the property of one mind, it can become the
property of the intellectual world. There are words in which the
knowledge can be conveyed.

The Christian is not a supernatural person, filled with supernatural
truths. He is a natural person, and all that he knows of value can be
naturally imparted. It is within his power to give all that he has to
the Agnostic.

The Principal of King's College is mistaken when he says that the
difference between the Agnostic and the Christian does not lie in the
fact that the Agnostic has no knowledge, "but that he does not believe
the authority on which these things are stated."

The real difference is this: the Christian says that he has knowledge;
the Agnostic admits that he has none; and yet the Christian accuses the
Agnostic of arrogance, and asks him how he has the impudence to admit
the limitations of his mind. To the Agnostic every fact is a torch, and
by this light, and this light only, he walks.

It is also true that the Agnostic does not believe the authority relied
on by the Christian. What is the authority of the Christian? Thousands
of years ago it is supposed that certain men, or, rather, uncertain men,
wrote certain things. It is alleged by the Christian that these men were
divinely inspired, and that the words of these men are to be taken as
absolutely true, no matter whether or not they are verified by modern
discovery and demonstration.

How can we know that any human being was divinely inspired? There has
been no personal revelation to us to the effect that certain people were
inspired--it is only claimed that the revelation was to them. For this
we have only their word, and about that there is this difficulty: we
know nothing of them, and, consequently, cannot, if we desire, rely upon
their character for truth. This evidence is not simply hearsay--it
is far weaker than that. We have only been told that they said these
things; we do not know whether the persons claiming to be inspired
wrote these things or not; neither are we certain that such persons ever
existed. We know now that the greatest men with whom we are acquainted
are often mistaken about the simplest matters. We also know that men
saying something like the same things, in other countries and in ancient
days, must have been impostors. The Christian has no confidence in the
words of Mohammed; the Mohammedan cares nothing about the declarations
of Buddha; and the Agnostic gives to the words of the Christian the
value only of the truth that is in them. He knows that these sayings get
neither truth nor worth from the person who uttered them. He knows
that the sayings themselves get their entire value from the truth they
express. So that the real difference between the Christian and the
Agnostic does not lie in their knowledge,--for neither of them has any
knowledge on this subject,--but the difference does lie in credulity,
and in nothing else. The Agnostic does not rely on the authority of
Moses and the prophets. He finds that they were mistaken in most matters
capable of demonstration. He finds that their mistakes multiply in the
proportion that human knowledge increases. He is satisfied that the
religion of the ancient Jews is, in most things, as ignorant and cruel
as other religions of the ancient world. He concludes that the efforts,
in all ages, to answer the questions of origin and destiny, and to
account for the phenomena of life, have all been substantial failures.

In the presence of demonstration there is no opportunity for the
exercise of faith. Truth does not appeal to credulity--it appeals to
evidence, to established facts, to the constitution of the mind. It
endeavors to harmonize the new fact with all that we know, and to bring
it within the circumference of human experience.

The church has never cultivated investigation. It has never said: Let
him who has a mind to think, think; but its cry from the first until now
has been: Let him who has ears to hear, hear.

The pulpit does not appeal to the reason of the pew; it speaks by
authority and it commands the pew to believe, and it not only commands,
but it threatens.

The Agnostic knows that the testimony of man is not sufficient to
establish what is known as the miraculous. We would not believe to-day
the testimony of millions to the effect that the dead had been raised.
The church itself would be the first to attack such testimony. If we
cannot believe those whom we know, why should we believe witnesses who
have been dead thousands of years, and about whom we know nothing?

Third.--The Principal of King's College, growing somewhat severe,
declares that "he may prefer to call himself an Agnostic, but his real
name is an older one--he is an infidel; that is to say, an unbeliever."

This is spoken in a kind of holy scorn. According to this gentleman, an
unbeliever is, to a certain extent, a disreputable person.

In this sense, what is an unbeliever? He is one whose mind is so
constituted that what the Christian calls evidence is not satisfactory
to him. Is a person accountable for the constitution of his mind, for
the formation of his brain? Is any human being responsible for the
weight that evidence has upon him? Can he believe without evidence? Is
the weight of evidence a question of choice? Is there such a thing as
honestly weighing testimony? Is the result of such weighing necessary?
Does it involve moral responsibility? If the Mosaic account does not
convince a man that it is true, is he a wretch because he is candid
enough to tell the truth? Can he preserve his manhood only by making a
false statement?

The Mohammedan would call the Principal of King's College an
unbeliever,--so would the tribes of Central Africa,--and he would return
the compliment, and all would be equally justified. Has the Principal of
King's College any knowledge that he keeps from the rest of the world?
Has he the confidence of the Infinite? Is there anything praiseworthy in
believing where the evidence is sufficient, or is one to be praised for
believing only where the evidence is insufficient? Is a man to be blamed
for not agreeing with his fellow-citizen? Were the unbelievers in the
pagan world better or worse than their neighbors? It is probably true
that some of the greatest Greeks believed in the gods of that nation,
and it is equally true that some of the greatest denied their existence.
If credulity is a virtue now, it must have been in the days of Athens.
If to believe without evidence entities one to eternal reward in this
century, certainly the same must have been true in the days of the
Pharaohs.

An infidel is one who does not believe in the prevailing religion. We
now admit that the infidels of Greece and Rome were right. The gods that
they refused to believe in are dead. Their thrones are empty, and long
ago the sceptres dropped from their nerveless hands. To-day the world
honors the men who denied and derided these gods.

Fourth.--The Principal of King's College ventures to suggest that "the
word infidel, perhaps, carries an unpleasant significance; perhaps it is
right that it should."

A few years ago the word infidel did carry "an unpleasant significance."
A few years ago its significance was so unpleasant that the man to
whom the word was applied found himself in prison or at the stake. In
particularly kind communities he was put in the stocks, pelted with
offal, derided by hypocrites, scorned by ignorance, jeered by cowardice,
and all the priests passed by on the other side.

There was a time when Episcopalians were regarded as infidels; when a
true Catholic looked upon a follower of Henry VIII. as an infidel, as
an unbeliever; when a true Catholic held in detestation the man who
preferred a murderer and adulterer--a man who swapped religions for the
sake of exchanging wives--to the Pope, the head of the universal church.

It is easy enough to conceive of an honest man denying the claims of
a church based on the caprice of an English king. The word infidel
"carries an unpleasant significance" only where the Christians are
exceedingly ignorant, intolerant, bigoted, cruel, and unmannerly.

The real gentleman gives to others the rights that he claims for
himself. The civilized man rises far above the bigotry of one who has
been "born again." Good breeding is far gentler than "universal love."

It is natural for the church to hate an unbeliever--natural for the
pulpit to despise one who refuses to subscribe, who refuses to give. It
is a question of revenue instead of religion. The Episcopal Church has
the instinct of self-preservation. It uses its power, its influence, to
compel contribution. It forgives the giver.

Fifth.--The Principal of King's College insists that "it is, and it
ought to be, an unpleasant thing for a man to have to say plainly that
he does not believe in Jesus Christ."

Should it be an unpleasant thing for a man to say plainly what he
believes? Can this be unpleasant except in an uncivilized community--a
community in which an uncivilized church has authority?

Why should not a man be as free to say that he does not believe as to
say that he does believe? Perhaps the real question is whether all men
have an equal right to express their opinions. Is it the duty of the
minority to keep silent? Are majorities always right? If the minority
had never spoken, what to-day would have been the condition of this
world? Are the majority the pioneers of progress, or does the pioneer,
as a rule, walk alone? Is it his duty to close his lips? Must the
inventor allow his inventions to die in the brain? Must the discoverer
of new truths make of his mind a tomb? Is man under any obligation to
his fellows? Was the Episcopal religion always in the majority? Was it
at any time in the history of the world an unpleasant thing to be
called a Protestant? Did the word Protestant "carry an unpleasant
significance"? Was it "perhaps right that it should"? Was Luther a
misfortune to the human race?

If a community is thoroughly civilized, why should it be an unpleasant
thing for a man to express his belief in respectful language? If the
argument is against him, it might be unpleasant; but why should simple
numbers be the foundation of unpleasantness? If the majority have the
facts,--if they have the argument,--why should they fear the mistakes of
the minority? Does any theologian hate the man he can answer?

It is claimed by the Episcopal Church that Christ was in fact God; and
it is further claimed that the New Testament is an inspired account of
what that being and his disciples did and said. Is there any obligation
resting on any human being to believe this account? Is it within the
power of man to determine the influence that testimony shall have upon
his mind?

If one denies the existence of devils, does he, for that reason, cease
to believe in Jesus Christ? Is it not possible to imagine that a great
and tender soul living in Palestine nearly twenty centuries ago was
misunderstood? Is it not within the realm of the possible that his
words have been inaccurately reported? Is it not within the range of the
probable that legend and rumor and ignorance and zeal have deformed his
life and belittled his character?

If the man Christ lived and taught and suffered, if he was, in reality,
great and noble, who is his friend--the one who attributes to him feats
of jugglery, or he who maintains that these stories were invented by
zealous ignorance and believed by enthusiastic credulity?

If he claimed to have wrought miracles, he must have been either
dishonest or insane; consequently, he who denies miracles does what
little he can to rescue the reputation of a great and splendid man.

The Agnostic accepts the good he did, the truth he said, and rejects
only that which, according to his judgment, is inconsistent with truth
and goodness.

The Principal of King's College evidently believes in the necessity of
belief. He puts conviction or creed or credulity in place of character.
According to his idea, it is impossible to win the approbation of God by
intelligent investigation and by the expression of honest conclusions.
He imagines that the Infinite is delighted with credulity, with belief
without evidence, faith without question.

Man has but little reason, at best; but this little should be used. No
matter how small the taper is, how feeble the ray of light it casts, it
is better than darkness, and no man should be rewarded for extinguishing
the light he has.

We know now, if we know anything, that man in this, the nineteenth
century, is better capable of judging as to the happening of any event,
than he ever was before. We know that the standard is higher to-day--we
know that the intellectual light is greater--we know that the human mind
is better equipped to deal with all questions of human interest, than at
any other time within the known history of the human race.

It will not do to say that "our Lord and his apostles must at least be
regarded as honest men." Let this be admitted, and what does it prove?
Honesty is not enough. Intelligence and honesty must go hand in hand.
We may admit now that "our Lord and his apostles" were perfectly honest
men; yet it does not follow that we have a truthful account of what they
said and of what they did. It is not pretended that "our Lord" wrote
anything, and it is not known that one of the apostles ever wrote
a word. Consequently, the most that we can say is that somebody has
written something about "our Lord and his apostles." Whether that
somebody knew or did not know is unknown to us. As to whether what is
written is true or false, we must judge by that which is written.

First of all, is it probable? is it within the experience of mankind?
We should judge of the gospels as we judge of other histories, of other
biographies. We know that many biographies written by perfectly honest
men are not correct. We know, if we know anything, that honest men can
be mistaken, and it is not necessary to believe everything that a man
writes because we believe he was honest. Dishonest men may write the
truth.

At last the standard or criterion is for each man to judge according to
what he believes to be human experience. We are satisfied that nothing
more wonderful has happened than is now happening. We believe that
the present is as wonderful as the past, and just as miraculous as the
future. If we are to believe in the truth of the Old Testament, the
word evidence loses its meaning; there ceases to be any standard of
probability, and the mind simply accepts or denies without reason.

We are told that certain miracles were performed for the purpose of
attesting the mission and character of Christ. How can these miracles
be verified? The miracles of the Middle Ages rest upon substantially the
same evidence. The same may be said of the wonders of all countries and
of all ages. How is it a virtue to deny the miracles of Mohammed and to
believe those attributed to Christ?

You may say of St. Augustine that what he said was true or false. We
know that much of it was false; and yet we are not justified in saying
that he was dishonest. Thousands of errors have been propagated by
honest men. As a rule, mistakes get their wings from honest people. The
testimony of a witness to the happening of the impossible gets no weight
from the honesty of the witness. The fact that falsehoods are in the
New Testament does not tend to prove that the writers were knowingly
untruthful. No man can be honest enough to substantiate, to the
satisfaction of reasonable men, the happening of a miracle.

For this reason it makes not the slightest difference whether the
writers of the New Testament were honest or not. Their character is not
involved. Whenever a man rises above his contemporaries, whenever he
excites the wonder of his fellows, his biographers always endeavor to
bridge over the chasm between the people and this man, and for that
purpose attribute to him the qualities which in the eyes of the
multitude are desirable.

Miracles are demanded by savages, and, consequently, the savage
biographer attributes miracles to his hero. What would we think now of a
man who, in writing the life of Charles Darwin, should attribute to him
supernatural powers? What would we say of an admirer of Humboldt who
should claim that the great German could cast out devils? We would feel
that Darwin and Humboldt had been belittled; that the biographies were
written for children and by men who had not outgrown the nursery.

If the reputation of "our Lord" is to be preserved--if he is to stand
with the great and splendid of the earth--if he is to continue a
constellation in the intellectual heavens, all claim to the miraculous,
to the supernatural, must be abandoned.

No one can overestimate the evils that have been endured by the human
race by reason of a departure from the standard of the natural. The
world has been governed by jugglery, by sleight-of-hand. Miracles,
wonders, tricks, have been regarded as of far greater importance than
the steady, the sublime and unbroken march of cause and effect. The
improbable has been established by the impossible. Falsehood has
furnished the foundation for faith.

Is the human body at present the residence of evil spirits, or have
these imps of darkness perished from the world? Where are they? If the
New Testament establishes anything, it is the existence of innumerable
devils, and that these satanic beings absolutely took possession of
the human mind. Is this true? Can anything be more absurd? Does any
intellectual man who has examined the question believe that depraved
demons live in the bodies of men? Do they occupy space? Do they live
upon some kind of food? Of what shape are they? Could they be classified
by a naturalist? Do they run or float or fly? If to deny the existence
of these supposed beings is to be an infidel, how can the word infidel
"carry an unpleasant significance"?

Of course it is the business of the principals of most colleges, as well
as of bishops, cardinals, popes, priests, and clergymen to insist upon
the existence of evil spirits. All these gentlemen are employeed to
counteract the influence of these supposed demons. Why should they take
the bread out of their own mouths? Is it to be expected that they will
unfrock themselves?

The church, like any other corporation, has the instinct of
self-preservation. It will defend itself; it will fight as long as it
has the power to change a hand into a fist.

The Agnostic takes the ground that human experience is the basis of
morality. Consequently, it is of no importance who wrote the gospels,
or who vouched or vouches for the genuineness of the miracles. In his
scheme of life these things are utterly unimportant. He is satisfied
that "the miraculous" is the impossible. He knows that the witnesses
were wholly incapable of examining the questions involved, that
credulity had possession of their minds, that "the miraculous" was
expected, that it was their daily food.

All this is very clearly and delightfully stated by Professor Huxley,
and it hardly seems possible that any intelligent man can read what he
says without feeling that the foundation of all superstition has
been weakened. The article is as remarkable for its candor as for its
clearness. Nothing is avoided--everything is met. No excuses are given..
He has left all apologies for the other side. When you have finished
what Professor Huxley has written, you feel that your mind has been
in actual contact with the mind of another, that nothing has been
concealed; and not only so, but you feel that this mind is not only
willing, but anxious, to know the actual truth.

To me, the highest uses of philosophy are, first, to free the mind of
fear, and, second, to avert all the evil that can be averted, through
intelligence--that is to say, through a knowledge of the conditions of
well-being.

We are satisfied that the absolute is beyond our vision, beneath our
touch, above our reach. We are now convinced that we can deal only with
phenomena, with relations, with appearances, with things that impress
the senses, that can be reached by reason, by the exercise of our
faculties. We are satisfied that the reasonable road is "the straight
road," the only "sacred way."

Of course there is faith in the world--faith in this world--and always
will be, unless superstition succeeds in every land. But the faith of
the wise man is based upon facts. His faith is a reasonable conclusion
drawn from the known. He has faith in the progress of the race, in the
triumph of intelligence, in the coming sovereignty of science. He has
faith in the development of the brain, in the gradual enlightenment of
the mind. And so he works for the accomplishment of great ends, having
faith in the final victory of the race.

He has honesty enough to say that he does not know. He perceives and
admits that the mind has limitations. He doubts the so-called wisdom of
the past. He looks for evidence, and he endeavors to keep his mind
free from prejudice. He believes in the manly virtues, in the judicial
spirit, and in his obligation to tell his honest thoughts.

It is useless to talk about a destruction of consolations. That which is
suspected to be untrue loses its power to console. A man should be brave
enough to bear the truth.

Professor Huxley has stated with great clearness the attitude of
the Agnostic. It seems that he is somewhat severe on the Positive
Philosophy, While it is hard to see the propriety of worshiping Humanity
as a being, it is easy to understand the splendid dream of August Comte.
Is the human race worthy to be worshiped by itself--that is to say,
should the individual worship himself? Certainly the religion of
humanity is better than the religion of the inhuman. The Positive
Philosophy is better far than Catholicism. It does not fill the heavens
with monsters, nor the future with pain.

It may be said that Luther and Comte endeavored to reform the Catholic
Church. Both were mistaken, because the only reformation of which that
church is capable is destruction. It is a mass of superstition.

The mission of Positivism is, in the language of its founder, "to
generalize science and to systematize sociality." It seems to me that
Comte stated with great force and with absolute truth the three phases
of intellectual evolution or progress.

First.--"In the supernatural phase the mind seeks causes--aspires to
know the essence of things, and the How and Why of their operation. In
this phase, all facts are regarded as the productions of supernatural
agents, and unusual phenomena are interpreted as the signs of the
pleasure or displeasure of some god."

Here at this point is the orthodox world of to-day. The church still
imagines that phenomena should be interpreted as the signs of the
pleasure or displeasure of God. Nearly every history is deformed with
this childish and barbaric view.

Second.--The next phase or modification, according to Comte, is the
metaphysical. "The supernatural agents are dispensed with, and in
their places we find abstract forces or entities supposed to inhere in
substances and capable of engendering phenomena."

In this phase people talk about laws and principles as though laws and
principles were forces capable of producing phenomena.

Third.--"The last stage is the Positive. The mind, convinced of the
futility of all enquiry into causes and essences, restricts itself to
the observation and classification of phenomena, and to the discovery of
the invariable relations of succession and similitude--in a word, to the
discovery of the relations of phenomena."

Why is not the Positive stage the point reached by the Agnostic? He
has ceased to inquire into the origin of things. He has perceived the
limitations of the mind. He is thoroughly convinced of the uselessness
and futility and absurdity of theological methods, and restricts himself
to the examination of phenomena, to their relations, to their effects,
and endeavors to find in the complexity of things the true conditions of
human happiness.

Although I am not a believer in the philosophy of Auguste Comte, I
cannot shut my eyes to the value of his thought; neither is it possible
for me not to applaud his candor, his intelligence, and the courage
it required even to attempt to lay the foundation of the Positive
Philosophy.

Professor Huxley and Frederic Harrison are splendid soldiers in the
army of Progress. They have attacked with signal success the sacred and
solemn stupidities of superstition. Both have appealed to that which is
highest and noblest in man. Both have been the destroyers of prejudice.
Both have shed light, and both have won great victories on the fields
of intellectual conflict. They cannot afford to waste time in attacking
each other.

After all, the Agnostic and the Positivist have the same end in
view--both believe in living for this world.

The theologians, finding themselves unable to answer the arguments
that have been urged, resort to the old subterfuge--to the old cry that
Agnosticism takes something of value from the life of man. Does the
Agnostic take any consolation from the world? Does he blot out, or dim,
one star in the heaven of hope? Can there be anything more consoling
than to feel, to know, that Jehovah is not God--that the message of the
Old Testament is not from the infinite?

Is it not enough to fill the brain with a happiness unspeakable to know
that the words, "Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire," will
never be spoken to one of the children of men?

Is it a small thing to lift from the shoulders of industry the burdens
of superstition? Is it a little thing to drive the monster of fear from
the hearts of men?--North American Review, April, 1889.




ERNEST RENAN.

     "Blessed are those
     Whose blood and judgment are so well co-mingled
     That they are not a pipe for fortune's finger
     To sound what stop she please."


ERNEST RENAN is dead. Another source of light; another force of
civilization; another charming personality; another brave soul, graceful
in thought, generous in deed; a sculptor in speech, a colorist in
words--clothing all in the poetry born of a delightful union of heart
and brain--has passed to the realm of rest.

Reared under the influences of Catholicism, educated for the priesthood,
yet by reason of his natural genius, he began to think. Forces that
utterly subjugate and enslave the mind of mediocrity sometimes rouse to
thought and action the superior soul.

Renan began to think--a dangerous thing for a Catholic to do. Thought
leads to doubt, doubt to investigation, investigation to truth--the
enemy of all superstition.

He lifted the Catholic extinguisher from the light and flame of reason.
He found that his mental vision was improved. He read the Scriptures
for himself, examined them as he did other books not claiming to be
inspired. He found the same mistakes, the same prejudices, the same
miraculous impossibilities in the book attributed to God that he found
in those known to have been written by men.

Into the path of reason, or rather into the highway, Renan was led by
Henriette, his sister, to whom he pays a tribute that has the perfume of
a perfect flower.

"I was," writes Renan, "brought up by women and priests, and therein
lies the whole explanation of my good qualities and of my defects."
In most that he wrote is the tenderness of woman, only now and then a
little touch of the priest showing itself, mostly in a reluctance to
spoil the ivy by tearing down some prison built by superstition.

In spite of the heartless "scheme" of things he still found it in his
heart to say, "When God shall be complete, He will be just," at the same
time saying that "nothing proves to us that there exists in the world
a central consciousness--a soul of the universe--and nothing proves the
contrary." So, whatever was the verdict of his brain, his heart asked
for immortality. He wanted his dream, and he was willing that others
should have theirs. Such is the wish and will of all great souls.

He knew the church thoroughly and anticipated what would finally
be written about him by churchmen: "Having some experience of
ecclesiastical writers I can sketch out in advance the way my biography
will be written in Spanish in some Catholic review, of Santa Fe, in the
year 2,000. Heavens! how black I shall be! I shall be so all the more,
because the church when she feels that she is lost will end with malice.
She will bite like a mad dog."

He anticipated such a biography because he had thought for himself, and
because he had expressed his thoughts--because he had declared that "our
universe, within the reach of our experience, is not governed by any
intelligent reason. God, as the common herd understand him, the living
God, the acting God--the God-Providence, does not show himself in the
universe"--because he attacked the mythical and the miraculous in the
life of Christ and sought to rescue from the calumnies of ignorance and
faith a serene and lofty soul.

The time has arrived when Jesus must become a myth or a man. The idea
that he was the infinite God must be abandoned by all who are not
religiously insane. Those who have given up the claim that he was God,
insist that he was divinely appointed and illuminated; that he was
a perfect man--the highest possible type of the human race and,
consequently, a perfect example for all the world.

As time goes on, as men get wider or grander or more complex ideas of
life, as the intellectual horizon broadens, the idea that Christ was
perfect may be modified.

The New Testament seems to describe several individuals under the same
name, or at least one individual who passed through several stages or
phases of religious development. Christ is described as a devout Jew,
as one who endeavored to comply in all respects with the old law. Many
sayings are attributed to him consistent with this idea. He certainly
was a Hebrew in belief and feeling when he said, "Swear not by Heaven,
because it is God's throne, nor by earth, for it is his footstool; nor
by Jerusalem, for it is his holy city." These reasons were in exact
accordance with the mythology of the Jews. God was regarded simply as
an enormous man, as one who walked in the garden in the cool of the
evening, as one who had met man face to face, who had conversed with
Moses for forty days upon Mount Sinai, as a great king, with a throne
in the heavens, using the earth to rest his feet upon, and regarding
Jerusalem as his holy city.

Then we find plenty of evidence that he wished to reform the religion
of the Jews; to fulfill the law, not to abrogate it Then there is still
another change: he has ceased his efforts to reform that religion and
has become a destroyer. He holds the Temple in contempt and repudiates
the idea that Jerusalem is the holy city. He concludes that it is
unnecessary to go to some mountain or some building to worship or to
find God, and insists that the heart is the true temple, that ceremonies
are useless, that all pomp and pride and show are needless, and that it
is enough to worship God under heaven's dome, in spirit and in truth.

It is impossible to harmonize these views unless we admit that Christ
was the subject of growth and change; that in consequence of growth and
change he modified his views; that, from wanting to preserve Judaism as
it was, he became convinced that it ought to be reformed. That he then
abandoned the idea of reformation, and made up his mind that the only
reformation of which the Jewish religion was capable was destruction. If
he was in fact a man, then the course he pursued was natural; but if he
was God, it is perfectly absurd. If we give to him perfect knowledge,
then it is impossible to account for change or growth. If, on the other
hand, the ground is taken that he was a perfect man, then, it might be
asked, Was he perfect when he wished to preserve, or when he wished to
reform, or when he resolved to destroy, the religion of the Jews? If
he is to be regarded as perfect, although not divine, when did he reach
perfection?

It is perfectly evident that Christ, or the character that bears that
name, imagined that the world was about to be destroyed, or at least
purified by fire, and that, on account of this curious belief, he became
the enemy of marriage, of all earthly ambition and of all enterprise.
With that view in his mind, he said to himself, "Why should we waste our
energies in producing food for destruction? Why should we endeavor to
beautify a world that is so soon to perish?" Filled with the thought of
coming change, he insisted that there was but one important thing, and
that was for each man to save his soul. He should care nothing for the
ties of kindred, nothing for wife or child or property, in the shadow of
the coming disaster. He should take care of himself. He endeavored, as
it is said, to induce men to desert all they had, to let the dead, bury
the dead, and follow him. He told his disciples, or those he wished to
make his disciples, according to the Testament, that it was their duty
to desert wife and child and property, and if they would so desert
kindred and wealth, he would reward them here and hereafter.

We know now--if we know anything--that Jesus was mistaken about the
coming of the end, and we know now that he was greatly controlled in
his ideas of life, by that mistake. Believing that the end was near,
he said, "Take no thought for the morrow, what ye shall eat or what ye
shall drink or wherewithal ye shall be clothed." It was in view of the
destruction of the world that he called the attention of his disciples
to the lily that toiled not and yet excelled Solomon in the glory of its
raiment. Having made this mistake, having acted upon it, certainly we
cannot now say that he was perfect in knowledge.

He is regarded by many millions as the impersonation of patience, of
forbearance, of meekness and mercy, and yet, according to the account,
he said many extremely bitter words, and threatened eternal pain.

We also know, if the account be true, that he claimed to have
supernatural power, to work miracles, to cure the blind and to raise the
dead, and we know that he did nothing of the kind. So if the writers of
the New Testament tell the truth as to what Christ claimed, it is absurd
to say that he was a perfect man. If honest, he was deceived, and those
who are deceived are not perfect.

There is nothing in the New Testament, so far as we know, that touches
on the duties of nation to nation, or of nation to its citizens; nothing
of human liberty; not one word about education; not the faintest hint
that there is such a thing as science; nothing calculated to stimulate
industry, commerce, or invention; not one word in favor of art, of music
or anything calculated to feed or clothe the body, nothing to develop
the brain of man.

When it is assumed that the life of Christ, as described in the New
Testament, is perfect, we at least take upon ourselves the burden of
deciding what perfection is. People who asserted that Christ was divine,
that he was actually God, reached the conclusion, without any laborious
course of reasoning, that all he said and did was absolute perfection.
They said this because they had first been convinced that he was divine.
The moment his divinity is given up and the assertion is made that he
was perfect, we are not permitted to reason in that way. They said he
was God, therefore perfect. Now, if it is admitted that he was human,
the conclusion that he was perfect does not follow. We then take the
burden upon ourselves of deciding what perfection is. To decide what is
perfect is beyond the powers of the human mind.

Renan, in spite of his education, regarded Christ as a man, and did the
best he could to account for the miracles that had been attributed
to him, for the legends that had gathered about his name, and the
impossibilities connected with his career, and also tried to account for
the origin or birth of these miracles, of these legends, of these myths,
including the resurrection and ascension. I am not satisfied with all
the conclusions he reached or with all the paths he traveled. The
refraction of light caused by passing through a woman's tears is hardly
a sufficient foundation for a belief in so miraculous a miracle as the
bodily ascension of Jesus Christ.

There is another thing attributed to Christ that seems to me conclusive
evidence against the claim of perfection. Christ is reported to have
said that all sins could be forgiven except the sin against the Holy
Ghost. This sin, however, is not defined. Although Christ died for the
whole world, that through him all might be saved, there is this one
terrible exception: There is no salvation for those who have sinned, or
who may hereafter sin, against the Holy Ghost. Thousands of persons are
now in asylums, having lost their reason because of their fear that they
had committed this unknown, this undefined, this unpardonable sin.

It is said that a Roman Emperor went through a form of publishing his
laws or proclamations, posting them so high on pillars that they could
not be read, and then took the lives of those who ignorantly violated
these unknown laws. He was regarded as a tyrant, as a murderer. And
yet, what shall we say of one who declared that the sin against the
Holy Ghost was the only one that could not be forgiven, and then left an
ignorant world to guess what that sin is? Undoubtedly this horror is an
interpolation.

There is something like it in the Old Testament. It is asserted by
Christians that the Ten Commandments are the foundation of all law and
of all civilization, and you will find lawyers insisting that the Mosaic
Code was the first information that man received on the subject of law;
that before that time the world was without any knowledge of justice or
mercy. If this be true the Jews had no divine laws, no real
instruction on any legal subject until the Ten Commandments were given.
Consequently, before that time there had been proclaimed or published
no law against the worship of other gods or of idols. Moses had been on
Mount Sinai talking with Jehovah. At the end of the dialogue he received
the Tables of Stone and started down the mountain for the purpose of
imparting this information to his followers. When he reached the camp
he heard music. He saw people dancing, and he found that in his absence
Aaron and the rest of the people had cast a molten calf which they were
then worshiping. This so enraged Moses that he broke the Tables of Stone
and made preparations for the punishment of the Jews. Remember that
they knew nothing about this law, and, according to the modern Christian
claims, could not have known that it was wrong to melt gold and silver
and mould it in the form of a calf. And yet Moses killed about thirty
thousand of these people for having violated a law of which they had
never heard; a law known only to one man and one God. Nothing could be
more unjust, more ferocious, than this; and yet it can hardly be said to
exceed in cruelty the announcement that a certain sin was unpardonable
and then fail to define the sin. Possibly, to inquire what the sin is,
is the sin.

Renan regards Jesus as a man, and his work gets its value from the
fact that it is written from a human standpoint. At the same time he,
consciously or unconsciously, or may be for the purpose of sprinkling
a little holy water on the heat of religious indignation, now and then
seems to speak of him as more than human, or as having accomplished
something that man could not.

He asserts that "the Gospels are in part legendary; that they contain
many things not true; that they are full of miracles and of the
supernatural." At the same time he insists that these legends, these
miracles, these supernatural things do not affect the truth of the
probable things contained in these writings. He sees, and sees clearly,
that there is no evidence that Matthew or Mark or Luke or John wrote the
books attributed to them; that, as a matter of fact, the mere title
of "according to Matthew," "according to Mark," shows that they were
written by others who claimed them to be in accordance with the stories
that had been told by Matthew or by Mark. So Renan takes the ground that
the Gospel of Luke is founded on anterior documents and "is the work of
a man who selected, pruned and combined, and that the same man wrote the
Acts of the Apostles and in the same way."

The gospels were certainly written long after the events described, and
Renan finds the reason for this in the fact that the Christians believed
that the world was about to end; that, consequently, there was no need
of composing books; it was only necessary for them to preserve in their
hearts during the little margin of time that remained a lively image of
Him whom they soon expected to meet in the clouds. For this reason
the gospels themselves had but little authority for 150 years, the
Christians relying on oral traditions. Renan shows that there was
not the slightest scruple about inserting additions in the gospels,
variously combining them, and in completing some by taking parts from
others; that the books passed from hand to hand, and that each one
transcribed in the margin of his copy the words and parables he had
found elsewhere which touched him; that it was not until human tradition
became weakened that the text bearing the names of the apostles became
authoritative.

Renan has criticised the gospels somewhat in the same spirit that he
would criticise a modern work. He saw clearly that the metaphysics
filling the discourses of John were deformities and distortions, full of
mysticism, having nothing to do really with the character of Jesus. He
shows too "that the simple idea of the Kingdom of God, at the time the
Gospel according to St. John was written, had faded away; that the
hope of the advent of Christ was growing dim, and that from belief the
disciples passed into discussion, from discussion to dogma, from dogma
to ceremony," and, finding that the new Heaven and the new Earth were
not coming as expected, they turned their attention to governing the old
Heaven and the old Earth. The disciples were willing to be humble for
a few days, with the expectation of wearing crowns forever. They were
satisfied with poverty, believing that the wealth of the world was to
be theirs. The coming of Christ, however, being for some unaccountable
reason delayed, poverty and humility grew irksome, and human nature
began to assert itself.

In the Gospel of John you will find the metaphysics of the church. There
you find the Second Birth. There you find the doctrine of the atonement
clearly set forth. There you find that God died for the whole world, and
that whosoever believeth not in him is to be damned. There is nothing of
the kind in Matthew. Matthew makes Christ say that, if you will forgive
others, God will forgive you. The Gospel "according to Mark" is the
same. So is the Gospel "according to Luke." There is nothing about
salvation through belief, nothing about the atonement. In Mark, in the
last chapter, the apostles are told to go into all the world and preach
the gospel, with the statement that whoever believed and was baptised
should be saved, and whoever failed to believe should be damned. But we
now know that that is an interpolation. Consequently, Matthew, Mark and
Luke never had the faintest conception of the "Christian religion." They
knew nothing of the atonement, nothing of salvation by faith--nothing.
So that if a man had read only Matthew, Mark and Luke, and had strictly
followed what he found, he would have found himself, after death, in
perdition.

Renan finds that certain portions of the Gospel "according to John" were
added later; that the entire twenty-first chapter is an interpolation;
also, that many places bear the traces of erasures and corrections. So
he says that it would be "impossible for any one to compose a life of
Jesus, with any meaning in it, from the discourses which John attributes
to him, and he holds that this Gospel of John is full of preaching,
Christ demonstrating himself; full of argumentation, full of stage
effect, devoid of simplicity, with long arguments after each miracle,
stiff and awkward discourses, the tone of which is often false and
unequal." He also insists that there are evidently "artificial portions,
variations like that of a musician improvising on a given theme."

In spite of all this, Renan, willing to soothe the prejudice of his
time, takes the ground that the four canonical gospels are authentic,
that they date from the first century, that the authors were, generally
speaking, those to whom they are attributed; but he insists that their
historic value is very diverse. This is a back-handed stroke. Admitting,
first, that they are authentic; second, that they were written about
the end of the first century; third, that they are not of equal value,
disposes, so far as he is concerned, of the dogma of inspiration.

One is at a loss to understand why four gospels should have been
written. As a matter of fact there can be only one true account of any
occurrence, or of any number of occurrences. Now, it must be taken for
granted, that an inspired account is true. Why then should there be four
inspired accounts? It may be answered that all were not to write
the entire story. To this the reply is that all attempted to cover
substantially the same ground.

Many years ago the early fathers thought it necessary to say why there
were four inspired books, and some of them said, because there were four
cardinal directions and the gospels fitted the north, south, east and
west. Others said that there were four principal winds--a gospel for
each wind. They might have added that some animals have four legs.

Renan admits that the narrative portions have not the same authority;
"that many legends proceeded from the zeal of the second Christian
generation; that the narrative of Luke is historically weak; that
sentences attributed to Jesus have been distorted and exaggerated;
that the book was written outside of Palestine and after the siege of
Jerusalem; that Luke endeavors to make the different narratives agree,
changing them for that purpose; that he softens the passages which had
become embarrassing; that he exaggerated the marvelous, omitted errors
in chronology; that he was a compiler, a man who had not been an
eye-witness himself, and who had not seen eye-witnesses, but who labors
at texts and wrests their sense to make them agree." This certainly is
very far from inspiration. So "Luke interprets the documents according
to his own idea; being a kind of anarchist, opposed to property, and
persuaded that the triumph of the poor was approaching; that he was
especially fond of the anecdotes showing the conversion of sinners, the
exaltation of the humble, and that he modified ancient traditions to
give them this meaning."

Renan reached the conclusion that the gospels are neither biographies
after the manner of Suetonius nor fictitious legends in the style of
Philostratus, but that they are legendary biographies like the legends
of the saints, the lives of Plotinus and Isidore, in which historical
truth and the desire to present models of virtue are combined in various
degrees; that they are "inexact" that they "contain numerous errors and
discordances." So he takes the ground that twenty or thirty years after
Christ, his reputation had greatly increased, that "legends had begun
to gather about Him like clouds," that "death added to His perfection,
freeing Him from all defects in the eyes of those who had loved Him,
that His followers wrested the prophecies so that they might fit Him.
They said, 'He is the Messiah.' The Messiah was to do certain things;
therefore Jesus did certain things. Then an account would be given of
the doing." All of which of course shows that there can be maintained no
theory of inspiration.

It is admitted that where individuals are witnesses of the same
transaction, and where they agree upon the vital points and disagree
upon details, the disagreement may be consistent with their honesty,
as tending to show that they have not agreed upon a story; but if
the witnesses are inspired of God then there is no reason for their
disagreeing on anything, and if they do disagree it is a demonstration
that they were not inspired, but it is not a demonstration that they
are not honest. While perfect agreement may be evidence of rehearsal,
a failure to perfectly agree is not a demonstration of the truth or
falsity of a story; but if the witnesses claim to be inspired, the
slightest disagreement is a demonstration that they were not inspired.

Renan reaches the conclusion, proving every step that he takes, that
the four principal documents--that is to say, the four gospels--are in
"flagrant contradiction one with another." He attacks, and with perfect
success, the miracles of the Scriptures, and upon this subject says:
"Observation, which has never once been falsified, teaches us that
miracles never happen, but in times and countries in which they are
believed and before persons disposed to believe them. No miracle ever
occurred in the presence of men capable of testing its miraculous
character." He further takes the ground that no contemporary miracle
will bear inquiry, and that consequently it is probable that the
miracles of antiquity which have been performed in popular gatherings
would be shown to be simple illusion, were it possible to criticise them
in detail. In the name of universal experience he banishes miracles
from history. These were brave things to do, things that will bear good
fruit. As long as men believe in miracles, past or present they remain
the prey of superstition. The Catholic is taught that miracles were
performed anciently not only, but that they are still being performed.
This is consistent inconsistency. Protestants teach a double doctrine:
That miracles used to be performed, that the laws of nature used to be
violated, but that no miracle is performed now. No Protestant will
admit that any miracle was performed by the Catholic Church. Otherwise,
Protestants could not be justified in leaving a church with whom the
God of miracles dwelt. So every Protestant has to adopt two kinds of
reasoning: that the laws of Nature used to be violated and that miracles
used to be performed, but that since the apostolic age Nature has had
her way and the Lord has allowed facts to exist and to hold the field.
A supernatural account, according to Renan, "always implies credulity or
imposture,"--probably both.

It does not seem possible to me that Christ claimed for himself what
the Testament claims for him. These claims were made by admirers, by
followers, by missionaries.

When the early Christians went to Rome they found plenty of demigods. It
was hard to set aside the religion of a demigod by telling the story of
a man from Nazareth. These missionaries, not to be outdone in ancestry,
insisted--and this was after the Gospel "according to St. John" had been
written--that Christ was the Son of God. Matthew believed that he was
the son of David, and the Messiah, and gave the genealogy of Joseph, his
father, to support that claim.

In the time of Christ no one imagined that he was of divine origin. This
was an after-growth. In order to place themselves on an equality with
Pagans they started the claim of divinity, and also took the second step
requisite in that country: First, a god for his father, and second, a
virgin for his mother. This was the Pagan combination of greatness, and
the Christians added to this that Christ was God.

It is hard to agree with the conclusion reached by Renan, that Christ
formed and intended to form a church. Such evidence, it seems to me,
is hard to find in the Testament. Christ seemed to satisfy himself,
according to the Testament, with a few statements, some of them
exceedingly wise and tender, some utterly impracticable and some
intolerant.

If we accept the conclusions reached by Renan we will throw away, the
legends without foundation; the miraculous legends; and everything
inconsistent with what we know of Nature. Very little will be left--a
few sayings to be found among those attributed to Confucius, to Buddha,
to Krishna, to Epictetus, to Zeno, and to many others. Some of these
sayings are full of wisdom, full of kindness, and others rush to such
extremes that they touch the borders of insanity. When struck on one
cheek to turn the other, is really joining a conspiracy to secure
the triumph of brutality. To agree not to resist evil is to become
an accomplice of all injustice. We must not take from industry, from
patriotism, from virtue, the right of self-defence.

Undoubtedly Renan gave an honest transcript of his mind, the road his
thought had followed, the reasons in their order that had occurred to
him, the criticisms born of thought, and the qualifications, softening
phrases, children of old sentiments and emotions that had not entirely
passed away. He started, one might say, from the altar and, during a
considerable part of the journey, carried the incense with him. The
farther he got away, the greater was his clearness of vision and the
more thoroughly he was convinced that Christ was merely a man, an
idealist. But, remembering the altar, he excused exaggeration in the
"inspired" books, not because it was from heaven, not because it was
in harmony with our ideas of veracity, but because the writers of the
gospel were imbued with the Oriental spirit of exaggeration, a spirit
perfectly understood by the people who first read the gospels, because
the readers knew the habits of the writers.

It had been contended for many years that no one could pass judgment
on the veracity of the Scriptures who did not understand Hebrew. This
position was perfectly absurd. No man needs to be a student of Hebrew
to know that the shadow on the dial did not go back several degrees to
convince a petty king that a boil was not to be fatal. Renan, however,
filled the requirement. He was an excellent Hebrew scholar. This was a
fortunate circumstance, because it answered a very old objection.

The founder of Christianity was, for his own sake, taken from the divine
pedestal and allowed to stand like other men on the earth, to be judged
by what he said and did, by his theories, by his philosophy, by his
spirit.

No matter whether Renan came to a correct conclusion or not, his work
did a vast deal of good. He convinced many that implicit reliance could
not be placed upon the gospels, that the gospels themselves are of
unequal worth; that they were deformed by ignorance and falsehood, or,
at least, by mistake; that if they wished to save the reputation of
Christ they must not rely wholly on the gospels, or on what is found
in the New Testament, but they must go farther and examine all legends
touching him. Not only so, but they must throw away the miraculous, the
impossible and the absurd.

He also has shown that the early followers of Christ endeavored to add
to the reputation of their Master by attributing to him the miraculous
and the foolish; that while these stories added to his reputation at
that time, since the world has advanced they must be cast aside or the
reputation of the Master must suffer.

It will not do now to say that Christ himself pretended to do miracles.
This would establish the fact at least that he was mistaken. But we are
compelled to say that his disciples insisted that he was a worker of
miracles. This shows, either that they were mistaken or untruthful.

We all know that a sleight-of-hand performer could gain a greater
reputation among savages than Darwin or Humboldt; and we know that the
world in the time of Christ was filled with barbarians, with people who
demanded the miraculous, who expected it; with people, in fact, who had
a stronger belief in the supernatural than in the natural; people who
never thought it worth while to record facts. The hero of such people,
the Christ of such people, with his miracles, cannot be the Christ of
the thoughtful and scientific.

Renan was a man of most excellent temper; candid; not striving for
victory, but for truth; conquering, as far as he could, the old
superstitions; not entirely free, it may be, but believing himself to be
so. He did great good. He has helped to destroy the fictions of faith.
He has helped to rescue man from the prison of superstition, and this is
the greatest benefit that man can bestow on man.

He did another great service, not only to Jews, but to Christendom,
by writing the history of "The People of Israel." Christians for many
centuries have persecuted the Jews. They have charged them with the
greatest conceivable crime--with having crucified an infinite God.
This absurdity has hardened the hearts of men and poisoned the minds of
children. The persecution of the Jews is the meanest, the most senseless
and cruel page in history. Every civilized Christian should feel on
his cheeks the red spots of shame as he reads the wretched and infamous
story.

The flame of this prejudice is fanned and fed in the Sunday schools
of our day, and the orthodox minister points proudly to the atrocities
perpetrated against the Jews by the barbarians of Russia as evidences of
the truth of the inspired Scriptures. In every wound God puts a tongue
to proclaim the truth of his book.

If the charge that the Jews killed God were true, it is hardly
reasonable to hold those who are now living responsible for what their
ancestors did nearly nineteen centuries ago.

But there is another point in connection with this matter: If Christ was
God, then the Jews could not have killed him without his consent; and,
according to the orthodox creed, if he had not been sacrificed, the
whole world would have suffered eternal pain. Nothing can exceed the
meanness of the prejudice of Christians against the Jewish people. They
should not be held responsible for their savage ancestors, or for their
belief that Jehovah was an intelligent and merciful God, superior to all
other gods. Even Christians do not wish to be held responsible for
the Inquisition, for the Torquemadas and the John Calvins, for the
witch-burners and the Quaker-whippers, for the slave-traders and
child-stealers, the most of whom were believers in our "glorious
gospel," and many of whom had been bom the second time.

Renan did much to civilize the Christians by telling the truth in a
charming and convincing way about the "People of Israel." Both sides are
greatly indebted to him: one he has ably defended, and the other greatly
enlightened.

Having done what good he could in giving what he believed was light to
his fellow-men, he had no fear of becoming a victim of God's wrath, and
so he laughingly said: "For my part I imagine that if the Eternal in his
severity were to send me to hell I should succeed in escaping from it.
I would send up to my Creator a supplication that would make him smile.
The course of reasoning by which I would prove to him that it was
through his fault that I was damned would be so subtle that he would
find some difficulty in replying. The fate which would suit me best is
Purgatory--a charming place, where many delightful romances begun on
earth must be continued."

Such cheerfulness, such good philosophy, with cap and bells, such banter
and blasphemy, such sound and solid sense drive to madness the priest
who thinks the curse of Rome can fright the world. How the snake of
superstition writhes when he finds that his fangs have lost their
poison.

He was one of the gentlest of men--one of the fairest in discussion,
dissenting from the views of others with modesty, presenting his own
with clearness and candor. His mental manners were excellent. He was
not positive as to the "unknowable." He said "Perhaps." He knew that
knowledge is good if it increases the happiness of man; and he felt that
superstition is the assassin of liberty and civilization. He lived a
life of cheerfulness, of industry, devoted to the welfare of mankind.

He was a seeker of happiness by the highway of the natural, a destroyer
of the dogmas of mental deformity, a worshiper of Liberty and the
Ideal. As he lived, he died--hopeful and serene--and now, standing in
imagination by his grave, we ask: Will the night be eternal? The brain
says, Perhaps; while the heart hopes for the Dawn.--North American
Review, November, 1892.




TOLSTOI AND "THE KREUTZER SONATA."

COUNT TOLSTOI is a man of genius. He is acquainted with Russian life
from the highest to the lowest--that is to say, from the worst to the
best. He knows the vices of the rich and the virtues of the poor. He is
a Christian, a real believer in the Old and New Testaments, an honest
follower of the Peasant of Palestine. He denounces luxury and ease, art
and music; he regards a flower with suspicion, believing that beneath
every blossom lies a coiled serpent. He agrees with Lazarus and
denounces Dives and the tax-gatherers. He is opposed, not only to
doctors of divinity, but of medicine.

From the Mount of Olives he surveys the world.

He is not a Christian like the Pope in the Vatican, or a cardinal in a
palace, or a bishop with revenues and retainers, or a millionaire who
hires preachers to point out the wickedness of the poor, or the director
of a museum who closes the doors on Sunday. He is a Christian something
like Christ.

To him this life is but a breathing-spell between the verdict and the
execution; the sciences are simply sowers of the seeds of pride, of
arrogance and vice. Shocked by the cruelties and unspeakable horrors of
war, he became a non-resistant and averred that he would not defend his
own body or that of his daughter from insult and outrage. In this he
followed the command of his Master: "Resist not evil." He passed,
not simply from war to peace, but from one extreme to the other, and
advocated a doctrine that would leave the basest of mankind the rulers
of the world. This was and is the error of a great and tender soul.

He did not accept all the teachings of Christ at once. His progress has
been, judging from his writings, somewhat gradual; but by accepting one
proposition he prepared himself for the acceptance of another. He is
not only a Christian, but has the courage of his convictions, and goes
without hesitation to the logical conclusion. He has another exceedingly
rare quality; he acts in accordance with his belief. His creed is
translated into deed. He opposes the doctors of divinity, because they
darken and deform the teachings of the Master. He denounces the doctors
of medicine, because he depends on Providence and the promises of Jesus
Christ. To him that which is called progress is, in fact, a profanation,
and property is a something that the organized few have stolen from the
unorganized many. He believes in universal labor, which is good, each
working for himself. He also believes that each should have only the
necessaries of life--which is bad. According to his idea, the world
ought to be filled with peasants. There should be only arts enough to
plough and sow and gather the harvest, to build huts, to weave coarse
cloth, to fashion clumsy and useful garments, and to cook the simplest
food. Men and women should not adorn their bodies. They should not make
themselves desirable or beautiful.

But even under such circumstances they might, like the Quakers, be proud
of humility and become arrogantly meek.

Tolstoi would change the entire order of human development. As a matter
of fact, the savage who adorns himself or herself with strings of
shells, or with feathers, has taken the first step towards civilization.
The tatooed is somewhat in advance of the unfrescoed. At the bottom of
all this is the love of approbation, of the admiration of their fellows,
and this feeling, this love, cannot be torn from the human heart.

In spite of ourselves we are attracted by what to us is beautiful,
because beauty is associated with pleasure, with enjoyment. The love of
the well-formed, of the beautiful, is prophetic of the perfection of the
human race. It is impossible to admire the deformed. They may be loved
for their goodness or genius, but never because of their deformity.
There is within us the love of proportion. There is a physical basis for
the appreciation of harmony, which is also a kind of proportion.

The love of the beautiful is shared with man by most animals. The wings
of the moth are painted by love, by desire. This is the foundation of
the bird's song. This love of approbation, this desire to please, to
be admired, to be loved, is in some way the cause of all heroic,
self-denying, and sublime actions.

Count Tolstoi, following parts of the New Testament, regards love
as essentially impure. He seems really to think that there is a love
superior to human love; that the love of man for woman, of woman for
man, is, after all, a kind of glittering degradation; that it is better
to love God than woman; better to love the invisible phantoms of the
skies than the children upon our knees--in other words, that it is far
better to love a heaven somewhere else than to make one here. He seems
to think that women adorn themselves simply for the purpose of getting
in their power the innocent and unsuspecting men. He forgets that
the best and purest of human beings are controlled, for the most part
unconsciously, by the hidden, subtle tendencies of nature. He seems to
forget the great fact of "natural selection," and that the choice of one
in preference to all others is the result of forces beyond the control
of the individual. To him there seems to be no purity in love, because
men are influenced by forms, by the beauty of women; and women, knowing
this fact, according to him, act, and consequently both are equally
guilty. He endeavors to show that love is a delusion; that at best it
can last but for a few days; that it must of necessity be succeeded by
indifference, then by disgust, lastly by hatred; that in every Garden of
Eden is a serpent of jealousy, and that the brightest days end with the
yawn of ennui.

Of course he is driven to the conclusion that life in this world is
without value, that the race can be perpetuated only by vice, and that
the practice of the highest virtue would leave the world without
the form of man. Strange as it may sound to some, this is the same
conclusion reached by his Divine Master: "They did eat, they drank, they
married, they were given in marriage, until the day that Noe entered
the ark and the flood came and destroyed them all." "Every one that hath
forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife,
or children, or lands, for my name's sake, shall receive an hundredfold,
and shall inherit everlasting life."

According to Christianity, as it really is and really was, the Christian
should have no home in this world--at least none until the earth has
been purified by fire. His affections should be given to God; not to
wife and children, not to friends or country. He is here but for a
time on a journey, waiting for the summons. This life is a kind of
dock running out into the sea of eternity, on which he waits for
transportation. Nothing here is of any importance; the joys of life are
frivolous and corrupting, and by losing these few gleams of happiness in
this world he will bask forever in the unclouded rays of infinite joy.
Why should a man risk an eternity of perfect happiness for the sake of
enjoying himself a few days with his wife and children? Why should he
become an eternal outcast for the sake of having a home and fireside
here?

The "Fathers" of the church had the same opinion of marriage. They
agreed with Saint Paul, and Tolstoi agrees with them. They had the same
contempt for wives and mothers, and uttered the same blasphemies against
that divine passion that has filled the world with art and song.

All this is to my mind a kind of insanity; nature soured or
withered--deformed so that celibacy is mistaken for virtue. The
imagination becomes polluted, and the poor wretch believes that he is
purer than his thoughts, holier than his desires, and that to outrage
nature is the highest form of religion. But nature imprisoned,
obstructed, tormented, always has sought for and has always found
revenge. Some of these victims, regarding the passions as low and
corrupting, feeling humiliated by hunger and thirst, sought through
maimings and mutilations the purification of the soul.

Count Tolstoi in "The Kreutzer Sonata," has drawn, with a free hand, one
of the vilest and basest of men for his hero. He is suspicious, jealous,
cruel, infamous. The wife is infinitely too good for such a wild
unreasoning beast, and yet the writer of this insane story seems to
justify the assassin. If this is a true picture of wedded life in
Russia, no wonder that Count Tolstoi looks forward with pleasure to the
extinction of the human race.

Of all passions that can take possession of the heart or brain jealousy
is the worst. For many generations the chemists sought for the secret by
which all metals could be changed to gold, and through which the basest
could become the best. Jealousy seeks exactly the opposite. It endeavors
to transmute the very gold of love into the dross of shame and crime.

The story of "The Kreutzer Sonata" seems to have been written for the
purpose of showing that woman is at fault; that she has no right to
be attractive, no right to be beautiful; and that she is morally
responsible for the contour of her throat, for the pose of her body, for
the symmetry of her limbs, for the red of her lips, and for the dimples
in her cheeks.

The opposite of this doctrine is nearer true. It would be far better to
hold people responsible for their ugliness than for their beauty. It may
be true that the soul, the mind, in some wondrous way fashions the body,
and that to that extent every individual is responsible for his looks.
It may be that the man or woman thinking high thoughts will give,
necessarily, a nobility to expression and a beauty to outline.

It is not true that the sins of man can be laid justly at the feet of
woman. Women are better than men; they have greater responsibilities;
they bear even the burdens of joy. This is the real reason why their
faults are considered greater.

Men and women desire each other, and this desire is a condition of
civilization, progress, and happiness, and of everything of real value.
But there is this profound difference in the sexes: in man this desire
is the foundation of love, while in woman love is the foundation of this
desire.

Tolstoi seems to be a stranger to the heart of woman.

Is it not wonderful that one who holds self-denial in such high esteem
should say, "That life is embittered by the fear of one's children, and
not only on account of their real or imaginary illnesses, but even by
their very presence"?

Has the father no real love for the children? Is he not paid a thousand
times through their caresses, their sympathy, their love? Is there no
joy in seeing their minds unfold, their affections develop? Of course,
love and anxiety go together. That which we love we wish to protect. The
perpetual fear of death gives love intensity and sacredness. Yet
Count Tolstoi gives us the feelings of a father incapable of natural
affection; of one who hates to have his children sick because the
orderly course of his wretched life is disturbed. So, too, we are told
that modern mothers think too much of their children, care too much for
their health, and refuse to be comforted when they die. Lest these words
may be thought libellous, the following extract is given;

"In old times women consoled themselves with the belief, The Lord hath
given, and the Lord hath taken away. Blessed be the name of the Lord.
They consoled themselves with the thought that the soul of the departed
had returned to him who gave it; that it was better to die innocent
than to live in sin. If women nowadays had such a comfortable faith to
support them, they might take their misfortunes less hard."

The conclusion reached by the writer is that without faith in God,
woman's love grovels in the mire.

In this case the mire is made by the tears of mothers falling on the
clay that hides their babes.

The one thing constant, the one peak that rises above all clouds, the
one window in which the light forever burns, the one star that darkness
cannot quench, is woman's love.

This one fact justifies the existence and the perpetuation of the human
race. Again I say that women are better than men; their hearts are more
unreservedly given; in the web of their lives sorrow is inextricably
woven with the greatest joys; self-sacrifice is a part of their nature,
and at the behest of love and maternity they walk willingly and joyously
down to the very gates of death.

Is there nothing in this to excite the admiration, the adoration, of a
modern reformer? Are the monk and nun superior to the father and mother?

The author of "The Kreutzer Sonata" is unconsciously the enemy of
mankind. He is filled with what might be called a merciless pity, a
sympathy almost malicious. Had he lived a few centuries ago, he might
have founded a religion; but the most he can now do is, perhaps, to
create the necessity for another asylum.

Count Tolstoi objects to music--not the ordinary kind, but to great
music, the music that arouses the emotions, that apparently carries us
beyond the limitations of life, that for the moment seems to break the
great chain of cause and effect, and leaves the soul soaring and free.
"Emotion and duty," he declares, "do not go hand in hand." All art
touches and arouses the emotional nature. The painter, the poet, the
sculptor, the composer, the orator, appeal to the emotions, to the
passions, to the hopes and fears. The commonplace is transfigured;
the cold and angular facts of existence take form and color; the
blood quickens; the fancies spread their wings; the intellect grows
sympathetic; the river of life flows full and free; and man becomes
capable of the noblest deeds. Take emotion from the heart of man and
the idea of obligation would be lost; right and wrong would lose their
meaning, and the word "ought" would never again be spoken. We are
subject to conditions, liable to disease, pain, and death. We are
capable of ecstasy. Of these conditions, of these possibilities, the
emotions are born.

Only the conditionless can be the emotionless.

We are conditioned beings; and if the conditions are changed, the result
may be pain or death or greater joy. We can only live within certain
degrees of heat. If the weather were a few degrees hotter or a few
degrees colder, we could not exist. We need food and roof and raiment.
Life and happiness depend on these conditions. We do not certainly know
what is to happen, and consequently our hopes and fears are constantly
active--that is to say, we are emotional beings. The generalization of
Tolstoi, that emotion never goes hand in hand with duty, is almost the
opposite of the truth. The idea of duty could not exist without emotion.
Think of men and women without love, without desires, without passions?
Think of a world without art or music--a world without beauty, without
emotion.

And yet there are many writers busy pointing out the loathsomeness of
love and their own virtues. Only a little while ago an article appeared
in one of the magazines in which all women who did not dress according
to the provincial prudery of the writer were denounced as impure.
Millions of refined and virtuous wives and mothers were described as
dripping with pollution because they enjoyed dancing and were so well
formed that they were not obliged to cover their arms and throats to
avoid the pity of their associates. And yet the article itself is far
more indelicate than any dance or any dress, or even lack of dress. What
a curious opinion dried apples have of fruit upon the tree!

Count Tolstoi is also the enemy of wealth, of luxury. In this he follows
the New Testament. "It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a
needle than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of Heaven." He gathers
his inspiration from the commandment, "Sell all that thou hast and give
to the poor."

Wealth is not a crime any more than health or bodily or intellectual
strength. The weak might denounce the strong, the sickly might envy the
healthy, just as the poor may denounce or envy the rich. A man is not
necessarily a criminal because he is wealthy. He is to be judged, not
by his wealth, but by the way he uses his wealth. The strong man can use
his strength, not only for the benefit of himself, but for the good of
others. So a man of intelligence can be a benefactor of the human race.
Intelligence is often used to entrap the simple and to prey upon the
unthinking, but we do not wish to do away with intelligence. So strength
is often used to tyrannize over the weak, and in the same way wealth may
be used to the injury of mankind. To sell all that you have and give to
the poor is not a panacea for poverty. The man of wealth should help
the poor man to help himself. Men cannot receive without giving some
consideration, and if they have not labor or property to give, they
give their manhood, their self-respect. Besides, if all should obey this
injunction, "Sell what thou hast and give to the poor," who would buy?
We know that thousands and millions of rich men lack generosity and have
but little feeling for their fellows. The fault is not in the money, not
in the wealth, but in the individuals. They would be just as bad were
they poor. The only difference is that they would have less power. The
good man should regard wealth as an instrumentality, as an opportunity,
and he should endeavor to benefit his fellow-men, not by making them the
recipients of his charity, but by assisting them to assist themselves.
The desire to clothe and feed, to educate and protect, wives and
children, is the principal reason for making money--one of the great
springs of industry, prudence, and economy.

Those who labor have a right to live. They have a right to what they
earn. He who works has a right to home and fireside and to the comforts
of life. Those who waste the spring, the summer, and the autumn of their
lives must bear the winter when it comes. Many of our institutions are
absurdly unjust. Giving the land to the few, making tenants of the many,
is the worst possible form of socialism--of paternal government. In
most of the nations of our day the idlers and non-producers are either
beggars or aristocrats, paupers or princes, and the great middle
laboring class support them both. Rags and robes have a liking for each
other. Beggars and kings are in accord; they are all parasites, living
on the same blood, stealing the same labor--one by beggary, the other by
force. And yet in all this there can be found no reason for denouncing
the man who has accumulated. One who wishes to tear down his bams and
build greater has laid aside something to keep the wolf of want from the
door of home when he is dead.

Even the beggars see the necessity of others working, and the nobility
see the same necessity with equal clearness. But it is hardly reasonable
to say that all should do the same kind of work, for the reason that all
have not the same aptitudes, the same talents. Some can plough,
others can paint; some can reap and mow, while others can invent the
instruments that save labor; some navigate the seas; some work in mines;
while others compose music that elevates and refines the heart of the
world.

But the worst thing in "The Kreutzer Sonata" is the declaration that a
husband can by force compel the wife to love and obey him. Love is not
the child of fear; it is not the result of force. No one can love on
compulsion. Even Jehovah found that it was impossible to compel the Jews
to love him. He issued his command to that effect, coupled with threats
of pain and death, but his chosen people failed to respond.

Love is the perfume of the heart; it is not subject to the will of
husbands or kings or God.

Count Tolstoi would establish slavery in every house; he would make
every husband a tyrant and every wife a trembling serf. No wonder that
he regards such marriage as a failure. He is in exact harmony with the
curse of Jehovah when he said unto the woman: "I will greatly multiply
thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth
children, and thy desire shall be unto thy husband, and he shall rule
over thee."

This is the destruction of the family, the pollution of home, the
crucifixion of love.

Those who are truly married are neither masters nor servants. The idea
of obedience is lost in the desire for the happiness of each. Love is
not a convict, to be detained with bolts and chains. Love is the highest
expression of liberty. Love neither commands nor obeys.

The curious thing is that the orthodox world insists that all men and
women should obey the injunctions of Christ; that they should take him
as the supreme example, and in all things follow his teachings. This is
preached from countless pulpits, and has been for many centuries. And
yet the man who does follow the Savior, who insists that he will not
resist evil, who sells what he has and gives to the poor, who deserts
his wife and children for the love of God, is regarded as insane.

Tolstoi, on most subjects, appears to be in accord with the founder of
Christianity, with the apostles, with the writers of the New Testament,
and with the Fathers of the church; and yet a Christian teacher of a
Sabbath school decides, in the capacity of Postmaster-General, that "The
Kreutzer Sonata" is unfit to be carried in the mails.

Although I disagree with nearly every sentence in this book, regard the
story as brutal and absurd, the view of life presented as cruel, vile,
and false, yet I recognize the right of Count Tolstoi to express his
opinions on all subjects, and the right of the men and women of America
to read for themselves.

As to the sincerity of the author, there is not the slightest doubt. He
is willing to give all that he has for the good of his fellow-men. He
is a soldier in what he believes to be a sacred cause, and he has the
courage of his convictions. He is endeavoring to organize society in
accordance with the most radical utterances that have been attributed
to Jesus Christ. The philosophy of Palestine is not adapted to an
industrial and commercial age. Christianity was born when the nation
that produced it was dying. It was a requiem--a declaration that life
was a failure, that the world was about to end, and that the hopes of
mankind should be lifted to another sphere. Tolstoi stands with his back
to the sunrise and looks mournfully upon the shadow. He has uttered many
tender, noble, and inspiring words. There are many passages in his works
that must have been written when his eyes were filled with tears. He has
fixed his gaze so intently on the miseries and agonies of life that he
has been driven to the conclusion that nothing could be better than the
effacement of the human race.

Some men, looking only at the faults and tyrannies of government, have
said: "Anarchy is better." Others, looking at the misfortunes, the
poverty, the crimes, of men, have, in a kind of pitying despair, reached
the conclusion that the best of all is death. These are the opinions of
those who have dwelt in gloom--of the self-imprisoned.

By comparing long periods of time, we see that, on the whole, the race
is advancing; that the world is growing steadily, and surely, better;
that each generation enjoys more and suffers less than its predecessor.
We find that our institutions have the faults of individuals. Nations
must be composed of men and women; and as they have their faults,
nations cannot be perfect. The institution of marriage is a failure to
the extent, and only to the extent, that the human race is a failure.
Undoubtedly it is the best and the most important institution that has
been established by the civilized world. If there is unhappiness in that
relation, if there is tyranny upon one side and misery upon the other,
it is not the fault of marriage. Take homes from the world and only wild
beasts are left.

We cannot cure the evils of our day and time by a return to savagery.
It is not necessary to become ignorant to increase our happiness. The
highway of civilization leads to the light. The time will come when the
human race will be truly enlightened, when labor will receive its due
reward, when the last institution begotten of ignorance and savagery
will disappear. The time will come when the whole world will say that
the love of man for woman, of woman for man, of mother for child, is the
highest, the noblest, the purest, of which the heart is capable.

Love, human love, love of men and women, love of mothers fathers, and
babes, is the perpetual and beneficent force. Not the love of phantoms,
the love that builds cathedrals and dungeons, that trembles and prays,
that kneels and curses; but the real love, the love that felled the
forests, navigated the seas, subdued the earth, explored continents,
built countless homes, and founded nations--the love that kindled the
creative flame and wrought the miracles of art, that gave us all there
is of music, from the cradle-song that gives to infancy its smiling
sleep to the great symphony that bears the soul away with wings of
fire--the real love, mother of every virtue and of every joy.--North
American Review, September, 1890.




THOMAS PAINE.

A MAGAZINE ARTICLE.

     "A great man's memory may outlive his life half a year,
     But, by'r lady, he must build churches then."


EIGHTY-THREE years ago Thomas Paine ceased to defend himself. The moment
he became dumb all his enemies found a tongue. He was attacked on every
hand. The Tories of England had been waiting for their revenge. The
believers in kings, in hereditary government, the nobility of every
land, execrated his memory. Their greatest enemy was dead. The believers
in human slavery, and all who clamored for the rights of the States
as against the sovereignty of a Nation, joined in the chorus of
denunciation. In addition to this, the believers in the inspiration of
the Scriptures, the occupants of orthodox pulpits, the professors in
Christian colleges, and the religious historians, were his sworn and
implacable foes.

This man had gratified no ambition at the expense of his fellow-men;
he had desolated no country with the flame and sword of war; he had not
wrung millions from the poor and unfortunate; he had betrayed no trust,
and yet he was almost universally despised. He gave his life for the
benefit of mankind. Day and night for many, many weary years, he labored
for the good of others, and gave himself body and soul to the great
cause of human liberty. And yet he won the hatred of the people for
whose benefit, for whose emancipation, for whose civilization, for whose
exaltation he gave his life.

Against him every slander that malignity could coin and hypocrisy pass
was gladly and joyously taken as genuine, and every truth with regard to
his career was believed to be counterfeit. He was attacked by thousands
where he was defended by one, and the one who defended him was instantly
attacked, silenced, or destroyed.

At last his life has been written by Moncure D. Conway, and the real
history of Thomas Paine, of what he attempted and accomplished, of what
he taught and suffered, has been intelligently, truthfully and candidly
given to the world. Henceforth the slanderer will be without excuse.

He who reads Mr. Conway's pages will find that Thomas Paine was more
than a patriot--that he was a philanthropist--a lover not only of his
country, but of all mankind. He will find that his sympathies were
with those who suffered, without regard to religion or race, country or
complexion. He will find that this great man did not hesitate to attack
the governing class of his native land--to commit what was called
treason against the king, that he might do battle for the rights of
men; that in spite of the prejudices of birth, he took the side of the
American Colonies; that he gladly attacked the political abuses and
absurdities that had been fostered by altars and thrones for many
centuries; that he was for the people against nobles and kings, and that
he put his life in pawn for the good of others.

In the winter of 1774, Thomas Paine came to America. After a time he was
employeed as one of the writers on the _Pennsylvania Magazine._

Let us see what he did, calculated to excite the hatred of his
fellow-men.

The first article he ever wrote in America, and the first ever published
by him anywhere, appeared in that magazine on the 8th of 'March, 1775.
It was an attack on American slavery--a plea for the rights of the
negro. In that article will be found substantially all the arguments
that can be urged against that most infamous of all institutions. Every
is full of humanity, pity, tenderness, and love of justice.

Five days after this article appeared the American Anti-Slavery Society
was formed. Certainly this should not excite our hatred. To-day the
civilized world agrees with the essay written by Thomas Paine in 1775.

At that time great interests were against him. The owners of slaves
became his enemies, and the pulpits, supported by slave labor, denounced
this abolitionist.

The next article published by Thomas Paine, in the same magazine, and
for the next month, was an attack on the practice of dueling, showing
that it was barbarous, that it did not even tend to settle the right or
wrong of a dispute, that it could not be defended on any just grounds,
and that its influence was degrading and cruel. The civilized world now
agrees with the opinions of Thomas Paine upon that barbarous practice.

In May, 1775, appeared in the same magazine another article written by
Thomas Paine, a Protest Against Cruelty to Animals. He began the work
that was so successfully and gloriously carried out by Henry Bergh,
one of the noblest, one of the grandest, men that this continent has
produced.

The good people of this world agree with Thomas Paine.

In August of the same year he wrote a plea for the Rights of Woman, the
first ever published in the New World. Certainly he should not be hated
for that.

He was the first to suggest a union of the colonies. Before the
Declaration of Independence was issued, Paine had written of and about
the Free and Independent States of America. He had also spoken of the
United Colonies as the "Glorious Union," and he was the first to write
these words: "The United States of America."

In May, 1775, Washington said: "If you ever hear of me joining in any
such measure (as separation from Great Britain) you have my leave to set
me down for everything wicked." He had also said; "It is not the wish or
interest of the government (meaning Massachusetts), or of any other upon
this continent, separately or collectively, to set up for independence."
And in the same year Benjamin Franklin assured Chatham that no one in
America was in favor of separation. As a matter of fact, the people
of the colonies wanted a redress of their grievances--they were not
dreaming of separation, of independence.

In 1775 Paine wrote the pamphlet known as "Common Sense." This was
published on the 10th of January, 1776. It was the first appeal for
independence, the first cry for national life, for absolute separation.
No pamphlet, no book, ever kindled such a sudden conflagration,--a
purifying flame, in which the prejudices and fears of millions were
consumed. To read it now, after the lapse of more than a hundred years,
hastens the blood. It is but the meagre truth to say that Thomas Paine
did more for the cause of separation, to sow the seeds of independence,
than any other man of his time. Certainly we should not despise him for
this. The Declaration of Independence followed, and in that declaration
will be found not only the thoughts, but some of the expressions of
Thomas Paine.

During the war, and in the very darkest hours, Paine wrote what is
called "The Crisis," a series of pamphlets giving from time to time
his opinion of events, and his prophecies. These marvelous publications
produced an effect nearly as great as the pamphlet "Common Sense." These
strophes, written by the bivouac fires, had in them the soul of battle.

In all he wrote, Paine was direct and natural. He touched the very heart
of the subject. He was not awed by names or titles, by place or power.
He never lost his regard for truth, for principle--never wavered in his
allegiance to reason, to what he believed to be right. His arguments
were so lucid, so unanswerable, his comparisons and analogies so apt, so
unexpected, that they excited the passionate admiration of friends
and the unquenchable hatred of enemies. So great were these appeals to
patriotism, to the love of liberty, the pride of independence, the glory
of success, that it was said by some of the best and greatest of that
time that the American cause owed as much to the pen of Paine as to the
sword of Washington.

On the 2d day of November, 1779, there was introduced into the Assembly
of Pennsylvania an act for the abolition of slavery. The preamble was
written by Thomas Paine. To him belongs the honor and glory of having
written the first Proclamation of Emancipation in America--Paine the
first, Lincoln the last.

Paine, of all others, succeeded in getting aid for the struggling
colonies from France. "According to Lamartine, the King, Louis XVI.,
loaded Paine with favors, and a gift of six millions was confided into
the hands of Franklin and Paine. On the 25th of August, 1781, Paine
reached Boston bringing two million five hundred thousand livres in
silver, and in convoy a ship laden with clothing and military stores."

"In November, 1779, Paine was elected clerk to the General Assembly
of Pennsylvania. In 1780, the Assembly received a letter from General
Washington in the field, saying that he feared the distresses in the
army would lead to mutiny in the ranks. This letter was read by Paine to
the Assembly. He immediately wrote to Blair McClenaghan, a Philadelphia
merchant, explaining the urgency, and inclosing five hundred dollars,
the amount of salary due him as clerk, as his contribution towards
a relief fund. The merchant called a meeting the next day, and read
Paine's letter. A subscription list was immediately circulated, and in
a short time about one million five hundred thousand dollars was raised.
With this capital the Pennsylvania bank--afterwards the bank of North
America--was established for the relief of the army."

In 1783 "Paine wrote a memorial to Chancellor Livingston, Secretary of
Foreign Affairs, Robert Morris, Minister of Finance, and his assistant,
urging the necessity of adding a Continental Legislature to Congress, to
be elected by the several States. Robert Morris invited the Chancellor
and a number of eminent men to meet Paine at dinner, where his plea
for a stronger Union was discussed and approved. This was probably the
earliest of a series of consultations preliminary to the Constitutional
Convention."

"On the 19th of April, 1783, it being the eighth anniversary of the
Battle of Lexington, Paine printed a little pamphlet entitled 'Thoughts
on Peace and the Probable Advantages Thereof.'" In this pamphlet
he pleads for "a supreme Nationality absorbing all cherished
sovereignties." Mr. Conway calls this pamphlet Paine's "Farewell
Address," and gives the following extract:

"It was the cause of America that made me an author. The force with
which it struck my mind, and the dangerous condition in which
the country was in, by courting an impossible and an unnatural
reconciliation with those who were determined to reduce her, instead of
striking out into the only line that could save her,--a Declaration
of Independence.--made it impossible for me, feeling as I did, to be
silent; and if, in the course of more than seven years, I have rendered
her any service, I have likewise added something to the reputation of
literature, by freely and disinterestedly employing it in the great
cause of mankind.... But as the scenes of war are closed, and every
man preparing for home and happier times, I therefore take leave of the
subject. I have most sincerely followed it from beginning to end, and
through all its turns and windings; and whatever country I may hereafter
be in, I shall always feel an honest pride at the part I have taken and
acted, and a gratitude to nature and providence for putting it in my
power to be of some use to mankind."

Paine had made some enemies, first, by attacking African slavery, and,
second, by insisting upon the sovereignty of the Nation.

During the Revolution our forefathers, in order to justify making war
on Great Britain, were compelled to take the ground that all men are
entitled to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. In no other way
could they justify their action. After the war, the meaner instincts
began to take possession of the mind, and those who had fought for
their own liberty were perfectly willing to enslave others. We must
also remember that the Revolution was begun and carried on by a noble
minority--that the majority were really in favor of Great Britain and
did what they dared to prevent the success of the American cause. The
minority, however, had control of affairs. They were active, energetic,
enthusiastic, and courageous, and the majority were overawed, shamed,
and suppressed. But when peace came, the majority asserted themselves
and the interests of trade and commerce were consulted. Enthusiasm
slowly died, and patriotism was mingled with the selfishness of traffic.

But, after all, the enemies of Paine were few, the friends were many.
He had the respect and admiration of the greatest and the best, and was
enjoying the fruits of his labor.

The Revolution was ended, the colonies were free. They had been united,
they formed a Nation, and the United States of America had a place on
the map of the world.

Paine was not a politician. He had not labored for seven years to get an
office. His services were no longer needed in America. He concluded to
educate the English people, to inform them of their rights, to expose
the pretences, follies and fallacies, the crimes and cruelties of
nobles, kings, and parliaments. In the brain and heart of this man were
the dream and hope of the universal republic. He had confidence in the
people. He hated tyranny and war, despised the senseless pomp and vain
show of crowned robbers, laughed at titles, and the "honorable" badges
worn by the obsequious and servile, by fawners and followers; loved
liberty with all his heart, and bravely fought against those who could
give the rewards of place and gold, and for those who could pay only
with thanks.

Hoping to hasten the day of freedom, he wrote the "Rights of Man"--a
book that laid the foundation for all the real liberty that the English
now enjoy--a book that made known to Englishmen the Declaration of
Nature, and convinced millions that all are children of the same
mother, entitled to share equally in her gifts. Every Englishman who
has outgrown the ideas of 1688 should remember Paine with love and
reverence. Every Englishman who has sought to destroy abuses, to lessen
or limit the prerogatives of the crown, to extend the suffrage, to do
away with "rotten boroughs," to take taxes from knowledge, to increase
and protect the freedom of speech and the press, to do away with
bribes under the name of pensions, and to make England a government of
principles rather than of persons, has been compelled to adopt the creed
and use the arguments of Thomas Paine. In England every step toward
freedom has been a triumph of Paine over Burke and Pitt. No man ever
rendered a greater service to his native land.

The book called the "Rights of Man" was the greatest contribution that
literature had given to liberty. It rests on the bed-rock. No attention
is paid to precedents except to show that they are wrong. Paine was not
misled by the proverbs that wolves had written for sheep. He had the
intelligence to examine for himself, and the courage to publish his
conclusions. As soon as the "Rights of Man" was published the Government
was alarmed. Every effort was made to suppress it. The author was
indicted; those who published, and those who sold, were arrested and
imprisoned. But the new gospel had been preached--a great man had shed
light--a new force had been born, and it was beyond the power of nobles
and kings to undo what the author-hero had done.

To avoid arrest and probable death, Paine left England. He had sown with
brave hand the seeds of thought, and he knew that he had lighted a fire
that nothing could extinguish until England should be free.

The fame of Thomas Paine had reached France in many ways--principally
through Lafayette. His services in America were well known. The pamphlet
"Common Sense" had been published in French, and its effect had been
immense. "The Rights of Man" that had created, and was then creating,
such a stir in England, was also known to the French. The lovers of
liberty everywhere were the friends and admirers of Thomas Paine. In
America, England, Scotland, Ireland, and France he was known as the
defender of popular rights. He had preached a new gospel. He had given a
new Magna Charta to the people.

So popular was Paine in France that he was elected by three
constituencies to the National Convention. He chose to represent Calais.
From the moment he entered French territory he was received with almost
royal honors. He at once stood with the foremost, and was welcomed
by all enlightened patriots. As in America, so in France, he knew no
idleness--he was an organizer and worker. The first thing he did was to
found the first Republican Society, and the next to write its Manifesto,
in which the ground was taken that France did not need a king; that the
people should govern themselves. In this Manifesto was this argument:

"What kind of office must that be in a government which requires
neither experience nor ability to execute? that may be abandoned to the
desperate chance of birth; that may be filled with an idiot, a madman,
a tyrant, with equal effect as with the good, the virtuous, the wise? An
office of this nature is a mere nonentity; it is a place of show, not of
use."

He said:

"I am not the personal enemy of kings. Quite the contrary. No man wishes
more heartily than myself to see them all in the happy and honorable
state of private individuals; but I am the avowed, open and intrepid
enemy of what is called monarchy; and I am such by principles which
nothing can either alter or corrupt, by my attachment to humanity, by
the anxiety which I feel within myself for the dignity and honor of the
human race."

One of the grandest things done by Thomas Paine was his effort to save
the life of Louis XVI. The Convention was in favor of death. Paine was a
foreigner. His career had caused some jealousies. He knew the danger he
was in--that the tiger was already crouching for a spring--but he
was true to his principles. He was opposed to the death penalty. He
remembered that Louis XVI. had been the friend of America, and he very
cheerfully risked his life, not only for the good of France, not only to
save the king, but to pay a debt of gratitude. He asked the Convention
to exile the king to the United States. He asked this as a member of the
Convention and as a citizen of the United States. As an American he felt
grateful not only to the king, but to every Frenchman. He, the adversary
of all kings, asked the Convention to remember that kings were men, and
subject to human frailties. He took still another step, and said: "As
France has been the first of European nations to abolish royalty, let us
also be the first to abolish the punishment of death."

Even after the death of Louis had been voted, Paine made another appeal.
With a courage born of the highest possible sense of duty he said:

"France has but one ally--the United States of America. That is the only
nation that can furnish France with naval provisions, for the kingdoms
of Northern Europe are, or soon will be, at war with her. It happens
that the person now under discussion is regarded in America as a
deliverer of their country. I can assure you that his execution will
there spread universal sorrow, and it is in your power not thus to wound
the feelings of your ally. Could I speak the French language I would
descend to your bar, and in their name become your petitioner to respite
the execution of your sentence on Louis. Ah, citizens, give not the
tyrant of England the triumph of seeing the man perish on the scaffold
who helped my dear brothers of America to break his chains."

This was worthy of the man who had said: "Where Liberty is _not_, there
is my country."

Paine was second on the committee to prepare the draft of a constitution
for France to be submitted to the Convention. He was the real author,
not only of the draft of the Constitution, but of the Declaration of
Rights.

In France, as in America, he took the lead. His first thoughts seemed
to be first principles. He was clear because he was profound. People
without ideas experience great difficulty in finding words to express
them.

From the moment that Paine cast his vote in favor of mercy--in favor of
life--the shadow of the guillotine was upon him. He knew that when he
voted for the King's life, he voted for his own death. Paine remembered
that the king had been the friend of America, and to him ingratitude
seemed the worst of crimes. He worked to destroy the monarch, not the
man; the king, not the friend. He discharged his duty and accepted
death. This was the heroism of goodness--the sublimity of devotion.

Believing that his life was near its close, he made up his mind to give
to the world his thoughts concerning "revealed religion." This he
had for some time intended to do, but other matters had claimed his
attention. Feeling that there was no time to be lost, he wrote the first
part of the "Age of Reason," and gave the manuscript to Joel Barlow.
Six hours after, he was arrested. The second part was written in prison
while he was waiting for death.

Paine clearly saw that men could not be really free, or defend the
freedom they had, unless they were free to think and speak. He knew that
the church was the enemy of liberty, that the altar and throne were in
partnership, that they helped each other and divided the spoils.

He felt that, being a man, he had the right to examine the creeds and
the Scriptures for himself, and that, being an honest man, it was his
duty and his privilege to tell his fellow-men the conclusions at which
he arrived.

He found that the creeds of all orthodox churches were absurd and cruel,
and that the Bible was no better. Of course he found that there were
some good things in the creeds and in the Bible. These he defended, but
the infamous, the inhuman, he attacked.

In matters of religion he pursued the same course that he had in things
political. He depended upon experience, and above all on reason. He
refused to extinguish the light in his own soul. He was true to himself,
and gave to others his honest thoughts. He did not seek wealth, or
place, or fame. He sought the truth.

He had felt it to be his duty to attack the institution of slavery in
America, to raise his voice against dueling, to plead for the rights
of woman, to excite pity for the sufferings of domestic animals,
the speechless friends of man; to plead the cause of separation, of
independence, of American nationality, to attack the abuses and crimes
of mon-archs, to do what he could to give freedom to the world.

He thought it his duty to take another step. Kings asserted that they
derived their power, their right to govern, from God. To this assertion
Paine replied with the "Rights of Man." Priests pretended that they were
the authorized agents of God. Paine replied with the "Age of Reason."

This book is still a power, and will be as long as the absurdities
and cruelties of the creeds and the Bible have defenders. The "Age of
Reason" affected the priests just as the "Rights of Man" affected nobles
and kings. The kings answered the arguments of Paine with laws, the
priests with lies. Kings appealed to force, priests to fraud. Mr. Conway
has written in regard to the "Age of Reason" the most impressive and the
most interesting chapter in his book.

Paine contended for the rights of the individual,--tor the jurisdiction
of the soul. Above all religions he placed Reason, above all kings, Men,
and above all men, Law.

The first part of the "Age of Reason" was written in the shadow of a
prison, the second part in the gloom of death. From that shadow, from
that gloom, came a flood of light. This testament, by which the wealth
of a marvelous brain, the love of a great and heroic heart were given to
the world, was written in the presence of the scaffold, when the writer
believed he was giving his last message to his fellow-men.

The "Age of Reason" was his crime.

Franklin, Jefferson, Sumner and Lincoln, the four greatest statesmen
that America has produced, were believers in the creed of Thomas Paine.

The Universalists and Unitarians have found their best weapons, their
best arguments, in the "Age of Reason."

Slowly, but surely, the churches are adopting not only the arguments,
but the opinions of the great Reformer.

Theodore Parker attacked the Old Testament and Calvinistic theology
with the same weapons and with a bitterness excelled by no man who has
expressed his thoughts in our language.

Paine was a century in advance of his time. If he were living now
his sympathy would be with Savage, Chadwick, Professor Briggs and the
"advanced theologians." He, too, would talk about the "higher criticism"
and the latest definition of "inspiration." These advanced thinkers
substantially are repeating the "Age of Reason." They still wear the
old uniform--clinging to the toggery of theology--but inside of their
religious rags they agree with Thomas Paine.

Not one argument that Paine urged against the inspiration of the Bible,
against the truth of miracles, against the barbarities and infamies of
the Old Testament, against the pretensions of priests and the claims of
kings, has ever been answered.

His arguments in favor of the existence of what he was pleased to call
the God of Nature were as weak as those of all Theists have been. But
in all the affairs of this world, his clearness of vision, lucidity
of expression, cogency of argument, aptness of comparison, power
of statement and comprehension of the subject in hand, with all its
bearings and consequences, have rarely, if ever, been excelled.

He had no reverence for mistakes because they were old. He did not
admire the castles of Feudalism even when they were covered with ivy. He
not only said that the Bible was not inspired, but he demonstrated that
it could not all be true. This was "brutal." He presented arguments so
strong, so clear, so convincing, that they could not be answered. This
was "vulgar."

He stood for liberty against kings, for humanity against creeds and
gods. This was "cowardly and low." He gave his life to free and civilize
his fellow-men. This was "infamous."

Paine was arrested and imprisoned in December, 1793. He was, to say the
least, neglected by Gouverneur Morris and Washington. He was released
through the efforts of James Monroe, in November, 1794. He was called
back to the Convention, but too late to be of use. As most of the actors
had suffered death, the tragedy was about over and the curtain was
falling. Paine remained in Paris until the "Reign of Terror" was ended
and that of the Corsican tyrant had commenced.

Paine came back to America hoping to spend the remainder of his life
surrounded by those for whose happiness and freedom he had labored so
many years. He expected to be rewarded with the love and reverence of
the American people.

In 1794 James Monroe had written to Paine these words:

"It is unnecessary for me to tell you how much all your countrymen, I
speak of the great mass of the people, are interested in your welfare.
They have not forgot the history of their own Revolution and the
difficult scenes through which they passed; nor do they review its
several stages without reviving in their bosoms a due sensibility of the
merits of those who served them in that great and arduous conflict. The
crime of ingratitude has not yet stained, and I hope never will stain,
our national character. You are considered by them as not only having
rendered important services in our own Revolution, but as being on a
more extensive scale the friend of human rights and a distinguished and
able advocate of public liberty. To the welfare of Thomas Paine we are
not and cannot be indifferent."

In the same year Mr. Monroe wrote a letter to the Committee of General
Safety, asking for the release of Mr. Paine, in which, among other
things, he said:

"The services Thomas Paine rendered to his country in its struggle
for freedom have implanted in the hearts of his countrymen a sense of
gratitude never to be effaced as long as they shall deserve the title of
a just and generous people."

On reaching America, Paine found that the sense of gratitude had been
effaced. He found that the Federalists hated him with all their hearts
because he believed in the rights of the people and was still true
to the splendid principles advocated during the darkest days of the
Revolution. In almost every pulpit he found a malignant and implacable
foe, and the pews were filled with his enemies. The slaveholders
hated him. He was held responsible even for the crimes of the French
Revolution. He was regarded as a blasphemer, an Atheist, an enemy of God
and man. The ignorant citizens of Bordentown, as cowardly as orthodox,
longed to mob the author of "Common Sense" and "The Crisis." They
thought he had sold himself to the Devil because he had defended God
against the slanderous charges that he had inspired the writers of the
Bible--because he had said that a being of infinite goodness and purity
did not establish slavery and polygamy.

Paine had insisted that men had the right to think for themselves. This
so enraged the average American citizen that he longed for revenge.

In 1802 the people of the United States had exceedingly crude ideas
about the liberty of thought and expression Neither had they any
conception of religious freedom. Their highest thought on that subject
was expressed by the word "toleration," and even this toleration
extended only to the various Christian sects. Even the vaunted religious
liberty of colonial Maryland was only to the effect that one kind of
Christian should not fine, imprison and kill another kind of Christian,
but all kinds of Christians had the right, and it was their duty, to
brand, imprison and kill Infidels of every kind.

Paine had been guilty of thinking for himself and giving his conclusions
to the world without having asked the consent of a priest--just as he
had published his political opinions without leave of the king. He had
published his thoughts on religion and had appealed to reason--to the
light in every mind, to the humanity, the pity, the goodness which he
believed to be in every heart. He denied the right of kings to make laws
and of priests to make creeds. He insisted that the people should make
laws, and that every human being should think for himself. While some
believed in the freedom of religion, he believed in the religion of
freedom.

If Paine had been a hypocrite, if he had concealed his opinions, if he
had defended slavery with quotations from the "sacred Scriptures"--if
he had cared nothing for the liberties of men in other lands--if he had
said that the state could not live without the church--if he had sought
for place instead of truth, he would have won wealth and power, and his
brow would have been crowned with the laurel of fame.

He made what the pious call the "mistake" of being true to himself--of
living with an unstained soul. He had lived and labored for the people.
The people were untrue' to him. They returned evil for good, hatred for
benefits received, and yet this great chivalric soul remembered their
ignorance and loved them with all his heart, and fought their oppressors
with all his strength.

We must remember what the churches and creeds were in that day, what the
theologians really taught, and what the people believed. To save a few
in spite of their vices, and to damn the many without regard to their
virtues, and all for the glory of the Damner:--_this was Calvinism_. "He
that hath ears to hear, let him hear," but he that hath a brain to think
must not think. He that believeth without evidence is good, and he that
believeth in spite of evidence is a saint. Only the wicked doubt, only
the blasphemer denies. _This was orthodox Christianity_.

Thomas Paine had the courage, the sense, the heart, to denounce these
horrors, these absurdities, these infinite infamies. He did what he
could to drive these theological vipers, these Calvinistic cobras, these
fanged and hissing serpents of superstition from the heart of man.

A few civilized men agreed with him then, and the world has progressed
since 1809. Intellectual wealth has accumulated; vast mental estates
have been left to the world. Geologists have forced secrets from the
rocks, astronomers from the stars, historians from old records and lost
languages. In every direction the thinker and the investigator have
ventured and explored, and even the pews have begun to ask questions of
the pulpits. Humboldt has lived, and Darwin and Haeckel and Huxley, and
the armies led by them, have changed the thought of the world.

The churches of 1809 could not be the friends of Thomas Paine. No church
asserting that belief is necessary to salvation ever was, or ever will
be, the champion of true liberty. A church founded on slavery--that
is to say, on blind obedience, worshiping irresponsible and arbitrary
power, must of necessity be the enemy of human freedom.

The orthodox churches are now anxious to save the little that Paine left
of their creed. If one now believes in God, and lends a little financial
aid, he is considered a good and desirable member. He need not define
God after the manner of the catechism. He may talk about a "Power that
works for righteousness," or the tortoise Truth that beats the rabbit
Lie in the long run, or the "Unknowable," or the "Unconditioned," or
the "Cosmic Force," or the "Ultimate Atom," or "Protoplasm," or the
"What"--provided he begins this word with a capital.

We must also remember that there is a difference between independence
and liberty. Millions have fought for independence--to throw off some
foreign yoke--and yet were at heart the enemies of true liberty. A man
in jail, sighing to be free, may be said to be in favor of liberty, but
not from principle; but a man who, being free, risks or gives his life
to free the enslaved, is a true soldier of liberty.

Thomas Paine had passed the legendary limit of life. One by one most of
his old friends and acquaintances had deserted him. Maligned on
every side, execrated, shunned and abhorred--his virtues denounced as
vices--his services forgotten--his character blackened, he preserved the
poise and balance of his soul. He was a victim of the people, but his
convictions remained unshaken. He was still a soldier in the army
of freedom, and still tried to enlighten and civilize those who were
impatiently waiting for his death. Even those who loved their enemies
hated him, their friend--the friend of the whole world--with all their
hearts.

On the 8th of June, 1809, death came--Death, almost his only friend.

At his funeral no pomp, no pageantry, no civic procession, no military
display. In a carriage, a woman and her son who had lived on the
bounty of the dead--On horseback, a Quaker, the humanity of whose heart
dominated the creed of his head--and, following on foot, two negroes
filled with gratitude--constituted the funeral cortege of Thomas Paine.

He who had received the gratitude of many millions, the thanks of
generals and statesmen--he who had been the friend and companion of the
wisest and best--he who had taught a people to be free, and whose words
had inspired armies and enlightened nations, was thus given back to
Nature, the mother of us all.

If the people of the great Republic knew the life of this generous, this
chivalric man, the real story of his services, his sufferings and his
triumphs--of what he did to compel the robed and crowned, the priests
and kings, to give back to the people liberty, the jewel of the soul; if
they knew that he was the first to write, "The Religion of Humanity";
if they knew that he, above all others, planted and watered the seeds
of independence, of union, of nationality, in the hearts of our
forefathers--that his words were gladly repeated by the best and bravest
in many lands; if they knew that he attempted, by the purest means, to
attain the noblest and loftiest ends--that he was original, sincere,
intrepid, and that he could truthfully say: "The world is my country, to
do good my religion"--if the people only knew all this--the truth--they
would repeat the words of Andrew Jackson: "Thomas Paine needs no
monument made with hands; he has erected a monument in the hearts of all
lovers of liberty."--North American Review, August, 1893.




THE THREE PHILANTHROPISTS.

     "Well, while I am a beggar, I will rail,
     And say there is no sin but to be rich."


MR. A. lived in the kingdom of--------. He was a sincere professional
philanthropist. He was absolutely certain that he loved his fellow-men,
and that his views were humane and scientific. He concluded to turn his
attention to taking care of people less fortunate than himself.

With this object in view he investigated the common people that lived
about him, and he found that they were extremely ignorant, that many of
them seemed to take no particular interest in life or in business, that
few of them had any theories of their own, and that, while many had
muscle, there was only now and then one who had any mind worth speaking
of. Nearly all of them were destitute of ambition. They were satisfied
if they got something to eat, a place to sleep, and could now and
then indulge in some form of dissipation. They seemed to have great
confidence in to-morrow--trusted to luck, and took no thought for the
future. Many of them were extravagant, most of them dissipated, and a
good many dishonest.

Mr. A. found that many of the husbands not only failed to support their
families, but that some of them lived on the labor of their wives; that
many of the wives were careless of their obligations, knew nothing about
the art of cooking; nothing about keeping house; and that parents, as a
general thing, neglected their children or treated them with cruelty. He
also found that many of the people were so shiftless that they died of
want and exposure.

After having obtained this information Mr. A. made up his mind to do
what little he could to better their condition. He petitioned the king
to assist him, and asked that he be allowed to take control of five
hundred people in consideration that he would pay a certain amount into
the treasury of the kingdom. The king being satisfied that Mr. A.
could take care of these people better than they were taking care of
themselves, granted the petition.

Mr. A., with the assistance of a few soldiers, took these people from
their old homes and haunts to a plantation of his own. He divided
them into groups, and over each group placed a superintendent. He
made certain rules and regulations for their conduct. They were only
compelled to work from twelve to fourteen hours a day, leaving ten hours
for sleep and recreation. Good and substantial food was provided. Their
houses were comfortable and their clothing sufficient. Their work was
laid out from day to day and from month to month, so that they knew
exactly what they were to do in each hour of every day. These rules
were made for the good of the people, to the end that they might not
interfere with each other, that they might attend to their duties, and
enjoy themselves in a reasonable way. They were not allowed to waste
their time, or to use stimulants or profane language. They were told to
be respectful to the superintendents, and especially to Mr. A.; to be
obedient, and, above all, to accept the position in which Providence had
placed them, without complaining, and to cheerfully perform their tasks.

Mr. A. had found out all that the five hundred persons had earned the
year before they were taken control of by him--just how much they had
added to the wealth of the world. He had statistics taken for the
year before with great care showing the number of deaths, the cases of
sickness and of destitution, the number who had committed suicide, how
many had been convicted of crimes and misdemeanors, how many days they
had been idle, and how much time and money they had spent in drink and
for worthless amusements.

During the first year of their enslavement he kept like statistics. He
found that they had earned several times as much; that there had been no
cases of destitution, no drunkenness; that no crimes had been committed;
that there had been but little sickness, owing to the regular course
of their lives; that few had been guilty of misdemeanors, owing to
the certainty of punishment; and that they had been so watched and
superintended that for the most part they had traveled the highway of
virtue and industry.

Mr. A. was delighted, and with a vast deal of pride showed these
statistics to his friends. He not only demonstrated that the five
hundred people were better off than they had been before, but that his
own income was very largely increased. He congratulated himself that he
had added to the well-being of these people not only, but had laid the
foundation of a great fortune for himself. On these facts and these
figures he claimed not only to be a philanthropist, but a philosopher;
and all the people who had a mind to go into the same business agreed
with him.

Some denounced the entire proceeding as unwarranted, as contrary to
reason and justice. These insisted that the five hundred people had
a right to live in their own way provided they did not interfere with
others; that they had the right to go through the world with little food
and with poor clothes, and to live in huts, if such was their choice.
But Mr. A. had no trouble in answering these objectors. He insisted
that well-being is the only good, and that every human being is under
obligation, not only to take care of himself, but to do what little
he can towards taking care of others; that where five hundred people
neglect to take care of themselves, it is the duty of somebody else, who
has more intelligence and more means, to take care of them; that the man
who takes five hundred people and improves their condition, gives
them on the average better food, better clothes, and keeps them out of
mischief, is a benefactor.

"These people," said Mr. A., "were tried. They were found incapable of
taking care of themselves. They lacked intelligence or will or honesty
or industry or ambition or something, so that in the struggle for
existence they fell behind, became stragglers, dropped by the wayside,
died in gutters; while many were destined to end their days either in
dungeons or on scaffolds. Besides all this, they were a nuisance to
their prosperous fellow-citizens, a perpetual menace to the peace of
society. They increased the burden of taxation; they filled the ranks
of the criminal classes, they made it necessary to build more jails, to
employ more policemen and judges; so that I, by enslaving them, not
only assisted them, not only protected them against themselves, not only
bettered their condition, not only added to the well-being of-society at
large, but greatly increased my own fortune."

Mr. A. also took the ground that Providence, by giving him superior
intelligence, the genius of command, the aptitude for taking charge
of others, had made it his duty to exercise these faculties for the
well-being of the people and for the glory of God. Mr. A. frequently
declared that he was God's steward. He often said he thanked God that he
was not governed by a sickly sentiment, but that he was a man of sense,
of judgment, of force of character, and that the means employeed by him
were in accordance with the logic of facts.

Some of the people thus enslaved objected, saying that they had the same
right to control themselves that Mr. A. had to control himself. But it
only required a little discipline to satisfy them that they were wrong.
Some of the people were quite happy, and declared that nothing gave them
such perfect contentment as the absence of all responsibility. Mr. A.
insisted that all men had not been endowed with the same capacity; that
the weak ought to be cared for by the strong; that such was evidently
the design of the Creator, and that he intended to do what little he
could to carry that design into effect.

Mr. A. was very successful. In a few years he had several thousands of
men, women, and children working for him. He amassed a large fortune.
He felt that he had been intrusted with this money by Providence. He
therefore built several churches, and once in a while gave large sums to
societies for the spread of civilization. He passed away regretted by a
great many people--not including those who had lived under his immediate
administration. He was buried with great pomp, the king being one of the
pall-bearers, and on his tomb was this:

HE WAS THE PROVIDENCE OF THE POOR.


