II.

     "And, being rich, my virtue then shall be
     To say there is no vice but beggary."

Mr. B. did not believe in slavery. He despised the institution with
every drop of his blood, and was an advocate of universal freedom. He
held all the ideas of Mr. A. in supreme contempt, and frequently spent
whole evenings in denouncing the inhumanity and injustice of the whole
business. He even went so far as to contend that many of A.'s slaves had
more intelligence than A. himself, and that, whether they had
intelligence or not, they had the right to be free. He insisted that Mr.
A.'s philanthropy was a sham; that he never bought a human being for the
purpose of bettering that being's condition; that he went into the
business simply to make money for himself; and that his talk about his
slaves committing less crime than when they were free was simply to
justify the crime committed by himself in enslaving his fellow-men.

Mr. B. was a manufacturer, and he employeed some five or six thousand
men. He used to say that these men were not forced to work for him; that
they were at perfect liberty to accept or reject the terms; that, so far
as he was concerned, he would just as soon commit larceny or robbery as
to force a man to work for him. "Every laborer under my roof," he used
to say, "is as free to choose as I am."

Mr B. believed in absolutely free trade; thought it an outrage to
interfere with the free interplay of forces; said that every man should
buy, or at least have the privilege of buying, where he could buy
cheapest, and should have the privilege of selling where he could get
the most. He insisted that a man who has labor to sell has the right to
sell it to the best advantage, and that the purchaser has the right to
buy it at the lowest price. He did not enslave men--he hired them. Some
said that he took advantage of their necessities; but he answered
that he created no necessities, that he was not responsible for their
condition, that he did not make them poor, that he found them poor and
gave them work, and gave them the same wages that he could employ others
for. He insisted that he was absolutely just to all; he did not give one
man more than another, and he never refused to employ a man on account
of the man's religion or politics; all that he did was simply to employ
that man if the man wished to be employed, and give him the wages, no
more and no less, that some other man of like capacity was willing to
work for.

Mr. B. also said that the price of the article manufactured by him
fixed the wages of the persons employed, and that he, Mr. B., was not
responsible for the price of the article he manufactured; consequently
he was not responsible for the wages of the workmen. He agreed to pay
them a certain price, he taking the risk of selling his articles, and he
paid them regularly just on the day he agreed to pay them, and if they
were not satisfied with the wages, they were at perfect liberty to
leave. One of his private sayings was: "The poor ye have always with
you." And from this he argued that some men were made poor so that
others could be generous. "Take poverty and suffering from the world,"
he said, "and you destroy sympathy and generosity."

Mr. B. made a large amount of money. Many of his workmen complained
that their wages did not allow them to live in comfort. Many had large
families, and therefore but little to eat. Some of them lived in crowded
rooms. Many of the children were carried off by disease; but Mr. B. took
the ground that all these people had the right to go, that he did not
force them to remain, that if they were not healthy it was not his
fault, and that whenever it pleased Providence to remove a child, or one
of the parents, he, Mr. B., was not responsible.

Mr. B. insisted that many of his workmen were extravagant; that they
bought things that they did not need; that they wasted in beer and
tobacco, money that they should save for funerals; that many of them
visited places of amusement when they should have been thinking about
death, and that others bought toys to please the children when
they hardly had bread enough to eat. He felt that he was in no way
accountable for this extravagance, nor for the fact that their wages did
not give them the necessaries of life, because he not only gave them the
same wages that other manufacturers gave, but the same wages that other
workmen were willing to work for.

Mr. B. said,--and he always said this as though it ended the
argument,--and he generally stood up to say it: "The great law of supply
and demand is of divine origin; it is the only law that will work in
all possible or conceivable cases; and this law fixes the price of all
labor, and from it there is no appeal. If people are not satisfied
with the operation of the law, then let them make a new world for
themselves."

Some of Mr. B.'s friends reported that on several occasions, forgetting
what he had said on others, he did declare that his confidence was
somewhat weakened in the law of supply and demand; but this was only
when there seemed to be an over-production of the things he was engaged
in manufacturing, and at such times he seemed to doubt the absolute
equity of the great law.

Mr. B. made even a larger fortune than Mr. A., because when his workmen
got old he did not have to care for them, when they were sick he paid no
doctors, and when their children died he bought no coffins. In this way
he was relieved of a large part of the expenses that had to be borne by
Mr. A. When his workmen became too old, they were sent to the poorhouse;
when they were sick, they were assisted by charitable societies; and
when they died, they were buried by pity.

In a few years Mr. B. was the owner of many millions. He also considered
himself as one of God's stewards; felt that Providence had given him the
intelligence to combine interests, to carry out great schemes, and
that he was specially raised up to give employment to many thousands
of people. He often regretted that he could do no more for his laborers
without lessening his own profits, or, rather, without lessening his
fund for the blessing of mankind--the blessing to begin immediately
after his death. He was so anxious to be the providence of posterity
that he was sometimes almost heartless in his dealings with
contemporaries. He felt that it was necessary for him to be economical,
to save every dollar that he could, because in this way he could
increase the fund that was finally to bless mankind. He also felt that
in this way he could lay the foundations of a permanent fame--that
he could build, through his executors, an asylum to be called the "B.
Asylum," that he could fill a building with books to be called the
"B. Library," and that he could also build and endow an institution of
learning to be called the "B. College," and that, in addition, a
large amount of money could be given for the purpose of civilizing the
citizens of less fortunate countries, to the end that they might become
imbued with that spirit of combination and manufacture that results in
putting large fortunes in the hands of those who have been selected by
Providence, on account of their talents, to make a better distribution
of wealth than those who earned it could have done.

Mr. B. spent many thousands of dollars to procure such legislation as
would protect him from foreign competition. He did not believe the law
of supply and demand would work when interfered with by manufacturers
living in other countries.

Mr. B., like Mr. A., was a man of judgment. He had what is called a
level head, was not easily turned aside from his purpose, and felt that
he was in accord with the general sentiment of his time. By his own
exertions he rose from poverty to wealth. He was born in a hut and died
in a palace. He was a patron of art and enriched his walls with the
works of the masters. He insisted that others could and should follow
his example. For those who failed or refused he had no sympathy. He
accounted for their poverty and wretchedness by saying: "These paupers
have only themselves to blame." He died without ever having lost a
dollar. His funeral was magnificent, and clergymen vied with each other
in laudations of the dead. Over his dust rises a monument of marble with
the words:

HE LIVED FOR OTHERS.


III

     "But there are men who steal, and vainly try
     To gild the crime with pompous charity."

There was another man, Mr. C., who also had the genius for combination.
He understood the value of capital, the value of labor; knew exactly
how much could be done with machinery; understood the economy of things;
knew how to do everything in the easiest and shortest way. And he, too,
was a manufacturer and had in his employ many thousands of men, women,
and children. He was what is called a visionary, a sentimentalist,
rather weak in his will, not very obstinate, had but little egotism; and
it never occurred to him that he had been selected by Providence, or any
supernatural power, to divide the property of others. It did not seem
to him that he had any right to take from other men their labor without
giving them a full equivalent. He felt that if he had more intelligence
than his fellow-men he ought to use that intelligence not only for his
own good but for theirs; that he certainly ought not to use it for the
purpose of gaining an advantage over those who were his intellectual
inferiors. He used to say that a man strong intellectually had no more
right to take advantage of a man weak intellectually than the physically
strong had to rob the physically weak.

He also insisted that we should not take advantage of each other's
necessities; that you should not ask a drowning man a greater price for
lumber than you would if he stood on the shore; that if you took into
consideration the necessities of your fellow-man, it should be only to
lessen the price of that which you would sell to him, not to increase
it. He insisted that honest men do not take advantage of their fellows.
He was so weak that he had not perfect confidence in the great law
of supply and demand as applied to flesh and blood. He took into
consideration another law of supply and demand; he knew that the
workingman had to be supplied with food, and that his nature demanded
something to eat, a house to live in, clothes to wear.

Mr. C. used to think about this law of supply and demand as applicable
to individuals. He found that men would work for exceedingly small wages
when pressed for the necessaries of life; that under some circumstances
they would give their labor for half of what it was worth to the
employer, because they were in a position where they must do something
for wife or child. He concluded that he had no right to take advantage
of the necessities of others, and that he should in the first place
honestly find what the work was worth to him, and then give to the man
who did the work that amount.

Other manufacturers regarded Mr. C. as substantially insane, while
most of his workmen looked upon him as an exceedingly good-natured
man, without any particular genius for business. Mr. C., however,
cared little about the opinions of others, so long as he maintained his
respect for himself.

At the end of the first year he found that he had made a large profit,
and thereupon he divided this profit with the people who had earned
it. Some of his friends said to him that he ought to endow some public
institution; that there should be a college in his native town; but Mr.
C. was of such a peculiar turn of mind that he thought justice ought
to go before charity, and a little in front of egotism, and a desire
to immortalize one's self. He said that it seemed to him that of all
persons in the world entitled to this profit were the men who had earned
it, the men who had made it by their labor, by days of actual toil. He
insisted that, as they had earned it, it was really theirs, and if it
was theirs, they should have it and should spend it in their own way.
Mr. C. was told that he would make the workmen in other factories
dissatisfied, that other manufacturers would become his enemies, and
that his course would scandalize some of the greatest men who had
done so much for the civilization of the world and for the spread of
intelligence. Mr. C. became extremely unpopular with men of talent, with
those who had a genius for business. He, however, pursued his way, and
carried on his business with the idea that the men who did the work were
entitled to a fair share of the profits; that, after all, money was not
as sacred as men, and that the law of supply and demand, as understood,
did not apply to flesh and blood.

Mr. C. said: "I cannot be happy if those who work for me are defrauded.
If I feel I am taking what belongs to them, then my life becomes
miserable. To feel that I have done justice is one of the necessities of
my nature. I do not wish to establish colleges. I wish to establish
no public institution. My desire is to enable those who work for me to
establish a few thousand homes for themselves. My ambition is to
enable them to buy the books they really want to read. I do not wish to
establish a hospital, but I want to make it possible for my workmen
to have the services of the best physicians--physicians of their own
choice.

"It is not for me to take their money and use it for the good of others
or for my own glory. It is for me to give what they have earned to them.
After I have given them the money that belongs to them, I can give them
my advice--I can tell them how I hope they will use it; and after I have
advised them, they will use it as they please. You cannot make great
men and great women by suppression. Slavery is not the school in
which genius is born. Every human being must make his own mistakes for
himself, must learn for himself, must have his own experience; and if
the world improves, it must be from choice, not from force; and every
man who does justice, who sets the example of fair dealing, hastens the
coming of universal honesty, of universal civilization."

Mr. C. carried his doctrine out to the fullest extent, honestly and
faithfully. When he died, there were at the funeral those who had worked
for him, their wives and their children. Their tears fell upon his
grave. They planted flowers and paid to him the tribute of their love.
Above his silent dust they erected a monument with this inscription:

HE ALLOWED OTHERS TO LIVE FOR THEMSELVES.

North American Review, December, 1831.




SHOULD THE CHINESE BE EXCLUDED?


THE average American, like the average man of any country, has but
little imagination. People who speak a different language, or worship
some other god, or wear clothing unlike his own, are beyond the horizon
of his sympathy. He cares but little or nothing for the sufferings or
misfortunes of those who are of a different complexion or of another
race. His imagination is not powerful enough to recognize the human
being, in spite of peculiarities. Instead of this he looks upon every
difference as an evidence of inferiority, and for the inferior he has
but little if any feeling. If these "inferior people" claim equal
rights he feels insulted, and for the purpose of establishing his own
superiority tramples on the rights of the so-called inferior.

In our own country the native has always considered himself as much
better than the immigrant, and as far superior to all people of a
different complexion. At one time our people hated the Irish, then the
Germans, then the Italians, and now the Chinese. The Irish and Germans,
however, became numerous. They became citizens, and, most important of
all, they had votes. They combined, became powerful, and the political
parties sought their aid. They had something to give in exchange for
protection--in exchange for political rights. In consequence of this
they were flattered by candidates, praised by the political press, and
became powerful enough not only to protect themselves, but at last to
govern the principal cities in the United States. As a matter of fact
the Irish and the Germans drove the native Americans out of the trades
and from the lower forms of labor. They built the railways and canals.
They became servants. Afterward the Irish and the Germans were driven
from the canals and railways by the Italians.

The Irish and Germans improved their condition. They went into other
businesses, into the higher and more lucrative trades. They entered
the professions, turned their attention to politics, became merchants,
brokers, and professors in colleges. They are not now building railroads
or digging on public works. They are contractors, legislators, holders
of office, and the Italians and Chinese are doing the old work.

If matters had been allowed to work in a natural way, without the
interference of mobs or legislators, the Chinese would have driven the
Italians to better employments, and all menial labor would, in time, be
done by the Mongolians.

In olden times each nation hated all others. This was considered natural
and patriotic. Spain, after many centuries of war, expelled the Moors,
then the Moriscoes, and then the Jews. And Spain, in the name of
religion and patriotism, succeeded in driving from its territory its
industry, its taste and its intelligence, and by these mistakes became
poor, ignorant and weak. France started on the same path when the
Huguenots were expelled, and even England at one time deported the Jews.
In those days a difference of race or religion was sufficient to justify
any absurdity and any cruelty.

In our country, as a matter of fact, there is but little prejudice
against emigrants coming from Europe, except among naturalized citizens;
but nearly all foreign-born citizens are united in their prejudice
against the Chinese.

The truth is that the Chinese came to this country by invitation. Under
the Burlingame Treaty, China and the United States recognized:

"The inherent and inalienable right of man to change his home and
allegiance, and also the mutual advantage of free migration and
emigration of their citizens and subjects respectively from one country
to the other for purposes of curiosity, of trade, or as permanent
residents."

And it was provided:

"That the citizens of the United States visiting or residing in China
and Chinese subjects visiting or residing in the United States should
reciprocally enjoy the same privileges, immunities and exemptions, in
respect to travel or residence, as shall be enjoyed by the citizens or
subjects of the most favored nation, in the country in which they shall
respectively be visiting or residing."

So, by the treaty of 1880, providing for the limitation or suspension of
emigration of Chinese labor, it was declared:

"That the limitation or suspension should apply only to Chinese who
emigrated to the United States as laborers; but that Chinese laborers
who were then in the United States should be allowed to go and come of
their own free will and should be accorded all the rights, privileges,
immunities and exemptions, which were accorded to the citizens and
subjects of the most favored nations."

It will thus be seen that all Chinese laborers who came to this country
prior to the treaty of 1880 were to be treated the same as the citizens
and subjects of the most favored nation; that is to say, they were to be
protected by our laws the same as we protect our own citizens.

These Chinese laborers are inoffensive, peaceable and law-abiding.
They are honest, keeping their contracts, doing as they agree. They
are exceedingly industrious, always ready to work and always giving
satisfaction to their employers. They do not interfere with other
people. They cannot become citizens. They have no voice in the making or
the execution of the laws. They attend to their own business. They have
their own ideas, customs, religion and ceremonies--about as foolish as
our own; but they do not try to make converts or to force their dogmas
on others. They are patient, uncomplaining, stoical and philosophical.
They earn what they can, giving reasonable value for the money they
receive, and as a rule, when they have amassed a few thousand dollars,
they go back to their own country. They do not interfere with our
ideas, our ways or customs. They are silent workers, toiling without any
object, except to do their work and get their pay. They do not establish
saloons and run for Congress. Neither do they combine for the purpose
of governing others. Of all the people on our soil they are the least
meddlesome. Some of them smoke opium, but the opium-smoker does not beat
his wife. Some of them play games of chance, but they are not members of
the Stock Exchange. They eat the bread that they earn; they neither beg
nor steal, but they are of no use to parties or politicians except as
they become fuel to supply the flame of prejudice. They are not citizens
and they cannot vote. Their employers are about the only friends they
have.

In the Pacific States the lowest became their enemies and asked for
their expulsion. They denounced the Chinese and those who gave
them work. The patient followers of Confucius were treated as
outcasts--stoned by boys in the streets and mobbed by the fathers. Few
seemed to have any respect for their rights or their feelings. They were
unlike us. They wore different clothes. They dressed their hair in
a peculiar way, and therefore they were beyond our sympathies. These
ideas, these practices, demoralized many communities; the laboring
people became cruel and the small politicians infamous.

When the rights of even one human being are held in contempt the rights
of all are in danger. We cannot destroy the liberties of others without
losing our own. By exciting the prejudices of the ignorant we at last
produce a contempt for law and justice, and sow the seeds of violence
and crime.

Both of the great political parties pandered to the leaders of the
crusade against the Chinese for the sake of electoral votes, and in the
Pacific States the friends of the Chinese were forced to keep still
or to publicly speak contrary to their convictions. The orators of
the "Sand Lots" were in power, and the policy of the whole country was
dictated by the most ignorant and prejudiced of our citizens. Both
of the great parties ratified the outrages committed by the mobs, and
proceeded with alacrity to violate the treaties and solemn obligations
of the Government. These treaties were violated, these obligations were
denied, and thousands of Chinamen were deprived of their rights, of
their property, and hundreds were maimed or murdered. They were driven
from their homes. They were hunted like wild beasts. All this was done
in a country that sends missionaries to China to tell the benighted
savages of the blessed religion of the United States.

At first a demand was made that the Chinese should be driven out, then
that no others should be allowed to come, and laws with these objects in
view were passed, in spite of the treaties, preventing the coming of any
more. For a time that satisfied the haters of the Mongolian. Then came
a demand for more stringent legislation, so that many of the Chinese
already here could be compelled to leave. The answer or response to this
demand is what is known as the Geary Law.

By this act it is provided, among other things, that any Chinaman
convicted of not being lawfully in the country shall be removed to
China, after having been imprisoned at hard labor for not exceeding one
year. This law also does away with bail on _habeas corpus_, proceedings
where the right to land has been denied to a Chinaman. It also compels
all Chinese laborers to obtain, within one year after the passage of the
law, certificates of residence from the revenue collectors, and if found
without such certificate they shall be held to be unlawfully in the
United States.

It is further provided that if a Chinaman claims that he failed to get
such certificate by "accident, sickness or other unavoidable cause,"
then he must clearly establish such claim to the satisfaction of the
judge "by at least one credible white witness."

If we were at war with China then we might legally consider every
Chinaman as an enemy, but we were and are at peace with that country.
The Geary Act was passed by Congress and signed by the President simply
for the sake of votes. The Democrats in Congress voted for it to save
the Pacific States to the Democratic column; and a Republican President
signed it so that the Pacific States should vote the Republican ticket.
Principle was forgotten, or rather it was sacrificed, in the hope of
political success. It was then known, as now, that China is a peaceful
nation, that it does not believe in war as a remedy, that it relies
on negotiation and treaty. It is also known that the Chinese in
this country were helpless, without friends, without power to defend
themselves. It is possible that many members of Congress voted in
favor of the Act believing that the Supreme Court would hold it
unconstitutional, and that in the meantime it might be politically
useful.

The idea of imprisoning a man at hard labor for a year, and this man
a citizen of a friendly nation, for the crime of being found in this
country without a certificate of residence, must be abhorrent to the
mind of every enlightened man. Such punishment for such an "offence" is
barbarous and belongs to the earliest times of which we know. This law
makes industry a crime and puts one who works for his bread on a level
with thieves and the lowest criminals, treats him as a felon, and
clothes him in the stripes of a convict,--and all this is done at the
demand of the ignorant, of the prejudiced, of the heartless, and because
the Chinese are not voters and have no political power.

The Chinese are not driven away because there is no room for them. Our
country is not crowded. There are many millions of acres waiting for
the plow. There is plenty of room here under our flag for five hundred
millions of people. These Chinese that we wish to oppress and imprison
are people who understand the art of irrigation. They can redeem the
deserts. They are the best of gardeners. They are modest and willing to
occupy the lowest seats. They only ask to be day-laborers, washers and
ironers. They are willing to sweep and scrub. They are good cooks. They
can clear lands and build railroads. They do not ask to be masters--they
wish only to serve. In every capacity they are faithful; but in this
country their virtues have made enemies, and they are hated because of
their patience, their honesty and their industry.

The Geary Law, however, failed to provide the ways and means for
carrying it into effect, so that the probability is it will remain a
dead letter upon the statute book. The sum of money required to carry it
out is too large, and the law fails to create the machinery and name the
persons authorized to deport the Chinese. Neither is there any mode of
trial pointed out. According to the law there need be no indictment by
a grand jury, no trial by a jury, and the person found guilty of being
here without a certificate of residence can be imprisoned and treated as
a felon without the ordinary forms of trial.

This law is contrary to the laws and customs of nations. The punishment
is unusual, severe, and contrary to our Constitution, and under its
provisions aliens--citizens of a friendly nation--can be imprisoned
without due process of law. The law is barbarous, contrary to the spirit
and genius of American institutions, and was passed in violation of
solemn treaty stipulations.

The Congress-that passed it is the same that closed the gates of the
World's Fair on the "blessed Sabbath," thinking it wicked to look at
statues and pictures on that day. These representatives of the people
seem to have had more piety than principle.

After the passage of such a law by the United States is it not indecent
for us to send missionaries to China? Is there not work enough for them
at home? We send ministers to China to convert the heathen; but when we
find a Chinaman on our soil, where he can be saved by our example, we
treat him as a criminal.

It is to the interest of this country to maintain friendly relations
with China. We want the trade of nearly one-fourth of the human race.
We want to pay for all we get from that country in articles of our
own manufacture. We lost the trade of Mexico and the South American
Republics because of slavery, because we hated people in whose veins was
found a drop of African blood, and now we are losing the trade of China
by pandering to the prejudices of the ignorant and cruel.

After all, it pays to do right. This is a hard truth to
learn--especially for a nation. A great nation should be bound by the
highest conception of justice and honor. Above all things it should be
true to its treaties, its contracts, its obligations. It should
remember that its responsibilities are in accordance with its power and
intelligence.

Our Government is founded on the equality of human rights--on the idea,
the sacred truth, that all are entitled to life, liberty and the
pursuit of happiness. Our country is an asylum for the oppressed of
all nations--of all races. Here, the Government gets its power from
the consent of the governed. After the abolition of slavery these
great truths were not only admitted, but they found expression in our
Constitution and laws.

Shall we now go back to barbarism?

Russia is earning the hatred of the civilized world by driving the Jews
from their homes. But what can the United States say? Our mouths are
closed by the Geary Law. We are in the same business. Our law is as
inhuman as the order or ukase of the Czar.

Let us retrace our steps, repeal the law and accomplish what we justly
desire by civilized means. Let us treat China as we would England; and,
above all, let us respect the rights of men,--North American Review,
July, 1893.




A WORD ABOUT EDUCATION.

THE end of life--the object of life--is happiness. Nothing can be better
than that--nothing higher. In order to be really happy, man must be in
harmony with his surroundings, with the conditions of well-being. In
order to know these surroundings, he must be educated, and education is
of value only as it contributes to the wellbeing of man, and only
that is education which increases the power of man to gratify his real
wants--wants of body and of mind.

The educated man knows the necessity of finding out the facts in nature,
the relations between himself and his fellow-men, between himself and
the world, to the end that he may take advantage of these facts and
relations for the benefit of himself and others. He knows that a man may
understand Latin and Greek, Hebrew and Sanscrit, and be as ignorant of
the great facts and forces in nature as a native of Central Africa.

The educated man knows something that he can use, not only for the
benefit of himself, but for the benefit of others. Every skilled
mechanic, every good farmer, every man who knows some of the real
facts in nature that touch him, is to that extent an educated man. The
skilled mechanic and the intelligent farmer may not be what we call
"scholars," and what we call scholars may not be educated men.

Man is in constant need. He must protect himself from cold and heat,
from sun and storm. He needs food and raiment for the body, and he needs
what we call art for the development and gratification of his brain.
Beginning with what are called the necessaries of life, he rises to
what are known as the luxuries, and the luxuries become necessaries, and
above luxuries he rises to the highest wants of the soul.

The man who is fitted to take care of himself, in the conditions he may
be placed, is, in a very important sense, an educated man. The savage
who understands the habits of animals, who is a good hunter and fisher,
is a man of education, taking into consideration his circumstances. The
graduate of a university who cannot take care of himself--no matter how
much he may have studied--is not an educated man.

In our time, an educated man, whether a mechanic, a farmer, or one who
follows a profession, should know something about what the world has
discovered. He should have an idea of the outlines of the sciences. He
should have read a little, at least, of the best that has been written.
He should know something of mechanics, a little about politics,
commerce, and metaphysics; and in addition to all this, he should know
how to make something. His hands should be educated, so that he can, if
necessary, supply his own wants by supplying the wants of others.

There are mental misers--men who gather learning all their lives and
keep it to themselves. They are worse than hoarders of gold, because
when they die their learning dies with them, while the metal miser is
compelled to leave his gold for others.

The first duty of man is to support himself--to see to it that he
does not become a burden. His next duty is to help others if he has a
surplus, and if he really believes they deserve to be helped.

It is not necessary to have what is called a university education in
order to be useful or to be happy, any more than it is necessary to be
rich, to be happy. Great wealth is a great burden, and to have more than
you can use, is to care for more than you want. The happiest are those
who are prosperous, and who by reasonable endeavor can supply their
reasonable wants and have a little surplus year by year for the winter
of their lives.

So, it is no use to learn thousands and thousands of useless facts, or
to fill the brain with unspoken tongues. This is burdening yourself with
more than you can use. The best way is to learn the useful.

We all know that men in moderate circumstances cau have just as
comfortable houses as the richest, just as comfortable clothing, just
as good food. They can see just as fine paintings, just as marvelous
statues, and they can hear just as good music. They can attend the same
theatres and the same operas. They can enjoy the same sunshine, and
above all, can love and be loved just as well as kings and millionaires.

So the conclusion of the whole matter is, that he is educated who knows
how to take care of himself; and that the happy man is the successful
man, and that it is only a burden to have more than you want, or to
learn those things that you cannot use.--The High School Register,
Omaha, Nebraska, January. 1891.




WHAT I WANT FOR CHRISTMAS.

IF I had the power to produce exactly what I want for next Christmas,
I would have all the kings and emperors resign and allow the people to
govern themselves.

I would have all the nobility drop their titles and give their lands
back to the people. I would have the Pope throw away his tiara, take off
his sacred vestments, and admit that he is not acting for God--is
not infallible--but is just an ordinary Italian. I would have all the
cardinals, archbishops, bishops, priests and clergymen admit that they
know nothing about theology, nothing about hell or heaven, nothing about
the destiny of the human race, nothing about devils or ghosts, gods
or angels. I would have them tell all their "flocks" to think for
themselves, to be manly men and womanly women, and to do all in their
power to increase the sum of human happiness.

I would have all the professors in colleges, all the teachers in schools
of every kind, including those in Sunday schools, agree that they would
teach only what they know, that they would not palm off guesses as
demonstrated truths.

I would like to see all the politicians changed to statesmen,--to men
who long to make their country great and free,--to men who care more for
public good than private gain--men who long to be of use.

I would like to see all the editors of papers and magazines agree to
print the truth and nothing but the truth, to avoid all slander and
misrepresentation, and to let the private affairs of the people alone.

I would like to see drunkenness and prohibition both abolished.

I would like to see corporal punishment done away with in every home, in
every school, in every asylum, reformatory, and prison. Cruelty hardens
and degrades, kindness reforms and ennobles.

I would like to see the millionaires unite and form a trust for the
public good.

I would like to see a fair division of profits between capital and
labor, so that the toiler could save enough to mingle a little June with
the December of his life.

I would like to see an international court established in which to
settle disputes between nations, so that armies could be disbanded and
the great navies allowed to rust and rot in perfect peace.

I would like to see the whole world free--free from injustice--free from
superstition.

This will do for next Christmas. The following Christmas, I may want
more.--The Arena, Boston, December, 1897.




FOOL FRIENDS.

NOTHING hurts a man, nothing hurts a party so terribly as fool friends.

A fool friend is the sewer of bad news, of slander and all base and
unpleasant things.

A fool friend always knows every mean thing that has been said against
you and against the party.

He always knows where your party is losing, and the other is making
large gains.

He always tells you of the good luck your enemy has had.

He implicitly believes every story against you, and kindly suspects your
defence.

A fool friend is always full of a kind of stupid candor.

He is so candid that he always believes the statement of an enemy.

He never suspects anything on your side.

Nothing pleases him like being shocked by horrible news concerning some
good man.

He never denies a lie unless it is in your favor.

He is always finding fault with his party, and is continually begging
pardon for not belonging to the other side.

He is frightfully anxious that all his candidates should stand well with
the opposition.

He is forever seeing the faults of his party and the virtues of the
other.

He generally shows his candor by scratching the ticket.

He always searches every nook and comer of his conscience to find a
reason for deserting a friend or a principle.

In the moment of victory he is magnanimously on your side.

In defeat he consoles you by repeating prophecies made after the event.

The fool friend regards your reputation as common prey for all the
vultures, hyenas and jackals.

He takes a sad pleasure in your misfortunes.

He forgets his principles to gratify your enemies.

He forgives your maligner, and slanders you with all his heart.

He is so friendly that you cannot kick him.

He generally talks for you but always bets the other way.




INSPIRATION

WE are told that we have in our possession the inspired will of God.
What is meant by the word "inspired" is not exactly known; but whatever
else it may mean, certainly it means that the "inspired" must be the
true. If it is true, there is in fact no need of its being inspired--the
truth will take care of itself.

The church is forced to say that the Bible differs from all other books;
it is forced to say that it contains the actual will of God. Let us then
see what inspiration really is. A man looks at the sea, and the sea
says something to him. It makes an impression upon his mind. It awakens
memory, and this impression depends upon the man's experience--upon
his intellectual capacity. Another looks upon the same sea. He has a
different brain; he has had a different experience. The sea may speak
to him of joy; to the other of grief and tears. The sea cannot tell the
same thing to any two human beings, because no two human beings have had
the same experience.

Another, standing upon the shore, listening to what the great Greek
tragedian called "The multitudinous laughter of the sea," may say: Every
drop has visited all the shores of the earth; every one has been frozen
in the vast and icy North; every one has fallen in snow, has been
whirled by storms around mountain peaks; every one has been kissed to
vapor by the sun; every one has worn the seven-hued garment of light;
every one has fallen in pleasant rain, gurgled from springs and laughed
in brooks while lovers wooed upon the banks, and every one has rushed
with mighty rivers back to the sea's embrace. Everything in Nature tells
a different story to all eyes that see, and to all ears that hear.

Once in my life, and once only, I heard Horace Greeley deliver a
lecture. I think the title was "Across the Continent." At last he
reached the mammoth trees of California, and I thought, "Here is an
opportunity for the old man to indulge his fancy. Here are trees that
have outlived a thousand human governments. There are limbs above his
head older than the pyramids. While man was emerging from barbarism
to something like civilization, these trees were growing. Older than
history, every one appeared to be a memory, a witness, and a prophecy.
The same wind that filled the sails of the Argonauts had swayed these
trees." But these trees said nothing of this kind to Mr. Greeley. Upon
these subjects not a word was told him. Instead, he took his pencil, and
after figuring awhile, remarked: "One of these trees, sawed into inch
boards, would make more than three hundred thousand feet of lumber."

I was once riding in the cars in Illinois. There had been a violent
thunder storm. The rain had ceased, the sun was going down. The
great clouds had floated toward the west, and there they assumed most
wonderful architectural shapes. There were temples and palaces domed
and turreted, and they were touched with silver, with amethyst and gold.
They looked like the homes of the Titans, or the palaces of the gods.
A man was sitting near me. I touched him and said, "Did you ever see
anything so beautiful?" He looked out. He saw nothing of the cloud,
nothing of the sun, nothing of the color; he saw only the country, and
replied, "Yes, it is beautiful; I always did like rolling land."

On another occasion I was riding in a stage. There had been a snow, and
after the snow a sleet, and all the trees were bent, and all the boughs
were arched. Every fence, every log cabin, had been transfigured,
touched with a glory almost beyond this world. The great fields were a
pure and perfect white; the forests, drooping beneath their load of gems,
made wonderful caves, from which one almost expected to see troops of
fairies come. The whole world looked like a bride, jeweled from head to
foot. A German on the back seat, hearing our talk, and our exclamations
of wonder, leaned forward, looked out of the stage window, and said,
"Y-a-a-s; it looks like a clean table cloth!"

So, when we look upon a flower, a painting, a statue, a star, or a
violet, the more we know, the more we have experienced, the more we
have thought, the more we remember,--the more the statue, the star,
the painting, the violet, has to tell. Nature says to me all that I am
capable of understanding--gives all that I can receive.

As with star or flower or sea, so with a book. A man reads Shakespeare.
What does he get from him? All that he has the mind to understand. He
gets his little cup full. Let another read him who knows nothing of the
drama, nothing of the impersonations of passion, and what does he get?
Almost nothing. Shakespeare has a different story for each reader. He
is a world in which each recognizes his acquaintances--he may know a
few--he may know all.

The impression that Nature makes upon the mind, the stories told by sea
and star and flower, must be the natural food of thought. Leaving out
for the moment the impression gained from ancestors, the hereditary
fears and drifts and trends--the natural food of thought must be the
impression made upon the brain by coming in contact, through the medium
of the five senses, with what we call the outward world. The brain is
natural. Its food is natural. The result--thought--must be natural. The
supernatural can be constructed with no material except the natural. Of
the supernatural we can have no conception.

"Thought" may be deformed, and the thought of one may be strange to, and
denominated as unnatural by, another; but it cannot be supernatural.
It may be weak, it may be insane, but it is not supernatural. Above
the natural, man cannot rise. There can be deformed ideas, as there are
deformed persons. There can be religious monstrosities and misshapen,
but they must be naturally produced. Some people have ideas about
what they are pleased to call the supernatural; what they call the
supernatural is simply the deformed. The world is to each man according
to each man. It takes the world as it really is, and that man to make
that man's world, and that man's world cannot exist without that man.

You may ask, and what of all this? I reply: As with everything in
Nature, so with the Bible. It has a different story for each reader. Is
then, the Bible a different book to every human being who reads it? It
is. Can God, then, through the Bible, make the same revelation to two
persons? He cannot. Why? Because the man who reads it is the man who
inspires. Inspiration is in the man, as well as in the book. God should
have "inspired" readers as well as writers.

You may reply, God knew that his book would be understood differently
by each one; really intended that it should be understood as it is
understood by each. If this is so, then my understanding of the Bible
is the real revelation to me. If this is so, I have no right to take the
understanding of another. I must take the revelation made to me through
my understanding, and by that revelation I must stand. Suppose, then,
that I do read this Bible honestly, carefully, and when I get through I
am compelled to say, "The book is not true!"

If this is the honest result, then you are compelled to say, either that
God has made no revelation to me, or that the revelation that it is not
true is the revelation made to me, and by which I am bound. If the book
and my brain are both the work of the same infinite God, whose fault
is it that the book and the brain do not agree? Either God should have
written a book to fit my brain, or should have made my brain to fit his
book.

The inspiration of the Bible depends upon the ignorance of him who
reads.--The Truth Seeker Annual, New York, 1885.




THE TRUTH OF HISTORY.

THOUSANDS of Christians have asked: How was it possible for Christ and
his apostles to deceive the people of Jerusalem? How came the miracles
to be believed? Who had the impudence to say that lepers had been
cleansed, and that the dead had been raised? How could such impostors
have escaped exposure?

I ask: How did Mohammed deceive the people of Mecca? How has the
Catholic Church imposed upon millions of people? Who can account for the
success of falsehood?

Millions of people are directly interested in the false. They live by
lying. To deceive is the business of their lives. Truth is a cripple;
lies have wings. It is almost impossible to overtake and kill and bury
a lie. If you do, some one will erect a monument over the grave, and the
lie is born again as an epitaph. Let me give you a case in point.

A few days ago the Matlock _Register_, a paper published in England,
printed the following:

CONVERSION OF THE ARCH ATHEIST.

"Mr. Isaac Loveland, of Shoreham, desires us to insert the following:--

"November 27, 1886.

"Dear Mr. Loveland.--A day or two since, I received from Mr.
Hine the exhilarating intelligence that through his lectures on the
'Identity of the British Nation with Lost Israel,' in Canada and the
United States, that Col. Bob Ingersoll, the arch Atheist, has been
converted to Christianity, and has joined the Episcopal Church. Praise
the Lord!!! 5,000 of his followers _have been won for Christ_ through
Mr. Hine's grand mission work, the other side of the Atlantic. The
Colonel's cousin, the Rev. Mr. Ingersoll, wrote to Mr. Hine soon after
he began lecturing in America, informing him that his lectures had made
a great impression on the Colonel and other Atheists. I noted it at the
time in the Messenger. Bradlaugh will yet be converted; his brother has
been, and has joined a British Israel Identity Association. This is
progress, and shows what an energetic, determined man (like Mr. Hine),
who is earnest in his faith, can do.

"Very faithfully yours,

"H. HODSON RUGG.

"Grove-road, St. John's Wood, London."

How can we account for an article like that? Who made up this story? Who
had the impudence to publish it?

As a matter of fact, I never saw Mr. Hine, never heard of him until this
extract was received by me in the month of December. I never read a word
about the "Identity of Lost Israel with the British Nation." It is a
question in which I never had, and never expect to have, the slightest
possible interest.

Nothing can be more preposterous than that the Englishman in whose veins
can be found the blood of the Saxon, the Dane, the Norman, the Piet, the
Scot and the Celt, is the descendant of "Abraham, Isaac and Jacob." The
English language does not bear the remotest resemblance to the Hebrew,
and yet it is claimed by the Reverend Hod-son Rugg that not only myself,
but five thousand other Atheists, were converted by the Rev. Mr. Hine,
because of his theory that Englishmen and Americans are simply Jews in
disguise.

This letter, in my judgment, was published to be used by missionaries in
China, Japan, India and Africa.

If stories like this can be circulated about a living man, what may we
not expect concerning the dead who have opposed the church?

Countless falsehoods have been circulated about all the opponents of
superstition. Whoever attacks the popular falsehoods of his time will
find that a lie defends itself by telling other lies. Nothing is so
prolific, nothing can so multiply itself, nothing can lay and hatch as
many eggs, as a good, healthy, religious lie.

And nothing is more wonderful than the credulity of the believers in the
supernatural. They feel under a kind of obligation to believe everything
in favor of their religion, or against any form of what they are pleased
to call "Infidelity."

The old falsehoods about Voltaire, Paine, Hume, Julian, Diderot and
hundreds of others, grow green every spring. They are answered; they
are demonstrated to be without the slightest foundation; but they
rarely die. And when one does die there seems to be a kind of Caesarian
operation, so that in each instance although the mother dies the child
lives to undergo, if necessary, a like operation, leaving another child,
and sometimes two.

There are thousands and thousands of tongues ready to repeat what the
owners know to be false, and these lies are a part of the stock in
trade, the valuable assets, of superstition. No church can afford to
throw its property away. To admit that these stories are false now, is
to admit that the church has been busy lying for hundreds of years, and
it is also to admit that the word of the church is not and cannot be
taken as evidence of any fact.

A few years ago, I had a little controversy with the editor of the New
York _Observer_, the Rev. Irenaeus Prime, (who is now supposed to be
in heaven enjoying the bliss of seeing Infidels in hell), as to whether
Thomas Paine recanted his religious opinions. I offered to deposit a
thousand dollars for the benefit of a charity, if the reverend doctor
would substantiate the charge that Paine recanted. I forced the New York
_Observer_ to admit that Paine did not recant, and compelled that paper
to say that "Thomas Paine died a blaspheming Infidel."

A few months afterward an English paper was sent to me--a religious
paper--and in that paper was a statement to the effect that the editor
of the New York _Observer_ had claimed that Paine recanted; that I had
offered to give a thousand dollars to any charity that Mr. Prime might
select, if he would establish the fact that Paine did recant; and that
so overwhelming was the testimony brought forward by Mr. Prime, that I
admitted that Paine did recant, and paid the thousand dollars.

This is another instance of what might be called the truth of history.

I wrote to the editor of that paper, telling the exact facts, and
offering him advertising rates to publish the denial, and in addition,
stated that if he would send me a copy of his paper with the denial, I
would send him twenty-five dollars for his trouble. I received no reply,
and the lie is in all probability still on its travels, going from
Sunday school to Sunday school, from pulpit to pulpit, from hypocrite
to savage,--that is to say, from missionary to Hottentot--without the
slightest evidence of fatigue--fresh and strong, and in its cheeks the
roses and lilies of perfect health.

Some person, expecting to add another gem to his crown of glory, put
in circulation the story that one of my daughters had joined the
Presbyterian Church,--a story without the slightest foundation--and
although denied a hundred times, it is still being printed and
circulated for the edification of the faithful. Every few days I receive
some letter of inquiry as to this charge, and I have industriously
denied it for years, but up to the present time, it shows no signs of
death--not even of weakness.

Another religious gentleman put in print the charge that my son, having
been raised in the atmosphere of Infidelity, had become insane and died
in an asylum. Notwithstanding the fact that I never had a son, the story
still goes right on, and is repeated day after day without the semblance
of a blush.

Now, if all this is done while I am alive and well, and while I have all
the facilities of our century for spreading the denials, what will be
done after my lips are closed?

The mendacity of superstition is almost enough to make a man believe in
the supernatural.

And so I might go on for a hundred columns. Billions of falsehoods have
been told and there are trillions yet to come. The doctrines of Malthus
have nothing to do with this particular kind of reproduction.

"And there are also many other falsehoods which the church has told, the
which if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world
itself could not contain the books that should be written."--The Truth
Seeker, New York, February, 19,1887.




HOW TO EDIT A LIBERAL PAPER.

A LIBERAL paper should be edited by a Liberal man.

And by the word Liberal I mean, not only free, not only one who thinks
for himself, not only one who has escaped from the prisons of customs
and creed, but one who is candid, intelligent and kind.

This Liberal editor should not forever play upon one string, no matter
how wonderful the music. He should not have his attention forever fixed
upon one question--that is to say, he should not look through a reversed
telescope and narrow his horizon to that degree that he sees only one
thing.

To know that the Bible is the literature of a barbarous people, to know
that it is uninspired, to be certain that the supernatural does not and
cannot exist--all this is but the beginning of wisdom. This only lays
the foundation for unprejudiced observation. To kill weeds, to fell
forests, to drive away or exterminate wild beasts--this is preparatory
to doing something of greater value. Of course the weeds must be killed,
the forests must be felled, and the beasts must be destroyed before the
building of homes and the cultivation of fields.

A Liberal paper should not discuss theological questions alone.
Intelligent people everywhere have given up most of the old
superstitions. They have pretty well made up their minds what is false,
and they want to know some others.

That is to say, liberal toward everything that is true. For this reason,
a Liberal paper should keep abreast of the discoveries of the human
mind. No science should be neglected; no fact should be overlooked.
Inventions should be described and understood. And not only this, but
the beautiful in thought, in form and color, should be preserved. The
paper should be filled with things calculated to interest thoughtful,
intelligent and serious people. There should be a column for children as
well as for men.

Above all, it should be perfectly kind and candid. In discussion there
is no place for hatred, no opportunity for slander. A personality
is always out of place. An angry man can neither reason himself, nor
perceive the reason of what another says. The orthodox world has always
dealt in personalities. Every minister can answer the argument of an
opponent by attacking the character of the opponent. This example should
never be followed by a Liberal man. Nobody can be bad enough to prove
that the Bible is uninspired, and nobody can be good enough to prove
that it is the word of God. These facts have no relation. They neither
stand nor fall together.

Nothing should be asserted that is not known. Nothing should be denied,
the falsity of which has not been, or cannot be, demonstrated. Opinions
are simply given for what they are worth. They are guesses, and one
guesser should give to another guesser all the right of guessing that he
claims for himself. Upon the great questions of origin, of destiny, of
immortality, of punishment and reward in other worlds, every honest man
must say, "I do not know." Upon these questions, this is the creed of
intelligence. Nothing is harder to bear than the egotism of ignorance
and the arrogance of superstition. The man who has some knowledge of
the difficulties surrounding these subjects, who knows something of the
limitations of the human mind, must, of necessity, be mentally modest.
And this condition of mental modesty is the only one consistent with
individual progress.

Above all, and over all, a Liberal paper should teach the absolute
freedom of the mind, the utter independence of the individual, the
perfect liberty of speech. We should remember that the world is as it
must be; that the present is the necessary offspring of the past; that
the future must be what the present makes it, and that the real work of
the reformer, of the philanthropist, is to change the conditions of the
present, to the end that the future may be better.

Secular Thought, Toronto, January 8,1887.




SECULARISM.


SEVERAL people have asked me the meaning of this term.

Secularism is the religion of humanity; it embraces the affairs of this
world; it is interested in everything that touches the welfare of a
sentient being; it advocates attention to the particular planet in which
we happen to live; it means that each individual counts for something;
it is a declaration of intellectual independence; it means that the pew
is superior to the pulpit, that those who bear the burdens shall have
the profits and that they who fill the purse shall hold the strings.
It is a protest against theological oppression, against ecclesiastical
tyranny, against being the serf, subject or slave of any phantom, or of
the priest of any phantom. It is a protest against wasting this life for
the sake of one that we know not of. It proposes to let the gods take
care of themselves. It is another name for common sense; that is to say,
the adaptation of means to such ends as are desired and understood.

Secularism believes in building a home here, in this world. It trusts
to individual effort, to energy, to intelligence, to observation and
experience rather than to the unknown and the supernatural. It desires
to be happy on this side of the grave.

Secularism means food and fireside, roof and raiment, reasonable work
and reasonable leisure, the cultivation of the tastes, the acquisition
of knowledge, the enjoyment of the arts, and it promises for the human
race comfort, independence, intelligence, and above all, liberty. It
means the abolition of sectarian feuds, of theological hatreds. It means
the cultivation of friendship and intellectual hospitality. It means
the living for ourselves and each other; for the present instead of
the past, for this world rather than for another. It means the right to
express your thought in spite of popes, priests, and gods. It means that
impudent idleness shall no longer live upon the labor of honest men.
It means the destruction of the business of those who trade in fear. It
proposes to give serenity and content to the human soul. It will put out
the fires of eternal pain. It is striving to do away with violence and
vice, with ignorance, poverty and disease. It lives for the ever present
to-day, and the ever coming to-morrow. It does not believe in praying
and receiving, but in earning and deserving. It regards work as worship,
labor as prayer, and wisdom as the savior of mankind. It says to every
human being, Take care of yourself so that you may be able to help
others; adorn your life with the gems called good deeds; illumine your
path with the sunlight called friendship and love.

Secularism is a religion, a religion that is understood. It has no
mysteries, no mummeries, no priests, no ceremonies, no falsehoods, no
miracles, and no persecutions. It considers the lilies of the field, and
takes thought for the morrow. It says to the whole world, Work that you
may eat, drink, and be clothed; work that you may enjoy; work that you
may not want; work that you may give and never need.--The Independent
Pulpit, Waco, Texas, 1887.




CRITICISM OF "ROBERT ELSMERE," "JOHN WARD, PREACHER," AND "AN AFRICAN FARM."


IF one wishes to know what orthodox religion really is--I mean that
religion unsoftened by Infidelity, by doubt--let him read "John Ward,
Preacher." This book shows exactly what the love of God will do in the
heart of man. This shows what the effect of the creed of Christendom is,
when absolutely believed. In this case it is the woman who is free
and the man who is enslaved. In "Robert Els-mere" the man is breaking
chains, while the woman prefers the old prison with its ivy-covered
walls.

Why should a man allow human love to stand between his soul and the
will of God--between his soul and eternal joy? Why should not the true
believer tear every blossom of pity, of charity, from his heart, rather
than put in peril his immortal soul?

An orthodox minister has a wife with a heart. Having a heart she cannot
believe in the orthodox creed. She thinks God better than he is. She
flatters the Infinite. This endangers the salvation of her soul. If she
is upheld in this the souls of others may be lost. Her husband feels not
only accountable for her soul, but for the souls of others that may
be injured by what she says, and by what she does. He is compelled to
choose between his wife and his duty, between the woman and God. He is
not great enough to go with his heart. He is selfish enough to side with
the administration, with power. He lives a miserable life and dies a
miserable death.

The trouble with Christianity is that it has no element of
compromise--it allows no room for charity so far as belief is concerned.
Honesty of opinion is not even a mitigating circumstance. You are not
asked to understand--you are commanded to believe. There is no common
ground. The church carries no flag of truce. It does not say, Believe
you must, but, You must believe. No exception can be made in favor of
wife or mother, husband or child. All human relations, all human love
must, if necessary, be sacrificed with perfect cheerfulness. "Let the
dead bury their dead--follow thou me. Desert wife and child. Human love
is nothing--nothing but a snare. You must love God better than wife,
better than child." John Ward endeavored to live in accordance with this
heartless creed.

Nothing can be more repulsive than an orthodox life--than one who lives
in exact accordance with the creed. It is hard to conceive of a more
terrible character than John Calvin. It is somewhat difficult to
understand the Puritans, who made themselves unhappy by way of
recreation, and who seemed to enjoy themselves when admitting their
utter worthlessness and in telling God how richly they deserved to be
eternally damned. They loved to pluck from the tree of life every bud,
every blossom, every leaf. The bare branches, naked to the wrath of God,
excited their admiration. They wondered how birds could sing, and the
existence of the rainbow led them to suspect the seriousness of the
Deity. How can there be any joy if man believes that he acts and lives
under an infinite responsibility, when the only business of this life
is to avoid the horrors of the next? Why should the lips of men feel
the ripple of laughter if there is a bare possibility that the creed of
Christendom is true?

I take it for granted that all people believe as they must--that all
thoughts and dreams have been naturally produced--that what we call the
unnatural is simply the uncommon. All religions, poems, statues, vices
and virtues, have been wrought by nature with the instrumentalities
called men. No one can read "John Ward, Preacher," without hating with
all his heart the creed of John Ward; and no one can read the creed of
John Ward, preacher, without pitying with all his heart John Ward; and
no one can read this book without feeling how much better the wife was
than the husband--how much better the natural sympathies are than the
religions of our day, and how much superior common sense is to what is
called theology.

When we lay down the book we feel like saying: No matter whether God
exists or not; if he does, he can take care of himself; if he does, he
does not take care of us; and whether he lives or not we must take care
of ourselves. Human love is better than any religion. It is better to
love your wife than to love God. It is better to make a happy home here
than to sunder hearts with creeds. This book meets the issues far more
frankly, with far greater candor. This book carries out to its logical
sequence the Christian creed. It shows how uncomfortable a true believer
must be, and how uncomfortable he necessarily makes those with whom he
comes in contact. It shows how narrow, how hard, how unsympathetic,
how selfish, how unreasonable, how unpoetic, the creed of the orthodox
church is.

In "Robert Elsmere" there is plenty of evidence of reading and
cultivation, of thought and talent. So in "John Ward, Preacher," there
is strength, purpose, logic, power of statement, directness and courage.
But "The Story of an African Farm" has but little in common with the
other two.

It is a work apart--belonging to no school, and not to be judged by the
ordinary rules and canons of criticism. There are some puerilities and
much philosophy, trivialities and some of the profoundest reflections.
In addition to this, there is a vast and wonderful sympathy.

The following upon love is beautiful and profound: "There is a love that
begins in the head and goes down to the heart, and grows slowly, but it
lasts till death and asks less than it gives. There is another love that
blots out wisdom, that is sweet with the sweetness of life and bitter
with the bitterness of death, lasting for an hour; but it is worth
having lived a whole life for that hour. It is a blood-red flower, with
the color of sin, but there is always the scent of a god about it."

There is no character in "Robert Elsmere" or in "John Ward, Preacher,"
comparable for a moment to Lyndall in the "African Farm." In her there
is a splendid courage. She does not blame others for her own faults;
she accepts. There is that splendid candor that you find in Juliet in
"Measure for Measure." She is asked:

"Love you the man that wronged you?"

And she replies:

"Yes; as I love the woman that wronged him."

The death of this wonderful girl is extremely pathetic.

None but an artist could have written it:

"Then slowly, without a sound, the beautiful eyes closed. The dead
face that the glass reflected was a thing of marvellous beauty and
tranquillity. The gray dawn crept in over it and saw it lying there."

So the story of the hunter is wonderfully told. This hunter climbs above
his fellows--day by day getting away from human sympathy, away from
ignorance. He lost at last his fellow-men, and truth was just as far
away as ever. Here he found the bones of another hunter, and as he
looked upon the poor remains the wild faces said:

"So he lay down here, for he was very tired. He went to sleep forever.
He put himself to sleep. Sleep is very tranquil. You are not lonely when
you are asleep, neither do your hands ache nor your heart."

So the death of Waldo is most wonderfully told. The book is filled with
thought, and with thoughts of the writer--nothing is borrowed. It is
original, true and exceedingly sad. It has the pathos of real life.
There is in it the hunger of the heart, the vast difference between the
actual and the ideal:

"I like to feel that strange life beating up against me. I like to
realize forms of life utterly unlike my own. When my own life feels
small and I am oppressed with it, I like to crush together and see it in
a picture, in an instant, a multitude of disconnected, unlike phases of
human life--a mediaeval monk with his string of beads pacing the quiet
orchard, and looking up from the grass at his feet to the heavy fruit
trees; little Malay boys playing naked on a shining sea-beach; a Hindoo
philosopher alone under his banyan tree, thinking, thinking, thinking,
so that in the thought of God he may lose himself; a troop of
Bacchanalians dressed in white, with crowns of vine-leaves, dancing
along the Roman streets; a martyr on the night of his death looking
through the narrow window to the sky and feeling that already he has the
wings that shall bear him up; an epicurean discoursing at a Roman
bath to a knot of his disciples on the nature of happiness; a Kafir
witch-doctor seeking for herbs by moonlight, while from the huts on
the hillside come the sound of dogs barking and the voices of women
and children; a mother giving bread and milk to her children in little
wooden basins and singing the evening song. I like to see it all; I
feel it run through me--that life belongs to me; it makes my little life
larger, it breaks down the narrow walls that shut me in."

The author, Olive Schreiner, has a tropic zone in her heart. She
sometimes prattles like a child, then suddenly, and without warning, she
speaks like a philosopher--like one who had guessed the riddle of the
Sphinx. She, too, is overwhelmed with the injustice of the world--with
the negligence of nature--and she finds that it is impossible to find
repose for heart or brain in any Christian creed.

These books show what the people are thinking--the tendency of modern
thought. Singularly enough the three are written by women. Mrs. Ward,
the author of "Robert Elsmere," to say the least is not satisfied with
the Episcopal Church. She feels sure that its creed is not true. At the
same time, she wants it denied in a respectful tone of voice, and she
really pities people who are compelled to give up the consolation of
eternal punishment, although she has thrown it away herself and the
tendency of her book is to make other people do so. It is what the
orthodox call "a dangerous book." It is a flank movement calculated
to suggest a doubt to the unsuspecting reader, to some sheep who has
strayed beyond the shepherd's voice.

It is hard for any one to read "John Ward, Preacher," without hating
Puritanism with all his heart and without feeling certain that nothing
is more heartless than the "scheme of salvation;" and whoever finishes
"The Story of an African Farm" will feel that he has been brought in
contact with a very great, passionate and tender soul. Is it possible
that women, who have been the Caryatides of the church, who have borne
its insults and its burdens, are to be its destroyers?

Man is a being capable of pleasure and pain. The fact that he can enjoy
himself--that he can obtain good--gives him courage--courage to defend
what he has, courage to try to get more. The fact that he can suffer
pain sows in his mind the seeds of fear. Man is also filled with
curiosity. He examines. He is astonished by the uncommon. He is forced
to take an interest in things because things affect him. He is liable at
every moment to be injured. Countless things attack him. He must defend
himself. As a consequence his mind is at work; his experience in some
degree tells him what may happen; he prepares; he defends himself from
heat and cold. All the springs of action lie in the fact that he can
suffer and enjoy. The savage has great confidence in his senses. He
has absolute confidence in his eyes and ears. It requires many years of
education and experience before he becomes satisfied that things are
not always what they appear. It would be hard to convince the average
barbarian that the sun does not actually rise and set--hard to convince
him that the earth turns. He would rely upon appearances and would
record you as insane.

As man becomes civilized, educated, he finally has more confidence in
his reason than in his eyes. He no longer believes that a being called
Echo exists. He has found out the theory of sound, and he then knows
that the wave of air has been returned to his ear, and the idea of a
being who repeats his words fades from his mind; he begins then to
rely, not upon appearances, but upon demonstration, upon the result of
investigation. At last he finds that he has been deceived in a thousand
ways, and he also finds that he can invent certain instruments that are
far more accurate than his senses--instruments that add power to his
sight, to his hearing and to the sensitiveness of his touch. Day by day
he gains confidence in himself.

There is in the life of the individual, as in the life of the race,
a period of credulity, when not only appearances are accepted without
question, but the declarations of others. The child in the cradle or
in the lap of its mother, has implicit confidence in fairy
stories--believes in giants and dwarfs, in beings who can answer wishes,
who create castles and temples and gardens with a thought. So the race,
in its infancy, believed in such beings and in such creations. As the
child grows, facts take the place of the old beliefs, and the same is
true of the race.

As a rule, the attention of man is drawn first, not to his own mistakes,
not to his own faults, but to the mistakes and faults of his neighbors.
The same is true of a nation--it notices first the eccentricities and
peculiarities of other nations. This is especially true of religious
systems. Christians take it for granted that their religion is true,
that there can be about that no doubt, no mistake. They begin to examine
the religions of other nations. They take it for granted that all
these other religions are false. They are in a frame of mind to notice
contradictions, to discover mistakes and to apprehend absurdities. In
examining other religions they use their common sense. They carry in the
hand the lamp of probability. The miracles of other Christs, or of the
founders of other religions, appear unreasonable--they find that
they are not supported by evidence. Most of the stories excite their
laughter. Many of the laws seem cruel, many of the ceremonies absurd.
These Christians satisfy themselves that they are right in their first
conjecture--that is, that other religions are all made by men. Afterward
the same arguments they have used against other religions were found to
be equally forcible against their own. They find that the miracles of
Buddha rest upon the same kind of evidence as the miracles in the Old
Testament, as the miracles in the New--that the evidence in the one case
is just as weak and unreliable as in the other. They also find that it
is just as easy to account for the existence of Christianity as for the
existence of any other religion, and they find that the human mind in
all countries has traveled substantially the same road and has arrived
at substantially the same conclusions.

It may be truthfully said that Christianity by the examination of other
religions laid the foundation for its own destruction. The moment
it examined another religion it became a doubter, a sceptic, an
investigator. It began to call for proof. This course being pursued in
the examination of Christianity itself, reached the result that had been
reached as to other religions. In other words, it was impossible for
Christians successfully to attack other religions without showing that
their own religion could be destroyed. The fact that only a few years
ago we were all provincial should be taken into consideration. A few
years ago nations were unacquainted with each other--no nation had
any conception of the real habits, customs, religions and ideas of any
other. Each nation imagined itself to be the favored of heaven--the only
one to whom God had condescended to make known his will--the only one in
direct communication with angels and deities. Since the circumnavigation
of the globe, since the invention of the steam engine, the discovery of
electricity, the nations of the world have become acquainted with each
other, and we now know that the old ideas were born of egotism, and that
egotism is the child of ignorance and savagery.

Think of the egotism of the ancient Jews, who imagined that they were
"the chosen people"--the only ones in whom God took the slightest
interest! Imagine the egotism of the Catholic Church, claiming that it
is the only church--that it is continually under the guidance of the
Holy Ghost, and that the pope is infallible and occupies the place of
God. Think of the egotism of the Presbyterian, who imagines that he
is one of "the elect," and that billions of ages before the world was
created, God, in the eternal counsel of his own good pleasure, picked
out this particular Presbyterian, and at the same time determined to
send billions and billions to the pit of eternal pain. Think of
the egotism of the man who believes in special providence. The old
philosophy, the old religion, was made in about equal parts of ignorance
and egotism. This earth was the universe. The sun rose and set simply
for the benefit of "God's chosen people." The moon and stars were made
to beautify the night, and all the countless hosts of heaven were for no
other purpose than to decorate what might be called the ceiling of the
earth. It was also believed that this firmament was solid--that up there
the gods lived, and that they could be influenced by the prayers and
desires of men.

We have now found that the earth is only a grain of sand, a speck, an
atom in an infinite universe. We now know that the sun is a million
times larger than the earth, and that other planets are millions of
times larger than the sun; and when we think of these things, the old
stories of the Garden of Eden and Sinai and Calvary seem infinitely out
of proportion.

At last we have reached a point where we have the candor and the
intelligence to examine the claims of our own religion precisely as we
examine those of other countries. We have produced men and women
great enough to free themselves from the prejudices born of
provincialism--from the prejudices, we might almost say, of patriotism.
A few people are great enough not to be controlled by the ideas of the
dead--great enough to know that they are not bound by the mistakes of
their ancestors--and that a man may actually love his mother without
accepting her belief. We have even gone further than this, and we are
now satisfied that the only way to really honor parents is to tell our
best and highest thoughts. These thoughts ought to be in the mind when
reading the books referred to. There are certain tendencies, certain
trends of thought, and these tendencies--these trends--bear fruit; that
is to say, they produce the books about which I have spoken as well as
many others.




THE LIBEL LAWS

Question. Have you any suggestions to make in regard to remodeling the
libel laws?

Answer. I believe that every article appearing in a paper should
be signed by the writer. If it is libelous, then the writer and the
publisher should both be held responsible in damages. The law on
this subject, if changed, should throw greater safeguards around the
reputation of the citizen. It does not seem to me that the papers have
any right to complain. Probably a good many suits are brought that
should not be instituted, but just think of the suits that are not
brought.

Personally I have no complaint to make, as it would be very hard to find
anything in any paper against me, but it has never occurred to me that
the press needed any greater liberty than it now enjoys.

It might be a good thing for a paper to publish each week, a list of
mistakes, if this could be done without making that edition too large.
But certainly when a false and scandalous charge has been made by
mistake or as the result of imposition, great pains should be taken to
give the retraction at once and in a way to attract attention.

I suppose the papers are liable to be imposed upon--liable to print
thousands of articles to which the attention of the editor or proprietor
was not called. Still, that is not the fault of the man whose character
is attacked. On the whole I think the papers have the advantage of the
average citizen as the law now is.

If all articles had to be signed by the writer, I am satisfied the
writer would be more careful and less liable to write anything of a
libelous nature. I am willing to admit that I have given but little
attention to the subject, probably for the reason that I have never been
a sufferer.

It would hardly do to hold only the writer responsible. Suppose a man
writes a libelous article, leaves the country, and then the article is
published; is there no remedy? A suit for libel is not much of a remedy,
I admit, but it is some. It is like the bayonet in war. Very few are
injured by bayonets, but a good many are afraid that they may be.

--The Herald, New York, October 26,1888.




REV. DR. NEWTON'S SERMON ON A NEW RELIGION.


I HAVE read the report of the Rev. R. Heber Newton's sermon and I
am satisfied, first, that Mr. Newton simply said what he thoroughly
believes to be true, and second, that some of the conclusions at which
he arrives are certainly correct. I do not regard Mr. Newton as a
heretic or sceptic. Every man who reads the Bible must, to a greater or
less extent, think for himself. He need not tell his thoughts; he has
the right to keep them to himself. But if he undertakes to tell them,
then he should be absolutely honest.

The Episcopal creed is a few ages behind the thought of the world. For
many, years the foremost members and clergymen in that church have been
giving some new meanings to the old words and phrases. Words are no
more exempt from change than other things in nature. A word at one time
rough, jagged, harsh and cruel, is finally worn smooth. A word known
as slang, picked out of the gutter, is cleaned, educated, becomes
respectable and finally is found in the mouths of the best and purest.

We must remember that in the world of art the picture depends not alone
on the painter, but on the one who sees it. So words must find some part
of their meaning in the man who hears or the man who reads. In the old
times the word "hell" gave to the hearer or reader the picture of a vast
pit filled with an ocean of molten brimstone, in which innumerable souls
were suffering the torments of fire, and where millions of devils were
engaged in the cheerful occupation of increasing the torments of the
damned. This was the real old orthodox view.

As man became civilized, however, the picture grew less and less vivid.
Finally, some expressed their doubts about the brimstone, and others
began to think that if the Devil was, and is, really an enemy of God he
would not spend his time punishing sinners to please God. Why should
the Devil be in partnership with his enemy, and why should he inflict
torments on poor souls who were his own friends, and who shared with him
the feeling of hatred toward the Almighty?

As men became more and more civilized, the idea began to dawn in their
minds that an infinitely good and wise being would not have created
persons, knowing that they would be eternal failures, or that they were
to suffer eternal punishment, because there could be no possible object
in eternal punishment--no reformation, no good to be accomplished--and
certainly the sight of all this torment would not add to the joy of
heaven, neither would it tend to the happiness of God.

So the more civilized adopted the idea that punishment is a consequence
and not an infliction. Then they took another step and concluded that
every soul, in every world, in every age, should have at least the
chance of doing right. And yet persons so believing still used the word
"hell," but the old meaning had dropped out.

So with regard to the atonement. At one time it was regarded as a kind
of bargain in which so much blood was shed for so many souls. This was a
barbaric view. Afterward, the mind developing a little, the idea got in
the brain that the life of Christ was worth its moral effect. And yet
these people use the word "atonement," but the bargain idea has been
lost.

Take for instance the word "justice." The meaning that is given to that
word depends upon the man who uses it--depends for the most part on the
age in which he lives, the country in which he was born. The same is
true of the word "freedom." Millions and millions of people boasted that
they were the friends of freedom, while at the same time they enslaved
their fellow-men. So, in the name of justice every possible crime has
been perpetrated and in the name of mercy every instrument of torture
has been used.

Mr. Newton realizes the fact that everything in the world changes; that
creeds are influenced by civilization, by the acquisition of knowledge,
by the progress of the sciences and arts--in other words, that there
is a tendency in man to harmonize his knowledge and to bring about a
reconciliation between what he knows and what he believes. This will be
fatal to superstition, provided the man knows anything.

Mr. Newton, moreover, clearly sees that people are losing confidence in
the morality of the gospel; that its foundation lacks common sense; that
the doctrine of forgiveness is unscientific, and that it is impossible
to feel that the innocent can rightfully suffer for the guilty, or that
the suffering of innocence can in any way justify the crimes of the
wicked. I think he is mistaken, however, when he says that the early
church softened or weakened the barbaric passions. I think the early
church was as barbarous as any institution that ever gained a footing
in this world. I do not believe that the creed of the early church, as
understood, could soften anything. A church that preaches the eternity
of punishment has within it the seed of all barbarism and the soil to
make it grow.

So Mr. Newton is undoubtedly right when he says that the organized
Christianity of to-day is not the leader in social progress. No one now
goes to a synod to find a fact in science or on any subject. A man in
doubt does not ask the average minister; he regards him as behind the
times. He goes to the scientist, to the library. He depends upon the
untrammelled thought of fearless men.

The church, for the most part, is in the control of the rich, of the
respectable, of the well-to-do, of the unsympathetic, of the men who,
having succeeded themselves, think that everybody ought to succeed.
The spirit of caste is as well developed in the church as it is in the
average club. There is the same exclusive feeling, and this feeling in
the next world is to be heightened and deepened to such an extent that a
large majority of our fellow-men are to be eternally excluded.

The peasants of Europe--the workingmen--do not go to the church for
sympathy. If they do they come home empty, or rather empty hearted.
So, in our own country the laboring classes, the mechanics, are not
depending on the churches to right their wrongs. They do not expect the
pulpits to increase their wages. The preachers get their money from
the well-to-do--from the employeer class--and their sympathies are with
those from whom they receive their wages.

The ministers attack the pleasures of the world. They are not so much
scandalized by murder and forgery as by dancing and eating meat on
Friday. They regard unbelief as the greatest of all sins. They are not
touching the real, vital issues of the day, and their hearts do not
throb in unison with the hearts of the struggling, the aspiring, the
enthusiastic and the real believers in the progress of the human race.

It is all well enough to say that we should depend on Providence, but
experience has taught us that while it may do no harm to say it, it will
do no good to do it. We have found that man must be the Providence of
man, and that one plow will do more, properly pulled and properly held,
toward feeding the world, than all the prayers that ever agitated the
air.

So, Mr. Newton is correct in saying, as I understand him to say, that
the hope of immortality has nothing to do with orthodox religion.
Neither, in my judgment, has the belief in the existence of a God
anything in fact to do with real religion. The old doctrine that God
wanted man to do something for him, and that he kept a watchful eye upon
all the children of men; that he rewarded the virtuous and punished
the wicked, is gradually fading from the mind. We know that some of the
worst men have what the world calls success. We know that some of
the best men lie upon the straw of failure. We know that honesty goes
hungry, while larceny sits at the banquet. We know that the vicious have
every physical comfort, while the virtuous are often clad in rags.

Man is beginning to find that he must take care of himself; that special
providence is a mistake. This being so, the old religions must go down,
and in their place man must depend upon intelligence, industry, honesty;
upon the facts that he can ascertain, upon his own experience, upon his
own efforts. Then religion becomes a thing of this world--a religion to
put a roof above our heads, a religion that gives to every man a home, a
religion that rewards virtue here.

If Mr. Newton's sermon is in accordance with the Episcopal creed, I
congratulate the creed. In any event, I think Mr. Newton deserves great
credit for speaking his thought. Do not understand that I imagine that
he agrees with me. The most I will say is that in some things I agree
with him, and probably there is a little too much truth and a little too
much humanity in his remarks to please the bishop.

There is this wonderful fact, no man has ever yet been persecuted for
thinking God bad. When any one has said that he believed God to be so
good that he would, in his own time and way, redeem the entire human
race, and that the time would come when every soul would be brought home
and sit on an equality with the others around the great fireside of
the universe, that man has been denounced as a poor, miserable, wicked
wretch.--New York Herald, December 13,1888.




AN ESSAY ON CHRISTMAS.


MY family and I regard Christmas as a holiday--that is to say, a day
of rest and pleasure--a day to get acquainted with each other, a day to
recall old memories, and for the cultivation of social amenities. The
festival now called Christmas is far older than Christianity. It was
known and celebrated for thousands of years before the establishment of
what is known as our religion. It is a relic of sun-worship. It is the
day on which the sun triumphs over the hosts of darkness, and thousands
of years before the New Testament was written, thousands of years before
the republic of Rome existed, before one stone of Athens was laid,
before the Pharaohs ruled in Egypt, before the religion of Brahma,
before Sanscrit was spoken, men and women crawled out of their caves,
pushed the matted hair from their eyes, and greeted the triumph of the
sun over the powers of the night.

There are many relics of this worship--among which is the shaving of the
priest's head, leaving the spot shaven surrounded by hair, in imitation
of the rays of the sun. There is still another relic--the ministers of
our day close their eyes in prayer. When men worshiped the sun--when
they looked at that luminary and implored its assistance--they shut
their eyes as a matter of necessity. Afterward the priests looking
at their idols glittering with gems, shut their eyes in flattery,
pretending that they could not bear the effulgence of the presence; and
to-day, thousands of years after the old ideas have passed away, the
modern parson, without knowing the origin of the custom, closes his eyes
when he prays.

There are many other relics and souvenirs of the dead worship of the
sun, and this festival was adopted by Egyptians, Greeks, Romans, and by
Christians. As a matter of fact, Christianity furnished new steam for an
old engine, infused a new spirit into an old religion, and, as a matter
of course, the old festival remained.

For all of our festivals you will find corresponding pagan festivals.
For instance, take the eucharist, the communion, where persons partake
of the body and blood of the Deity. This is an exceedingly old custom.
Among the ancients they ate cakes made of corn, in honor of Ceres and
they called these cakes the flesh of the goddess, and they drank wine in
honor of Bacchus, and called this the blood of their god. And so I could
go on giving the pagan origin of every Christian ceremony and custom.
The probability is that the worship of the sun was once substantially
universal, and consequently the festival of Christ was equally wide
spread.

As other religions have been produced, the old customs have been adopted
and continued, so that the result is, this festival of Christmas is
almost world-wide. It is popular because it is a holiday. Overworked
people are glad of days that bring rest and recreation and allow them to
meet their families and their friends. They are glad of days when they
give and receive gifts--evidences of friendship, of remembrance and
love. It is popular because it is really human, and because it is
interwoven with our customs, habits, literature, and thought.

For my part I am willing to have two or three a year--the more holidays
the better. Many people have an idea that I am opposed to Sunday. I am
perfectly willing to have two a week. All I insist on is that these days
shall be for the benefit of the people, and that they shall be kept not
in a way to make folks miserable or sad or hungry, but in a way to make
people happy, and to add a little to the joy of life. Of course, I am
in favor of everybody keeping holidays to suit himself, provided he does
not interfere with others, and I am perfectly willing that everybody
should go to church on that day, provided he is willing that I should go
somewhere else.--The Tribune, New York, December, 1889.




HAS FREETHOUGHT A CONSTRUCTIVE SIDE?


THE object of the Freethinker is to ascertain the truth--the conditions
of well-being--to the end that this life will be made of value. This is
the affirmative, positive, and constructive side.

Without liberty there is no such thing as real happiness. There may be
the contentment of the slave--of one who is glad that he has passed the
day without a beating--one who is happy because he has had enough to
eat--but the highest possible idea of happiness is freedom.

All religious systems enslave the mind. Certain things are
demanded--certain things must be believed--certain things must
be done--and the man who becomes the subject or servant of this
superstition must give up all idea of individuality or hope of
intellectual growth and progress.

The religionist informs us that there is somewhere in the universe an
orthodox God, who is endeavoring to govern the world, and who for this
purpose resorts to famine and flood, to earthquake and pestilence--and
who, as a last resort, gets up a revival of religion. That is called
"affirmative and positive."

The man of sense knows that no such God exists, and thereupon he affirms
that the orthodox doctrine is infinitely absurd. This is called a
"negation." But to my mind it is an affirmation, and is a part of the
positive side of Freethought.

A man who compels this Deity to abdicate his throne renders a vast and
splendid service to the human race.

As long as men believe in tyranny in heaven they will practice tyranny
on earth. Most people are exceedingly imitative, and nothing is so
gratifying to the average orthodox man as to be like his God.

These same Christians tell us that nearly everybody is to be punished
forever, while a few fortunate Christians who were elected and selected
billions of ages before the world was created, are to be happy. This
they call the "tidings of great joy." The Freethinker denounces this
doctrine as infamous beyond the power of words to express. He says, and
says clearly, that a God who would create a human being, knowing that
that being was to be eternally miserable, must of necessity be an
infinite fiend.

The free man, into whose brain the serpent of superstition has not
crept, knows that the dogma of eternal pain is an infinite falsehood. He
also knows--if the dogma be true--that every decent human being should
hate, with every drop of his blood, the creator of the universe. He also
knows--if he knows anything--that no decent human being could be happy
in heaven with a majority of the human race in hell. He knows that
a mother could not enjoy the society of Christ with her children in
perdition; and if she could, he knows that such a mother is simply
a wild beast. The free man knows that the angelic hosts, under such
circumstances, could not enjoy themselves unless they had the hearts of
boa-constrictors.

It will thus be seen that there is an affirmative, a positive, a
constructive side to Freethought.

What is the positive side?

First: A denial of all orthodox falsehoods--an exposure of all
superstitions. This is simply clearing the ground, to the end that seeds
of value may be planted. It is necessary, first, to fell the trees, to
destroy the poisonous vines, to drive out the wild beasts. Then comes
another phase--another kind of work. The Freethinker knows that the
universe is natural--that there is no room, even in infinite space, for
the miraculous, for the impossible. The Freethinker knows, or feels that
he knows, that there is no sovereign of the universe, who, like some
petty king or tyrant, delights in showing his authority. He feels that
all in the universe are conditioned beings, and that only those are
happy who live in accordance with the conditions of happiness, and this
fact or truth or philosophy embraces all men and all gods--if there be
gods.

The positive side is this: That every good action has good
consequences--that it bears good fruit forever--and that every bad
action has evil consequences, and bears bad fruit. The Freethinker also
asserts that every man must bear the consequences of his actions--that
he must reap what he sows, and that he cannot be justified by the
goodness of another, or damned for the wickedness of another.

There is still another side, and that is this: The Freethinker knows
that all the priests and cardinals and popes know nothing of the
supernatural--they know nothing about gods or angels or heavens or
hells--nothing about inspired books or Holy Ghosts, or incarnations or
atonements. He knows that all this is superstition pure and simple.
He knows also that these people--from pope to priest, from bishop to
parson, do not the slightest good in this world--that they live upon the
labor of others--that they earn nothing themselves--that they contribute
nothing toward the happiness, or well-being, or the wealth of mankind.
He knows that they trade and traffic in ignorance and fear, that they
make merchandise of hope and grief--and he also knows that in every
religion the priest insists on five things--First: There is a God.
Second: He has made known his will. Third: He has selected me to explain
this message. Fourth: We will now take up a collection; and Fifth: Those
who fail to subscribe will certainly be damned.

The positive side of Freethought is to find out the truth--the facts of
nature--to the end that we may take advantage of those truths, of those
facts--for the purpose of feeding and clothing and educating mankind.

In the first place, we wish to find that which will lengthen human
life--that which will prevent or kill disease--that which will do away
with pain--that which will preserve or give us health.

We also want to go in partnership with these forces of nature, to the
end that we may be well fed and clothed--that we may have good houses
that protect us from heat and cold. And beyond this--beyond these simple
necessities--there are still wants and aspirations, and free-thought
will give us the highest possible in art--the most wonderful and
thrilling in music--the greatest paintings, the most marvelous
sculpture--in other words, free-thought will develop the brain to
its utmost capacity. Freethought is the mother of art and science, of
morality and happiness.

It is charged by the worshipers of the Jewish myth, that we destroy,
that we do not build.

What have we destroyed? We have destroyed the idea that a monster
created and governs this world--the declaration that a God of infinite
mercy and compassion upheld slavery and polygamy and commanded the
destruction of men, women, and babes. We have destroyed the idea that
this monster created a few of his children for eternal joy, and the vast
majority for everlasting pain. We have destroyed the infinite absurdity
that salvation depends upon belief, that investigation is dangerous, and
that the torch of reason lights only the way to hell. We have taken a
grinning devil from every grave, and the curse from death--and in the
place of these dogmas, of these infamies, we have put that which is
natural and that which commends itself to the heart and brain.

Instead of loving God, we love each other. Instead of the religion of
the sky--the religion of this world--the religion of the family--the
love of husband for wife, of wife for husband--the love of all for
children. So that now the real religion is: Let us live for each other;
let us live for this world, without regard for the past and without fear
for the future. Let us use our faculties and our powers for the benefit
of ourselves and others, knowing that if there be another world, the
same philosophy that gives us joy here will make us happy there.

Nothing can be more absurd than the idea that we can do something to
please or displease an infinite Being. If our thoughts and actions can
lessen or increase the happiness of God, then to that extent God is the
slave and victim of man.

The energies of the world have been wasted in the service of a
phantom--millions of priests have lived on the industry of others and no
effort has been spared to prevent the intellectual freedom of mankind.

We know, if we know anything, that supernatural religion has no
foundation except falsehood and mistake. To expose these falsehoods--to
correct these mistakes--to build the fabric of civilization on the
foundation of demonstrated truth--is the task of the Freethinker. To
destroy guide-boards that point in the wrong direction--to correct
charts that lure to reef and wreck--to drive the fiend of fear from the
mind--to protect the cradle from the serpent of superstition and dispel
the darkness of ignorance with the sun of science--is the task of the
Freethinker.

What constructive work has been done by the church? Christianity gave us
a flat world a few thousand years ago--a heaven above it where Jehovah
dwells and a hell below it where most people will dwell. Christianity
took the ground that a certain belief was necessary to salvation and
that this belief was far better and of more importance than the practice
of all the virtues. It became the enemy of investigation--the bitter and
relentless foe of reason and the liberty of thought. It committed every
crime and practiced every cruelty in the propagation of its creed. It
drew the sword against the freedom of the world. It established schools
and universities for the preservation of ignorance. It claimed to have
within its keeping the source and standard of all truth. If the church
had succeeded the sciences could not have existed.

Freethought has given us all we have of value. It has been the great
constructive force. It is the only discoverer, and every science is its
child.--The Truth Seeker, New York 1890.




THE IMPROVED MAN.

THE Improved Man will be in favor of universal liberty, that is to say, he
will be opposed to all kings and nobles, to all privileged classes.
He will give to all others the rights he claims for himself. He will
neither bow nor cringe, nor accept bowing and cringing from others. He
will be neither master nor slave, neither prince nor peasant--simply
man.

He will be the enemy of all caste, no matter whether its foundation be
wealth, title or power, and of him it will be said: "Blessed is that man
who is afraid of no man and of whom no man is afraid."

The Improved Man will be in favor of universal education. He will
believe it the duty of every person to shed all the light he can, to the
end that no child may be reared in darkness. By education he will mean
the gaining of useful knowledge, the development of the mind along the
natural paths that lead to human happiness.

He will not waste his time in ascertaining the foolish theories of
extinct peoples or in studying the dead languages for the sake of
understanding the theologies of ignorance and fear, but he will turn his
attention to the affairs of life, and will do his utmost to see to it
that every child has an opportunity to learn the demonstrated facts of
science, the true history of the world, the great principles of right
and wrong applicable to human conduct--the things necessary to the
preservation of the individual and of the state, and such arts and
industries as are essential to the preservation of all.

He will also endeavor to develop the mind in the direction of the
beautiful--of the highest art--so that the palace in which the mind
dwells may be enriched and rendered beautiful, to the end that these
stones, called facts, may be changed into statues.

The Improved Man will believe only in the religion of this world. He
will have nothing to do with the miraculous and supernatural. He will
find that there is no room in the universe for these things. He will
know that happiness is the only good, and that everything that tends to
the happiness of sentient beings is good, and that to do the things--and
no other--that add to the happiness of man is to practice the highest
possible religion. His motto will be: "Sufficient unto each world is the
evil thereof." He will know that each man should be his own priest, and
that the brain is the real cathedral. He will know that in the realm
of mind there is no authority--that majorities in this mental world can
settle nothing--that each soul is the sovereign of its own world, and
that it cannot abdicate without degrading itself. He will not bow to
numbers or force; to antiquity or custom. He, standing under the flag of
nature, under the blue and stars, will decide for himself. He will not
endeavor by prayers and supplication, by fastings and genuflections, to
change the mind of the "Infinite" or alter the course of nature, neither
will he employ others to do those things in his place. He will have no
confidence in the religion of idleness, and will give no part of what he
earns to support parson or priest, archbishop or pope. He will know that
honest labor is the highest form of prayer. He will spend no time
in ringing bells or swinging censers, or in chanting the litanies
of barbarism, but he will appreciate all that is artistic--that is
beautiful--that tends to refine and ennoble the human race. He will not
live a life of fear. He will stand in awe neither of man nor ghosts. He
will enjoy not only the sunshine of life, but will bear with fortitude
the darkest days. He will have no fear of death. About the grave, there
will be no terrors, and his life will end as serenely as the sun rises.

The Improved Man will be satisfied that the supernatural does not
exist--that behind every fact, every thought and dream is an efficient
cause. He will know that every human action is a necessary product,
and he will also know that men cannot be reformed by punishment, by
degradation or by revenge. He will regard those who violate the laws
of nature and the laws of States as victims of conditions, of
circumstances, and he will do what he can for the wellbeing of his
fellow-men.

The Improved Man will not give his life to the accumulation of wealth.
He will find no happiness in exciting the envy of his neighbors. He will
not care to live in a palace while others who are good, industrious and
kind are compelled to huddle in huts and dens. He will know that great
wealth is a great burden, and that to accumulate beyond the actual
needs of a reasonable human being is to increase not wealth, but
responsibility and trouble.

The Improved Man will find his greatest joy in the happiness of others
and he will know that the home is the real temple. He will believe in
the democracy of the fireside, and will reap his greatest reward in
being loved by those whose lives he has enriched.

The Improved Man will be self-poised, independent, candid and free.
He will be a scientist. He will observe, investigate, experiment and
demonstrate. He will use his sense and his senses. He will keep his mind
open as the day to the hints and suggestions of nature. He will always
be a student, a learner and a listener--a believer in intellectual
hospitality. In the world of his brain there will be continuous summer,
perpetual seed-time and harvest. Facts will be the foundation of his
faith. In one hand he will carry the torch of truth, and with the other
raise the fallen.--The World, New York, February 28,1890.




EIGHT HOURS MUST COME.


I HARDLY know enough on the subject to give an opinion as to the
time when eight hours are to become a day's work, but I am perfectly
satisfied that eight hours will become a labor day.

The working people should be protected by law; if they are not, the
capitalists will require just as many hours as human nature can bear.
We have seen here in America street-car drivers working sixteen and
seventeen hours a day. It was necessary to have a strike in order to
get to fourteen, another strike to get to twelve, and nobody could blame
them for keeping on striking till they get to eight hours.

For a man to get up before daylight and work till after dark, life is
of no particular importance. He simply earns enough one day to prepare
himself to work another. His whole life is spent in want and toil, and
such a life is without value.

Of course, I cannot say that the present effort is going to succeed--all
I can say is that I hope it will. I cannot see how any man who does
nothing--who lives in idleness--can insist that others should work ten
or twelve hours a day. Neither can I see how a man who lives on the
luxuries of life can find it in his heart, or in his stomach, to say
that the poor ought to be satisfied with the crusts and crumbs they get.

I believe there is to be a revolution in the relations between labor
and capital. The laboring people a few generations ago were not very
intellectual. There were no schoolhouses, no teachers except the church,
and the church taught obedience and faith--told the poor people that
although they had a hard time here, working for nothing, they would be
paid in Paradise with a large interest. Now the working people are more
intelligent--they are better educated--they read and write. In order to
carry on the works of the present, many of them are machinists of the
highest order. They must be reasoners. Every kind of mechanism insists
upon logic. The working people are reasoners--their hands and heads are
in partnership. They know a great deal more than the capitalists. It
takes a thousand times the brain to make a locomotive that it does to
run a store or a bank. Think of the intelligence in a steamship and
in all the thousand machines and devices that are now working for the
world. These working people read. They meet together--they discuss. They
are becoming more and more independent in thought. They do not believe
all they hear. They may take their hats off their heads to the priests,
but they keep their brains in their heads for themselves.

The free school in this country has tended to put men on an equality,
and the mechanic understands his side of the case, and is able to
express his views. Under these circumstances there must be a revolution.
That is to say, the relations between capital and labor must be changed,
and the time must come when they who do the work--they who make the
money--will insist on having some of the profits.

I do not expect this remedy to come entirely from the Government, or
from Government interference. I think the Government can aid in passing
good and wholesome laws--laws fixing the length of a labor day; laws
preventing the employment of children; laws for the safety and security
of workingmen in mines and other dangerous places. But the laboring
people must rely upon themselves; on their intelligence, and especially
on their political power. They are in the majority in this country.
They can if they wish--if they will stand together--elect Congresses
and Senates, Presidents and Judges. They have it in their power to
administer the Government of the United States.

The laboring man, however, ought to remember that all who labor are
their brothers, and that all women who labor are their sisters, and
whenever one class of workingmen or working women is oppressed all other
laborers ought to stand by the oppressed class. Probably the worst paid
people in the world are the working-women. Think of the sewing women in
this city--and yet we call ourselves civilized! I would like to see all
working people unite for the purpose of demanding justice, not only for
men, but for women.

All my sympathies are on the side of those who toil--of those who
produce the real wealth of the world--of those who carry the burdens of
mankind.

Any man who wishes to force his brother to work--to toil--more than
eight hours a day is not a civilized man.

My hope for the workingman has its foundation in the fact that he is
growing more and more intelligent. I have also the same hope for the
capitalist. The time must come when the capitalist will clearly and
plainly see that his interests are identical with those of the laboring
man. He will finally become intelligent enough to know that his
prosperity depends on the prosperity of those who labor. When both
become intelligent the matter will be settled.

Neither labor nor capital should resort to force.--The Morning Journal,
April 27, 1890.




THE JEWS.


WHEN I was a child, I was taught that the Jews were an exceedingly
hard-hearted and cruel people, and that they were so destitute of the
finer feelings that they had a little while before that time crucified
the only perfect man who had appeared upon the earth; that this perfect
man was also perfect God, and that the Jews had really stained their
hands with the blood of the Infinite.

When I got somewhat older, I found that nearly all people had been
guilty of substantially the same crime--that is, that they had destroyed
the progressive and the thoughtful; that religionists had in all ages
been cruel; that the chief priests of all people had incited the mob, to
the end that heretics--that is to say, philosophers--that is to say, men
who knew that the chief priests were hypocrites--might be destroyed.

I also found that Christians had committed more of these crimes than all
other religionists put together.

I also became acquainted with a large number of Jewish people, and I
found them like other people, except that, as a rule, they were more
industrious, more temperate, had fewer vagrants among them, no beggars,
very few criminals; and in addition to all this, I found that they were
intelligent, kind to their wives and children, and that, as a rule, they
kept their contracts and paid their debts.

The prejudice was created almost entirely by religious, or rather
irreligious, instruction. All children in Christian countries are taught
that all the Jews are to be eternally damned who die in the faith
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; that it is not enough to believe in
the inspiration of the Old Testament--not enough to obey the Ten
Commandments--not enough to believe the miracles performed in the days
of the prophets, but that every Jew must accept the New Testament
and must be a believer in Christianity--that is to say, he must be
regenerated--or he will simply be eternal kindling wood.

The church has taught, and still teaches, that every Jew is an outcast;
that he is to-day busily fulfilling prophecy; that he is a wandering
witness in favor of "the glad tidings of great joy;" that Jehovah is
seeing to it that the Jews shall not exist as a nation--that they shall
have no abiding place, but that they shall remain scattered, to the end
that the inspiration of the Bible may be substantiated.

Dr. John Hall of this city, a few years ago, when the Jewish people were
being persecuted in Russia, took the ground that it was all fulfillment
of prophecy, and that whenever a Jewish maiden was stabbed to death, God
put a tongue in every wound for the purpose of declaring the truth of
the Old Testament.

Just as long as Christians take these positions, of course they will do
what they can to assist in the fulfillment of what they call prophecy,
and they will do their utmost to keep the Jewish people in a state
of exile, and then point to that fact as one of the corner-stones of
Christianity.

My opinion is that in the early days of Christianity all sensible Jews
were witnesses against the faith, and in this way excited the hostility
of the orthodox. Every sensible Jew knew that no miracles had been
performed in Jerusalem. They all knew that the sun had not been
darkened, that the graves had not given up their dead, that the veil
of the temple had not been rent in twain--and they told what they knew.
They were then denounced as the most infamous of human beings, and this
hatred has pursued them from that day to this.

There is no other chapter in history so infamous, so bloody, so cruel,
so relentless, as the chapter in which is told the manner in which
Christians--those who love their enemies--have treated the Jewish
people. This story is enough to bring the blush of shame to the cheek,
and the words of indignation to the lips of every honest man.

Nothing can be more unjust than to generalize about nationalities, and
to speak of a race as worthless or vicious, simply because you have met
an individual who treated you unjustly. There are good people and bad
people in all races, and the individual is not responsible for the
crimes of the nation, or the nation responsible for the actions of the
few. Good men and honest men are found in every faith, and they are not
honest or dishonest because they are Jews or Gentiles, but for entirely
different reasons.

Some of the best people I have ever known are Jews, and some of the
worst people I have known are Christians. The Christians were not bad
simply because they were Christians, neither were the Jews good because
they were Jews. A man is far above these badges of faith and race. Good
Jews are precisely the same as good Christians, and bad Christians are
wonderfully like bad Jews.

Personally, I have either no prejudices about religion, or I have equal
prejudice against all religions. The consequence is that I judge of
people not by their creeds, not by their rites, not by their mummeries,
but by their actions.

In the first place, at the bottom of this prejudice lies the coiled
serpent of superstition. In other words, it is a religious question.
It seems impossible for the people of one religion to like the people
believing in another religion. They have different gods, different
heavens, and a great variety of hells. For the followers of one god to
treat the followers of another god decently is a kind of treason. In
order to be really true to his god, each follower must not only hate all
other gods, but the followers of all other gods.

The Jewish people should outgrow their own superstitions. It is time
for them to throw away the idea of inspiration. The intelligent jew of
to-day knows that the Old Testament was written by barbarians., and he
knows that the rites and ceremonies are simply absurd. He knows that
no intelligent man should care anything about Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
three dead barbarians. In other words, the Jewish people should leave
their superstition and rely on science and philosophy.

The Christian should do the same. He, by this time, should know that his
religion is a mistake, that his creed has no foundation in the eternal
verities. The Christian certainly should give up the hopeless task of
converting the Jewish people, and the Jews should give up the useless
task of converting the Christians. There is no propriety in swapping
superstitions--neither party can afford to give any boot.

When the Christian throws away his cruel and heartless superstitions,
and when the Jew throws away his, then they can meet as man to man.

In the meantime, the world will go on in its blundering way, and I shall
know and feel that everybody does as he must, and that the Christian,
to the extent that he is prejudiced, is prejudiced by reason of his
ignorance, and that consequently the great lever with which to raise all
mankind into the sunshine of philosophy, is intelligence.




CRUMBLING CREEDS.

THERE is a desire in each brain to harmonize the knowledge that it has.
If a man knows, or thinks he knows, a few facts, he will naturally use
those facts for the purpose of determining the accuracy of his opinions
on other subjects. This is simply an effort to establish or prove the
unknown by the known--a process that is constantly going on in the minds
of all intelligent people.

It is natural for a man not governed by fear, to use what he knows
in one department of human inquiry, in every other department that he
investigates. The average of intelligence has in the last few years
greatly increased. Man may have as much credulity as he ever had, on
some subjects, but certainly on the old subjects he has less. There
is not as great difference to-day between the members of the learned
professions and the common people. Man is governed less and less by
authority. He cares but little for the conclusions of the universities.
He does not feel bound by the actions of synods or ecumenical
councils--neither does he bow to the decisions of the highest tribunals,
unless the reasons given for the decision satisfy his intellect. One
reason for this is, that the so-called "learned" do not agree among
themselves--that the universities dispute each other--that the synod
attacks the ecumenical council--that the parson snaps his fingers at the
priest, and even the Protestant bishop holds the pope in contempt. If
the learned cau thus disagree, there is no reason why the common people
should hold to one opinion. They are at least called upon to decide as
between the universities or synods; and in order to decide, they must
examine both sides, and having examined both sides, they generally have
an opinion of their own.

There was a time when the average man knew nothing of medicine--he
simply opened his mouth and took the dose. If he died, it was simply a
dispensation of Providence--if he got well, it was a triumph of science.
Now this average man not only asks the doctor what is the matter with
him--not only asks what medicine will be good for him,--but insists
on knowing the philosophy of the cure--asks the doctor why he gives
it--what result he expects--and, as a rule, has a judgment of his own.

So in law. The average business man has an exceedingly good idea of the
law affecting his business. There is nothing now mysterious about what
goes on in courts or in the decisions of judges--they are published in
every direction, and all intelligent people who happen to read these
opinions have their ideas as to whether the opinions are right or wrong.
They are no longer the victims of doctors, or of lawyers, or of courts.

The same is true in the world of art and literature. The average man has
an opinion of his own. He is no longer a parrot repeating what somebody
else says. He not only has opinions, but he has the courage to express
them. In literature the old models fail to satisfy him. He has the
courage to say that Milton is tiresome--that Dante is prolix--that they
deal with subjects having no human interest. He laughs at Young's "Night
Thoughts" and Pollok's "Course of Time"--knowing that both are filled
with hypocrisies and absurdities. He no longer falls upon his knees
before the mechanical poetry of Mr. Pope. He chooses--and stands by his
own opinion. I do not mean that he is entirely independent, but that he
is going in that direction.

The same is true of pictures. He prefers the modern to the old masters.
He prefers Corot to Raphael. He gets more real pleasure from Millet and
Troyon than from all the pictures of all the saints and donkeys of the
Middle Ages.

In other words, the days of authority are passing away.

The same is true in music. The old no longer satisfies, and there is a
breadth, color, wealth, in the new that makes the old poor and barren in
comparison.

To a far greater extent this advance, this individual independence, is
seen in the religious world. The religion of our day--that is to say,
the creeds--at the time they were made, were in perfect harmony with the
knowledge, or rather with the ignorance, of man in all other departments
of human inquiry. All orthodox creeds agreed with the sciences of
their day--with the astronomy and geology and biology and political
conceptions of the Middle Ages. These creeds were declared to be the
absolute and eternal truth. They could not be changed without abandoning
the claim that made them authority. The priests, through a kind of
unconscious self-defence, clung to every word. They denied the truth of
all discovery. They measured every assertion in every other
department by their creeds. At last the facts against them became
so numerous--their congregations became so intelligent--that it
was necessary to give new meanings to the old words. The cruel was
softened--the absurd was partially explained, and they kept these old
words, although the original meanings had fallen out. They became empty
purses, but they retained them still.

Slowly but surely came the time when this course could not longer be
pursued. The words must be thrown away--the creeds must be changed--they
were no longer believed--only occasionally were they preached. The
ministers became a little ashamed--they began to apologize. Apology is
the prelude to retreat.

Of all the creeds, the Presbyterian, the old Congregational, were the
most explicit, and for that reason the most absurd. When these creeds
were written, those who wrote them had perfect confidence in their
truth. They did not shrink because of their cruelty. They cared nothing
for what others called absurdity. They failed not to declare what they
believed to be "the whole counsel of God."

At that time, cruel punishments were inflicted by all governments.
People were torn asunder, mutilated, burned. Every atrocity was
perpetrated in the name of justice, and the limit of pain was the limit
of endurance. These people imagined that God would do as they would do.
If they had had it in their power to keep the victim alive for years in
the flames, they would most cheerfully have supplied the fagots.
They believed that God could keep the victim alive forever, and that
therefore his punishment would be eternal. As man becomes civilized he
becomes merciful, and the time came when civilized Presbyterians and
Congregationalists read their own creeds with horror.

I am not saying that the Presbyterian creed is any worse than the
Catholic. It is only a little more specific. Neither am I saying that it
is more horrible than the Episcopal. It is not. All orthodox creeds are
alike infamous. All of them have good things, and all of them have bad
things. You will find in every creed the blossom of mercy and the oak of
justice, but under the one and around the other are coiled the serpents
of infinite cruelty.

The time came when orthodox Christians began dimly to perceive that
God ought at least to be as good as they were. They felt that they
were incapable of inflicting eternal pain, and they began to doubt the
propriety of saying that God would do that which a civilized Christian
would be incapable of.

We have improved in all directions for the same reasons. We have better
laws now because we have a better sense of justice. We are believing
more and more in the government of the people. Consequently we are
believing more and more in the education of the people, and from that
naturally results greater individuality and a greater desire to hear the
honest opinions of all.

The moment the expression of opinion is allowed in any department,
progress begins. We are using our knowledge in every direction. The
tendency is to test all opinions by the facts we know. All claims are
put in the crucible of investigation--the object being to separate the
true from the false. He who objects to having his opinions thus tested
is regarded as a bigot.

If the professors of all the sciences had claimed that the knowledge
they had was given by inspiration--that it was absolutely true, and that
there was no necessity of examining further, not only, but that it was
a kind of blasphemy to doubt--all the sciences would have remained
as stationary as religion has. Just to the extent that the Bible was
appealed to in matters of science, science was retarded; and just to
the extent that science has been appealed to in matters of religion,
religion has advanced--so that now the object of intelligent
religionists is to adopt a creed that will bear the test and criticism
of science.

Another thing may be alluded to in this connection. All the countries
of the world are now, and have been for years, open to us. The ideas
of other people--their theories, their religions--are now known; and we
have ascertained that the religions of all people have exactly the
same foundation as our own--that they all arose in the same way, were
substantiated in the same way, were maintained by the same means, having
precisely the same objects in view.

For many years, the learned of the religious world were examining the
religions of other countries, and in that work they established certain
rules of criticism--pursued certain lines of argument--by which they
overturned the claims of those religions to supernatural origin. After
this had been successfully done, others, using the same methods on our
religion, pursuing the same line of argument, succeeded in overturning
ours. We have found that all miracles rest on the same basis--that all
wonders were born of substantially the same ignorance and the same fear.

The intelligence of the world is far better distributed than ever
before. The historical outlines of all countries are well known.
The arguments for and against all systems of religion are generally
understood. The average of intelligence is far higher than ever before.
All discoveries become almost immediately the property of the whole
civilized world, and all thoughts are distributed by the telegraph and
press with such rapidity, that provincialism is almost unknown. The
egotism of ignorance and seclusion is passing away. The prejudice of
race and religion is growing feebler, and everywhere, to a greater
extent than ever before, the light is welcome.

These are a few of the reasons why creeds are crumbling, and why such a
change has taken place in the religious world.

Only a few years ago the pulpit was an intellectual power. The pews
listened with wonder, and accepted without question. There was something
sacred about the preacher. He was different from other mortals. He had
bread to eat which they knew not of. He was oracular, solemn, dignified,
stupid.

The pulpit has lost its position. It speaks no longer with authority.
The pews determine what shall be preached. They pay only for that which
they wish to buy--for that which they wish to hear. Of course in every
church there is an advance guard and a conservative party, and nearly
every minister is obliged to preach a little for both. He now and then
says a radical thing for one part of his congregation, and takes it
mostly back on the next Sabbath, for the sake of the others. Most of
them ride two horses, and their time is taken up in urging one forward
and in holding the other back.

The great reason why the orthodox creeds have become unpopular is, that
all teach the dogma of eternal pain.

In old times, when men were nearly wild beasts, it was natural enough
for them to suppose that God would do as they would do in his place, and
so they attributed to this God infinite cruelty, infinite revenge. This
revenge, this cruelty, wore the mask of justice. They took the ground
that God, having made man, had the right to do with him as he pleased.
At that time they were not civilized to the extent of seeing that a God
would not have the right to make a failure, and that a being of infinite
wisdom and power would be under obligation to do the right, and that
he would have no right to create any being whose life would not be a
blessing. The very fact that he made man, would put him under obligation
to see to it that life should not be a curse.

The doctrine of eternal punishment is in perfect harmony with the
savagery of the men who made the orthodox creeds. It is in harmony with
torture, with flaying alive and with burnings. The men who burned
their fellow-men for a moment, believed that God would burn his enemies
forever.

No civilized men ever believed in this dogma. The belief in eternal
punishment has driven millions from the church. It was easy enough for
people to imagine that the children of others had gone to hell; that
foreigners had been doomed to eternal pain; but when it was brought
home--when fathers and mothers bent above their dead who had died in
their sins--when wives shed their tears on the faces of husbands who had
been born but once--love suggested doubts and love fought the dogma of
eternal revenge.

This doctrine is as cruel as the hunger of hyenas, and is infamous
beyond the power of any language to express--yet a creed with this
doctrine has been called "the glad tidings of great joy"--a consolation
to the weeping world. It is a source of great pleasure to me to know
that all intelligent people are ashamed to admit that they believe
it--that no intelligent clergyman now preaches it, except with a preface
to the effect that it is probably untrue.

I have been blamed for taking this consolation from the world--for
putting out, or trying to put out, the fires of hell; and many orthodox
people have wondered how I could be so wicked as to deprive the world of
this hope.

The church clung to the doctrine because it seemed a necessary excuse
for the existence of the church. The ministers said: "No hell, no
atonement; no atonement, no fall of man; no fall of man, no inspired
book; no inspired book, no preachers; no preachers, no salary; no hell,
no missionaries; no sulphur, no salvation."

At last, the people are becoming enlightened enough to ask for a better
philosophy. The doctrine of hell is now only for the poor, the ragged,
the ignorant. Well-dressed people won't have it. Nobody goes to hell
in a carriage--they foot it. Hell is for strangers and tramps. No soul
leaves a brown-stone front for hell--they start from the tenements, from
jails and reformatories. In other words, hell is for the poor. It is
easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a poor man
to get into heaven, or for a rich man to get into hell. The ministers
stand by their supporters. Their salaries are paid by the well-to-do,
and they can hardly afford to send the subscribers to hell. Every creed
in which is the dogma of eternal pain is doomed. Every church teaching
the infinite lie must fall, and the sooner the better.--The Twentieth
Century, N, Y., April 21,1890.




OUR SCHOOLS.


I BELIEVE that education is the only lever capable of raising mankind.
If we wish to make the future of the Republic glorious we must educate
the children of the present. The greatest blessing conferred by our
Government is the free school. In importance it rises above everything
else that the Government does. In its influence it is far greater.

The schoolhouse is infinitely more important than the church, and if
all the money wasted in the building of churches could be devoted to
education we should become a civilized people. Of course, to the extent
that churches disseminate thought they are good, and to the extent that
they provoke discussion they are of value, but the real object should be
to become acquainted with nature--with the conditions of happiness--to
the end that man may take advantage of the forces of nature. I believe
in the schools for manual training, and that every child should be
taught not only to think, but to do, and that the hand should be
educated with the brain. The money expended on schools is the best
investment made by the Government.

The schoolhouses in New York are not sufficient. Many of them are small,
dark, unventilated, and unhealthy. They should be the finest public
buildings in the city. It would be far better for the Episcopalians to
build a university than a cathedral. Attached to all these schoolhouses
there should be grounds for the children--places for air and sunlight.
They should be given the best. They are the hope of the Republic and, in
my judgment, of the world.

We need far more schoolhouses than we have, and while money is being
wasted in a thousand directions, thousands of children are left to be
educated in the gutter. It is far cheaper to build schoolhouses than
prisons, and it is much better to have scholars than convicts.

The Kindergarten system should be adopted, especially for the young;
attending school is then a pleasure--the children do not run away from
school, but to school. We should educate the children not simply in
mind, but educate their eyes and hands, and they should be taught
something that will be of use, that will help them to make a living,
that will give them independence, confidence--that is to say, character.

The cost of the schools is very little, and the cost of land--giving the
children, as I said before, air and light--would amount to nothing.

There is another thing: Teachers are poorly paid. Only the best should
be employeed, and they should be well paid. Men and women of the highest
character should have charge of the children, because there is a vast
deal of education in association, and it is of the utmost importance
that the children should associate with real gentlemen--that is to say,
with real men; with real ladies--that is to say, with real women.

Every schoolhouse should be inviting, clean, well ventilated,
attractive. The surroundings should be delightful. Children forced to
school, learn but little. The schoolhouse should not be a prison or the
teachers turnkeys.

I believe that the common school is the bread of life, and all should
be commanded to eat of the fruit of the tree of knowledge. It would have
been far better to have expelled those who refused to eat.

The greatest danger to the Republic is ignorance. Intelligence is the
foundation of free government.--The World, New York, September 7, 1800.




VIVISECTION.

     *A letter written to Philip G. Peabody. May 27, 1800.


VIVISECTION is the Inquisition--the Hell--of Science.

All the cruelty which the human--or rather the inhuman--heart is capable
of inflicting, is in this one word. Below this there is no depth. This
word lies like a coiled serpent at the bottom of the abyss.

We can excuse, in part, the crimes of passion. We take into
consideration the fact that man is liable to be caught by the whirlwind,
and that from a brain on fire the soul rushes to a crime. But
what excuse can ingenuity form for a man who deliberately--with an
unaccelerated pulse--with the calmness of John Calvin at the murder
of Servetus--seeks, with curious and cunning knives, in the living,
quivering flesh of a dog, for all the throbbing nerves of pain? The
wretches who commit these infamous crimes pretend that they are working
for the good of man; that they are actuated by philanthropy; and that
their pity for the sufferings of the human race drives out all pity for
the animals they slowly torture to death. But those who are incapable
of pitying animals are, as a matter of fact, incapable of pitying men.
A physician who would cut a living rabbit in pieces--laying bare the
nerves, denuding them with knives, pulling them out with forceps--would
not hesitate to try experiments with men and women for the gratification
of his curiosity.

To settle some theory, he would trifle with the life of any patient
in his power. By the same reasoning he will justify the vivisection of
animals and patients. He will say that it is better that a few animals
should suffer than that one human being should die; and that it is far
better that one patient should die, if through the sacrifice of that
one, several may be saved.

Brain without heart is far more dangerous than heart without brain.

Have these scientific assassins discovered anything of value? They may
have settled some disputes as to the action of some organ, but have they
added to the useful knowledge of the race?

It is not necessary for a man to be a specialist in order to have and
express his opinion as to the right or wrong of vivisection. It is not
necessary to be a scientist or a naturalist to detest cruelty and to
love mercy. Above all the discoveries of the thinkers, above all the
inventions of the ingenious, above all the victories won on fields of
intellectual conflict, rise human sympathy and a sense of justice.

I know that good for the human race can never be accomplished by
torture. I also know that all that has been ascertained by vivisection
could have been done by the dissection of the dead. I know that all the
torture has been useless. All the agony inflicted has simply hardened
the hearts of the criminals, without enlightening their minds.

It may be that the human race might be physically improved if all the
sickly and deformed babes were killed, and if all the paupers, liars,
drunkards, thieves, villains, and vivisectionists were murdered. All
this might, in a few ages, result in the production of a generation
of physically perfect men and women; but what would such beings be
worth,--men and women healthy and heartless, muscular and cruel--that is
to say, intelligent wild beasts?

Never can I be the friend of one who vivisects his fellow-creatures. I
do not wish to touch his hand.

When the angel of pity is driven from the heart; when the fountain of
tears is dry,--the soul becomes a serpent crawling in the dust of a
desert.




THE CENSUS ENUMERATOR'S OFFICIAL CATECHISM.


I SUPPOSE the Government has a right to ask all of these questions, and
any more it pleases, but undoubtedly the citizen would have the right
to refuse to answer them. Originally the census was taken simply for
the purpose of ascertaining the number of people--first, as a basis of
representation; second, as a basis of capitation tax; third, as a basis
to arrive at the number of troops that might be called from each State;
and it may be for some other purposes, but I imagine that all are
embraced in the foregoing.

The Government has no right to invade the privacy of the citizen; no
right to inquire into his financial condition, as thereby his credit
might be injured; no right to pry into his affairs, into his diseases,
or his deformities; and, while the Government may have the right to ask
these questions, I think it was foolish to instruct the enumerators to
ask them, and that the citizens have a perfect right to refuse to
answer them. Personally, I have no objection to answering any of these
questions, for the reason that nothing is the matter with me that money
will not cure.

I know that it is thought advisable by many to find out the amount of
mortgages in the United States, the rate of interest that is being paid,
the general indebtedness of individuals, counties, cities and States,
and I see no impropriety in finding this out in any reasonable way.
But I think it improper to insist on the debtor exposing his financial
condition. My opinion is that Mr. Porter only wants what is perfectly
reasonable, and if left to himself, would ask only those questions that
all people would willingly answer.

I presume we can depend on medical statistics--on the reports of
hospitals, etc., in regard to diseases and deformities, without
interfering with the patients. As to the financial standing of people,
there are already enough of spies in this country attending to that
business. I don't think there is any danger of the courts compelling a
man to answer these questions. Suppose a man refuses to tell whether
he has a chronic disease or not, and he is brought up before a United
States Court for contempt. In my opinion the judge would decide that the
man could not be compelled to answer. It is bad enough to have a chronic
disease without publishing it to the world. All intelligent people, of
course, will be desirous of giving all useful information of a character
that cannot be used to their injury, but can be used for the benefit of
society at large.

If, however, the courts shall decide that the enumerators have the right
to ask these questions, and that everybody must answer them, I doubt
if the census will be finished for many years. There are hundreds and
thousands of people who delight in telling all about their diseases,
when they were attacked, what they have taken, how many doctors have
given them up to die, etc., and if the enumerators will stop to listen,
the census of 1890 will not be published until the next century.--The
World, New York, June 8, 1890.




THE AGNOSTIC CHRISTMAS


AGAIN we celebrate the victory of Light over Darkness, of the God of day
over the hosts of night. Again Samson is victorious over Delilah, and
Hercules triumphs once more over Omphale. In the embrace of Isis, Osiris
rises from the dead, and the scowling Typhon is defeated once more.
Again Apollo, with unerring aim, with his arrow from the quiver of
light, destroys the serpent of shadow. This is the festival of Thor,
of Baldur and of Prometheus. Again Buddha by a miracle escapes from the
tyrant of Madura, Zoroaster foils the King, Bacchus laughs at the rage
of Cadmus, and Chrishna eludes the tyrant.

This is the festival of the sun-god, and as such let its observance be
universal.

This is the great day of the first religion, the mother of all
religions--the worship of the sun.

Sun worship is not only the first, but the most natural and most
reasonable of all. And not only the most natural and the most
reasonable, but by far the most poetic, the most beautiful.

The sun is the god of benefits, of growth, of life, of warmth, of
happiness, of joy. The sun is the all-seeing, the all-pitying, the
all-loving.

This bright God knew no hatred, no malice, never sought for revenge.

All evil qualities were in the breast of the God of darkness, of shadow,
of night. And so I say again, this is the festival of Light. This is the
anniversary of the triumph of the Sun over the hosts of Darkness.

Let us all hope for the triumph of Light--of Right and Reason--for the
victory of Fact over Falsehood, of Science over Superstition.

And so hoping, let us celebrate the venerable festival of the Sun.--The
Journal, New York, December 25,1892.




SPIRITUALITY.


IF there is an abused word in our language, it is "spirituality."

It has been repeated over and over for several hundred years by pious
pretenders and snivelers as though it belonged exclusively to them.

In the early days of Christianity, the "spiritual" renounced the world
with all its duties and obligations. They deserted their wives and
children. They became hermits and dwelt in caves. They spent their
useless years in praying for their shriveled and worthless souls. They
were too "spiritual" to love women, to build homes and to labor for
children. They were too "spiritual" to earn their bread, so they became
beggars and stood by the highways of Life and held out their hands and
asked alms of Industry and Courage. They were too "spiritual" to be
merciful. They preached the dogma of eternal pain and gloried in "the
wrath to come." They were too "spiritual" to be civilized, so they
persecuted their fellow-men for expressing their honest thoughts. They
were so "spiritual" that they invented instruments of torture, founded
the Inquisition, appealed to the whip, the rack, the sword and the
fagot. They tore the flesh of their fellow-men with hooks of iron,
buried their neighbors alive, cut off their eyelids, dashed out the
brains of babes and cut off the breasts of mothers. These "spiritual"
wretches spent day and night on their knees, praying for their own
salvation and asking God to curse the best and noblest of the world.

John Calvin was intensely "spiritual" when he warmed his fleshless hands
at the flames that consumed Servetus.

John Knox was constrained by his "spirituality" to utter low and
loathsome calumnies against all women. All the witch-burners and
Quaker-maimers and mutilators were so "spiritual" that they constantly
looked heavenward and longed for the skies.

These lovers of God--these haters of men--looked upon the Greek marbles
as unclean, and denounced the glories of Art as the snares and pitfalls
of perdition.

These "spiritual" mendicants hated laughter and smiles and dimples, and
exhausted their diseased and polluted imaginations in the effort to make
love loathsome.

From almost every pulpit was heard the denunciation of all that adds
to the wealth, the joy and glory of life. It became the fashion for the
"spiritual" to malign every hope and passion that tends to humanize
and refine the heart. Man was denounced as totally depraved. Woman was
declared to be a perpetual temptation--her beauty a snare and her touch
pollution.

Even in our own time and country some of the ministers, no matter how
radical they claim to be, retain the aroma, the odor, or the smell of
the "spiritual."

They denounce some of the best and greatest--some of the benefactors
of the race--for having lived on the low plane of usefulness--and for
having had the pitiful ambition to make their fellows happy in this
world.

Thomas Paine was a groveling wretch because he devoted his life to the
preservation of the rights of man, and Voltaire lacked the "spiritual"
because he abolished torture in France and attacked, with the enthusiasm
of a divine madness, the monster that was endeavoring to drive the hope
of liberty from the heart of man.

Humboldt was not "spiritual" enough to repeat with closed eyes
the absurdities of superstition, but was so lost to all the "skyey
influences" that he was satisfied to add to the intellectual wealth of
the world.

Darwin lacked "spirituality," and in its place had nothing but
sincerity, patience, intelligence, the spirit of investigation and
the courage to give his honest conclusions to the world. He contented
himself with giving to his fellow-men the greatest and the sublimest
truths that man has spoken since lips have uttered speech.

But we are now told that these soldiers of science, these heroes of
liberty, these sculptors and painters, these singers of songs, these
composers of music, lack "spirituality" and after all were only common
clay.

This word "spirituality" is the fortress, the breastwork, the rifle-pit
of the Pharisee. It sustains the same relation to sincerity that Dutch
metal does to pure gold.

There seems to be something about a pulpit that poisons the
occupant--that changes his nature--that causes him to denounce what he
really loves and to laud with the fervor of insanity a joy that he
never felt--a rapture that never thrilled his soul. Hypnotized by his
surroundings, he unconsciously brings to market that which he supposes
the purchasers desire.

In every church, whether orthodox or radical, there are two parties--one
conservative, looking backward, one radical, looking forward, and
generally a minister "spiritual" enough to look both ways.

A minister who seems to be a philosopher on the street, or in the home
of a sensible man, cannot withstand the atmosphere of the pulpit.
The moment he stands behind the Bible cushion, like Bottom, he is
"translated" and the Titania of superstition "kisses his large, fair
ears."

Nothing is more amusing than to hear a clergyman denounce
worldliness--ask his hearers what it will profit them to build railways
and palaces and lose their own souls--inquire of the common folks
before him why they waste their precious years in following trades and
professions, in gathering treasures that moths corrupt and rust devours,
giving their days to the vulgar business of making money,--and then see
him take up a collection, knowing perfectly well that only the worldly,
the very people he has denounced, can by any possibility give a dollar.

"Spirituality" for the most part is a mask worn by idleness, arrogance
and greed.

Some people imagine that they are "spiritual" when they are sickly.

It may be well enough to ask: What is it to be really spiritual?

The spiritual man lives to his ideal. He endeavors to make others happy.
He does not despise the passions that have filled the world with art and
glory. He loves his wife and children--home and fireside. He cultivates
the amenities and refinements of life. He is the friend and champion of
the oppressed. His sympathies are with the poor and the suffering. He
attacks what he believes to be wrong, though defended by the many, and
he is willing to stand for the right against the world. He enjoys the
beautiful. In the presence of the highest creations of Art his eyes are
suffused with tears. When he listens to the great melodies, the divine
harmonies, he feels the sorrows and the raptures of death and love. He
is intensely human. He carries in his heart the burdens of the world.
He searches for the deeper meanings. He appreciates the harmonies of
conduct, the melody of a perfect life.

He loves his wife and children better than any god. He cares more for
the world he lives in than for any other. He tries to discharge the
duties of this life, to help those that he can reach. He believes in
being useful--in making money to feed and clothe and educate the ones he
loves--to assist the deserving and to support himself. He does not wish
to be a burden on others. He is just, generous and sincere.

Spirituality is all of this world. It is a child of this earth, born and
cradled here. It comes from no heaven, but it makes a heaven where it
is.

There is no possible connection between superstition and the spiritual,
or between theology and the spiritual.

The spiritually-minded man is a poet. If he does not write poetry,
he lives it. He is an artist. If he does not paint pictures or chisel
statues, he feels them, and their beauty softens his heart. He fills the
temple of his soul with all that is beautiful, and he worships at the
shrine of the Ideal.

In all the relations of life he is faithful and true. He asks for
nothing that he does not earn. He does not wish to be happy in heaven
if he must receive happiness as alms He does not rely on the goodness of
another. He is not ambitious to become a winged pauper.

Spirituality is the perfect health of the soul. It is noble, manly,
generous, brave, free-spoken, natural, superb.

Nothing is more sickening than the "spiritual" whine--the pretence
that crawls at first and talks about humility and then suddenly becomes
arrogant and says: "I am 'spiritual.' I hold in contempt the vulgar joys
of this life. You work and toil and build homes and sing songs and weave
your delicate robes. You love women and children and adorn yourselves.
You subdue the earth and dig for gold. You have your theatres, your
operas and all the luxuries of life; but I, beggar that I am, Pharisee
that I am, am your superior because I am 'spiritual.'"

Above all things, let us be sincere.--The Conservator, Philadelphia,
1891.




SUMTER'S GUN.


1861--April 12th--1891

FOR about three-quarters of a century the statesmen, that is to say, the
politicians, of the North and South', had been busy making compromises,
adopting constitutions and enacting laws; busy making speeches, framing
platforms and political pretences, to the end that liberty and slavery
might dwell in peace and friendship under the same flag.

Arrogance on one side, hypocrisy on the other.

Right apologized to Wrong for the sake of the Union.

The sources of justice were poisoned, and patriotism became the defender
of piracy. In the name of humanity mothers were robbed of their babes.

Thirty years ago to-day a shot was fired, and in a moment all the
promises, all the laws, all the constitutional amendments, and all
the idiotic and heartless decisions of courts, and all the speeches of
orators inspired by the hope of place and power, were blown into rags
and ravelings, pieces and patches.

The North and South had been masquerading as friends, and in a moment,
while the sound of that shot was ringing in their ears, they faced each
other as enemies.

The roar of that cannon announced the birth of a new epoch. The echoes
of that shot went out, not only over the bay of Charleston, but over the
hills, the prairies and forests of the continent.

These echoes said marvelous things and uttered prophecies that none were
wise enough to understand.

Who at that time had the slightest conception of the immediate future?
Who then was great enough to see the end? Who then was wise enough
to know that the echoes would be kept alive and repeated for years by
thousands and thousands of cannon, by millions of muskets, on the fields
of ruthless war?

At that time Abraham Lincoln, an Illinois lawyer, was barely a month in
the President's chair, and that shot made him the most commanding and
majestic figure of the nineteenth century--a figure that stands alone.

Who could have guessed the names of the heroes to be repeated by
countless lips before the echoes of that shot should have died away?

There was at that time a young man at Galena, silent, unobtrusive,
unknown; and yet, the moment that shot was fired he was destined to lead
the greatest host ever marshaled on a field of war, destined to receive
the final sword of the Rebellion.

There was another, in the Southwest, who heard one of the echoes of that
shot, and who afterward marched from Atlanta to the sea; and another,
far away by the Pacific, who also heard one of the echoes, and who
became one of the immortal three.

But, above all, the echoes were heard by millions of men and women in
the fields of unpaid toil, and they knew not the meaning, but felt that
they had heard a prophecy of freedom. And the echoes told of death
and glory for many thousands--of the agonies of women--the sobs of
orphans--the sighs of the imprisoned, and the glad shouts of the
delivered, the enfranchised, the redeemed.

They who fired that gun did not dream that they were giving liberty to
millions of people, including themselves, white as well as black, North
as well as South, and that before the echoes should die away, all the
shackles would be broken, all the constitutions and statutes of slavery
repealed, and all the compromises merged and lost in a great compact
made to preserve the liberties of all.




WHAT INFIDELS HAVE DONE.


ONE HUNDRED years after Christ had died suppose some one had asked a
Christian, What hospitals have you built? What asylums have you founded?
They would have said "None." Suppose three hundred years after the death
of Christ the same questions had been asked the Christian, he would have
said "None, not one." Two hundred years more and the answer would
have been the same. And at that time the Christian could have told the
questioner that the Mohammedans had built asylums before the Christians.
He could also have told him that there had been orphan asylums in China
for hundreds and hundreds of years, hospitals in India, and hospitals
for the sick at Athens.

Here it may be well enough to say that all hospitals and asylums are
not built for charity. They are built because people do not want to be
annoyed by the sick and the insane. If a sick man should come down the
street and sit upon your doorstep, what would you do with him? You
would have to take him into your house or leave him to suffer. Private
families do not wish to take the burden of the sick. Consequently,
in self-defence, hospitals are built so that any wanderer coming to a
house, dying, or suffering from any disease, may immediately be packed
off to a hospital and not become a burden upon private charity. The fact
that many diseases are contagious rendered hospitals necessary for the
preservation of the lives of the citizens. The same thing is true of the
asylums. People do not, as a rule, want to take into their families, all
the children who happen to have no fathers and mothers. So they endow
and build an asylum where those children can be sent--and where they
can be whipped according to law. Nobody wants an insane stranger in
his house. The consequence is, that the community, to get rid of these
people, to get rid of the trouble, build public institutions and send
them there.

Now, then, to come to the point, to answer the interrogatory often flung
at us from the pulpit, What institutions have Infidels built? In the
first place, there have not been many Infidels for many years and, as
a rule, a known Infidel cannot get very rich, for the reason that the
Christians are so forgiving and loving they boycott him. If the average
Infidel, freely stating his opinion, could get through the world
himself, for the last several hundred years, he has been in good luck.
But as a matter of fact there have been some Infidels who have done
some good, even from a Christian standpoint. The greatest charity ever
established in the United States by a man--not by a community to get rid
of a nuisance, but by a man who wished to do good and wished that
good to last after his death--is the Girard College in the city of
Philadelphia. Girard was an Infidel. He gained his first publicity by
going like a common person into the hospitals and taking care of those
suffering from contagious diseases--from cholera and smallpox. So there
is a man by the name of James Lick, an Infidel, who has given the finest
observatory ever given to the world. And it is a good thing for an
Infidel to increase the sight of men. The reason people are theologians
is because they cannot see. Mr. Lick has increased human vision, and
I can say right here that nothing has been seen through the telescope,
calculated to prove the astronomy of Joshua. Neither can you see with
that telescope a star that bears a Christian name. The reason is
that Christianity was opposed to astronomy. So astronomers took their
revenge, and now there is not one star that glitters in all the vast
firmament of the boundless heavens that has a Christian name. Mr.
Carnegie has been what they call a public-spirited man. He has given
millions of dollars for libraries and other institutions, and he
certainly is not an orthodox Christian.

Infidels, however, have done much better even than that. They have
increased the sum of human knowledge. John W. Draper, in his work on
"The Intellectual Development of Europe," has done more good to the
American people and to the civilized world than all the priests in it.
He was an Infidel. Buckle is another who has added to the sum of human
knowledge. Thomas Paine, an Infidel, did more for this country than any
other man who ever lived in it.

Most of the colleges in this country have, I admit, been founded
by Christians, and the money for their support has been donated by
Christians, but most of the colleges of this country have simply
classified ignorance, and I think the United States would be more
learned than it is to-day if there never had been a Christian college in
it. But whether Christians gave or Infidels gave has nothing to do with
the probability of the Jonah story or with the probability that the mark
on the dial went back ten degrees to prove that a little Jewish king was
not going to die of a boil. And if the Infidels are all stingy and the
Christians are all generous it does not even tend to prove that three
men were in a fiery furnace heated seven times hotter than was its wont
without even scorching their clothes.

The best college in this country--or, at least, for a long time the
best--was the institution founded by Ezra Cornell. That is a school
where people try to teach what they know instead of what they guess. Yet
Cornell University was attacked by every orthodox college in the United
States at the time it was founded, because they said it was without
religion.

Everybody knows that Christianity does not tend to generosity.
Christianity says: "Save your own soul, whether anybody else saves his
or not." Christianity says: "Let the great ship go down. You get into
the little life-boat of the gospel and paddle ashore, no matter what
becomes of the rest." Christianity says you must love God, or something
in the sky, better than you love your wife and children. And the
Christian, even when giving, expects to get a very large compound
interest in another world. The Infidel who gives, asks no return except
the joy that comes from relieving the wants of another.

Again the Christians, although they have built colleges, have built them
for the purpose of spreading their superstitions, and have poisoned the
minds of the world, while the Infidel teachers have filled the world
with light. Darwin did more for mankind than if he had built a thousand
hospitals. Voltaire did more than if he had built a thousand asylums for
the insane. He will prevent thousands from going insane that otherwise
might be driven into insanity by the "glad tidings of great joy."
Haeckel is filling the world with light.

I am perfectly willing that the results of the labors of Christians and
the labors of Infidels should be compared. Then let it be understood
that Infidels have been in this world but a very short time. A few years
ago there were hardly any. I can remember when I was the only Infidel in
the town where I lived. Give us time and we will build colleges in which
something will be taught that is of use. We hope to build temples that
will be dedicated to reason and common sense, and where every effort
will be made to reform mankind and make them better and better in this
world.

I am saying nothing against the charity of Christians; nothing against
any kindness or goodness. But I say the Christians, in my judgment, have
done more harm than they have done good. They may talk of the asylums
they have built, but they have not built asylums enough to hold the
people who have been driven insane by their teachings. Orthodox religion
has opposed liberty. It has opposed investigation and free thought. If
all the churches in Europe had been observatories, if the cathedrals had
been universities where facts were taught and where nature was studied,
if all the priests had been real teachers, this world would have been
far, far beyond what it is to-day.

There is an idea that Christianity is positive, and Infidelity is
negative. If this be so, then falsehood is positive and truth is
negative. What I contend is that Infidelity is a positive religion; that
Christianity is a negative religion. Christianity denies and Infidelity
admits. Infidelity stands by facts; it demonstrates by the conclusions
of the reason. Infidelity does all it can to develop the brain and the
heart of man. That is positive. Religion asks man to give up this
world for one he knows nothing about. That is negative. I stand by the
religion of reason. I stand by the dogmas of demonstration.




CRUELTY IN THE ELMIRA REFORMATORY.


IN my judgment, no human being was ever made better, nobler, by being
whipped or clubbed.

Mr. Brockway, according to his own testimony, is simply a savage. He
belongs to the Dark Ages--to the Inquisition, to the torture-chamber,
and he needs reforming more than any prisoner under his control. To
put any man within his power is in itself a crime. Mr. Brockway is a
believer in cruelty--an apostle of brutality. He beats and bruises flesh
to satisfy his conscience--his sense of duty. He wields the club himself
because he enjoys the agony he inflicts.

When a poor wretch, having reached the limit of endurance, submits or
becomes unconscious, he is regarded as reformed. During the remainder of
his term he trembles and obeys. But he is not reformed. In his heart is
the flame of hatred, the desire for revenge; and he returns to society
far worse than when he entered the prison.

Mr. Brockway should either be removed or locked up, and the Elmira
Reformatory should be superintended by some civilized man--some man with
brain enough to know, and heart enough to feel.

I do not believe that one brute, by whipping, beating and lacerating
the flesh of another, can reform him. The lash will neither develop the
brain nor cultivate the heart. There should be no bruising, no scarring
of the body in families, in schools, in reformatories, or prisons. A
civilized man does not believe in the methods of savagery. Brutality
has been tried for thousands of years and through all these years it has
been a failure.

Criminals have been flogged, mutilated and maimed, tortured in a
thousand ways, and the only effect was to demoralize, harden and
degrade society and increase the number of crimes. In the army and navy,
soldiers and sailors were flogged to death, and everywhere by church and
state the torture of the helpless was practiced and upheld.

Only a few years ago there were two hundred and twenty-three offences
punished with death in England. Those who wished to reform this savage
code were denounced as the enemies of morality and law. They were
regarded as weak and sentimental.

At last the English code was reformed through the efforts of men who
had brain and heart. But it is a significant fact that no bishop of
the Episcopal Church, sitting in the House of Lords, ever voted for the
repeal of one of those savage laws. Possibly this fact throws light
on the recent poetic and Christian declaration by Bishop Potter to the
effect that "there are certain criminals who can only be made to realize
through their hides the fact that the State has laws to which the
individual must be obedient."

This orthodox remark has the true apostolic ring, and is in perfect
accord with the history of the church. But it does not accord with the
intelligence and philanthropy of our time. Let us develop the brain by
education, the heart by kindness. Let us remember that criminals
are produced by conditions, and let us do what we can to change the
conditions and to reform the criminals.




LAW'S DELAY.


THE object of a trial is not to convict--neither is it to acquit. The
object is to ascertain the truth by legal testimony and in accordance
with law.

In this country we give the accused the benefit of all reasonable
doubts. We insist that his guilt shall be really established by
competent testimony.

We also allow the accused to take exceptions to the rulings of the judge
before whom he is tried, and to the verdict of the jury, and to have
these exceptions passed upon by a higher court.

We also insist that he shall be tried by an impartial jury, and that
before he can be found guilty all the jurors must unite in the verdict.

Some people, not on trial for any crime, object to our methods. They
say that time is wasted in getting an impartial jury; that more time is
wasted because appeals are allowed, and that by reason of insisting on a
strict compliance with law in all respects, trials sometimes linger for
years, and that in many instances the guilty escape.

No one, so far as I know, asks that men shall be tried by partial and
prejudiced jurors, or that judges shall be allowed to disregard the law
for the sake of securing convictions, or that verdicts shall be allowed
to stand unsupported by sufficient legal evidence. Yet they talk as
if they asked for these very things. We must remember that revenge is
always in haste, and that justice can always afford to wait until the
evidence is actually heard.

There should be no delay except that which is caused by taking the time
to find the truth. Without such delay courts become mobs, before which,
trials in a legal sense are impossible. It might be better, in a city
like New York, to have the grand jury in almost perpetual session,
so that a man charged with crime could be immediately indicted and
immediately tried. So, the highest court to which appeals are taken
should be in almost constant session, in order that all appeals might be
quickly decided.

But we do not wish to take away the right of appeal. That right tends to
civilize the trial judge, reduces to a minimum his arbitrary power, puts
his hatreds and passions in the keeping and control of his intelligence.
That right of appeal has an excellent effect on the jury, because they
know that their verdict may not be the last word. The appeal, where the
accused is guilty, does not take the sword from the State, but it is a
shield for the innocent.

In England there is no appeal. The trials are shorter, the judges more
arbitrary, the juries subservient, and the verdict often depends on the
prejudice of the judge. The judge knows that he has the last guess--that
he cannot be reviewed--and in the passion often engendered by the
conflict of trial he acts much like a wild beast.

The case of Mrs. Maybrick is exactly in point, and shows how dangerous
it is to clothe the trial judge with supreme power.

Without doubt there is in this country too much delay, and this, it
seems to me, can be avoided without putting the life or liberty of
innocent persons in peril. Take only such time as may be necessary to
give the accused a fair trial, before an impartial jury, under and in
accordance with the established forms of law, and to allow an appeal to
the highest court.

The State in which a criminal cannot have an impartial trial is not
civilized. People who demand the conviction of the accused without
regard to the forms of law are savages.

But there is another side to this question. Many people are losing
confidence in the idea that punishment reforms the convict, or that
capital punishment materially decreases capital crimes.

My own opinion is that ordinary criminals should, if possible, be
reformed, and that murderers and desperate wretches should be imprisoned
for life. I am inclined to believe that our prisons make more criminals
than they reform; that places like the Reformatory at Elmira plant and
cultivate the seeds of crime.

The State should never seek revenge; neither should it put in peril the
life or liberty of the accused for the sake of a hasty trial, or by the
denial of appeal.

In my judgment, defective as our criminal courts and methods are, they
are far better than the English.

Our judges are kinder, more humane; our juries nearer independent, and
our methods better calculated to ascertain the truth.




THE BIGOTRY OF COLLEGES.

     * A newspaper dispatch from Lawrence, Kansas, published
     yesterday, stated that Col. Robert O. Ingersoll had been
     invited by the law students of the Kansas State University
     to address them at the commencement exercises, and that the
     faculty council had objected and had invited Chauncey M.
     Depew instead.

     The dispatch also stared that the council had notified
     representatives of the law school that if they insisted on
     the great Agnostic speaking before the school, the faculty
     would take heroic measures to thwart their design.

     It was also stated that the law students had made it clearly
     understood that the lecture Ingersoll had been invited to
     deliver was to be on the subject of law, and that his views
     on religion, the Bible and the Deity were not to be alluded
     to, and they considered that the faculty council had
     "subjected them to an insult," and had gone out of its way,
     also, to affront Colonel Ingersoll without cause.

     Colonel Ingersoll, when seen yesterday and questioned about
     the matter, took it, as he does all things of that nature,
     philosophically and in a true manly spirit.

     Chauncey M. Depew was seen at his residence, No. 43 West
     Fifty-fourth Street, last night and asked if he had been
     invited to address the students of the Kansas University in
     the place of Colonel Ingersoll. He said he had not.

     "Would you go if you were invited?" he was asked.

     "No; I would not," he answered. "You see, I am so busy here;
     besides, my social and semi-political engagements are such
     that I would not have time to go to such a distant point,
     anyhow.

     "No, I do not care to express any opinion regarding the
     action of the faculty council of the Kansas University, but
     I consider Colonel Ingersoll one of the greatest intellects
     of the century, from whose teaching all can profit."--The
     Journal, New York, January 24, im.


UNIVERSITIES are naturally conservative. They know that if suspected of
being really scientific, orthodox Christians will keep their sons away,
so they pander to the superstitions of the times.

Most of the universities are exceedingly poor, and poverty is the
enemy of independence. Universities, like people, have the instinct of
self-preservation. The University of Kansas is like the rest.

The faculty of Cornell, upon precisely the same question, took exactly
the same action, and the faculty of the University of Missouri did
the same. These institutions must be the friends and defenders of
superstition.

The Vanderbilt College, or University of Tennessee, discharged Professor
Winchell because he differed with the author of Genesis on geology.

These colleges act as they must, and we should blame nobody. If Humboldt
and Darwin were now alive they would not be allowed to teach in these
institutions of "learning."

We need not find fault with the president and professors. They want
to keep their places. The probability is that they would like to do
better--that they desire to be free, and, if free, would, with all their
hearts, welcome the truth. Still, these universities seem to do good.
The minds of their students are developed to that degree, that they
naturally turn to me as the defender of their thoughts.

This gives me great hope for the future. The young, the growing, the
enthusiastic, are on my side. All the students who have selected me are
my friends, and I thank them with all my heart.




A YOUNG MAN'S CHANCES TO-DAY.

     * Col. Robert G. Ingersoll represents what is intellectually
     highest among the whole world's opponents of religion. He
     counts theology as the science of a superstition. He decries
     religion as it exists, and holds that the broadest thing a
     man, or all human nature, can do is to acknowledge ignorance
     when it cannot know. He accepts nothing on faith. He is the
     American who is forever asking, "Why?"--who demands a reason
     and material proof before believing.

     As Christianity's corner-stone is faith, he rejects
     Christianity, and argues that all men who are broad enough
     to know when to narrow their ideas down to fact or
     demonstrable theory must reject it. Believe as he does or
     not, all Americans must be interested in him. His mind is
     marvelous, his tongue is silvern, his logic is invincible--
     as logic.

     Col. Ingersoll is a shining example of the oft-quoted fact
     that, given mental ability, health and industry, a young man
     may make for himself whatever place in life he desires and
     is fitted to fill. His early advantages were limited, for
     his father, a Congregational minister whose field of labor
     often changed, was a man of far too small an income to send
     his sons to college. Whatever of mental training the young
     man had he was obliged to get by reason of his own exertion,
     and his splendid triumphs as an orator, and his solid
     achievements as a lawyer are all the result of his own
     efforts. The only help he had was that which is the common
     heritage of all American young men--the chance to fight even
     handed for success. It is not surprising, therefore, that
     Col. Ingersoll feels a deep interest in every bright young
     man of his acquaintance who is struggling manfully for the
     glittering prize so brilliantly won by the great Agnostic
     himself. He does not believe, however, that the young man
     who goes out mto the world nowadays to seek his fortune has
     so easy a battle to fight as had the young men of thirty
     years ago. In conversation with the writer Col. Ingersoll
     spoke earnestly upon this subject.

     Col. Ingersoll's views regarding the Bible and Christianity
     were not generally understood by the public for some time
     after he had become famous as an orator, although he  began
     to diverge from orthodoxy when quite young, and was as
     pronounced an Agnostic when he went into the army, as he is
     now.

     Col. Ingersoll is an inch less than six feet tall, and
     weighs ten more than two hundred pounds. He will be sixty-
     one next August, and his hair is snowy. His shoulders are
     broad and as straight as they were eighteen years ago when
     he electrified a people and place! his own name upon the
     list of a nation's greatest orators with his matchless
     "Plumed Knight" speech in nominating

     James G. Blaine for the presidency. His blue eyes look
     straight into yours when he speaks to you, and his sentences
     are punctuated by engaging little tricks of facial
     expression--now the brow is criss-crossed with the lines of
     a frown, sometimes quizzical and sometimes indignant--next,
     the smooth-shaven lips break into a curving smile, which may
     grow into a broad grin if the point just made were a
     humorous one, and this is quite likely to be followed by a
     look of sueh intense earnestness that you wonder if he will
     ever smile again. And all the time his eyes flash,
     illuminating, sometimes anticipatory, glances that add
     immensely to the clearness with which the thought he is
     expressing is set before you. He delights to tell a story,
     and he never tells any but good ones, but--and in this he is
     like Lincoln--he is apt to use his stories to drive some
     proposition home. This is almost invariably true, even when
     he sets out to spin a yarn for the story's simple sake. His
     mentality seems to be duplex, quadruplex, multiplex, if you
     please--and while his lips and tongue are effectively
     delivering the story, his wonderful brain is, seemingly,
     unconsciously applying the point of the story to the proving
     of a pet theory, and when the tale has been told the verbal
     application follows.

     His birthplace was Dresden, N. Y. His early boyhood was
     passed in New York State and his youth and young manhood in
     Illinois, Ohio and Wisconsin.

     His handgrasp is hearty and his manner and words are the
     very essence of straightforward directness. I called at his
     office once when the Colonel was closeted with a person who
     wished to retain him in a law case involving a good deal of
     money. After a bit I was told that I could see him, and as I
     entered he was saying: "The case can't be won, for you are
     in the wrong. I don't want it."

     "But," pleaded the would-be client, "It seems to me that a
     good deal can be done in such a case by the way it is
     handled before the jury, and I thought if you were to be the
     man I might get a verdict."

     "No, sir," was the reply, and the words fell like the lead
     of a plumb line; "I won't take it. Good morning, sir."

     It has been sometimes said, indulgently, of Col. Ingersoll
     that he is indolent, but no one can hold that view who is at
     all familiar with him or his work. As a matter of fact, his
     industry is phenomenal, though, indeed, it is not carried on
     after the fashion of less brainy men. When he has an
     important case ahead of him his devotion to the mastery of
     its details absorbs him at once and completely. It sometimes
     becomes necessary for him to take up a line of chemical
     inquiry entirely new to him; again, to elaborate
     genealogical researches are necessary; still again, it may
     be essential for him to thoroughly inform himself concerning
     hitherto uninvestigated local historical records. But
     whatever is needful to be studied he studies, and so
     thoroughly that his mind becomes saturated with the
     knowledge required. And once acquired no sort of information
     ever leaves him, for he has a memory quite as marvelous as
     any other of his altogether marvelous characteristics.

     It is the same when he has an address to prepare. Every
     authority that can be consulted upon the subject to be
     treated in the address, is consulted, and often the material
     that suggests some of the most telling points is one which
     no one but Ingersoll himself would think of referring to.
     Here again his wonderful memory stands him in good stead for
     he has packed away within the convolutions of his brain a
     lot of facts that bear upon almost every conceivable branch
     of human thought or investigation.

     His memory is quite as retentive of the features of a man he
     has seen as of other matters; it retains voices also, as a
     war time friend of his discovered last summer. It was a busy
     day with the Colonel, who had given instructions to his
     office boy that under no circumstances was he to be
     disturbed; so when his old friend called he was told that
     Col. Ingersoll could not see him "But," said the visitor: "I
     must see him. I haven't seen him for twenty years; I am
     going out of town this afternoon, and I wouldn't miss
     talking with him for a few minutes for a good deal of
     money."

     "Well," said the boy, "he wasn't to be disturbed by
     anybody."

     At this moment the door of the Colonel's private office
     opened, and the Colonel's portly form appeared upon the
     scene.

     "Why, Maj. Blank," he said, "come in. I did tell the boy I
     wouldn't see anybody, but you are more important than the
     biggest law case in the world."

     The Colonel's memory had retained the sound of the major's
     voice, and because of that, the latter was not obliged to
     leave New York without seeing and renewing his old
     acquaintance.

     Col. Ingersoll's retorts are as quick as a flash-light and
     as searching. One of them was so startling and so effective
     as to give a certain famous long drawn out railroad suit the
     nickname. "The Ananias and Sapphira ease." Ingersoll was
     speaking and had made certain statements highly damaging to
     the other side, in such a way as to thoroughly anger a
     member of the opposing counsel, who suddenly interrupted the
     speaker with the abrupt and sarcastic remark:

     "I suppose the Colonel, in the nature of things, never heard
     of the story of Ananias ana Sapphira."

     There were those present who expected to witness an angry
     outburst on the part of Ingersoll in response to this plain
     implication that his statement had not the quality of
     veracity, but they were disappointed. Ingersoll didn't even
     get angry. He turned slightly, fixed his limpid blue eyes
     upon the speaker, and looked cherubically. Then he gently
     drawled out.

     "Oh, yes, I have, yes, I have. And I've watched the
     gentleman who has just spoken all through this case with a
     curious Interest. I've been expecting every once in a while
     to see him drop dead, but he seems to be all right down to
     the present moment."

     Ingersoll never gets angry when he is interrupted, even if
     it is in the middle of an address or a lecture. A man
     interrupted him in Cincinnati once, cutting right into one
     of the lecturer's most resonant periods with a yell:

     "That's a lie. Bob lngersoll, and you know it."

     The audience was in an uproar in an instant, and cries of
     "Put him out!" "Throw him down stairs!" and the like were
     heard from all parts of the house. Ingersoll stopped talking
     for a moment, and held up his hands, smiling.

     "Don't hurt the man," he said. "He thinks he is right. But
     let me explain this thing for his especial benefit."

     Then he reasoned the matter out in language so simple and
     plain that no one of any intelligence whatever could fail to
     comprehend. The man was not ejected, but sat through the
     entire address, and at the close asked the privilege of
     begging the lecturer's pardon.

     Like most men of genius, Colonel lngersoll is a passionate
     lover of music, and the harmonies of Wagner seem to him to
     be the very acme of musical expression....

     Notwithstanding his thoroughly heretical beliefs or lack of
     beliefs, or, as he would say, because of them, Colonel
     lngersoll is a very tender-hearted man. No one has ever made
     so strong an argument against vivisection in the alleged
     interests of science as lngersoll did in a speech a few
     years ago. To the presentation of his views against the
     refinements of scientific cruelty he brought his most vivid
     imagination, his most careful thought and his most
     impassioned oratory.

     Colonel Ingersoll's popularity with those who know him is
     proverbial. The clerks in his offices not only admire him
     for his ability and his achievements, but they esteem him
     for his kindliness of heart and his invariable courtesy in
     his intercourse with them. His offices are located in one of
     the buildings devoted to corporations and professional men
     on the lower part of Nassau street and consist of three
     rooms. The one used by the head of the firm is farthest from
     the entrance. All are furnished in solid black walnut. In
     the Colonel's room there is a picture of his loved brother
     Ebon, and hanging below the frame thereof is the tin sign
     that the two brothers hung out for a shingle when they went
     into the law business in Peoria. There are also pictures of
     a judge or two. The desks in all the rooms are littered with
     papers. Books are piled to the ceiling. Everywhere there is
     an air of personal freedom. There is no servility either to
     clients or the head of the business, but there is everywhere
     an informal courtesy somewhat akin to that which is born of
     a fueling of great comradeship.

     Of the Colonel's ideal home life the world has often been
     told. He lives during the winter at his town house in Fifth
     Avenue; in the summer at Dobbs Ferry, a charming place a few
     miles up the Hudson from New York.--Boston Herald, July,
     1894.


A FEW years ago there were many thousand miles of railroads to be built,
a great many towns and cities to be located, constructed and filled;
vast areas of uncultivated land were waiting for the plow, vast forests
the axe, and thousands of mines were longing to be opened. In those days
every young man of energy and industry had a future. The professions
were not overcrowded; there were more patients than doctors, more
litigants than lawyers, more buyers of goods than merchants. The young
man of that time who was raised on a farm got a little education, taught
school, read law or medicine--some of the weaker ones read theology--and
there seemed to be plenty of room, plenty of avenues to success and
distinction.

So, too, a few years ago a political life was considered honorable,
and so in politics there were many great careers. So, hundreds of towns
wanted newspapers, and in each of those towns there was an opening for
some energetic young man. At that time the plant cost but little; a few
dollars purchased the press--the young publisher could get the paper
stock on credit.

Now the railroads have all been built; the canals are finished; the
cities have been located; the outside property has been cut into lots,
and sold and mortgaged many times over. Now it requires great capital
to go into business. The individual is counting for less and less; the
corporation, the trust, for more and more. Now a great merchant employs
hundreds of clerks; a few years ago most of those now clerks would have
been merchants. And so it seems to be in nearly every department of
life. Of course, I do not know what inventions may leap from the brains
of the future; there may be millions and millions of fortunes yet to be
made in that direction, but of that I am not speaking.

So, I think that a few years ago the chances were far more numerous and
favorable to young men who wished to make a name for themselves, and to
succeed in some department of human energy than now.

In savage life a living is very easy to get. Most any savage can hunt
or fish; consequently there are few failures. But in civilized life
competition becomes stronger and sharper; consequently, the percentage
of failures increases, and this seems to be the law. The individual is
constantly counting for less. It may be that, on the average, people
live better than they did formerly, that they have more to eat, drink
and wear; but the individual horizon has lessened; it is not so wide and
cloudless as formerly. So I say that the chances for great fortunes, for
great success, are growing less and less.

I think a young man should do that which is easiest for him to do,
provided there is an opportunity; if there is none, then he should
take the next. The first object of every young man should be to be
self-supporting, no matter in what direction--be independent. He should
avoid being a clerk and he should avoid giving his future into the hands
of any one person. He should endeavor to get a business in which the
community will be his patron, and whether he is to be a lawyer, a doctor
or a day-laborer depends on how much he has mixed mind with muscle.

If a young man imagines that he has an aptitude for public
speaking--that is, if he has a great desire to make his ideas known to
the world--the probability is that the desire will choose the way, time
and place for him to make the effort.

If he really has something to say, there will be plenty to listen. If he
is so carried away with his subject, is so in earnest that he becomes an
instrumentality of his thought--so that he is forgotten by himself; so
that he cares neither for applause nor censure--simply caring to present
his thoughts in the highest and best and most comprehensive way, the
probability is that he will be an orator.

I think oratory is something that cannot be taught. Undoubtedly a man
can learn to be a fair talker. He can by practice learn to present his
ideas consecutively, clearly and in what you may call "form," but there
is as much difference between this and an oration as there is between a
skeleton and a living human being clad in sensitive, throbbing flesh.

There are millions of skeleton makers, millions of people who can
express what may be called "the bones" of a discourse, but not one in a
million who can clothe these bones.

You can no more teach a man to be an orator than you can teach him to be
an artist or a poet of the first class. When you teach him, there is the
same difference between the man who is taught, and the man who is what
he is by virtue of a natural aptitude, that there is between a pump
and a spring--between a canal and a river--between April rain and
water-works. It is a question of capacity and feeling--not of education.
There are some things that you can tell an orator not to do. For
instance, he should never drink water while talking, because the
interest is broken, and for the moment he loses control of his audience.
He should never look at his watch for the same reason. He should never
talk about himself. He should never deal in personalities. He should
never tell long stories, and if he tells any story he should never say
that it is a true story, and that he knew the parties. This makes it a
question of veracity instead of a question of art. He should never clog
his discourse with details. He should never dwell upon particulars--he
should touch universals, because the great truths are for all time.

If he wants to know something, if he wishes to feel something, let him
read Shakespeare. Let him listen to the music of Wagner, of Beethoven,
or Schubert. If he wishes to express himself in the highest and most
perfect form, let him become familiar with the great paintings of the
world--with the great statues--all these will lend grace, will give
movement and passion and rhythm to his words. A great orator puts into
his speech the perfume, the feelings, the intensity of all the great and
beautiful and marvelous things that he has seen and heard and felt. An
orator must be a poet, a metaphysician, a logician--and above all, must
have sympathy with all.




SCIENCE AND SENTIMENT.

IT was thought at one time by many that science would do away with
poetry--that it was the enemy of the imagination. We know now that is
not true. We know that science goes hand in hand with imagination. We
know that it is in the highest degree poetic and that the old ideas once
considered so beautiful are flat and stale. Compare Kepler's laws with
the old Greek idea that the planets were boosted or pushed by angels.
The more we know, the more beauty, the more poetry we find. Ignorance is
not the mother of the poetic or artistic.

So, some people imagine that science will do away with sentiment. In my
judgment, science will not only increase sentiment but sense.

A person will be attracted to another for a thousand reasons, and why
a person is attracted to another, may, and in some degree will, depend
upon the intellectual, artistic and ethical development of each.

The handsomest girl in Zululand might not be attractive to Herbert
Spencer, and the fairest girl in England might not be able to hasten the
pulse of a Choctaw brave. This does not prove that there is any lack
of sentiment. Men are influenced according to their capacity, their
temperament, their knowledge.

Some men fall in love with a small waist, an arched instep or curly
hair, without the slightest regard to mind or muscle. This we call
sentiment.

Now, educate such men, develop their brains, enlarge their intellectual
horizon, teach them something of the laws of health, and then they may
fall in love with women because they are developed grandly in body and
mind. The sentiment is still there--still controls--but back of the
sentiment is science.

Sentiment can never be destroyed, and love will forever rule the human
race.

Thousands, millions of people fear that science will destroy not only
poetry, not only sentiment, but religion. This fear is idiotic. Science
will destroy superstition, but it will not injure true religion. Science
is the foundation of real religion. Science teaches us the consequences
of actions, the rights and duties of all. Without science there can be
no real religion.

Only those who live on the labor of the ignorant are the enemies of
science. Real love and real religion are in no danger from science. The
more we know the safer all good things are.

Do I think that the marriage of the sickly and diseased ought to be
prevented by law?

I have not much confidence in law--in law that I know cannot be carried
out. The poor, the sickly, the diseased, as long as they are ignorant,
will marry and help fill the world with wretchedness and want.

We must rely on education instead of legislation.

We must teach the consequences of actions. We must show the sickly and
diseased what their children will be. We must preach the gospel of the
body. I believe the time will come when the public thought will be so
great and grand that it will be looked upon as infamous to perpetuate
disease--to leave a legacy of agony.

I believe the time will come when men will refuse to fill the future
with consumption and insanity. Yes, we shall study ourselves. We shall
understand the conditions of health and then we shall say: We are under
obligation to put the flags of health in the cheeks of our children.

Even if I should get to heaven and have a harp, I know that I could
not bear to see my descendants still on the earth, diseased, deformed,
crazed--all suffering the penalties of my ignorance. Let us have more
science and more sentiment--more knowledge and more conscience--more
liberty and more love.




SOWING AND REAPING.


I HAVE read the sermon on "Sowing and Reaping," and I now understand Mr.
Moody better than I did before. The other day, in New York, Mr. Moody
said that he implicitly believed the story of Jonah and really thought
that he was in the fish for three days.

When I read it I was surprised that a man living in the century of
Humboldt, Darwin, Huxley, Spencer and Haeckel, should believe such an
absurd and idiotic story.

Now I understand the whole thing. I can account for the amazing
credulity of this man. Mr. Moody never read one of my lectures. That
accounts for it all, and no wonder that he is a hundred years behind the
times. He never read one of my lectures; that is a perfect explanation.

Poor man! He has no idea of what he has lost. He has been living on
miracles and mistakes, on falsehood and foolishness, stuffing his mind
with absurdities when he could have had truth, facts and good, sound
sense.

Poor man!

Probably Mr. Moody has never read one word of Darwin and so he still
believes in the Garden of Eden and the talking snake and really thinks
that Jehovah took some mud, moulded the form of a man, breathed in its
nostrils, stood it up and called it Adam, and that he then took one
of Adam's ribs and some more mud and manufactured Eve. Probably he has
never read a word written by any great geologist and consequently still
believes in the story of the flood. Knowing nothing of astronomy, he
still thinks that Joshua stopped the sun.

Poor man! He has neglected Spencer and has no idea of evolution. He
thinks that man has, through all the ages, degenerated, the first pair
having been perfect. He does not believe that man came from lower forms
and has gradually journeyed upward.

He really thinks that the Devil outwitted God and vaccinated the human
race with the virus of total depravity.

Poor man!

He knows nothing of the great scientists--of the great thinkers, of the
emancipators of the human race; knows nothing of Spinoza, of Voltaire,
of Draper, Buckle, of Paine or Renan.

Mr. Moody ought to read something besides the Bible--ought to find
out what the really intelligent have thought. He ought to get some
new ideas--a few facts--and I think that, after he did so, he would be
astonished to find how ignorant and foolish he had been. He is a good
man. His heart is fairly good, but his head is almost useless.

The trouble with this sermon, "Sowing and Reaping," is that he
contradicts it. I believe that a man must reap what he sows, that every
human being must bear the natural consequences of his acts. Actions are
good or bad according to their consequences. That is my doctrine.

There is no forgiveness in nature. But Mr. Moody tells us that a man may
sow thistles and gather figs, that having acted like a fiend tor seventy
years, he can, between his last dose of medicine and his last breath,
repent; that he can be washed clean by the blood of the lamb, and that
myriads of angels will carry his soul to heaven--in other words, that
this man will not reap what he sowed, but what Christ sowed, that this
man's thistles will be changed to figs.

This doctrine, to my mind, is not only absurd, but dishonest and
corrupting.

This is one of the absurdities in Mr. Moody's theology. The other is
that a man can justly be damned for the sin of another.

Nothing can exceed the foolishness of these two ideas--first: "Man can
be justly punished forever for the sin of Adam." Second: "Man can be
justly rewarded with eternal joy for the goodness of Christ."

Yet the man who believes this, preaches a sermon in which he says that
a man must reap what he sows. Orthodox Christians teach exactly the
opposite. They teach that no matter what a man sows, no matter how
wicked his life has been, that he can by repentance change the crop.
That all his sins shall be forgotten and that only the goodness of
Christ will be remembered.

Let us see how this works:

Mr. A. has lived a good and useful life, kept his contracts, paid his
debts, educated his children, loved his wife and made his home a heaven,
but he did not believe in the inspiration of Mr. Moody's Bible. He died
and his soul was sent to hell. Mr. Moody says that as a man sows so
shall he reap.

Mr. B. lived a useless and wicked life. By his cruelty he drove his wife
to insanity, his children became vagrants and beggars, his home was a
perfect hell, he committed many crimes, he was a thief, a burglar, a
murderer. A few minutes before he was hanged he got religion and his
soul went from the scaffold to heaven. And yet Mr. Moody says that as a
man sows so shall he reap.

Mr. Moody ought to have a little philosophy--a little good sense.

So Mr. Moody says that only in this life can a man secure the reward of
repentance.

Just before a man dies, God loves him--loves him as a mother loves her
babe--but a moment after he dies, he sends his soul to hell. In the
other world nothing can be done to reform him. The society of God and
the angels can have no good effect. Nobody can be made better in heaven.
This world is the only place where reform is possible. Here, surrounded
by the wicked in the midst of temptations, in the darkness of ignorance,
a human being may reform if he is fortunate enough to hear the words
of some revival preacher, but when he goes before his maker--before the
Trinity--he has no chance. God can do nothing for his soul except to
send it to hell.

This shows that the power for good is confined to people in this world
and that in the next world God can do nothing to reform his children.
This is theology. This is what they call "Tidings of great joy."

Every orthodox creed is savage, ignorant and idiotic.

In the orthodox heaven there is no mercy, no pity. In the orthodox hell
there is no hope, no reform. God is an eternal jailer, an everlasting
turnkey.

And yet Christians now say that while there may be no fire in hell--no
actual flames--yet the lost souls will feel forever the tortures of
conscience.

What will conscience trouble the people in hell about? They tell us that
they will remember their sins.

Well, what about the souls in heaven? They committed awful sins, they
made their fellow-men unhappy. They took the lives of others--sent many
to eternal torment. Will they have no conscience? Is hell the only place
where souls regret the evil they have done? Have the angels no regret,
no remorse, no conscience?

If this be so, heaven must be somewhat worse than hell.

In old times, if people wanted to know anything they asked the preacher.
Now they do if they don't.

The Bible has, with intelligent men, lost its authority.

The miracles are now regarded by sensible people as the spawn of
ignorance and credulity. On every hand people are looking for facts--for
truth--and all religions are taking their places in the museum of myths.

Yes, the people are becoming civilized, and so they are putting out the
fires of hell. They are ceasing to believe in a God who seeks eternal
revenge.

The people are becoming sensible. They are asking for evidence. They
care but little for the winged phantoms of the air--for the ghosts and
devils and supposed gods. The people are anxious to be happy here and
they want a little heaven in this life.

Theology is a curse. Science is a blessing. We do not need preachers,
but teachers; not priests, but thinkers; not churches, but schools; not
steeples, but observatories. We want knowledge.

Let us hope that Mr. Moody will read some really useful books.




SHOULD INFIDELS SEND THEIR CHILDREN TO SUNDAY SCHOOL?

SHOULD parents, who are Infidels, unbelievers or Atheists, send their
children to Sunday schools and churches to give them the benefit of
Christian education?

Parents who do not believe the Bible to be an inspired book should
not teach their children that it is. They should be absolutely honest.
Hypocrisy is not a virtue, and, as a rule, lies are less valuable than
facts.

An unbeliever should not allow the mind of his child to be deformed,
stunted and shriveled by superstition. He should not allow the child's
imagination to be polluted. Nothing is more outrageous than to take
advantage of the helplessness of childhood to sow in the brain the seeds
of falsehoods, to imprison the soul in the dungeon of Fear, to teach
dimpled infancy the infamous dogma of eternal pain--filling life with
the glow and glare of hell.

No unbeliever should allow his child to be tortured in the orthodox
inquisitions. He should defend the mind from attack as he would the
body. He should recognize the rights of the soul. In the orthodox Sunday
schools, children are taught that it is a duty to believe--that evidence
is not essential--that faith is independent of facts and that religion
is superior to reason. They are taught not to use their natural
sense--not to tell what they really think--not to entertain a doubt--not
to ask wicked questions, but to accept and believe what their teachers
say. In this way the minds of the children are invaded, corrupted and
conquered. Would an educated man send his child to a school in which
Newton's statement in regard to the attraction of gravitation was
denied--in which the law of falling bodies, as given by Galileo, was
ridiculed--Kepler's three laws declared to be idiotic, and the rotary
motion of the earth held to be utterly absurd?

Why then should an intelligent man allow his child to be taught the
geology and astronomy of the Bible? Children should be taught to seek
for the truth--to be honest, kind, generous, merciful and just. They
should be taught to love liberty and to live to the ideal.

Why then should an unbeliever, an Infidel, send his child to an orthodox
Sunday school where he is taught that he has no right to seek for the
truth--no right to be mentally honest, and that he will be damned for
an honest doubt--where he is taught that God was ferocious,
revengeful, heartless as a wild beast--that he drowned millions of his
children--that he ordered wars of extermination and told his soldiers
to kill gray-haired and trembling age, mothers and children, and to
assassinate with the sword of war the babes unborn?

Why should an unbeliever in the Bible send his child to an orthodox
Sunday school where he is taught that God was in favor of slavery
and told the Jews to buy of the heathen and that they should be their
bondmen and bondwomen forever; where he is taught that God upheld
polygamy and the degradation of women?

Why should an unbeliever, who believes in the uniformity of Nature, in
the unbroken and unbreakable chain of cause and effect, allow his child
to be taught that miracles have been performed; that men have gone
bodily to heaven; that millions have been miraculously fed with manna
and quails; that fire has refused to burn clothes and flesh of men; that
iron has been made to float; that the earth and moon have been stopped
and that the earth has not only been stopped, but made to turn the other
way; that devils inhabit the bodies of men and women; that diseases have
been cured with words, and that the dead, with a touch, have been made
to live again?

The thoughtful man knows that there is not the slightest evidence that
these miracles ever were performed. Why should he allow his children to
be stuffed with these foolish and impossible falsehoods? Why should
he give his lambs to the care and keeping of the wolves and hyenas of
superstition?

Children should be taught only what somebody knows. Guesses should not
be palmed off on them as demonstrated facts. If a Christian lived in
Constantinople he would not send his children to the mosque to be taught
that Mohammed was a prophet of God and that the Koran is an inspired
book. Why? Because he does not believe in Mohammed or the Koran. That is
reason enough. So, an Agnostic, living in New York, should not allow his
children to be taught that the Bible is an inspired book. I use the word
"Agnostic" because I prefer it to the word Atheist. As a matter of fact,
no one knows that God exists and no one knows that God does not exist.
To my mind there is no evidence that God exists--that this world is
governed by a being of infinite goodness, wisdom and power, but I do
not pretend to know. What I insist upon is that children should not be
poisoned--should not be taken advantage of--that they should be treated
fairly, honestly--that they should be allowed to develop from the inside
instead of being crammed from the outside--that they should be taught
to reason, not to believe--to think, to investigate and to use their
senses, their minds.

Would a Catholic send his children to a school to be taught that
Catholicism is superstition and that Science is the only savior of
mankind?

Why then should a free and sensible believer in Science, in the
naturalness of the universe, send his child to a Catholic school?

Nothing could be more irrational, foolish and absurd.

My advice to all Agnostics is to keep their children from the orthodox
Sunday schools, from the orthodox churches, from the poison of the
pulpits.

Teach your children the facts you know. If you do not know, say so. Be
as honest as you are ignorant. Do all you can to develop their minds, to
the end that they may live useful and happy lives.

Strangle the serpent of superstition that crawls and hisses about
the cradle. Keep your children from the augurs, the soothsayers, the
medicine-men, the priests of the supernatural. Tell them that all
religions have been made by folks and that all the "sacred books" were
written by ignorant men.

Teach them that the world is natural. Teach them to be absolutely
honest. Do not send them where they will contract diseases of the
mind--the leprosy of the soul. Let us do all we can to make them
intelligent.




WHAT WOULD YOU SUBSTITUTE FOR THE BIBLE AS A MORAL GUIDE?

     * Written for The Boston Investigator.


YOU ask me what I would "substitute for the Bible as a moral guide.".

I know that many people regard the Bible as the only moral guide
and believe that in that book only can be found the true and perfect
standard of morality.

There are many good precepts, many wise sayings and many good
regulations and laws in the Bible, and these are mingled with bad
precepts, with foolish sayings, with absurd rules and cruel laws.

But we must remember that the Bible is a collection of many books
written centuries apart, and that it in part represents the growth and
tells in part the history of a people. We must also remember that the
writers treat of many subjects. Many of these writers have nothing to
say about right or wrong, about vice or virtue.

The book of Genesis has nothing about morality. There is not a line in
it calculated to shed light on the path of conduct. No one can call that
book a moral guide. It is made up of myth and miracle, of tradition and
legend.

In Exodus we have an account of the manner in which Jehovah delivered
the Jews from Egyptian bondage.

We now know that the Jews were never enslaved by the Egyptians; that the
entire story is a fiction. We know this, because there is not found in
Hebrew a word of Egyptian origin, and there is not found in the language
of the Egyptians a word of Hebrew origin. This being so, we know that
the Hebrews and Egyptians could not have lived together for hundreds of
years.

Certainly Exodus was not written to teach morality. In that book you
cannot find one word against human slavery. As a matter of fact, Jehovah
was a believer in that institution.

The killing of cattle with disease and hail, the murder of the
first-born, so that in every house was death, because the king refused
to let the Hebrews go, certainly was not moral; it was fiendish. The
writer of that book regarded all the people of Egypt, their children,
their flocks and herds, as the property of Pharaoh, and these people and
these cattle were killed, not because they had done anything wrong, but
simply for the purpose of punishing the king. Is it possible to get any
morality out of this history?

All the laws found in Exodus, including the Ten Commandments, so far as
they are really good and sensible, were at that time in force among all
the peoples of the world.

Murder is, and always was, a crime, and always will be, as long as a
majority of people object to being murdered.

Industry always has been and always will be the enemy of larceny.

The nature of man is such that he admires the teller of truth and
despises the liar. Among all tribes, among all people, truth-telling has
been considered a virtue and false swearing or false speaking a vice.

The love of parents for children is natural, and this love is found
among all the animals that live. So the love of children for parents is
natural, and was not and cannot be created by law. Love does not spring
from a sense of duty, nor does it bow in obedience to commands.

So men and women are not virtuous because of anything in books or
creeds.

All the Ten Commandments that are good were old, were the result of
experience. The commandments that were original with Jehovah were
foolish.

The worship of "any other God" could not have been worse than the
worship of Jehovah, and nothing could have been more absurd than the
sacredness of the Sabbath.

If commandments had been given against slavery and polygamy, against
wars of invasion and extermination, against religious persecution in all
its forms, so that the world could be free, so that the brain might be
developed and the heart civilized, then we might, with propriety, call
such commandments a moral guide.

Before we can truthfully say that the Ten Commandments constitute a
moral guide, we must add and subtract. We must throw away some, and
write others in their places.

The commandments that have a known application here, in this world, and
treat of human obligations are good, the others have no basis in fact,
or experience.

Many of the regulations found in Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers and
Deuteronomy, are good. Many are absurd and cruel.

The entire ceremonial of worship is insane.

Most of the punishment for violations of laws are un-philosophic and
brutal.... The fact is that the Pentateuch upholds nearly all crimes,
and to call it a moral guide is as absurd as to say that it is merciful
or true.

Nothing of a moral nature can be found in Joshua or Judges. These books
are filled with crimes, with massacres and murders. They are about the
same as the real history of the Apache Indians.

The story of Ruth is not particularly moral.

In first and second Samuel there is not one word calculated to develop
the brain or conscience.

Jehovah murdered seventy thousand Jews because David took a census of
the people. David, according to the account, was the guilty one, but
only the innocent were killed.

In first and second Kings can be found nothing of ethical value. All
the kings who refused to obey the priests were denounced, and all the
crowned wretches who assisted the priests, were declared to be the
favorites of Jehovah. In these books there cannot be found one word in
favor of liberty.

There are some good Psalms, and there are some that are infamous. Most
of these Psalms are selfish. Many of them, are passionate appeals for
revenge.

The story of Job shocks the heart of every good man. In this book there
is some poetry, some pathos, and some philosophy, but the story of this
drama called Job, is heartless to the last degree. The children of
Job are murdered to settle a little wager between God and the Devil.
Afterward, Job having remained firm, other children are given in the
place of the murdered ones. Nothing, however, is done for the children
who were murdered.

The book of Esther is utterly absurd, and the only redeeming feature in
the book is that the name of Jehovah is not mentioned.

I like the Song of Solomon because it tells of human love, and that is
something I can understand. That book in my judgment, is worth all the
ones that go before it, and is a far better moral guide.

There are some wise and merciful Proverbs. Some are selfish and some are
flat and commonplace.

I like the book of Ecclesiastes because there you find some sense, some
poetry, and some philosophy. Take away the interpolations and it is a
good book.

Of course there is nothing in Nehemiah or Ezra to make men better,
nothing in Jeremiah or Lamentations calculated to lessen vice, and only
a few passages in Isaiah that can be used in a good cause.

In Ezekiel and Daniel we find only ravings of the insane.

In some of the minor prophets there is now and then a good verse, now
and then an elevated thought.

You can, by selecting passages from different books, make a very good
creed, and by selecting passages from different books, you can make a
very bad creed.

The trouble is that the spirit of the Old Testament, its disposition,
its temperament, is bad, selfish and cruel. The most fiendish things are
commanded, commended and applauded.

The stories that are told of Joseph, of Elisha, of Daniel and Gideon,
and of many others, are hideous; hellish.

On the whole, the Old Testament cannot be considered a moral guide.

Jehovah was not a moral God. He had all the vices, and he lacked all the
virtues. He generally carried out his threats, but he never faithfully
kept a promise.

At the same time, we must remember that the Old Testament is a natural
production, that it was written by savages who were slowly crawling
toward the light. We must give them credit for the noble things they
said, and we must be charitable enough to excuse their faults and even
their crimes.

I know that many Christians regard the Old Testament as the foundation
and the New as the superstructure, and while many admit that there are
faults and mistakes in the Old Testament, they insist that the New is
the flower and perfect fruit.

I admit that there are many good things in the New Testament, and if we
take from that book the dogmas of eternal pain, of infinite revenge, of
the atonement, of human sacrifice, of the necessity of shedding blood;
if we throw away the doctrine of non-resistance, of loving enemies,
the idea that prosperity is the result of wickedness, that poverty is a
preparation for Paradise, if we throw all these away and take the good,
sensible passages, applicable to conduct, then we can make a fairly good
moral guide,--narrow, but moral.

Of course, many important things would be left out. You would have
nothing about human rights, nothing in favor of the family, nothing for
education, nothing for investigation, for thought and reason, but still
you would have a fairly good moral guide.

On the other hand, if you would take the foolish passages, the extreme
ones, you could make a creed that would satisfy an insane asylum.

If you take the cruel passages, the verses that inculcate eternal
hatred, verses that writhe and hiss like serpents, you can make a creed
that would shock the heart of a hyena.

It may be that no book contains better passages than the New Testament,
but certainly no book contains worse.

Below the blossom of love you find the thorn of hatred; on the lips that
kiss, you find the poison of the cobra.

The Bible is not a moral guide.

Any man who follows faithfully all its teachings is an enemy of society
and will probably end his days in a prison or an asylum.

What is morality?

In this world we need certain things. We have many wants. We are exposed
to many dangers. We need food, fuel, raiment and shelter, and besides
these wants, there is, what may be called, the hunger of the mind.

We are conditioned beings, and our happiness depends upon conditions.
There are certain things that diminish, certain things that increase,
well-being. There are certain things that destroy and there are others
that preserve.

Happiness, including its highest forms, is after all the only good, and
everything, the result of which is to produce or secure happiness, is
good, that is to say, moral. Everything that destroys or diminishes
well-being is bad, that is to say, immoral. In other words, all that is
good is moral, and all that is bad is immoral.

What then is, or can be called, a moral guide? The shortest possible
answer is one word: Intelligence.

We want the experience of mankind, the true history of the race. We want
the history of intellectual development, of the growth of the ethical,
of the idea of justice, of conscience, of charity, of self-denial. We
want to know the paths and roads that have been traveled by the human
mind.

These facts in general, these histories in outline, the results reached,
the conclusions formed, the principles evolved, taken together, would
form the best conceivable moral guide.

We cannot depend on what are called "inspired books," or the religions
of the world. These religions are based on the supernatural, and
according to them we are under obligation to worship and obey some
supernatural being, or beings. All these religions are inconsistent with
intellectual liberty. They are the enemies of thought, of investigation,
of mental honesty. They destroy the manliness of man. They promise
eternal rewards for belief, for credulity, for what they call faith.

This is not only absurd, but it is immoral.

These religions teach the slave virtues. They make inanimate things
holy, and falsehoods sacred. They create artificial crimes. To eat meat
on Friday, to enjoy yourself on Sunday, to eat on fast-days, to be happy
in Lent, to dispute a priest, to ask for evidence, to deny a creed, to
express your sincere thought, all these acts are sins, crimes against
some god. To give your honest opinion about Jehovah, Mohammed or Christ,
is far worse than to maliciously slander your neighbor. To question
or doubt miracles, is far worse than to deny known facts. Only the
obedient, the credulous, the cringers, the kneelers, the meek, the
unquestioning, the true believers, are regarded as moral, as virtuous.
It is not enough to be honest, generous and useful; not enough to be
governed by evidence, by facts. In addition to this, you must believe.
These things are the foes of morality. They subvert all natural
conceptions of virtue.

All "inspired books," teaching that what the supernatural commands
is right, and right because commanded, and that what the supernatural
prohibits is wrong, and wrong because prohibited, are absurdly
unphilosophic.

And all "inspired books," teaching that only those who obey the
commands of the supernatural are, or can be, truly virtuous, and that
unquestioning faith will be rewarded with eternal joy, are grossly
immoral.

Again I say: Intelligence is the only moral guide.




GOVERNOR ROLLINS' FAST-DAY PROCLAMATION.


THE Governor of New Hampshire, undoubtedly a good and sincere man,
issued a Fast-Day Proclamation to the people of his State, in which I
find the following paragraph:

"The decline of the Christian religion, particularly in our rural
communities, is a marked feature of the times, and steps should be taken
to remedy it. No matter what our belief may be in religious matters,
every good citizen knows that when the restraining influences of
religion are withdrawn from a community, its decay, moral, mental
and financial, is swift and sure. To me this is one of the strongest
evidences of the fundamental truth of Christianity. I suggest to-day,
as far as possible on Fast-Day, union meetings be held, made up of all
shades of belief, including all who are interested in the welfare of our
State, and that in your prayers and other devotions and in your mutual
councils you remember and consider the problem of the condition of
religion in the rural communities. There are towns where no church bell
sends forth its solemn call from January to January. There are villages
where children grow to manhood unchristened. There are communities where
the dead are laid away without the benison of the name of the Christ,
and where marriages are solemnized only by Justices of the Peace. This
is a matter worthy of your thoughtful consideration, citizens of New
Hampshire. It does not augur well for the future. You can afford to
devote one day in the year to your fellow-men, to work and thought and
prayer for your children and your children's children."

These words of the Governor have caused surprise, discussion and danger.
Many ministers have denied that Christianity is declining, and have
attacked the Governor with the malice of meekness and the savagery of
humility. The question is: Is Christianity declining?

In order to answer this question we must state what Christianity is.

Christians tell us that there are certain fundamental truths that must
be believed.

We must believe in God, the creator and governor of the universe; in
Jesus Christ, his only begotten son; in the Holy Ghost; in the atonement
made by Christ; in salvation by faith; in the second birth; in heaven
for believers, in hell for deniers and doubters, and in the
inspiration of the Old and New Testaments. They must also believe in a
prayer-hearing and prayer-answering God, in special providence, and
in addition to all this they must practice a few ceremonies. This, I
believe, is a fair skeleton of Christianity. Of course I cannot give
an exact definition. Christians do not and never have agreed among
themselves. They have been disputing and fighting for many centuries,
and to-day they are as far apart as ever.

A few years ago Christians believed the "fundamental truths" They had
no doubts. They knew that God existed; that he made the world. They
knew when he commenced to work at the earth and stars and knew when he
finished. They knew that he, like a potter, mixed and moulded clay into
the shape of a man and breathed into its nostrils the breath of life.
They knew that he took from this man a rib and framed the first woman.

It must be admitted that sensible Christians have outgrown this belief.
Jehovah the gardener, the potter, the tailor, has been dethroned. The
story of creation is believed only by the provincial, the stupid, the
truly orthodox. People who have read Darwin and Haeckel and had sense
enough to understand these great men, laugh at the legends of the Jews.

A few years ago most Christians believed that Christ was the son of God,
and not only the son of God, but God himself.

This belief is slowly fading from the minds of Christians, from the
minds of those who have minds.

Many Christians now say that Christ was simply a man--a perfect man.
Others say that he was divine, but not actually God--a union of God and
man. Some say that while Christ was not God, he was as nearly like God
as it is possible for man to be.

The old belief that he was actually God--that he sacrificed himself unto
himself--that he deserted himself; that he bore the burden of his
own wrath; that he made it possible to save a few of his children by
shedding his own blood; that he could not forgive the sins of men until
they murdered him--this frightful belief is slowly dying day by
day. Most ministers are ashamed to preach these cruel and idiotic
absurdities. The Christ of our time is not the Christ of the New
Testament--not the Christ of the Middle Ages; nor of Luther, Wesley or
the Puritan fathers.

The Christ who was God--who was his own son and his own father--who
was born of a virgin, cast out devils, rose from the dead, and ascended
bodily to heaven--is not the Christ of to-day.

The Holy Ghost has never been accurately defined or described. He has
always been a winged influence--a divine aroma; a disembodied essence;
a spiritual climate; an enthusiastic flame; a something sensitive and
unforgiving; the real father of Jesus Christ.

A few years ago the clergy had a great deal to say about the Holy Ghost,
but now the average minister, while he alludes to this shadowy deity
to round out a prayer, seems ta have but little confidence in him. This
deity is and always has been extremely vague. He has been represented
in the form of a dove; but this form is not associated with much
intelligence.

Formerly it was believed that all men were by nature wicked, and that it
would be perfectly just for God to damn the entire human race. In fact,
it was thought that God, feeling that he had to damn all his children,
invented a scheme by which some could be saved and at the same time
justice could be satisfied. God knew that without the shedding of blood
there could be no remission of sin. For many centuries he was satisfied
with the blood of oxen, lambs and doves. But the sins continued to
increase. A greater sacrifice was necessary. So God concluded to make
the greatest possible sacrifice--to shed his own blood, that is to say,
to have it shed by his chosen people. This was the atonement--the scheme
of salvation--a scheme that satisfied justice and partially defeated the
Devil.

No intelligent Christians believe in this atonement. It is utterly
unphilosophic. The idea that man made salvation possible by murdering
God is infinitely absurd. This makes salvation the blossom of a
crime--the blessed fruit of murder. According to this the joys of heaven
are born of the agonies of innocence. If the Jews had been civilized--if
they had believed in freedom of conscience and had listened kindly and
calmly to the teachings of Christ, the whole world, including Christ's
mother, would have gone to hell.

Our fathers had two absurdities. They balanced each other. They said
that God could justly damn his children for the sin of Adam, and that he
could justly save his children on account of the sufferings and virtues
of Christ; that is to say, on account of his own sufferings and virtues.

This view of the atonement has mostly been abandoned. It is now
preached, not that Christ bought souls with his blood, but that he has
ennobled souls by his example. The supernatural part of the atonement
has, by the more intelligent, been thrown away. So the idea of imputed
sin--of vicarious vice--has been by many abandoned.

Salvation by faith is growing weak. People are beginning to see that
character is more important than belief; that virtue is above all
creeds. Civilized people no longer believe in a God who will damn an
honest, generous man. They see that it is not honest to offer a reward
for belief. The promise of reward is not evidence. It is an attempt to
bribe.

If God wishes his children to believe, he should furnish evidence.
He should not endeavor to make promises and threats take the place
of facts. To offer a reward for credulity is dishonest and
immoral--infamous.

To say that good people who never heard of Christ ought to be damned for
not believing on him is a mixture of idiocy and savagery.

People are beginning to perceive that happiness is a result, not a
reward; that happiness must be earned; that it is not alms. It is also
becoming apparent that sins cannot be forgiven; that no power can step
between actions and consequences; that men must "reap what they sow;"
that a man who has lived a cruel life cannot, by repenting between the
last dose of medicine and the last breath, be washed in the blood of the
Lamb, and become an angel--an angel entitled to an eternity of joy.

All this is absurd, but you may say that it is not cruel. But to say
that a man who has lived a useful life; who has made a happy home; who
has lifted the fallen, succored the oppressed and battled to uphold
the right; to say that such a man, because he failed to believe without
evidence, will suffer eternal pain, is to say that God is an infinite
wild beast.

Salvation for credulity means damnation for investigation.

At one time the "second birth" was regarded as a divine mystery--as a
miracle--a something done by a supernatural power; probably by the Holy
Ghost. Now ministers are explaining this mystery. A change of heart is a
change of ideas. About this there is nothing miraculous.

This happens to most men and women--happens many times in the life
of one man. If this happens without excitement--as the result of
thought--it is called reformation. If it occurs in a revival--if it is
the result of fright--it is called the "second birth."

A few years ago Christians believed in the inspiration of the Bible.
They had no doubts. The Bible was the standard. If some geologist found
a fact inconsistent with the Scriptures he was silenced with a text.
If some doubter called attention to a contradiction in the Bible he was
denounced as an ungodly and blaspheming wretch. Christians then knew
that the universe was only about six thousand years old, and any man who
denied this was an enemy of Christ and a friend of the Devil.

All this has changed. The Bible is no longer the standard. Science has
dethroned the inspired volume. Even theologians are taking facts
into consideration. Only ignorant bigots now believe in the plenary
inspiration of the Bible.

The intelligent ministers know that the Holy Scriptures are filled with
mistakes, contradictions and interpolations. They no longer believe in
the flood, in Babel, in Lot's wife or in the fire and brimstone storm.
They are not sure about the burning bush, the plagues of Egypt, the
division of the Red Sea or the miracles in the wilderness. All these
wonders are growing foolish. They belong to the Mother Goose of the
past, and many clergymen are ashamed to say that they believe them. So,
the lengthening of the day in order that General Joshua might have more
time to kill, the journey of Elijah to heaven, the voyage of Jonah
in the fish, and many other wonders of a like kind, have become so
transparently false that even a theologian refuses to believe.

The same is true of many of the miracles of the New Testament. No
sensible man now believes that Christ cast devils and unclean spirits
out of the bodies of men and women. A few years ago all Christians
believed all these devil miracles with all the mind they had. A few
years ago only Infidels denied these miracles, but now the theologians
who are studying the "Higher Criticism" are reaching the conclusions of
Voltaire and Paine. They have just discovered that the objections made
to the Bible by the Deists are supported by the facts.

At the same time these "Higher Critics," while they admit that the Bible
is not true, still insist that it is inspired.

The other evening I attended Forepaugh & Sell's Circus at Madison Square
Garden and saw a magnificent panorama of performances. While looking at
a man riding a couple of horses I thought of the "Higher Critics." They
accept Darwin and cling to Genesis. They admit that Genesis is false in
fact, and then assert that in a higher sense it is absolutely true.

A lie bursts into blossom and has the perfume of truth. These critics
declare that the Bible is the inspired word of God, and then establish
the truth of the declaration by showing that it is filled with
contradictions, absurdities and false prophecies.

The horses they ride, sometimes get so far apart that it seems to me
that walking would be easier on the legs.

So, I saw at the circus the "Snake Man." I saw him tie himself into all
kinds of knots; saw him make a necktie of his legs; saw him throw back
his head and force it between his knees; saw him twist and turn as
though his bones were made of rubber, and as I watched him I thought of
the mental doublings and contortions of the preachers who have answered
me.

Let Christians say what they will, the Bible is no longer the actual
word of God; it is no longer perfect; it is no longer quite true.

The most that is now claimed for the Bible by the "Higher Critics" is,
that some passages are inspired; that some passages are true, and that
God has left man free to pick these passages out.

The ministers are preaching Infidelity. What would Lyman Beecher have
thought of a man like Dr. Abbott? he would have consigned him to hell.
What would John Wesley have thought of a Methodist like Dr. Cadman? He
would have denounced him as a child of the Devil. What would Calvin have
thought of a Presbyterian like Professor Briggs? He would have burned
him at the stake, and through the smoke and flame would have shouted,
"You are a dog of Satan." How would Jeremy Taylor have treated an
Episcopalian like Heber Newton?

The Governor of New Hampshire is right when he says that Christianity
has declined. The flames of faith are flickering, zeal is cooling and
even bigotry is beginning to see the other side. I admit that there
are still millions of orthodox Christians whose minds are incapable of
growth, and who care no more for facts than a monitor does for bullets.
Such obstructions on the highway of progress are removed only by death.

The dogma of eternal pain is no longer believed by the reasonably
intelligent. People who have a sense of justice know that eternal
revenge cannot be enjoyed by infinite goodness. They know that hell
would make heaven impossible. If Christians believed in hell as they
once did, the fagots would be lighted again, heretics would be stretched
on the rack, and all the instruments of torture would again be stained
with innocent blood. Christianity has declined because intelligence has
increased.

Men and women who know something of the history of man, of the horrors
of plague, famine and flood, of earthquake, volcano and cyclone, of
religious persecution and slavery, have but little confidence in special
providence. They do not believe that a prayer was ever answered.

Thousands of people who accept Christ as a moral guide have thrown, away
the supernatural.

Christianity does not satisfy the brain and heart. It contains too many
absurdities. It is unphilosophic, unnatural, impossible. Not to resist
evil is moral suicide. To love your enemies is impossible. To desert
wife and children for the sake of heaven is cowardly and selfish. To
promise rewards for belief is dishonest. To threaten torture for honest
unbelief is infamous. Christianity is declining because men and women
are growing better.

The Governor was not satisfied with saying that Christianity had
declined, but he added this: "Every good citizen knows that when the
restraining influences of religion are withdrawn from a community, its
decay, moral, mental and financial is swift and sure."

The restraining influences of religion have never been withdrawn from
Spain or Portugal, from Austria or Italy. The "restraining influences"
are still active in Russia. Emperor William relies on them in Germany,
and the same influences are very busy taking care of Ireland. If these
influences should be withdrawn from Spain there would be "mental, moral
and financial decay." Is not this statement perfectly absurd?

The fact is that religion has reduced Spain to a guitar, Italy to a
hand organ and Ireland to exile. What are the restraining influences of
religion? I admit that religion can prevent people from eating meat on
Friday, from dancing in Lent, from going to the theatre on holy days and
from swearing in public. In other words, religion can restrain people
from committing artificial offences. But the real question is: Can
religion restrain people from committing natural crimes?

The church teaches that God can and will forgive sins.

Christianity sells sin on a credit. It says to men and women, "Be good;
do right; but no matter how many crimes you commit you can be forgiven."
How can such a religion be regarded as a restraining influence! There
was a time when religion had power; when the church ruled Christendom;
when popes crowned and uncrowned kings. Was there at that time moral,
mental and financial growth? Did the nations thus restrained by
religion, prosper? When these restraining influences were weakened, when
popes were humbled, when creeds were denied, did morality, intelligence
and prosperity begin to decay?

What are the restraining influences of religion? Did anybody ever hear
of a policeman being dismissed because a new church had been organized?

Christianity teaches that the man who does right carries a cross. The
exact opposite of this is true. The cross is carried by the man who
does wrong. I believe in the restraining influences of intelligence.
Intelligence is the only lever capable of raising mankind. If you wish
to make men moral and prosperous develop the brain. Men must be taught
to rely on themselves. To supplicate the supernatural is a waste of
time.

The only evils that have been caused by the decline of Christianity,
as pointed out by the Governor, are that in some villages they hear no
solemn bells, that the dead are buried without Christian ceremony, that
marriages are contracted before Justices of the Peace, and that children
go unchristened.

These evils are hardly serious enough to cause moral, mental and
financial decay. The average church bell is not very musical--not
calculated to develop the mind or quicken the conscience. The absence of
the ordinary funeral sermon does not add to the horror of death, and
the failure to hear a minister say, as he stands by the grave, "One star
differs in glory from another star. There is a difference between the
flesh of fowl and fish. Be not deceived. Evil communications corrupt
good manners," does not necessarily increase the grief of the mourners.
So far as children are concerned, if they are vaccinated, it does not
make much difference whether they are christened or not.

Marriage is a civil contract, and God is not one of the contracting
parties. It is a contract with which the church has no business to
interfere. Marriage with us is regulated by law. The real marriage--the
uniting of hearts, the lighting of the sacred flame in each--is the work
of Nature, and it is the best work that nature does. The ceremony of
marriage gives notice to the world that the real marriage has taken
place. Ministers have no real interest in marriages outside of the fees.
Certainly marriages by Justices of the Peace cannot cause the mental,
moral and financial decay of a State.

The things pointed out by the Governor were undoubtedly produced by
the decline of Christianity, but they are not evils, and they cannot
possibly injure the people morally, mentally or financially. The
Governor calls on the people to think, work and pray. With two-thirds of
this I agree. If the people of New Hampshire will think and work without
praying they will grow morally, mentally and financially. If they pray
without working and thinking, they will decay.

Prayer is beggary--an effort to get something for nothing. Labor is the
honest prayer.

I do not think that the good and true in Christianity are declining. The
good and true are more clearly perceived and more precious than ever.
The supernatural, the miraculous part of Christianity is declining.
The New Testament has been compelled to acknowledge the jurisdiction of
reason. If Christianity continues to decline at the same rate and ratio
that it has declined in this generation, in a few years all that is
supernatural in the Christian religion will cease to exist. There is a
conflict--a battle between the natural and the supernatural. The natural
was baffled and beaten for thousands of years. The flag of defeat was
carried by the few, by the brave and wise, by the real heroes of our
race. They were conquered, captured, imprisoned, tortured and burned.
Others took their places. The banner was kept in the air. In spite of
countless defeats the army of the natural increased. It began to gain
victories. It did not torture and kill the conquered. It enlightened
and blessed. It fought ignorance with science, cruelty with kindness,
slavery with justice, and all vices with virtues. In this great conflict
we have passed midnight. When the morning comes its rays will gild but
one flag--the flag of the natural.

All over Christendom religions are declining. Only children and the
intellectually undeveloped have faith--the old faith that defies facts.
Only a few years ago to be excommunicated by the pope blanched the
cheeks of the bravest. Now the result would be laughter. Only a few
years ago, for the sake of saving heathen souls, priests would brave all
dangers and endure all hardships.

I once read the diary of a priest--one who long ago went down the
Illinois River, the first white man to be borne on its waters. In this
diary he wrote that he had just been paid for all that he had suffered.
He had added a gem to the crown of his glory--had saved a soul for
Christ. He had baptized a papoose.

That kind of faith has departed from the world.

The zeal that flamed in the hearts of Calvin, Luther and Knox, is
cold and dead. Where are the Wesleys and Whitfields? Where are the old
evangelists, the revivalists who swayed the hearts of their hearers with
words of flame? The preachers of our day have lost the Promethean fire.
They have lost the tone of certainty, of authority. "Thus saith the
Lord" has dwindled to "perhaps." Sermons, messages from God, promises
radiant with eternal joy, threats lurid with the flames of hell--have
changed to colorless essays; to apologies and literary phrases; to
inferences and peradventures.

"The blood-dyed vestures of the Redeemer are not waving in triumph over
the ramparts of sin and rebellion," but over the fortresses of faith
float the white flags of truce. The trumpets no longer sound for battle,
but for parley. The fires of hell have been extinguished, and heaven
itself is only a dream. The "eternal verities" have changed to doubts.
The torch of inspiration, choked with ashes, has lost its flame. There
is no longer in the church "a sound from heaven as of a rushing, mighty
wind;" no "cloven tongues like as of fire;" no "wonders in the heaven
above," and no "signs in the earth beneath." The miracles have faded
away and the sceptre is passing from superstition to science--science,
the only possible savior of mankind.




A LOOK BACKWARD AND A PROPHECY.

     * Written for the Twenty-fifth Anniversary Number of  the
     New York Truth Seeker, September 3, 1898.


I CONGRATULATE _The Truth Seeker_ on its twenty-fifth birthday. It has
fought a good fight. It has always been at the front. It has carried the
flag, and its flag is a torch that sheds light.

Twenty-five years ago the people of this country, for the most part,
were quite orthodox. The great "fundamental" falsehoods of Christianity
were generally accepted. Those who were not Christians, as a rule,
admitted that they ought to be; that they ought to repent and join the
church, and this they generally intended to do.

The ministers had few doubts. The most of them had been educated not
to think, but to believe. Thought was regarded as dangerous, and the
clergy, as a rule, kept on the safe side. Investigation was discouraged.
It was declared that faith was the only road that led to eternal joy.

Most of the schools and colleges were under sectarian control, and the
presidents and professors were defenders of their creeds. The people
were crammed with miracles and stuffed with absurdities. They were
taught that the Bible was the "inspired" word of God, that it was
absolutely perfect, that the contradictions were only apparent, and
that it contained no mistakes in philosophy, none in science. The great
scheme of salvation was declared to be the result of infinite wisdom and
mercy. Heaven and hell were waiting for the human race. Only those could
be saved who had faith and who had been born twice.

Most of the ministers taught the geology of Moses, the astronomy of
Joshua, and the philosophy of Christ. They regarded scientists as
enemies, and their principal business was to defend miracles and deny
facts. They knew, however, that men were thinking, investigating in
every direction, and they feared the result. They became a little
malicious--somewhat hateful. With their congregations they relied
on sophistry, and they answered their enemies with epithets, with
misrepresentations and slanders; and yet their minds were filled with a
vague fear, with a sickening dread. Some of the people were reading and
some were thinking. Lyell had told them something about geology, and in
the light of facts they were reading Genesis again. The clergy called
Lyell an Infidel, a blasphemer, but the facts seemed to care nothing
for opprobrious names. Then the "called," the "set apart," the "Lord's
anointed" began changing the "inspired" word. They erased the word "day"
and inserted "period," and then triumphantly exclaimed: "The world was
created in six periods." This answer satisfied bigotry, hypocrisy, and
honest ignorance, but honest intelligence was not satisfied.

More and more was being found about the history of life, of living
things, the order in which the various forms had appeared and the
relations they had sustained to each other. Beneath the gaze of
the biologist the fossils were again clothed with flesh, submerged
continents and islands reappeared, the ancient forest grew once more,
the air was filled with unknown birds, the seas with armored monsters,
and the land with beasts of many forms that sought with tooth and claw
each other's flesh.

Haeckel and Huxley followed life through all its changing forms from
monad up to man. They found that men, women, and children had been on
this poor world for hundreds of thousands of years.

The clergy could not dodge these facts, this conclusion, by calling
"days" periods, because the Bible gives the age of Adam when he died,
the lives and ages to the flood, to Abraham, to David, and from David to
Christ, so that, according to the Bible, man at the birth of Christ had
been on this earth four thousand and four years and no more.

There was no way in which the sacred record could be changed, but of
course the dear ministers could not admit the conclusion arrived at by
Haeckel and Huxley. If they did they would have to give up original sin,
the scheme of the atonement, and the consolation of eternal fire.

They took the only course they could. They promptly and solemnly, with
upraised hands, denied the facts, denounced the biologists as irreverent
wretches, and defended the Book. With tears in their voices they talked
about "Mother's Bible," about the "faith of the fathers," about the
prayers that the children had said, and they also talked about the
wickedness of doubt. This satisfied bigotry, hypocrisy, and honest
ignorance, but honest intelligence was not satisfied.

The works of Humboldt had been translated, and were being read; the
intellectual horizon was enlarged, and the fact that the endless chain
of cause and effect had never been broken, that Nature had never been
interfered with, forced its way into many minds. This conception of
nature was beyond the clergy. They did not believe it; they could not
comprehend it. They did not answer Humboldt, but they attacked him with
great virulence. They measured his works by the Bible, because the Bible
was then the standard.

In examining a philosophy, a system, the ministers asked: "Does it agree
with the sacred book?" With the Bible they separated the gold from the
dross. Every science had to be tested by the Scriptures. Humboldt did
not agree with Moses. He differed from Joshua. He had his doubts about
the flood. That was enough.

Yet, after all, the ministers felt that they were standing on thin
ice, that they were surrounded by masked batteries, and that something
unfortunate was liable at any moment to happen. This increased their
efforts to avoid, to escape. The truth was that they feared the truth.
They were afraid of facts. They became exceedingly anxious for morality,
for the young, for the inexperienced. They were afraid to trust human
nature. They insisted that without the Bible the world would rush to
crime. They warned the thoughtless of the danger of thinking. They knew
that it would be impossible for civilization to exist without the Bible.
They knew this because their God had tried it. He gave no Bible to the
antediluvians, and they became so bad that he had to destroy them.
He gave the Jews only the Old Testament, and they were dispersed.
Irreverent people might say that Jehovah should have known this without
a trial, but after all that has nothing to do with theology.

Attention had been called to the fact that two accounts of creation are
in Genesis, and that they do not agree and cannot be harmonized, and
that, in addition to that, the divine historian had made a mistake as
to the order of creation; that according to one account Adam was made
before the animals, and Eve last of all, from Adam's rib; and by the
other account Adam and Eve were made after the animals, and both at the
same time. A good many people were surprised to find that the Creator
had written contradictory accounts of the creation, and had forgotten
the order in which he created.

Then there was another difficulty. Jehovah had declared that on Tuesday,
or during the second period, he had created the "firmament" to divide
the waters which were below the firmament from the waters above the
firmament. It was found that there is no firmament; that the moisture
in the air is the result of evaporation, and that there was nothing to
divide the waters above, from the waters below. So that, according to
the facts, Jehovah did nothing on the second day or period, because the
moisture above the earth is not prevented from falling by the firmament,
but because the mist is lighter than air.

The preachers, however, began to dodge, to evade, to talk about
"oriental imagery." They declared that Genesis was a "sublime poem,"
a divine "panorama of creation," an "inspired vision;" that it was
not intended to be exact in its details, but that it was true in a far
higher sense, in a poetical sense, in a spiritual sense, conveying a
truth much higher, much grander than simple, fact. The contradictions
were covered with the mantle of oriental imagery. This satisfied
bigotry, hypocrisy, and honest ignorance, but honest intelligence was
not satisfied.

People were reading Darwin. His works interested not only the
scientific, but the intelligent in all the walks of life. Darwin was the
keenest observer of all time, the greatest naturalist in all the world.
He was patient, modest, logical, candid, courageous, and absolutely
truthful. He told the actual facts. He colored nothing. He was anxious
only to ascertain the truth. He had no prejudices, no theories, no
creed. He was the apostle of the real.

The ministers greeted him with shouts of derision. From nearly all the
pulpits came the sounds of ignorant laughter, one of the saddest of all
sounds. The clergy in a vague kind of way believed the Bible account
of creation; they accepted the Miltonic view; they believed that all
animals, including man, had been made of clay, fashioned by Jehovah's
hands, and that he had breathed into all forms, not only the breath of
life, but instinct and reason. They were not in the habit of descending
to particulars; they did not describe Jehovah as kneading the clay or
modeling his forms like a sculptor, but what they did say included these
things.

The theory of Darwin contradicted all their ideas on the subject, vague
as they were. He showed that man had not appeared at first as man, that
he had not fallen from perfection, but had slowly risen through many
ages from lower forms. He took food, climate, and all conditions into
consideration, and accounted for difference of form, function, instinct,
and reason, by natural causes. He dispensed with the supernatural. He
did away with Jehovah the potter.

Of course the theologians denounced him as a blasphemer, as a dethroner
of God. They even went so far as to smile at his ignorance. They said:
"If the theory of Darwin is true the Bible is false, our God is a myth,
and our religion a fable."

In that they were right.

Against Darwin they rained texts of Scripture like shot and shell.
They believed that they were victorious and their congregations were
delighted. Poor little frightened professors in religious colleges sided
with the clergy. Hundreds of backboneless "scientists" ranged themselves
with the enemies of Darwin. It began to look as though the church was
victorious.

Slowly, steadily, the ideas of Darwin gained ground. He began to be
understood. Men of sense were reading what he said. Men of genius were
on his side. In a little while the really great in all departments of
human thought declared in his favor. The tide began to turn. The smile
on the face of the theologian became a frozen grin. The preachers began
to hedge, to dodge. They admitted that the Bible was not inspired for
the purpose of teaching science--only inspired about religion, about the
spiritual, about the divine. The fortifications of faith were crumbling,
the old guns had been spiked, and the armies of the "living God" were in
retreat.

Great questions were being discussed, and freely discussed. People
were not afraid to give their opinions, and they did give their honest
thoughts. Draper had shown in his "Intellectual Development of Europe"
that Catholicism had been the relentless enemy of progress, the bitter
foe of all that is really useful. The Protestants were delighted with
this book.

Buckle had shown in his "History of Civilization in England" that
Protestantism had also enslaved the mind, had also persecuted to the
extent of its power, and that Protestantism in its last analysis was
substantially the same as the creed of Rome.

This book satisfied the thoughtful.

Hegel in his first book had done a great work and it did great good in
spite of the fact that his second book was almost a surrender. Lecky in
his first volume of "The History of Rationalism" shed a flood of
light on the meanness, the cruelty, and the malevolence of "revealed
religion," and this did good in spite of the fact that he almost
apologizes in the second volume for what he had said in the first.

The Universalists had done good. They had civilized a great many
Christians. They declared that eternal punishment was infinite revenge,
and that the God of hell was an infinite savage.

Some of the Unitarians, following the example of Theodore Parker,
denounced Jehovah as a brutal, tribal God. All these forces worked
together for the development of the orthodox brain.

Herbert Spencer was being read and understood. The theories of this
great philosopher were being adopted. He overwhelmed the theologians
with facts, and from a great height he surveyed the world. Of course he
was attacked, but not answered.

Emerson had sowed the seeds of thought--of doubt--in many minds, and
from many directions the world was being flooded with intellectual
light. The clergy became apologetic; they spoke with less certainty;
with less emphasis, and lost a little confidence in the power of
assertion. They felt the necessity of doing something, and they began to
harmonize as best they could the old lies and the new truths. They tried
to get the wreck ashore, and many of them were willing to surrender if
they could keep their side-arms; that is to say, their salaries.

Conditions had been reversed. The Bible had ceased to be the standard.
Science was the supreme and final test.

There was no peace for the pulpit; no peace for the shepherds. Students
of the Bible in England and Germany had been examining the inspired
Scriptures. They had been trying to find when and by whom the books of
the Bible were written. They found that the Pentateuch was not written
by Moses; that the authors of Joshua, Judges, Ruth, Samuel, Kings,
Chronicles, Esther, and Job were not known; that the Psalms were
not written by David; that Solomon had nothing to do with Proverbs,
Ecclesiastes, or the Song; that Isaiah was the work of at least three
authors; that the prophecies of Daniel were written after the happening
of the events prophesied. They found many mistakes and contradictions,
and some of them went so far as to assert that the Hebrews had never
been slaves in Egypt; that the story of the plagues, the exodus, and the
pursuit was only a myth.

The New Testament fared no better than the Old. These critics found that
nearly all of the books of the New Testament had been written by unknown
men; that it was impossible to fix the time when they were written; that
many of the miracles were absurd and childish, and that in addition
to all of this, the gospels were found filled with mistakes, with
interpolations' and contradictions; that the writers of Matthew, Mark,
and Luke did not understand the Christian religion as it was understood
by the author of the gospel according to John.

Of course, the critics were denounced from most of the pulpits, and the
religious papers, edited generally by men who had failed as preachers,
were filled with bitter denials and vicious attacks. The religious
editors refused to be enlightened. They fought under the old flag. When
dogmas became too absurd to be preached, they were taught in the Sunday
schools; when worn out there, they were given to the missionaries;
but the dear old religious weeklies, the Banners, the Covenants, the
Evangelists, continued to feed their provincial subscribers with known
mistakes and refuted lies.

There is another fact that should be taken into consideration. All
religions are provincial. Mingled with them all and at the foundation of
all are the egotism of ignorance, of isolation, the pride of race, and
what is called patriotism. Every religion is a natural product--the
result of conditions. When one tribe became acquainted with another,
the ideas of both were somewhat modified. So when nations and races come
into contact a change in thought, in opinion, is a necessary result.

A few years ago nations were strangers, and consequently hated each
other's institutions and religions. Commerce has done a great work in
destroying provincialism. To trade commodities is to exchange ideas.
So the press, the steamships, the railways, cables, and telegraphs
have brought the nations together and enabled them to compare their
prejudices, their religions, laws and customs.

Recently many scholars have been studying the religions of the world
and have found them much the same. They have also found that there is
nothing original in Christianity; that the legends, miracles, Christs,
and conditions of salvation, the heavens, hells, angels, devils, and
gods were the common property of the ancient world. They found that
Christ was a new name for an old biography; that he was not a life, but
a legend; not a man, but a myth.

People began to suspect that our religion had not been supernaturally
revealed, while others, far older and substantially the same, had been
naturally produced. They found it difficult to account for the fact that
poor, ignorant savages had in the darkness of nature written so well
that Jehovah thousands of years afterwards copied it and adopted it as
his own. They thought it curious that God should be a plagiarist.

These scholars found that all the old religions had recognized the
existence of devils, of evil spirits, who sought in countless ways to
injure the children of men. In this respect they found that the sacred
books of other nations were just the same as our Bible, as our New
Testament.

Take the Devil from our religion and the entire fabric falls. No Devil,
no fall of man. No Devil, no atonement. No Devil, no hell.

The Devil is the keystone of the arch.

And yet for many years the belief in the existence of the Devil--of
evil spirits--has been fading from the minds of intelligent people. This
belief has now substantially vanished. The minister who now seriously
talks about a personal Devil is regarded with a kind of pitying
contempt.

The Devil has faded from his throne and the evil spirits have vanished
from the air.

The man who has really given up a belief in the existence of the Devil
cannot believe in the inspiration of the New Testament--in the divinity
of Christ. If Christ taught anything, if he believed in anything, he
taught a belief in the existence of the Devil..His principal business
was casting out devils. He himself was taken possession of by the Devil
and carried to the top of the temple.

Thousands and thousands of people have ceased to believe the account in
the New Testament regarding devils, and yet continue to believe in the
dogma of "inspiration" and the divinity of Christ.

In the brain of the average Christian, contradictions dwell in unity.

While a belief in the existence of the Devil has almost faded away, the
belief in the existence of a personal God has been somewhat weakened.
The old belief that back of nature, back of all substance and force, was
and is a personal God, an infinite intelligence who created and
governs the world, began to be questioned. The scientists had shown
the indestructibility of matter and force. Buechner's great work had
convinced most readers that matter and force could not have been
created. They also became satisfied that matter cannot exist apart from
force and that force cannot exist apart from matter.

They found, too, that thought is a form of force, and that consequently
intelligence could not have existed before matter, because without
matter, force in any form cannot and could not exist.

The creator of anything is utterly unthinkable.

A few years ago God was supposed to govern the world. He rewarded the
people with sunshine, with prosperity and health, or he punished with
drought and flood, with plague and storm. He not only attended to the
affairs of nations, but he watched the actions of individuals. He sank
ships, derailed trains, caused conflagrations, killed men and women with
his lightnings, destroyed some with earthquakes, and tore the homes and
bodies of thousands into fragments with his cyclones.

In spite of the church, in spite of the ministers, the people began to
lose confidence in Providence. The right did not seem always to triumph.
Virtue was not always rewarded and vice was not always punished. The
good failed; the vicious succeeded; the strong and cruel enslaved the
weak; toil was paid with the lash; babes were sold from the breasts of
mothers, and Providence seemed to be absolutely heartless.

In other words, people began to think that the God of the Christians and
the God of nature were about the same, and that neither appeared to take
any care of the human race.

The Deists of the last century scoffed at the Bible God. He was too
cruel, too savage. At the same time they praised the God of nature. They
laughed at the idea of inspiration and denied the supernatural origin of
the Scriptures.

Now, if the Bible is not inspired, then it is a natural production, and
nature, not God, should be held responsible for the Scriptures. Yet the
Deists denied that God was the author and at the same time asserted the
perfection of nature.

This shows that even in the minds of Deists contradictions dwell in
unity.

Against all these facts and forces, these theories and tendencies, the
clergy fought and prayed. It is not claimed that they were consciously
dishonest, but it is claimed that they were prejudiced--that they were
incapable of examining the other side--that they were utterly destitute
of the philosophic spirit. They were not searchers for the facts,
but defenders of the creeds, and undoubtedly they were the product of
conditions and surroundings, and acted as they must.

In spite of everything a few rays of light penetrated the orthodox mind.
Many ministers accepted some of the new facts, and began to mingle
with Christian mistakes a few scientific truths. In many instances they
excited the indignation of their congregations. Some were tried for
heresy and driven from their pulpits, and some organized new churches
and gathered about them a few people willing to listen to the sincere
thoughts of an honest man.

The great body of the church, however, held to the creed--not quite
believing it, but still insisting that it was true.

In private conversation they would apologize and admit that the old
ideas were outgrown, but in public they were as orthodox as ever. In
every church, however, there were many priests who accepted the new
gospel; that is to say, welcomed the truth.

To-day it may truthfully be said that the Bible in the old sense is
no longer regarded as the inspired word of God. Jehovah is no longer
accepted or believed in as the creator of the universe. His place
has been taken by the Unknown, the Unseen, the Invisible, the
Incomprehensible Something, the Cosmic Dust, the First Cause, the
Inconceivable, the Original Force, the Mystery. The God of the Bible,
the gentleman who walked in the cool of the evening, who talked face to
face with Moses, who revenged himself on unbelievers and who gave laws
written with his finger on tables of stone, has abdicated. He has become
a myth.

So, too, the New Testament has lost its authority. People reason about
it now as they do about other books, and even orthodox ministers
pick out the miracles that ought to be believed, and when anything is
attributed to Christ not in accordance with their views, they take the
liberty of explaining it away by saying "interpolation."

In other words, we have lived to see Science the standard instead of the
Bible. We have lived to see the Bible tested by Science, and, what is
more, we have lived to see reason the standard not only in religion,
but in all the domain of science. Now all civilized scientists appeal to
reason. They get their facts, and then reason from the foundation.
Now the theologian appeals to reason. Faith is no longer considered a
foundation. The theologian has found that he must build upon the truth
and that he must establish this truth by satisfying human reason.

This is where we are now.

What is to be the result? Is progress to stop? Are we to retrace our
steps? Are we going back to superstition? Are we going to take authority
for truth?

Let me prophesy.

In modern times we have slowly lost confidence in the supernatural
and have slowly gained confidence in the natural. We have slowly lost
confidence in gods and have slowly gained confidence in man. For
the cure of disease, for the stopping of plague, we depend on the
natural--on science. We have lost confidence in holy water and religious
processions. We have found that prayers are never answered.

In my judgment, all belief in the supernatural will be driven from the
human mind. All religions must pass away. The augurs, the soothsayers,
the seers, the preachers, the astrologers and alchemists will all lie
in the same cemetery and one epitaph will do for them all. In a little
while all will have had their day. They were naturally produced and
they will be naturally destroyed. Man at last will depend entirely upon
himself--on the development of the brain--to the end that he may take
advantage of the forces of nature--to the end that he may supply the
wants of his body and feed the hunger of his mind.

In my judgment, teachers will take the place of preachers and the
interpreters of nature will be the only priests.




POLITICAL MORALITY.


THE room of the House Committee on Elections was crowded this morning
with committeemen and spectators to listen to an argument by Col. Robert
G. Ingersoll in the contested election case of Strobach against Herbert,
of the IId Alabama district. Colonel Ingersoll appeared for Strobach,
the contestant. While most of his argument was devoted to the dry
details of the testimony, he entered into some discussion of the general
principles involved in contested election cases, and spoke with great
eloquence and force.

The mere personal controversy, as between Herbert and Strobach, is
not worth talking about. It is a question as to whether or not the
republican system is a failure. Unless the will of the majority can be
ascertained, and surely ascertained, through the medium of the ballot,
the foundation of this Government rests upon nothing--the Government
ceases to be. I would a thousand time rather a Democrat should come
to Congress from this district, or from any district, than that a
Republican should come who was not honestly elected. I would a thousand
times rather that this country should honestly go to destruction than
dishonestly and fraudulently go anywhere. We want it settled whether
this form of government is or is not a failure. That is the real
question, and it is the question at issue in every one of these cases.
Has Congress power and has Congress the sense to say to-day, that no man
shall sit as a maker of laws for the people who has not been honestly
elected? Whenever you admit a man to Congress and allow him to vote and
make laws, you poison the source of justice--you poison the source of
power; and the moment the people begin to think that many members of
Congress are there through fraud, that moment they cease to have respect
for the legislative department of this Government--that moment they
cease to have respect for the sovereignty of the people represented by
fraud.

Now, as I have said, I care nothing about the personal part of it, and,
maybe you will not believe me, but I care nothing about the political
part. The question is, Who has the right on his side? Who is honestly
entitled to this seat? That is infinitely more important than any
personal or party question. My doctrine is that a majority of the people
must control--that we have in this country a king, that we have in this
country a sovereign, just as truly as they can have in any other, and,
as a matter of fact, a republic is the only country that does in truth
have a sovereign, and that sovereign is the legally expressed will of
the people. So that any man that puts in a fraudulent vote is a traitor
to that sovereign; any man that knowingly counts an illegal vote is a
traitor to that sovereign, and is not fit to be a citizen of the great
Republic. Any man who fraudulently throws out a vote, knowing it to be a
legal vote, tampers with the source of power, and is, in fact, false to
our institutions. Now, these are the questions to be decided, and I want
them decided, not because this case happens to come from the South any
more than if it came from the North. It is a matter that concerns the
whole country. We must decide it. There must be a law on the subject. We
have got to lay down a stringent rule that shall apply to these cases.
There should be--there must be--such a thing as political morality so
far as voting is concerned.--New York Tribune, May 13, 1883.




A FEW REASONS FOR DOUBTING THE INSPIRATION OF THE BIBLE.


     * Printed from manuscript notes found among Colonel
     Ingersoll's papers, evidently written in the early '80's.
     While much of the argument and criticism will be found
     embodied in his various lectures magazine articles and
     contributions to the press, it was thought too valuable in
     its present form to be left out of a complete edition of his
     works, on account of too much repetition. Undoubtedly it was
     the author's intention to go through the Bible in this same
     manner and to publish in book form. "A few Reasons for
     doubting the Inspiration of the Bible."


THE Old Testament must have been written nearly two thousand years
before the invention of printing. There were but few copies, and
these were in the keeping of those whose interest might have prompted
interpolations, and whose ignorance might have led to mistakes.

Second. The written Hebrew was composed entirely of consonants, without
any points or marks standing for vowels, so that anything like accuracy
was impossible. Anyone can test this for himself by writing an English
sentence, leaving out the vowels. It will take far more inspiration to
read than to write a book with consonants alone.

Third. The books composing the Old Testament were not divided into
chapters or verses, and no system of punctuation was known. Think of
this a moment and you will see how difficult it must be to read such a
book.

Fourth. There was not among the Jews any dictionary of their language,
and for this reason the accurate meaning of words could not be
preserved. Now the different meanings of words are preserved so that by
knowing the age in which a writer lived we can ascertain with reasonable
certainty his meaning.

Fifth. The Old Testament was printed for the first time in 1488. Until
this date it existed only in manuscript, and was constantly exposed to
erasures and additions.

Sixth. It is now admitted by the most learned in the Hebrew language
that in our present English version of the Old Testament there are
at least one hundred thousand errors. Of course the believers in
inspiration assert that these errors are not sufficient in number to
cast the least suspicion upon any passages upholding what are called the
"fundamentals."

Seventh. It is not certainly known who in fact wrote any of the books of
the Old Testament. For instance, it is now generally conceded that Moses
was not the author of the Pentateuch.

Eighth. Other books, not now in existence, are referred to in the Old
Testament as of equal authority, such as the books of Jasher, Nathan,
Ahijah, Iddo, Jehu, Sayings of the Seers.

Ninth. The Christians are not agreed among themselves as to what books
are inspired. The Catholics claim as inspired the books of Maccabees,
Tobit, Esdras, etc. Others doubt the inspiration of Esther,
Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Solomon.

Tenth. In the book of Esther and the Song of Solomon the name of God is
not mentioned, and no reference is made to any supreme being, nor to any
religious duty. These omissions would seem sufficient to cast a little
doubt upon these books.

Eleventh. Within the present century manuscript copies of the Old
Testament have been found throwing new light and changing in many
instances the present readings. In consequence a new version is now
being made by a theological syndicate composed of English and American
divines, and after this is published it may be that our present Bible
will fall into disrepute.

Twelfth. The fact that language is continually changing, that words are
constantly dying and others being born; that the same word has a variety
of meanings during its life, shows hew hard it is to preserve the
original ideas that might have been expressed in the Scriptures, for
thousands of years, without dictionaries, without the art of printing,
and without the light of contemporaneous literature.

Thirteenth. Whatever there was of the Old Testament seems to have been
lost from the time of Moses until the days of Josiah, and it is probable
that nothing like the Bible existed in any permanent form among the Jews
until a few hundred years before Christ. It is said that Ezra gave
the Pentateuch to the Jews, but whether he found or originated it is
unknown. So it is claimed that Nehemiah gathered up the manuscripts
about the kings and prophets, while the books of Job, Psalms, Proverbs,
Ruth, Ecclesiastes, and some others were either collected or written
long after. The Jews themselves did not agree as to what books were
really inspired.

Fourteenth. In the Old Testament we find several contradictory
laws about the same thing, and contradictory accounts of the same
occurrences. In the twentieth chapter of Exodus we find the first
account of the giving of the Ten Commandments. In the thirty-fourth
chapter another account is given. These two accounts could never have
been written by the same person. Read these two accounts and you will
be forced to admit that one of them cannot be true. So there are two
histories of the creation, of the flood, and of the manner in which Saul
became king.

Fifteenth. It is now generally admitted that Genesis must have been
written by two persons, and the parts written by each can be separated,
and when separated they are found to contradict each other in many
important particulars.

Sixteenth. It is also admitted that copyists made verbal changes not
only, but pieced out fragments; that the speeches of Elihu in the book
of Job were all interpolated, and that most of the prophecies were made
by persons whose names we have never known.

Seventeenth. The manuscripts of the Old Testament were not alike, and
the Greek version differed from the Hebrew, and there was no absolutely
received text of the Old Testament until after the commencement of the
Christian era. Marks and points to denote vowels were invented probably
about the seventh century after Christ. Whether these vowels were put in
the proper places or not is still an open question.

Eighteenth. The Alexandrian version, or what is known as the Septuagint,
translated by seventy learned Jews, assisted by "miraculous power,"
about two hundred years before Christ, could not have been, it is said,
translated from the Hebrew text that we now have. The differences can
only be accounted for by supposing that they had a different Hebrew
text. The early Christian Churches adopted the Septuagint, and were
satisfied for a time. But so many errors were found, and so many were
scanning every word in search of something to sustain their peculiar
views, that several new versions appeared, all different somewhat from
the Hebrew manuscripts, from the Septuagint, and from each other.
All these versions were in Greek. The first Latin Bible originated in
Africa, but no one has ever found out which Latin manuscript was the
original. Many were produced, and all differed from each other. These
Latin versions were compared with each other and with the Hebrew, and
a new Latin version was made in the fifth century, but the old Latin
versions held their own for about four hundred years, and no one yet
knows which were right. Besides these there were Egyptian, Ethiopie,
Armenian, and several others, all differing from each other as well as
from all others in the world.

It was not until the fourteenth century that the Bible was translated
into German, and not until the fifteenth that Bibles were printed in
the principal languages of Europe. Of these Bibles there were several
kinds--Luther's, the Dort, King James's, Genevan, French, besides the
Danish and Swedish. Most of these differed from each other, and gave
rise to infinite disputes and crimes without number. The earliest
fragment of the Bible in the "Saxon" language known to exist was written
sometime in the seventh century. The first Bible was printed in England
in 1538. In 1560 the first English Bible was printed that was divided
into verses. Under Henry VIII. the Bible was revised; again under Queen
Elizabeth, and once again under King James. This last was published in
1611, and is the one now in general use.

Nineteenth. No one in the world has learning enough, nor has he time
enough even if he had the learning, and could live a thousand years, to
find out what books really belong to and constitute the Old Testament,
the authors of these books, when they were written, and what they really
mean. And until a man has the learning and the time to do all this he
cannot certainly tell whether he believes the Bible or not.

Twentieth. If a revelation from God was actually necessary to the
happiness of man here and to his salvation hereafter, it is not easy to
see why such revelation was not given to all the nations of the
earth. Why were the millions of Asia, Egypt, and America left to the
insufficient light of nature. Why was not a written, or what is still
better, a printed revelation given to Adam and Eve in the Garden of
Eden? And why were the Jews themselves without a Bible until the days
of Ezra the scribe? Why was nature not so made that it would give light
enough? Why did God make men and leave them in darkness--a darkness that
he, knew would fill the world with want and crime, and crowd with damned
souls the dungeons of his hell? Were the Jews the only people who needed
a revelation? It may be said that God had no time to waste with other
nations, and gave the Bible to the Jews that other nations through them
might learn of his existence and his will. If he wished other nations
to be informed, and revealed himself to but one, why did he not choose
a people that mingled with others? Why did he give the message to those
who had no commerce, who were obscure and unknown, and who regarded
other nations with the hatred born of bigotry and weakness? What would
we now think of a God who made his will known to the South Sea
Islanders for the benefit of the civilized world? If it was of such vast
importance for man to know that there is a God, why did not God make
himself known? This fact could have been revealed by an infinite being
instantly to all, and there certainly was no necessity of telling it
alone to the Jews, and allowing millions for thousands of years to die
in utter ignorance.

Twenty-first. The Chinese, Japanese, Hindus, Tartars, Africans, Eskimo,
Persians, Turks, Kurds, Arabs, Polynesians, and many other peoples,
are substantially ignorant of the Bible. All the Bible societies of
the world have produced only about one hundred and twenty millions of
Bibles, and there are about fourteen hundred million people. There
are hundreds of languages and tongues in which no Bible has yet been
printed. Why did God allow, and why does he still allow, a vast majority
of his children to remain in ignorance of his will?

Twenty-second. If the Bible is the foundation of all civilization, of
all just ideas of right and wrong, of our duties to God and each other,
why did God not give to each nation at least one copy to start with? He
must have known that no nation could get along successfully without a
Bible, and he also knew that man could not make one for himself. Why,
then, were not the books furnished? He must have known that the light
of nature was not sufficient to reveal the scheme of the atonement, the
necessity of baptism, the immaculate conception, transubstantiation, the
arithmetic of the Trinity, or the resurrection of the dead.

Twenty-third. It is probably safe to say that not one-third of the
inhabitants of this world ever heard of the Bible, and not one-tenth
ever read it. It is also safe to say that no two persons who ever read
it agreed as to its meaning, and it is not likely that even one person
has ever understood it. Nothing is more needed at the present time than
an inspired translator. Then we shall need an inspired commentator,
and the translation and the commentary should be written in an inspired
universal language, incapable of change, and then the whole world should
be inspired to understand this language precisely the same. Until these
things are accomplished, all written revelations from God will fill the
world with contending sects, contradictory creeds and opinions.

Twenty-fourth. All persons who know anything of constitutions and laws
know how impossible it is to use words that will convey the same ideas
to all. The best statesmen, the profoundest lawyers, differ as widely
about the real meaning of treaties and statutes as do theologians about
the Bible. When the differences of lawyers are left to courts, and the
courts give written decisions, the lawyers will again differ as to the
real meaning of the opinions. Probably no two lawyers in the United
States understand our Constitution alike. To allow a few men to tell
what the Constitution means, and to hang for treason all who refuse to
accept the opinions of these few men, would accomplish in politics what
most churches have asked for in religion.

Twenty-fifth. Is it very wicked to deny that the universe was created
of nothing by an infinite being who existed from all eternity? The human
mind is such that it cannot possibly conceive of creation, neither can
it conceive of an infinite being who dwelt in infinite space an infinite
length of time.

Twenty-sixth. The idea that the universe was made in six days, and is
but about six thousand years old, is too absurd for serious refutation.
Neither will it do to say that the six days were six periods, because
this does away with the Sabbath, and is in direct violation of the text.

Twenty-seventh. Neither is it reasonable that this God made man out of
dust, and woman out of one of the ribs of the man; that this pair were
put in a garden; that they were deceived by a snake that had the power
of speech; that they were turned out of this garden to prevent them from
eating of the tree of life and becoming immortal; that God himself made
them clothes; that the sons of God intermarried with the daughters
of men; that to destroy all life upon the earth a flood was sent that
covered the highest mountains; that Noah and his sons built an ark and
saved some of all animals as well as themselves; that the people tried
to build a tower that would reach to heaven; that God confounded their
language, and in this way frustrated their design.

Twenty-eighth. It is hard to believe that God talked to Abraham as one
man talks to another; that he gave him land that he pointed out; that he
agreed to give him land that he never did; that he ordered him to murder
his own son; that angels were in the habit of walking about the earth
eating veal dressed with butter and milk, and making bargains about the
destruction of cities.

Twenty-ninth. Certainly a man ought not to be eternally damned for
entertaining an honest doubt about a woman having been turned into
a pillar of salt, about cities being destroyed by storms of fire and
brimstone, and about people once having lived for nearly a thousand
years.

Thirtieth. Neither is it probable that God really wrestled with Jacob
and put his thigh out of joint, and that for that reason the
Jews refused "to eat the sinew that shrank," as recounted in the
thirty-second chapter of Genesis; that God in the likeness of a flame
inhabited a bush; that he amused himself by changing the rod of Moses
into a serpent, and making his hand leprous as snow.

Thirty-first. One can scarcely be blamed for hesitating to believe that
God met Moses at a hotel and tried to kill him that afterward he made
this same Moses a god to Pharaoh, and gave him his brother Aaron for a
prophet;2 that he turned all the ponds and pools and streams and all the
rivers into blood,3 and all the water in vessels of wood and stone; that
the rivers thereupon brought forth frogs;4 that the frogs covered the
whole land of Egypt; that he changed dust into lice, so that all the
men, women, children, and animals were covered with them;6 that he sent
swarms of flies upon the Egyptians;8 that he destroyed the innocent
cattle with painful diseases; that he covered man and beast with blains
and boils;7 that he so covered the magicians of Egypt with boils that
they could not stand before Moses for the purpose of performing the
same feats, that he destroyed every beast and every man that was in
the fields, and every herb, and broke every tree with storm of hail and
fire;9 that he sent locusts that devoured every herb that escaped the
hail, and devoured every tree that grew;10 that he caused thick darkness
over the land and put lights in the houses of the Jews;11 that he
destroyed all of the firstborn of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh
upon the throne to the firstborn of the maidservant that sat behind the
mill,"12 together with the firstborn of all beasts, so that there was
not a house in which the dead were not."

     1 Ex. iv, 24.    5 Ex. viii, 16, 17.  9 Ex. ix, 25.

     2 Ex. vii. 1.    6 Ex. viii, 21.     10 Ex. x, 15.

     3 Ex. viii, 19.  7 Ex. ix, 9.        11 Ex. x, 22, 23.

     4 Ex. viii, 3.   8 Ex. ix, 11.       12 Ex. xi, 5.

     13 Ex. xii, 29.

Thirty-second. It is very hard to believe that three millions of people
left a country and marched twenty or thirty miles all in one day. To
notify so many people would require a long time, and then the sick, the
halt, and the old would be apt to impede the march. It seems impossible
that such a vast number--six hundred thousand men, besides women and
children--could have been cared for, could have been fed and clothed,
and the sick nursed, especially when we take into consideration that
"they were thrust out of Egypt, and could not tarry, neither had they
prepared for themselves any victual." 1

Thirty-third. It seems cruel to punish a man forever for denying that
God went before the Jews by day "in a pillar of a cloud to lead' them
the way, and by night in a pillar of fire to give them light to go by
day and night," or for denying that Pharaoh pursued the Jews with six
hundred chosen chariots, and all the chariots of Egypt, and that the six
hundred thousand men of war of the Jews were sore afraid when they saw
the pursuing hosts. It does seems strange that after all the water in a
country had been turned to blood--after it had been overrun with frogs
and devoured with flies; after all the cattle had died with the murrain,
and the rest had been killed by the fire and hail and the remainder had
suffered with boils, and the firstborn of all that were left had died;
that after locusts had devoured every herb and eaten up every tree of
the field, and the firstborn had died, from the firstborn of the king
on the throne to the firstborn of the captive in the dungeon; that after
three millions of people had left, carrying with them the jewels of
silver and gold and the raiment of their oppressors, the Egyptians still
had enough soldiers and chariots and horses left to pursue and destroy
an army of six hundred thousand men, if God had not interfered.

     1 Ex. xii, 37-39

Thirty-fourth. It certainly ought to satisfy God to torment a man for
four or five thousand years for insisting that it is but a small thing
for an infinite being to vanquish an Egyptian army; that it was rather a
small business to trouble people with frogs, flies, and vermin; that it
looked almost malicious to cover people with boils and afflict cattle
with disease; that a real good God would not torture innocent beasts
on account of something the owners had done; that it was absurd to do
miracles before a king to induce him to act in a certain way, and then
harden his heart so that he would refuse; and that to kill all the
firstborn of a nation was the act of a heartless fiend.

Thirty-fifth. Certainly one ought to be permitted to doubt that twelve
wells of water were sufficient for three millions of people, together
with their flocks and herds,1 and to inquire a little into the nature of
manna that was cooked by baking and seething and yet would melt in the
sun,2 and that would swell or shrink so as to make an exact omer, no
matter how much or how little there really was.3 Certainly it is not a
crime to say that water cannot be manufactured by striking a rock with a
stick, and that the fate of battle cannot be decided by lifting one hand
up or letting it fall.4 Must we admit that God really did come down upon
Mount Sinai in the sight of all the people; that he commanded that all
who should go up into the Mount or touch the border of it should be put
to death, and that even the beasts that came near it should be killed?5
Is it wrong to laugh at this? Is it sinful to say that God never spoke
from the top of a mountain covered with clouds these words to Moses, "Go
down, charge the people, lest they break through unto the Lord to gaze,
and many of them perish; and let the priests also, which come near to
the Lord, sanctify themselves, lest the Lord break forth upon them"?6

     1 Ex. xv, 27.      3 Ex. xix. 12.       5 Ex. xix, 13, 13.

     2 Ex. xvi, 23, 21  4 Ex. xvii, 11, 13.  6 Ex. xix, 21, 22

Can it be that an infinite intelligence takes delight in scaring
savages, and that he is happy only when somebody trembles? Is it
reasonable to suppose that God surrounded himself with thunderings and
lightnings and thick darkness to tell the priests that they should not
make altars of hewn stones, nor with stairs? And that this God at the
same time he gave the Ten Commandments ordered the Jews to break the
most of them? According to the Bible these infamous words came from the
mouth of God while he was wrapped and clothed in darkness and clouds
upon the Mount of Sinai:

If thou buy an Hebrew servant six years he shall serve: and in the
seventh he shall go out free for nothing. If he came in by himself he
shall go out by himself; if he were married, then his wife shall go out
with him. If his master have given him a wife, and she have borne him
sons or daughters, the wife and her children shall be her master's, and
he shall go out by himself. And if the servant shall plainly say, I love
my master, my wife, and my children; I will not go out free: then his
master shall bring him unto the judges; he shall also bring him to the
door or unto the doorpost; and his master shall bore his ear through
with an awl; and he shall serve him forever.2 And if a man smite his
servant, or his maid, with a rod, and he die under his hand, he shall be
surely punished. Notwithstanding, if he continue a day or two, he shall
not be punished; for he is his money.3

Do you really think that a man will be eternally damned for endeavoring
to wipe from the record of God those barbaric words?

Thirty-sixth. Is it because of total depravity that some people refuse
to believe that God went into partnership with insects and granted
letters of marque and reprisal to hornets;4 that he wasted forty
days and nights furnishing Moses with plans and specifications for a
tabernacle, an ark, a mercy seat and two cherubs of gold, a table,
four rings, some dishes and spoons, one candlestick, three bowls, seven
lamps, a pair of tongs, some snuff dishes (for all of which God had
patterns), ten curtains with fifty loops, a roof for the tabernacle of
rams' skins dyed red, a lot of boards, an altar with horns, ash pans,
basins, and flesh hooks, and fillets of silver and pins of brass; that
he told Moses to speak unto all the wise-hearted that he had filled with
wisdom, that they might make a suit of clothes for Aaron, and that
God actually gave directions that an ephod "shall have the two
shoulder-pieces thereof joined at the two edges thereof."

     1 Ex. xix, 25, 26.  3 Ex. xxi, 20, 21

     2 Ex. xxi, 2-6,     4 Ex, xxiii, 28

And gave all the orders concerning mitres, girdles, and onyx stones,
ouches, emeralds, breastplates, chains, rings, Urim and Thummim, and the
hole in the top of the ephod like the hole of a habergeon?1

Thirty-seventh. Is there a Christian missionary who could help laughing
if in any heathen country he had seen the following command of God
carried out? "And thou shalt take the other ram; and Aaron and his sons
shall put their hands upon the head of the ram. Then shalt thou kill the
ram and take of his blood and put it upon the tip of the right ear of
Aaron, and upon the tip of the right ear of his sons, and upon the thumb
of their right hand, and upon the great toe of their right foot."2 Does
one have to be born again to appreciate the beauty and solemnity of such
a performance? Is not the faith of the most zealous Christian somewhat
shaken while reading the recipes for cooking mutton, veal, beef, birds,
and unleavened dough, found in the cook book that God made for Aaron and
his sons?

Thirty-eighth. Is it to be wondered at that some people have doubted the
statement that God told Moses how to make some ointment, hair oil, and
perfume, and then made it a crime punishable with death to make any like
them? Think of a God killing a man for imitating his ointment!3 Think of
a God saying that he made heaven and earth in six days and rested on the
seventh day and was refreshed!4 Think of this God threatening to destroy
the Jews, and being turned from his purpose because Moses told him that
the Egyptians might mock him!5

    1 Ex. xxvii and xxviii.  3 Ex. xxx, 23.  5 Ex. xxxii, 11, 12

    2 Ex. xxix, 19, 20       4 Ex. xxxi, 17.

Thirty-ninth. What must we think of a man impudent enough to break in
pieces tables of stone upon which God had written with his finger? What
must we think of the goodness of a man that would issue the following
order: "Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Put every man his sword by
his side, and go in and out from gate to gate throughout the camp, and
slay every man his brother, and every man his companion, and every man
his neighbor. Consecrate yourselves to-day to the Lord, even every
man upon his son, and upon his brother; that he may bestow upon you a
blessing this day"?1 Is it true that the God of the Bible demanded human
sacrifice? Did it please him for man to kill his neighbor, for brother
to murder his brother, and for the father to butcher his sou? If there
is a God let him cause it to be written in the book of his memory,
opposite my name, that I refuted this slander and denied this lie.

Fortieth. Can it be true that God was afraid to trust himself with the
Jews for fear he would consume them? Can it be that in order to keep
from devouring them he kept away and sent one of his angels in his
place?2 Can it be that this same God talked to Moses "face to face, as a
man speaketh unto his friend," when it is declared in the same chapter,
by God himself, "Thou canst not see my face: for there shall no man see
me, and live"?3

Forty-first. Why should a man, because he has done a bad action, go and
kill a sheep? How can man make friends with God by cutting the throats
of bullocks and goats? Why should God delight in the shedding of blood?
Why should he want his altar sprinkled with blood, and the horns of his
altar tipped with blood, and his priests covered with blood? Why should
burning flesh be a sweet savor in the nostrils of God? Why did he compel
his priests to be butchers, cutters and stabbers?

     1 Ex. xxxii, 27-29.  2 Ex. xxxiii, 2, 3.

     3 Ex. xxxiii, 11, 20.

Why should the same God kill a man for eating the fat of an ox, a sheep,
or a goat?

Forty-second. Could it be a consolation to a man when dying to think
that he had always believed that God told Aaron to take two goats and
draw cuts to see which goat should be killed and which should be a
scapegoat?1 And that upon the head of the scapegoat Aaron should lay
both his hands and confess over him all the iniquities of the children
of Israel, and all their transgressions, and put them all on the head
of the goat, and send him away by the hand of a fit man into the
wilderness; and that the goat should bear upon him all the iniquities
of the people into a land not inhabited?2 How could a goat carry away
a load of iniquities and transgressions? Why should he carry them to a
land uninhabited? Were these sins contagious? About how many sins
could an average goat carry? Could a man meet such a goat now without
laughing?

Forty-third. Why should God object to a man wearing a garment made of
woolen and linen? Why should he care whether a man rounded the corners
of his beard?3 Why should God prevent a man from offering the sacred
bread merely because he had a flat nose, or was lame, or had five
fingers on one hand, or had a broken foot, or was a dwarf? If he
objected to such people, why did he make them?4

Forty-fourth. Why should we believe that God insisted upon the sacrifice
of human beings? Is it a sin to deny this, and to deny the inspiration
of a book that teaches it? Read the twenty-eighth and twenty-ninth
verses of the last chapter of Leviticus, a book in which there is more
folly and cruelty, more stupidity and tyranny, than in any other book in
this world except some others in the same Bible. Read the thirty-second
chapter of Exodus and you will see how by the most infamous of crimes
man becomes reconciled to this God.

     1 Lev, xvi, 8.  2 Lev. xvi, 21, 22.  3 Lev. xix, 19, 27,

     4 Lev. xxi, 18-20.

You will see that he demands of fathers the blood of their sons. Read
the twelfth and thirteenth verses of the third chapter of Numbers, "And
I, behold, I have taken the Levites from among the children of Israel,"
etc.

How, in the desert of Sinai, did the Jews obtain curtains of fine linen?
How did these absconding slaves make cherubs of gold? Where did they get
the skins of badgers, and how did they dye them red? How did they make
wreathed chains and spoons, basins and tongs? Where did they get the
blue cloth and their purple? Where did they get the sockets of brass?
How did they coin the shekel of the sanctuary? How did they overlay
boards with gold? Where did they get the numberless instruments and
tools necessary to accomplish all these things? Where did they get the
fine flour and the oil? Were all these found in the desert of Sinai?
Is it a sin to ask these questions? Are all these doubts born of a
malignant and depraved heart? Why should God in this desert prohibit
priests from drinking wine, and from eating moist grapes? How could
these priests get wine?

Do not these passages show that these laws were made long after the Jews
had left the desert, and that they were not given from Sinai? Can you
imagine a God silly enough to tell a horde of wandering savages upon a
desert that they must not eat any fruit of the trees they planted until
the fourth year?

Forty-fifth. Ought a man to be despised and persecuted for denying that
God ordered the priests to make women drink dirt and water to test their
virtue? 1 Or for denying that over the tabernacle there was a cloud
during the day and fire by night, and that the cloud lifted up when God
wished the Jews to travel, and that until it was lifted they remained in
their tents?2

     1 Num. v, 12-31.  2 Num. ix, 16-18.

Can it be possible that the "ark of the covenant" traveled on its own
account, and that "when the ark set forward" the people followed, as is
related in the tenth chapter of the holy book of Numbers?

Forty-sixth. Was it reasonable for God to give the Jews manna, and
nothing else, year after year? He had infinite power, and could just as
easily have given them something good, in reasonable variety, as to
have fed them on manna until they loathed the sight of it, and longingly
remembered the fish, cucumbers, melons, leeks, onions, and garlic of
Egypt. And yet when the poor people complained of the diet and asked for
a little meat, this loving and merciful God became enraged, sent them
millions of quails in his wrath, and while they were eating, while the
flesh was yet between their teeth, before it was chewed, this amiable
God smote the people with a plague and killed all those that lusted
after meat. In a few days after, he made up his mind to kill the rest,
but was dissuaded when Moses told him that the Canaanites would laugh at
him.1 No wonder the poor Jews wished they were back in Egypt. No wonder
they had rather be the slaves of Pharaoh than the chosen people of God.
No wonder they preferred the wrath of Egypt to the love of heaven. In my
judgment, the Jews would have fared far better if Jehovah had let them
alone, or had he even taken the side of the Egyptians.

When the poor Jews were told by their spies that the Canaanites were
giants, they, seized with fear, said, "Let us go back to Egypt." For
this, their God doomed all except Joshua and Caleb to a wandering
death. Hear the words of this most merciful God: "But as for you, your
carcasses they shall fall in this wilderness, and your children shall
wander in the wilderness forty years and bear your sins until your
carcasses be wasted in the wilderness."2 And yet this same God promised
to give unto all these people a land flowing with milk and honey.

     1 Num. xiv, 15, 16.  2 Num. xiv. 32-33.

Forty-seventh. "And while the children of Israel were in the wilderness
they found a man that gathered sticks upon the Sabbath day.

"And they that found him gathering sticks brought him unto Moses and
Aaron, and unto all the congregation.

"And they put him in ward, because it was not declared what should be
done to him.

"And the Lord said unto Moses, The man shall be surely put to death; all
the congregation shall stone him with stones without the camp.

"And all the congregation brought him without the camp, and stoned him
with stones, and he died." 1

When the last stone was thrown, and he that was a man was but a mangled,
bruised, and broken mass, this God turned, and, _touched with pity_,
said: "Speak unto the children of Israel, and bid them that they
make them fringes in the borders of their garments throughout their
generations, and that they put upon the fringe of the borders a riband
of blue."2

In the next chapter, this Jehovah, whose loving kindness is over all his
works, because Korah, Dathan, and Abiram objected to being starved to
death in the wilderness, made the earth open and swallow not only them,
but their wives and their little ones. Not yet satisfied, he sent a
plague and killed fourteen thousand seven hundred more. There never was
in the history of the world such a cruel, revengeful, bloody, jealous,
fickle, unreasonable, and fiendish ruler, emperor, or king as Jehovah.
No wonder the children of Israel cried out, "Behold we die, we perish,
we all perish."

Forty-eighth. I cannot believe that a dry stick budded, blossomed, and
bore almonds; that the ashes of a red heifer are a purification for
sin;3 that God gave the cities into the hands of the Jews because they
solemnly agreed to murder all the inhabitants; that God became enraged
and induced snakes to bite his chosen people; that God told Balaam to go
with the Princess of Moab, and then got angry because he did go; that an
animal ever saw an angel and conversed with a man.

     1 Num. xv, 32-36.  2 Num. xv, 38,  3 Num. xix, 2-10.

I cannot believe that thrusting a spear through the body of a woman ever
stayed a plague;1 that any good man ever ordered his soldiers to slay
the men and keep the maidens alive for themselves; that God commanded
men not to show mercy to each other; that he induced men to obey his
commandments by promising them that he would assist them in murdering
the wives and children of their neighbors; or that he ever commanded a
man to kill his wife because she differed with him about religion;2 or
that God was mistaken about hares chewing the cud;3 or that he objected
to the people raising horses 4 or that God wanted a camp kept clean
because he walked through it at night;5 or that he commanded widows to
spit in the faces of their brothers-in-law;6 or that he ever threatened
to give anybody the itch;7 or that he ever secretly buried a man and
allowed the corpse to write an account of the funeral.

Forty-ninth. Does it necessarily follow that a man wishes to commit some
crime if he refuses to admit that the river Jordan cut itself in two
and allowed the lower end to run away? Or that seven priests could blow
seven ram's horns loud enough to throw down the walls of a city;8 or
that God, after Achan had confessed that he had secreted a garment and
a wedge of gold, became good natured as soon as Achan and his sons and
daughters had been stoned to death and their bodies burned?10 Is it not
a virtue to abhor such a God?

     1 Num. XXV, 8.       4 Deut. xvii, 16.       7 Deut. xxviii, 27.

     2 Deut. xiii, 6-10.  5 Deut. xxiii, 13, 14.  8 Josh, iii, 16.

     3 Deut. xiv, 7.      6 Deut. xxv, 9.,        9 Josh. vi, 20.

                         10 Josh, vii, 24, 25.

Must we believe that God sanctioned and commanded all the cruelties
and horrors described in the Old Testament; that he waged the most
relentless and heartless wars; that he declared mercy a crime; that to
spare life was to excite his wrath; that he smiled when maidens were
violated, laughed when mothers were ripped open with a sword, and
shouted with joy when babes were butchered in their mothers' arms? Read
the infamous book of Joshua, and then worship the God who inspired it if
you can.

Fiftieth. Can any sane man believe that the sun stood still in the midst
of heaven and hasted not to go down about a whole day, and that the moon
stayed?1 That these miracles were performed in the interest of massacre
and bloodshed; that the Jews destroyed men, women, and children by the
million, and practiced every cruelty that the ingenuity of their God
could suggest? Is it possible that these things really happened? Is it
possible that God commanded them to be done? Again I ask you to read
the book of Joshua. After reading all its horrors you will feel a grim
satisfaction in the dying words of Joshua to the children of Israel:
"Know for a certainty that the Lord your God will no more drive out any
of these nations from before you; but they shall be snares and traps
unto you, and scourges in your sides, and thorns in your eyes, until ye
perish from off this good land."2

Think of a God who boasted that he gave the Jews a land for which they
did not labor, cities which they did not build, and allowed them to eat
of oliveyards and vineyards which they did not plant.3 Think of a God
who murders some of his children for the benefit of the rest, and then
kills the rest because they are not thankful enough. Think of a God who
had the power to stop the sun and moon, but could not defeat an army
that had iron chariots.4

     1 Josh, x, 13.  2 Josh, xiii, 13.  3 Josh. xxiv, 13.

     4 Judges i, 19.

Fifty-first. Can we blame the Hebrews for getting tired of their God?
Never was a people so murdered, starved, stoned, burned, deceived,
humiliated, robbed, and outraged. Never was there so little liberty
among men. Never did the meanest king so meddle, eavesdrop, spy out,
harass, torment, and persecute his people. Never was ruler so jealous,
unreasonable, contemptible, exacting, and ignorant as this God of the
Jews. Never was such ceremony, such mummery, such stuff about bullocks,
goats, doves, red heifers, lambs, and unleavened dough--never was such
directions about kidneys and blood, ashes and fat, about curtains,
tongs, fringes, ribands, and brass pins--never such details for killing
of animals and men and the sprinkling of blood and the cutting of
clothes. Never were such unjust laws, such punishments, such damned
ignorance and infamy! Fifty-second. Is it not wonderful that the creator
of all worlds, infinite in power and wisdom, could not hold his own
against the gods of wood and stone? Is it not strange that after he had
appeared to his chosen people, delivered them from slavery, fed them
by miracles, opened the sea for a path, led them by cloud and fire,
and overthrown their pursuers, they still preferred a calf of their
own making? Is it not beyond belief that this God, by statutes and
commandments, by punishments and penalties, by rewards and promises,
by wonders and plagues, by earthquakes and pestilence, could not in the
least civilize the Jews--could not get them beyond a point where they
deserved killing? What shall we think of a God who gave his entire time
for forty years to the work of converting three millions of people, and
succeeded in getting only two men, and not a single woman, decent enough
to enter the promised land? Was there ever in the history of man so
detestible an administration of public affairs? Is it possible that
God sold his children to the king of Mesopotamia; that he sold them to
Jabin, king of Canaan, to the Philistines, and to the children of Ammon?
Is it possible that an angel of the Lord devoured unleavened cakes and
broth with fire that came out of the end of a stick as he sat under an
oak-tree?1 Can it be true that God made known his will by making dew
fall on wool without wetting the ground around it?2 Do you really
believe that men who lap water like a dog make the best soldiers?3 Do
you think that a man could hold a lamp in his left hand, a trumpet in
his right hand, blow his trumpet, shout "the sword of the Lord and of
Gideon," and break pitchers at the same time? 4

Fifty-third. Read the story of Jephthah and his daughter, and then tell
me what you think of a father who would sacrifice his daughter to God,
and what you think of a God who would receive such a sacrifice. This one
story should be enough to make every tender and loving father hold this
book in utter abhorrence. Is it necessary, in order to be saved, that
one must believe that an angel of God appeared unto Manoah in the
absence of her husband; that this angel afterward went up in a flame of
fire; that as a result of this visit a child was born whose strength was
in his hair? a child that made beehives of lions, incendiaries of foxes,
and had a wife that wept seven days to get the answer to his riddle?
Will the wrath of God abide forever upon a man for doubting the story
that Samson killed a thousand men with a new jawbone? Is there enough
in the Bible to save a soul with this story left out? Is hell hungry for
those who deny that water gushed from a "hollow place" in a dry bone? Is
it evidence of a new heart to believe that one man turned over a house
so large that over three thousand people were on the roof? For my part,
I cannot believe these things, and if my salvation depends upon my
credulity I am as good as damned already. I cannot believe that the
Philistines took back the ark with a present of five gold mice, and that
thereupon God relented.5

     1 Judges vi, 21.   2 Judges vi, 37.  3 Judges vii, 5.

     4 Judges vii, 20.  5 I Sam. vi. 4.

I can not believe that God killed fifty thousand men for looking into a
box.1 It seems incredible, after all the Jews had done, after all their
wars and victories, even when Saul was king, that there was not among
them one smith who could make a sword or spear, and that they were
compelled to go to the Philistines to sharpen every plowshare, coulter,
and mattock.2 Can you believe that God said to Saul, "Now go and smite
Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have, and spare them not;
but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling"? Can you believe that
because Saul took the king alive after killing every other man, woman,
and child, the ogre called Jehovah was displeased and made up his mind
to hurl Saul from the throne and give his place to another?3 I cannot
believe that the Philistines all ran away because one of their number
was killed with a stone. I cannot justify the conduct of Abigail, the
wife of Nabal, who took presents to David. David hardly did right when
he said to this woman, "I have hearkened to thy voice, and have accepted
thy person." It could hardly have been chance that made Nabal so deathly
sick next morning and killed him in ten days. All this looks wrong,
especially as David married his widow before poor Nabal was fairly
cold.4

Fifty-fourth. Notwithstanding all I have heard of Katie King, I cannot
believe that a witch at Endor materialized the ghost of Samuel and
caused it to appear with a cloak on.5 I cannot believe that God
tempted David to take the census, and then gave him his choice of three
punishments: First, Seven years of famine; Second, Flying three months
before their enemies; Third, A pestilence of three days; that David
chose the pestilence, and that God destroyed seventy thousand men.6

     1 I Sam. vi, 19.        3 I Sam. xv.   5 I Sam. xxviii.

     2 I Sam. xiii, 19, 20.  4 I Sam. xxv.  6 2 Sam. xxiv.

Why should God kill the people for what David did? Is it a sin to be
counted? Can anything more brutally hellish be conceived? Why should man
waste prayers upon such a God?

Fifty-fifth. Must we admit that Elijah was fed by ravens; that they
brought him bread and flesh every morning and evening? Must we believe
that this same prophet could create meal and oil, and induce a departed
soul to come back and take up its residence once more in the body? That
he could get rain by praying for it; that he could cause fire to burn
up a sacrifice and altar, together with twelve barrels of water?1 Can we
believe that an angel of the Lord turned cook and prepared two suppers
in one night for Elijah, and that the prophet ate enough to last him
forty days and forty nights?* Is it true that when a captain with fifty
men went after Elijah, this prophet caused fire to come down from heaven
and consume them all? Should God allow such wretches to manage his fire?
Is it true that Elijah consumed another captain with fifty men in the
same way?3 Is it a fact that a river divided because the water was
struck with a cloak? Did a man actually go to heaven in a chariot
of fire drawn by horses of fire, or was he carried to Paradise by a
whirlwind? Must we believe, in order to be good and tender fathers and
mothers, that because some "little children" mocked at an old man with
a bald head, God--the same God who said, "Suffer little children to come
unto me"--sent two she-bears out of the wood and tare forty-two of these
babes? Think of the mothers that watched and waited for their children.
Think of the wailing when these mangled ones were found, when they
were brought back and pressed to the breasts of weeping women. What an
amiable gentleman Mr. Elisha must have been.4

Fifty-sixth. It is hard to believe that a prophet by lying on a dead
body could make it sneeze seven times.5

     1 I Kings xviii.  3 2 Kings i.  5 2 Kings iv.

     2 I Kings xix.    4 2 Kings ii.

It is hard to believe that being dipped seven times in the Jordan could
cure the leprosy.1 Would a merciful God curse children, and children's
children yet unborn, with leprosy for a father's fault?2 Is it possible
to make iron float in water?3 Is it reasonable to say that when a corpse
touched another corpse it came to life?4 Is it a sign that a man wants
to commit a crime because he refuses to believe that a king had a boil
and that God caused the sun to go backward in heaven so that the shadow
on a sun-dial went back ten degrees as a sign that the aforesaid would
get well?5 Is it true that this globe turned backward, that its motion
was reversed as a sign to a Jewish king? If it did not, this story is
false, and that part of the Bible is not true even if it is inspired.

Fifty-seventh. How did the Bible get lost?5 Where was the precious
Pentateuch from Moses to Josiah? How was it possible for the Jews to get
along without the directions as to fat and caul and kidney contained
in Leviticus? Without that sacred book in his possession a priest might
take up ashes and carry them out without changing his pantaloons. Such
mistakes kindled the wrath of God.

As soon as the Pentateuch was found Josiah began killing wizards and
such as had familiar spirits.

Fifty-eighth. I cannot believe that God talked to Solomon, that he
visited him in the night and asked him what he should give him; I cannot
believe that he told him, "I will give thee riches and wealth and honor,
such as none of the kings have had before thee, neither shall there any
after thee have the like."7 If Jehovah said this he was mistaken. It is
not true that Solomon had fourteen hundred chariots of war in a country
without roads. It is not true that he made gold and silver at Jerusalem
as plenteous as stones. There were several kings in his day, and
thousands since, that could have thrown away the value of Palestine
without missing the amount.

     1 2 Kings v.      3 2 Kings, vi. 6.    5 2 Kings xx, 1-11.

     2 2 Kings v. 27.  4 2 Kings xiii, 21.  6 2 Kings xxii, 8.

     7 2 Chron. i, 7, 12.

The Holy Land was and is a wretched country. There are no monuments, no
ruins attesting former wealth and greatness. The Jews had no commerce,
knew nothing of other nations, had no luxuries, never produced a
painter, a sculptor, architect, scientist, or statesman until after the
destruction of Jerusalem. As long as Jehovah attended to their affairs
they had nothing but civil war, plague, pestilence, and famine. After he
abandoned, and the Christians ceased to persecute them, they became the
most prosperous of people. Since Jehovah, in anger and disgust, cast
them away they have produced painters, sculptors, scientists, statesmen,
composers, and philosophers.

Fifty-ninth. I cannot admit that Hiram, the King of Tyre, wrote a letter
to Solomon in which he admitted that the "God of Israel made heaven and
earth." 1 This King was not a Jew. It seems incredible that Solomon had
eighty thousand men hewing timber for the temple, with seventy thousand
bearers of burdens, and thirty-six hundred overseers.2

Sixtieth. I cannot believe that God shuts up heaven and prevents rain,
or that he sends locusts to devour a land, or pestilence to destroy the
people.3 I cannot believe that God told Solomon that his eyes and heart
should perpetually be in the house that Solomon had built.4

Sixty-first. I cannot believe that Solomon passed all the kings of the
earth in riches; that all the kings of the earth sought his presence
and brought presents of silver and gold, raiment, harness, spices, and
mules--a rate year by year.5 Is it possible that Shishak, a King of
Egypt, invaded Palestine with seventy thousand horsemen and twelve
hundred chariots of war?6

     1 2 Chron. ii, 12.  3 2 Chron. vii, 13.  5 2 Chron. ix, 22-24.

     2 2 Chron. ii, 18.  4 2 Chron. vii, 16.  6 2 Chron. xii, 2, 3.

I cannot believe that in a battle between Jeroboam and Abijah, the army
of Abijah actually slew in one day five hundred thousand chosen men.1
Does anyone believe that Zerah, the Ethiopian, invaded Palestine with a
million men?2 I cannot believe that Jehoshaphat had a standing army
of nine hundred and sixty thousand men.3 I cannot believe that God
advertised for a liar to act as his messenger.4 I cannot believe that
King Amaziah did right in the sight of the Lord, and that he broke in
pieces ten thousand men by casting them from a precipice.5 I cannot
think that God smote a king with leprosy because he tried to burn
incense.6 I cannot think that Pekah slew one hundred and twenty thousand
men in one day.7

     1 2 Chron. xiii, 17. 3 2 Chron. xvii, 14-19.  5 2 Chron. xxv, 12.

     2 2 Chron. xiv, 9.   4 2 Chron. xviii, 19-22. 6 2 Chron. xxvi, 19.

     7 2 Chron. xxviii, 6.













