X.

The fear of punishment may deter some, the fear of exposure others; but
there is no real reforming power in fear or punishment. Men cannot be
tortured into greatness, into goodness. All this, as I said before, has
been thoroughly tried. The idea that punishment was the only relief,
found its limit, its infinite, in the old doctrine of eternal pain; but
the believers in that dogma stated distinctly that the victims never
would be, and never could be, reformed.

As men become civilized they become capable of greater pain and of
greater joy. To the extent that the average man is capable of enjoying
or suffering, to that extent he has sympathy with others. The average
man, the more enlightened he becomes, the more apt he is to put himself
in the place of another. He thinks of his prisoner, of his employee, of
his tenant--and he even thinks beyond these; he thinks of the community
at large. As man becomes civilized he takes more and more into
consideration circumstances and conditions. He gradually loses faith in
the old ideas and theories that every man can do as he wills, and in the
place of the word "wills," he puts the word "must." The time comes
to the intelligent man when in the place of punishments he thinks of
consequences, results--that is to say, not something inflicted by some
other power, but something necessarily growing out of what is done. The
clearer men perceive the consequences of actions, the better they will
be. Behind consequences we place no personal will, and consequently do
not regard them as inflictions, or punishments. Consequences, no matter
how severe they may be, create in the mind no feeling of resentment, no
desire for revenge.' We do not feel bitterly toward the fire because it
burns, or the frost that freezes, or the flood that overwhelms, or the
sea that drowns--because we attribute to these things no motives, good
or bad. So, when through the development of the intellect man perceives
not only the nature, but the absolute certainty of consequences, he
refrains from certain actions, and this may be called reformation
through the intellect--and surely there is no better reformation than
this. Some may be, and probably millions have been, reformed, through
kindness, through gratitude--made better in the sunlight of charity.
In the atmosphere of kindness the seeds of virtue burst into bud
and flower. Cruelty, tyranny, brute force, do not and can not by any
possibility better the heart of man. He who is forced upon his knees has
the attitude, but never the feeling, of prayer.

I am satisfied that the discipline of the average prison hardens and
degrades. It is for the most part a perpetual exhibition of arbitrary
power. There is really no appeal. The cries of the convict are not heard
beyond the walls. The protests die in cells, and the poor prisoner feels
that the last tie between him and his fellow-men has been broken. He is
kept in ignorance of the outer world. The prison is a cemetery, and his
cell is a grave.

In many of the penitentiaries there are instruments of torture, and now
and then a convict is murdered. Inspections and investigations go
for naught, because the testimony of a convict goes for naught. He is
generally prevented by fear from telling his wrongs; but if he speaks,
he is not believed--he is regarded as less than a human being, and so
the imprisoned remain without remedy. When the visitors are gone, the
convict who has spoken is prevented from speaking again.

Every manly feeling, every effort toward real reformation, is trampled
under foot, so that when the convict's time is out there is little left
on which to build. He has been humiliated to the last degree, and his
spirit has so long been bent by authority and fear that even the desire
to stand erect has almost faded from the mind. The keepers feel that
they are safe, because no matter what they do, the convict when released
will not tell the story of his wrongs, for if he conceals his shame, he
must also hide their guilt.

Every penitentiary should be a real reformatory. That should be the
principal object for the establishment of the prison. The men in charge
should be of the kindest and noblest. They should be filled with divine
enthusiasm for humanity, and every means should be taken to convince
the prisoner that his good is sought--that nothing is done for
revenge--nothing for a display of power, and nothing for the
gratification of malice. He should feel that the warden is his unselfish
friend. When a convict is charged with a violation of the rules--with
insubordination, or with any offence, there should be an investigation
in due and proper form, giving the convict an opportunity to be heard.
He should not be for one moment the victim of irresponsible power. He
would then feel that he had some rights, and that some little of
the human remained in him still. They should be taught things of
value--instructed by competent men. Pains should be taken, not to
punish, not to degrade, but to benefit and ennoble.

We know, if we know anything, that men in the penitentiaries are not
altogether bad, and that many out are not altogether good; and we feel
that in the brain and heart of all, there are the seeds of good and bad.
We know, too, that the best are liable to fall, and it may be that the
worst, under certain conditions, may be capable of grand and heroic
deeds. Of one thing we may be assured--and that is, that criminals will
never be reformed by being robbed, humiliated and degraded.

Ignorance, filth, and poverty are the missionaries of crime. As long as
dishonorable success outranks honest effort--as long as society bows and
cringes before the great thieves, there will be little ones enough to
fill the jails.

XI.

All the penalties, all the punishments, are inflicted under a belief
that man can do right under all circumstances--that his conduct is
absolutely under his control, and that his will is a pilot that can,
in spite of winds and tides, reach any port desired. All this is, in my
judgment, a mistake. It is a denial of the integrity of nature. It is
based upon the supernatural and miraculous, and as long as this mistake
remains the corner-stone of criminal jurisprudence, reformation will be
impossible.

We must take into consideration the nature of man--the facts of
mind--the power of temptation--the limitations of the intellect--the
force of habit--the result of heredity--the power of passion--the
domination of want--the diseases of the brain--the tyranny of
appetite--the cruelty of conditions--the results of association--the
effects of poverty and wealth, of helplessness and power.

Until these subtle things are understood--until we know that man, in
spite of all, can certainly pursue the highway of the right, society
should not impoverish and degrade, should not chain and kill those who,
after all, may be the helpless victims of unknown causes that are deaf
and blind.

We know something of ourselves--of the average man--of his thoughts,
passions, fears and aspirations--something of his sorrows and his joys,
his weakness, his liability to fall--something of what he resists--the
struggles, the victories and the failures of his life. We know something
of the tides and currents of the mysterious sea--something of the
circuits of the wayward winds--but we do not know where the wild storms
are born that wreck and rend. Neither do we know in what strange realm
the mists and clouds are formed that darken all the heaven of the mind,
nor from whence comes the tempest of the brain in which the will to
do, sudden as the lightning's flash, seizes and holds the man until the
dreadful deed is done that leaves a curse upon the soul.

We do not know. Our ignorance should make us hesitate. Our weakness
should make us merciful.

I cannot more fittingly close this address than by quoting the prayer
of the Buddhist: "I pray thee to have pity on the vicious--thou hast
already had pity on the virtuous by making them so."




A WOODEN GOD.

To the Editor:

To-day Messrs. Wright, Dickey, O'Connor, and Murch, of the select
committee on the causes of the present depression of labor, presented
the majority special report upon Chinese immigration.

These gentlemen are in great fear for the future of our most holy and
perfectly authenticated religion, and have, like faithful watchmen,
from the walls and towers of Zion, hastened to give the alarm. They have
informed Congress that "Joss has his temple of worship in the Chinese
quarters, in San Francisco. Within the walls of a dilapidated structure
is exposed to the view of the faithful the god of the Chinaman, and here
are his altars of worship. Here he tears up his pieces of paper; here he
offers up his prayers; here he receives his religious consolations,
and here is his road to the celestial land;" that "Joss is located in a
long, narrow room in a building in a back alley, upon a kind of altar;"
that "he is a wooden image, looking as much like an alligator as like a
human being;" that the Chinese "think there is such a place as heaven;"
that "all classes of Chinamen worship idols;" that "the temple is open
every day at all hours;" that "the Chinese have no Sunday;" that this
heathen god has "huge jaws, a big red tongue, large white teeth, a
half-dozen arms, and big, fiery eyeballs. About him are placed offerings
of meat and other eatables--a sacrificial offering."

*A letter to the Chicago Times, written at Washington, D. C., March
27,1880.

No wonder that these members of the committee were shocked at such an
image of God, knowing as they did that the only true God was correctly
described by the inspired lunatic of Patmos in the following words:

"And there sat in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks one like
unto the Son of man, clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt
about the paps with a golden girdle. His head and his hairs were white
like wool, as white as snow; and his eyes were as a flame of fire; and
his feet like unto fine brass, as if they burned in a furnace; and his
voice as the sound of many waters. And he had in his right hand seven
stars: and out of his mouth went a sharp, two-edged sword: and his
countenance was as the sun shineth in his strength."

Certainly a large mouth filled with white teeth is preferable to one
used as the scabbard of a sharp, two-edged sword. Why should these
gentlemen object to a god with big, fiery eyeballs, when their own Deity
has eyes like a flame of fire?

Is it not a little late in the day to object to people because they
sacrifice meat and other eatables to their god? We all know that for
thousands of years the "real" God was exceedingly fond of roasted meat;
that he loved the savor of burning flesh, and delighted in the perfume
of fresh, warm blood.

The following account of the manner in which the "living God" desired
that his chosen people should sacrifice, tends to show the degradation
and religious blindness of the Chinese:

"Aaron therefore went unto the altar, and slew the calf of the sin
offering, which was for himself. And the sons of Aaron brought the blood
unto him: and he dipped his finger in the blood, and put it upon the
horns of the altar, and poured out the blood at the bottom of the altar:
But the fat, and the kidneys, and the caul above the liver of the sin
offering, he burnt upon the altar; as the Lord commanded Moses. And the
flesh and the hide he burnt with fire without the camp. And he slew the
burnt offering; and Aaron's sons presented unto him the blood, which
he sprinkled round about upon the altar. * * * And he brought the meat
offering, and took a handful thereof, and burnt it upon the altar. * * *
He slew also the bullock and the ram for a sacrifice of peace offering,
which was for the people: and Aaron's sons presented unto him the
blood, which he sprinkled upon the altar round about, and the fat of the
bullock and of the ram, the rump, and that which covereth the inwards
and the kidneys, and the caul above the liver, and they put the fat upon
the breasts, and he burnt the fat upon the altar. And the breast and the
right shoulder Aaron waved for a wave offering before the Lord, as Moses
commanded."

If the Chinese only did something like this, we would know that they
worshiped the "living" God. The idea that the supreme head of the
"American system of religion" can be placated with a little meat and
"ordinary eatables" is simply preposterous. He has always asked for
blood, and has always asserted that without the shedding of blood there
is no remission of sin.

The world is also informed by these gentlemen that "the idolatry of
the Chinese produces a demoralizing effect upon our American youth by
bringing sacred things into disrespect, and making religion a theme of
disgust and contempt."

In San Francisco there are some three hundred thousand people. Is it
possible that a few Chinese can bring our "holy religion" into disgust
and contempt? In that city there are fifty times as many churches as
joss-houses. Scores of sermons are uttered every week; religious books
and papers are plentiful as leaves in autumn, and somewhat dryer;
thousands of Bibles are within the reach of all. And there, too, is the
example of a Christian city.

Why should we send missionaries to China if we can not convert the
heathen when they come here? When missionaries go to a foreign land,
the poor, benighted people have to take their word for the blessings
showered upon a Christian people; but when the heathen come here they
can see for themselves. What was simply a story becomes a demonstrated
fact. They come in contact with people who love their enemies. They see
that in a Christian land men tell the truth; that they will not take
advantage of strangers; that they are just and patient, kind and tender;
that they never resort to force; that they have no prejudice on account
of color, race, or religion; that they look upon mankind as brethren;
that they speak of God as a universal Father, and are willing to work,
and even to suffer, for the good not only of their own countrymen, but
of the heathen as well. All this the Chinese see and know, and why
they still cling to the religion of their country is to me a matter of
amazement.

We all know that the disciples of Jesus do unto others as they would
that others should do unto them, and that those of Confucius do not unto
others anything that they would not that others should do unto them.
Surely, such peoples ought to live together in perfect peace.

Rising with the subject, growing heated with a kind of holy indignation,
these Christian representatives of a Christian people most solemnly
declare that:

"Anyone who is really endowed with a correct knowledge of our religious
system, which acknowledges the existence of a living God and an
accountability to him, and a future state of reward and punishment, who
feels that he has an apology for this abominable pagan worship is not a
fit person to be ranked as a good citizen of the American Union. It is
absurd to make any apology for its toleration. It must be abolished,
and the sooner the decree goes forth by the power of this Government the
better it will be for the interests of this land."

I take this, the earliest opportunity, to inform these gentlemen
composing a majority of the committee, that we have in the United States
no "religious system"; that this is a secular Government. That it has
no religious creed; that it does not believe or disbelieve in a future
state of reward and punishment; that it neither affirms nor denies
the existence of a "living God"; and that the only god, so far as this
Government is concerned, is the legally expressed will of a majority of
the people. Under our flag the Chinese have the same right to worship a
wooden god that you have to worship any other. The Constitution protects
equally the church of Jehovah and the house of Joss. Whatever their
relative positions may be in heaven, they stand upon a perfect equality
in the United States.

This Government is an Infidel Government. We have a Constitution with
man put in and God left out; and it is the glory of this country that we
have such a Constitution.

It may be surprising to you that I have an apology for pagan worship,
yet I have. And it is the same one that I have for the writers of this
report. I account for both by the word _superstition_. Why should
we object to their worshiping God as they please? If the worship is
improper, the protestation should come not from a committee of Congress,
but from God himself. If he is satisfied that is sufficient.

Our religion can only be brought into contempt by the actions of those
who profess to be governed by its teachings. This report will do more
in that direction than millions of Chinese could do by burning pieces of
paper before a wooden image. If you wish to impress the Chinese with the
value of your religion, of what you are pleased to call "The American
system," show them that Christians are better than heathens. Prove to
them that what you are pleased to call the "living God" teaches higher
and holier things, a grander and purer code of morals than can be found
upon pagan pages. Excel these wretches in industry, in honesty, in
reverence for parents, in cleanliness, in frugality; and above all by
advocating the absolute liberty of human thought.

Do not trample upon these people because they have a different
conception of things about which even this committee knows nothing.

Give them the same privilege you enjoy of making a God after their own
fashion. And let them describe him as they will. Would you be willing
to have them remain, if one of their race, thousands of years ago, had
pretended to have seen God, and had written of him as follows:

"There went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth
devoured: coals were kindled by it, * * * and he rode upon a cherub and
did fly."

Why should you object to these people on account of their religion? Your
objection has in it the spirit of hate and intolerance. Of that spirit
the Inquisition was born. That spirit lighted the fagot, made the
thumbscrew, put chains upon the limbs, and lashes upon the backs of men.
The same spirit bought and sold, captured and kidnapped human beings;
sold babes, and justified all the horrors of slavery.

Congress has nothing to do with the religion of the people. Its members
are not responsible to God for the opinions of their constituents, and
it may tend to the happiness of the constituents for me to state that
they are in no way responsible for the religion of the members.
Religion is an individual, not a national, matter. And where the nation
interferes with the right of conscience, the liberties of the people are
devoured by the monster superstition.

If you wish to drive out the Chinese, do not make a pretext of religion.
Do not pretend that you are trying to do God a favor. Injustice in his
name is doubly detestable. The assassin can not sanctify his dagger by
falling on his knees, and it does not help a falsehood if it be uttered
as a prayer. Religion, used to intensify the hatred of men toward men
under the pretence of pleasing God, has cursed this world.

A portion of this most remarkable report is intensely religious. There
is in it almost the odor of sanctity; and when reading it, one is
impressed with the living piety of its authors. But on the twenty-fifth
page there are a few passages that must pain the hearts of true
believers.

Leaving their religious views, the members immediately betake themselves
to philosophy and prediction. Listen:

"The Chinese race and the American citizen, whether native-born or one
who is eligible to our naturalization laws and becomes a citizen, are in
a state of antagonism. They cannot, or will not, ever meet upon common
ground, and occupy together the same social level. This is impossible.
The pagan and the Christian travel different paths. This one believes in
a living God; and that one in a type of monsters and the worship of wood
and stone. Thus in the religion of the two races of men they are as wide
apart as the poles of the two hemispheres. They cannot now and never
will approach the same religious altar. The Christian will not recede
to barbarism, nor will the Chinese advance to the enlightened belt
(whatever it is) of civilization. * * * He cannot be converted to those
modern ideas of religious worship which have been accepted by Europe and
which crown the American system."

Christians used to believe that through their religion all the nations
of the earth were finally to be blest. In accordance with that belief
missionaries have been sent to every land, and untold wealth has been
expended for what has been called the spread of the gospel.

I am almost sure that I have read somewhere that "Christ died for _all_
men," and that "God is no respecter of persons." It was once taught that
it was the duty of Christians to tell all people the "tidings of
great joy." I have never believed these things myself, but have always
contended that an honest merchant was the best missionary. Commerce
makes friends, religion makes enemies; the one enriches and the other
impoverishes; the one thrives best where the truth is told, the other
where falsehoods are believed. For myself, I have but little confidence
in any business or enterprise or investment that promises dividends only
after the death of the stockholders.

But I am astonished that four Christian statesmen, four members of
Congress, in the last quarter of the nineteenth century, who seriously
object to people on account of their religious convictions, should
still assert that the very religion in which they believe--and the
only religion established by the "living God," head of the American
system--is not adapted to the spiritual needs of one-third of the human
race. It is amazing that these four gentlemen have, in the defence
of the Christian religion, announced the discovery that it is wholly
inadequate for the civilization of mankind; that the light of the cross
can never penetrate the darkness of China; "that all the labors of
the missionary, the example of the good, the exalted character of our
civilization, make no impression upon the pagan life of the Chinese;"
and that even the report of this committee will not tend to elevate,
refine, and Christianize the yellow heathen of the Pacific coast. In the
name of religion these gentlemen have denied its power, and mocked at
the enthusiasm of its founder. Worse than this, they have predicted for
the Chinese a future of ignorance and idolatry in this world, and, if
the "American system" of religion is true, hell-fire in the next.

For the benefit of these four philosophers and prophets I will give a
few extracts from the writings of Confucius, that will, in my judgment,
compare favorably with the best passages of their report:

"My doctrine is that man must be true to the principles of his nature,
and the benevolent exercise of them toward others.

With coarse rice to eat, with water to drink, and with my bended arm for
a pillow, I still have joy.

Riches and honor acquired by injustice are to me but floating clouds.

The man who, in view of gain, thinks of righteousness; who, in view of
danger, forgets life, and who remembers an old agreement, however far
back it extends, such a man may be reckoned a complete man.

Recompense injury with justice, and kindness with kindness.

There is one word which may serve as a rule of practice for all one's
life: Reciprocity is that word."

When the ancestors of the four Christian Congressmen were barbarians,
when they lived in caves, gnawed bones, and worshiped dried snakes, the
infamous Chinese were reading these sublime sentences of Confucius. When
the forefathers of these Christian statesmen were hunting toads to
get the jewels out of their heads, to be used as charms, the wretched
Chinese were calculating eclipses, and measuring the circumference
of the earth. When the progenitors of these representatives of the
"American system of religion" were burning women charged with nursing
devils, the people "incapable of being influenced by the exalted
character of our civilization," were building asylums for the insane.

Neither should it be forgotten that, for thousands of years, the Chinese
have honestly practiced the great principle known as Civil Service
Reform--a something that even the administration of Mr. Hayes has
reached only through the proxy of promise.

If we wish to prevent the immigration of the Chinese, let us reform our
treaties with the vast empire from whence they came. For thousands of
years the Chinese secluded themselves from the rest of the world. They
did not deem the Christian nations fit to associate with. We forced
ourselves upon them. We called, not with cards, but with cannon. The
English battered down the door in the names of opium and Christ. This
infamy was regarded as another triumph for the gospel. At last, in
self-defence, the Chinese allowed Christians to touch their shores.
Their wise men, their philosophers, protested, and prophesied that time
would show that Christians could not be trusted. This report proves that
the wise men were not only philosophers, but prophets.

Treat China as you would England. Keep a treaty while it is in force.
Change it if you will, according to the laws of nations, but on no
account excuse a breach of national faith by pretending that we are
dishonest for God's sake.




SOME INTERROGATION POINTS.

A NEW party is struggling for recognition--a party with leaders who are
not politicians, with followers who are not seekers after place. Some of
those who suffer and some of those who sympathize, have combined.
Those who feel that they are oppressed are organized for the purpose of
redressing their wrongs. The workers for wages, and the seekers for
work have uttered a protest. This party is an instrumentality for the
accomplishment of certain things that are very near and very dear to the
hearts of many millions.

The object to be attained is a fairer division of profits between
employers and employed. There is a feeling that in some way the workers
should not want--that the industrious should not be the indigent. There
is a hope that men and women and children are not forever to be the
victims of ignorance and want--that the tenement house is not always to
be the home of the poor, or the gutter the nursery of their babes.

As yet, the methods for the accomplishment of these aims have not been
agreed upon. Many theories have been advanced and none has been adopted.
The question is so vast, so complex, touching human interests in so many
ways, that no one has yet been great enough to furnish a solution, or,
if any one has furnished a solution, no one else has been wise enough to
understand it.

'The hope of the future is that this question will finally be
understood. It must not be discussed in anger. If a broad and
comprehensive view is to be taken, there is no place for hatred or for
prejudice. Capital is not to blame. Labor is not to blame. Both have
been caught in the net of circumstances. The rich are as generous as
the poor would be if they should change places. Men acquire through the
noblest and the tenderest instincts. They work and save not only for
themselves, but for their wives and for their children. There is but
little confidence in the charity of the world. The prudent man in his
youth makes preparation for his age. The loving father, having struggled
himself, hopes to save his children from drudgery and toil.

In every country there are classes--that is to say, the spirit of caste,
and this spirit will exist until the world is truly civilized. Persons
in most communities are judged not as individuals, but as members of a
class. Nothing is more natural, and nothing more heartless. These lines
that divide hearts on account of clothes or titles, are growing more and
more indistinct, and the philanthropists, the lovers of the human race,
believe that the time is coming when they will be obliterated. We may
do away with kings and peasants, and yet there may still be the rich
and poor, the intelligent and foolish, the beautiful and deformed,
the industrious and idle, and it may be, the honest and vicious. These
classifications are in the nature of things. They are produced for the
most part by forces that are now beyond the control of man--but the old
rule, that men are disreputable in the proportion that they are useful,
will certainly be reversed. The idle lord was always held to be the
superior of the industrious peasant, the devourer better than the
producer, and the waster superior to the worker.

While in this country we have no titles of nobility, we have the rich
and the poor--no princes, no peasants, but millionaires and mendicants.
The individuals composing these classes are continually changing. The
rich of to-day may be the poor of to-morrow, and the children of the
poor may take their places. In this country, the children of the poor
are educated substantially in the same schools with those of the rich.
All read the same papers, many of the same books, and all for many years
hear the same questions discussed. They are continually being educated,
not only at schools, but by the press, by political campaigns, by
perpetual discussions on public questions, and the result is that those
who are rich in gold are often poor in thought, and many who have
not whereon to lay their heads have within those heads a part of the
intellectual wealth of the world.

Years ago the men of wealth were forced to contribute toward the
education of the children of the poor. The support of schools by general
taxation was defended on the ground that it was a means of providing for
the public welfare, of perpetuating the institutions of a free country
by making better men and women. This policy has been pursued until at
last the schoolhouse is larger than the church, and the common people
through education have become uncommon. They now know how little is
really known by what are called the upper classes--how little after all
is understood by kings, presidents, legislators, and men of culture.
They are capable not only of understanding a few questions, but they
have acquired the art of discussing those that no one understands.
With the facility of politicians they can hide behind phrases, make
barricades of statistics, and _chevaux-de-frise_ of inferences and
assertions. They understand the sophistries of those who have governed.

In some respects these common people are the superiors of the so-called
aristocracy. While the educated have been turning their attention to the
classics, to the dead languages, and the dead ideas and mistakes that
they contain--while they have been giving their attention to ceramics,
artistic decorations, and compulsory prayers, the common people have
been compelled to learn the practical things--to become acquainted with
facts--by doing the work of the world. The professor of a college is
no longer a match for a master mechanic. The master mechanic not only
understands principles, but their application. He knows things as they
are. He has come in contact with the actual, with realities. He knows
something of the adaptation of means to ends, and this is the highest
and most valuable form of education. The men who make locomotives, who
construct the vast engines that propel ships, necessarily know more than
those who have spent their lives in conjugating Greek verbs, looking for
Hebrew roots, and discussing the origin and destiny of the universe.

Intelligence increases wants. By education the necessities of the people
become increased. The old wages will not supply the new wants. Man longs
for a harmony between the thought within and the things without. When
the soul lives in a palace the body is not satisfied with rags and
patches. The glaring inequalities among men, the differences in
condition, the suffering and the poverty, have appealed to the good
and great of every age, and there has been in the brain of the
philanthropist a dream--a hope, a prophecy, of a better day.

It was believed that tyranny was the foundation and cause of the
differences between men--that the rich were all robbers and the poor all
victims, and that if a society or government could be founded on equal
rights and privileges, the inequalities would disappear, that all would
have food and clothes and reasonable work and reasonable leisure, and
that content would be found by every hearth.

There was a reliance on nature--an idea that men had interfered with the
harmonious action of great principles which if left to themselves would
work out universal wellbeing for the human race. Others imagined that
the inequalities between men were necessary--that they were part of a
divine plan, and that all would be adjusted in some other world--that
the poor here would be the rich there, and the rich here might be in
torture there. Heaven became the reward of the poor, of the slave, and
hell their revenge.

When our Government was established it was declared that all men are
endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights, among which
were life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. It was then believed
that if all men had an equal opportunity, if they were allowed to make
and execute their own laws, to levy their own taxes, the frightful
inequalities seen in the despotisms and monarchies of the old world
would entirely disappear. This was the dream of 1776. The founders of
the Government knew how kings and princes and dukes and lords and barons
had lived upon the labor of the peasants. They knew the history of those
ages of want and crime, of luxury and suffering. But in spite of
our Declaration, in spite of our Constitution, in spite of universal
suffrage, the inequalities still exist. We have the kings and
princes, the lords and peasants, in fact, if not in name. Monopolists,
corporations, capitalists, workers for wages, have taken their places,
and we are forced to admit that even universal suffrage cannot clothe
and feed the world.

For thousands of years men have been talking and writing about the great
law of supply and demand--and insisting that in some way this mysterious
law has governed and will continue to govern the activities of the human
race. It is admitted that this law is merciless--that when the demand
fails, the producer, the laborer, must suffer, must perish--that the
law feels neither pity nor malice--it simply acts, regardless of
consequences. Under this law capital will employ the cheapest. The
single man can work for less than the married. Wife and children are
luxuries not to be enjoyed under this law. The ignorant have fewer wants
than the educated, and for this reason can afford to work for less.
The great law will give employment to the single and to the ignorant in
preference to the married and intelligent. The great law has nothing
to do with food or clothes, with filth or crime. It cares nothing for
homes, for penitentiaries, or asylums. It simply acts--and some men
triumph, some succeed, some fail, and some perish.

Others insist that the curse of the world is monopoly. And yet, as
long as some men are stronger than others, as long as some are more
intelligent than others, they must be, to the extent of such advantage,
monopolists. Every man of genius is a monopolist.

We are told that the great remedy against monopoly--that is to say,
against extortion, is free and unrestricted competition. But after all,
the history of this world shows that the brutalities of competition are
equaled only by those of monopoly. The successful competitor becomes a
monopolist, and if competitors fail to destroy each other, the instinct
of self-preservation suggests a combination. In other words, competition
is a struggle between two or more persons or corporations for the
purpose of determining which shall have the uninterrupted privilege of
extortion.

In this country the people have had the greatest reliance on
competition. If a railway company charged too much a rival road was
built. As a matter of fact, we are indebted for half the railroads of
the United States to the extortion of the other half, and the same may
truthfully be said of telegraph lines. As a rule, while the exactions
of monopoly constructed new roads and new lines, competition has either
destroyed the weaker, or produced the pool which is a means of keeping
both monopolies alive, or of producing a new monopoly with greater
needs, supplied by methods more heartless than the old. When a rival
road is built the people support the rival because the fares and
freights are somewhat less. Then the old and richer monopoly inaugurates
war, and the people, glorying in the benefits of competition, are absurd
enough to support the old. In a little while the new company, unable to
maintain the contest, left by the people at the mercy of the stronger,
goes to the wall, and the triumphant monopoly proceeds to make the
intelligent people pay not only the old price, but enough in addition to
make up for the expenses of the contest.

Is there any remedy for this? None, except with the people themselves.
When the people become intelligent enough to support the rival at a
reasonable price; when they know enough to allow both roads to live;
when they are intelligent enough to recognize a friend and to stand by
that friend as against a known enemy, this question will be at least on
the edge of a solution.

So far as I know, this course has never been pursued except in one
instance, and that is the present war between the Gould and Mackay
cables. The Gould system had been charging from sixty to eighty cents a
word, and the Mackay system charged forty. Then the old monopoly tried
to induce the rival to put the prices back to sixty. The rival refused,
and thereupon the Gould combination dropped to twelve and a half, for
the purpose of destroying the rival. The Mackay cable fixed the tariff
at twenty-five cents, saying to its customers, "You are intelligent
enough to understand what this war means. If our cables are defeated,
the Gould system will go back not only to the old price, but will add
enough to reimburse itself for the cost of destroying us. If you really
wish for competition, if you desire a reasonable service at a reasonable
rate, you will support us." Fortunately an exceedingly intelligent class
of people does business by the cables. They are merchants, bankers, and
brokers, dealing with large amounts, with intricate, complicated, and
international questions. Of necessity, they are used to thinking for
themselves. They are not dazzled into blindness by the glare of the
present. They see the future. They are not duped by the sunshine of a
moment or the promise of an hour. They see beyond the horizon of a
penny saved. These people had intelligence enough to say, "The rival who
stands between us and extortion is our friend, and our friend shall not
be allowed to die."

Does not this tend to show that people must depend upon themselves, and
that some questions can be settled by the intelligence of those who buy,
of those who use, and that customers are not entirely helpless?

Another thing should not be forgotten, and that is this: there is the
same war between monopolies that there is between individuals, and the
monopolies for many years have been trying to destroy each other. They
have unconsciously been working for the extinction of monopolies. These
monopolies differ as individuals do. You find among them the rich and
the poor, the lucky and the unfortunate, millionaires and tramps. The
great monopolies have been devouring the little ones.

Only a few years ago, the railways in this country were controlled by
local directors and local managers. The people along the lines were
interested in the stock. As a consequence, whenever any legislation was
threatened hostile to the interests of these railways, they had local
friends who used their influence with legislators, governors and juries.
During this time they were protected, but when the hard times came many
of these companies were unable to pay their interest. They suddenly
became Socialists. They cried out against their prosperous rivals. They
felt like joining the Knights of Labor. They began to talk about rights
and wrongs. But in spite of their cries, they have passed into the hands
of the richer roads--they were seized by the great monopolies. Now the
important railways are owned by persons living in large cities or in
foreign countries. They have no local friends, and when the time conies,
and it may come, for the General Government to say how much these
companies shall charge for passengers and freight, they will have no
local friends. It may be that the great mass of the people will then be
on the other side. So that after all, the great corporations have been
busy settling the question against themselves.

Possibly a majority of the American people believe to-day that in some
way all these questions between capital and labor can be settled by
constitutions, laws, and judicial decisions. Most people imagine that a
statute is a sovereign specific for any evil. But while the theory has
all been one way, the actual experience has been the other--just as the
free traders have all the arguments and the protectionists most of the
facts.

The truth is, as Mr. Buckle says, that for five hundred years all real
advance in legislation has been made by repealing laws. Of one thing
we must be satisfied, and that is that real monopolies have never
been controlled by law, but the fact that such monopolies exist, is
a demonstration that the law has been controlled. In our country,
legislators are for the most part controlled by those who, by their
wealth and influence, elect them. The few, in reality, cast the votes of
the many, and the few influence the ones voted for by the many. Special
interests, being active, secure special legislation, and the object of
special legislation is to create a kind of monopoly--that is to say, to
get some advantage. Chiefs, barons, priests, and kings ruled, robbed,
destroyed, and duped, and their places have been taken by corporations,
monopolists, and politicians. The large fish still live on the little
ones, and the fine theories have as yet failed to change the condition
of mankind.

Law in this country is effective only when it is the recorded will of a
majority. When the zealous few get control of the Legislature, and laws
are passed to prevent Sabbath-breaking, or wine-drinking, they succeed
only in putting their opinions and provincial prejudices in legal
phrase. There was a time when men worked from fourteen to sixteen hours
a day. These hours have not been lessened, they have not been shortened
by law. The law has followed and recorded, but the law is not a leader
and not a prophet. It appears to be impossible to fix wages--just as
impossible as to fix the values of all manufactured things, including
works of art. The field is too great, the problem too complicated, for
the human mind to grasp.

To fix the value of labor is to fix all values--labor being the
foundation of all values. The value of labor cannot be fixed unless we
understand the relations that all things bear to each other and to man.
If labor were a legal tender--if a judgment for so many dollars could be
discharged by so many days of labor,--and the law was that twelve hours
of work should be reckoned as one day, then the law could change the
hours to ten or eight, and the judgments could be paid in the shortened
days. But it is easy to see that in all contracts made after the
passage of such a law, the difference in hours would be taken into
consideration.

We must remember that law is not a creative force. It produces nothing.
It raises neither corn nor wine. The legitimate object of law is to
protect the weak, to prevent violence and fraud, and to enforce honest
contracts, to the end that each person may be free to do as he desires,
provided only that he does not interfere with the rights of others. Our
fathers tried to make people religious by law. They failed. Thousands
are now trying to make people temperate in the same manner. Such efforts
always have been and probably always will be failures. People who
believe that an infinite God gave to the Hebrews a perfect code of laws,
must admit that even this code failed to civilize the inhabitants of
Palestine.

It seems impossible to make people just or charitable or industrious
or agreeable or successful, by law, any more than you can make them
physically perfect or mentally sound. Of course we admit that good
people intend to make good laws, and that good laws faithfully and
honestly executed, tend to the preservation of human rights and to the
elevation of the race, but the enactment of a law not in accordance with
a sentiment already existing in the minds and hearts of the people--the
very people who are depended upon to enforce this law--is not a help,
but a hindrance. A real law is but the expression, in an authoritative
and accurate form, of the judgment and desire of the majority. As
we become intelligent and kind, this intelligence and kindness find
expression in law.

But how is it possible to fix the wages of every man? To fix wages is to
fix prices, and a government to do this intelligently, would necessarily
have to have the wisdom generally attributed to an infinite Being. It
would have to supervise and fix the conditions of every exchange of
commodities and the value of every conceivable thing. Many things can be
accomplished by law, employeers may be held responsible for injuries to
the employed. The mines can be ventilated. Children can be rescued
from the deformities of toil--burdens taken from the backs of wives and
mothers--houses made wholesome, food healthful--that is to say, the weak
can be protected from the strong, the honest from the vicious, honest
contracts can be enforced, and many rights protected.

The men who have simply strength, muscle, endurance, compete not only
with other men of strength, but with the inventions of genius. What
would doctors say if physicians of iron could be invented with curious
cogs and wheels, so that when a certain button was touched the proper
prescription would be written? How would lawyers feel if a lawyer could
be invented in such a way that questions of law, being put in a kind of
hopper and a crank being turned, decisions of the highest court could be
prophesied without failure? And how would the ministers feel if somebody
should invent a clergyman of wood that would to all intents and purposes
answer the purpose?

Invention has filled the world with the competitors not only of
laborers, but of mechanics--mechanics of the highest skill. To-day the
ordinary laborer is for the most part a cog in a wheel. He works with
the tireless--he feeds the insatiable. When the monster stops, the
man is out of employment, out of bread; He has not saved anything. The
machine that he fed was not feeding him, was not working for him--the
invention was not for his benefit. The other day I heard a man say
that it was almost impossible for thousands of good mechanics to get
employment, and that, in his judgment, the Government ought to furnish
work for the people. A few minutes after, I heard another say that he
was selling a patent for cutting out clothes, that one of his machines
could do the work of twenty tailors, and that only the week before he
had sold two to a great house in New York, and that over forty cutters
had been discharged.

On every side men are being discharged and machines are being invented
to take their places. When the great factory shuts down, the workers who
inhabited it and gave it life, as thoughts do the brain, go away and it
stands there like an empty skull. A few workmen, by the force of
habit, gather about the closed doors and broken windows and talk about
distress, the price of food and the coming winter. They are convinced
that they have not had their share of what their labor created. They
feel certain that the machines inside were not their friends. They look
at the mansion of the employeer and think of the places where they live.
They have saved nothing--nothing but themselves. The employeer seems to
have enough. Even when employeers fail, when they become bankrupt, they
are far better off than the laborers ever were. Their worst is better
than the toilers' best.

The capitalist comes forward with his specific. He tells the workingman
that he must be economical--and yet, under the present system, economy
would only lessen wages. Under the great law of supply and demand every
saving, frugal, self-denying workingman is unconsciously doing what
little he can to reduce the compensation of himself and his fellows. The
slaves who did not wish to run away helped fasten chains on those who
did. So the saving mechanic is a certificate that wages are high enough.
Does the great law demand that every worker live on the least possible
amount of bread? Is it his fate to work one day, that he may get enough
food to be able to work another? Is that to be his only hope--that and
death?

Capital has always claimed and still claims the right to combine.
Manufacturers meet and determine upon prices, even in spite of the great
law of supply and demand. Have the laborers the same right to consult
and combine? The rich meet in the bank, the clubhouse, or parlor.
Workingmen, when they combine, gather in the street. All the organized
forces of society are against them. Capital has the army and the navy,
the legislative, the judicial, and the executive departments. When the
rich combine, it is for the purpose of "exchanging ideas." When the poor
combine, it is a "conspiracy." If they act in concert, if they really do
something, it is a "mob." If they defend themselves, it is "treason."
How is it that the rich control the departments of government? In this
country the political power is equally divided among the men. There are
certainly more poor than there are rich. Why should the rich control?
Why should not the laborers combine for the purpose of controlling the
executive, legislative, and judicial departments? Will they ever find
how powerful they are?

In every country there is a satisfied class--too satisfied to care. They
are like the angels in heaven, who are never disturbed by the miseries
of earth. They are too happy to be generous. This satisfied class asks
no questions and answers none. They believe the world is as it should
be. All reformers are simply disturbers of the peace. When they talk
low, they should not be listened to; when they talk loud, they should be
suppressed.

The truth is to-day what it always has been--what it always will
be--those who feel are the only ones who think. A cry comes from the
oppressed, from the hungry, from the down-trodden, from the unfortunate,
from men who despair and from women who weep. There are times when
mendicants become revolutionists--when a rag becomes a banner, under
which the noblest and bravest battle for the right.

How are we to settle the unequal contest between men and machines? Will
the machine finally go into partnership with the laborer? Can these
forces of nature be controlled for the benefit of her suffering
children? Will extravagance keep pace with ingenuity? Will the workers
become intelligent enough and strong enough to be the owners of the
machines? Will these giants, these Titans, shorten or lengthen the hours
of labor? Will they give leisure to the industrious, or will they make
the rich richer, and the poor poorer?

Is man involved in the "general scheme of things"? Is there no pity, no
mercy? Can man become intelligent enough to be generous, to be just;
or does the same law or fact control him that controls the animal and
vegetable world? The great oak steals the sunlight from the smaller
trees. The strong animals devour the weak--everything eating something
else--everything at the mercy of beak and claw and hoof and tooth--of
hand and club, of brain and greed--inequality, injustice, everywhere.

The poor horse standing in the street with his dray, overworked,
over-whipped, and under-fed, when he sees other horses groomed to
mirrors, glittering with gold and silver, scorning with proud feet the
very earth, probably indulges in the usual socialistic reflections, and
this same horse, worn out and old, deserted by his master, turned into
the dusty road, leans his head on the topmost rail, looks at donkeys in
a field of clover, and feels like a Nihilist.

In the days of savagery the strong devoured the weak--actually ate
their flesh. In spite of all the laws that man has made, in spite of
all advance in science, literature and art, the strong, the cunning, the
heartless still live on the weak, the unfortunate, and foolish. True,
they do not eat their flesh, they do not drink their blood, but they
live on their labor, on their self-denial, their weariness and want.
The poor man who deforms himself by toil, who labors for wife and child
through all his anxious, barren, wasted life--who goes to the grave
without even having had one luxury--has been the food of others. He has
been devoured by his fellow-men. The poor woman living in the bare
and lonely room, cheerless and fireless, sewing night and day to keep
starvation from a child, is slowly being eaten by her fellow-men. When
I take into consideration the agony of civilized life--the number of
failures, the poverty, the anxiety, the tears, the withered hopes, the
bitter realities, the hunger, the crime, the humiliation, the shame--I
am almost forced to say that cannibalism, after all, is the most
merciful form in which man has ever lived upon his fellow-man.

Some of the best and purest of our race have advocated what is known
as Socialism. They have not only taught, but, what is much more to
the purpose, have believed that a nation should be a family; that the
government should take care of all its children; that it should provide
work and food and clothes and education for all, and that it should
divide the results of all labor equitably with all.

Seeing the inequalities among men, knowing of the destitution and crime,
these men were willing to sacrifice, not only their own liberties, but
the liberties of all.

Socialism seems to be one of the worst possible forms of slavery.
Nothing, in my judgment, would so utterly paralyze all the forces, all
the splendid ambitions and aspirations that now tend to the civilization
of man. In ordinary systems of slavery there are some masters, a few are
supposed to be free; but in a socialistic state all would be slaves.

If the government is to provide work it must decide for the worker
what he must do. It must say who shall chisel statues, who shall
paint pictures, who shall compose music, and who shall practice the
professions. Is any government, or can any government, be capable
of intelligently performing these countless duties? It must not only
control work, it must not only decide what each shall do, but it must
control expenses, because expenses bear a direct relation to products.
Therefore the government must decide what the worker shall eat and
wherewithal he shall be clothed; the kind of house in which he shall
live; the manner in which it shall be furnished, and, if this government
furnishes the work, it must decide on the days or the hours of leisure.
More than this, it must fix values; it must decide not only who shall
sell, but who shall buy, and the price that must be paid--and it must
fix this value not simply upon the labor, but on everything that can be
produced, that can be exchanged or sold.

Is it possible to conceive of a despotism beyond this?

The present condition of the world is bad enough, with its poverty and
ignorance, but it is far better than it could by any possibility be
under any government like the one described. There would be less hunger
of the body, but not of the mind. Each man would simply be a citizen of
a large penitentiary, and, as in every well regulated prison, somebody
would decide what each should do. The inmates of a prison retire
early; they rise with the sun; they have something to eat; they are not
dissipated; they have clothes; they attend divine service; they have but
little to say about their neighbors; they do not suffer from cold; their
habits are excellent, and yet, no one envies their condition. Socialism
destroys the family. The children belong to the state. Certain officers
take the places of parents. Individuality is lost.

The human race cannot afford to exchange its liberty for any possible
comfort. You remember the old fable of the fat dog that met the lean
wolf in the forest. The wolf, astonished to see so prosperous an animal,
inquired of the dog where he got his food, and the dog told him that
there was a man who took care of him, gave him his breakfast, his
dinner, and his supper with the utmost regularity, and that he had all
that he could eat and very little to do. The wolf said, "Do you think
this man would treat me as he does you?" The dog replied, "Yes, come
along with me." So they jogged on together toward the dog's home. On the
way the wolf happened to notice that some hair was worn off the dog's
neck, and he said, "How did the hair become worn?" "That is," said the
dog, "the mark of the collar--my master ties me at night." "Oh," said
the wolf, "Are you chained? Are you deprived of your liberty? I believe
I will go back. I prefer hunger."

It is impossible for any man with a good heart to be satisfied with this
world as it now is. No one can truly enjoy even what he earns--what he
knows to be his own, knowing that millions of his fellow-men are in
misery and want. When we think of the famished we feel that it is almost
heartless to eat. To meet the ragged and shivering makes one almost
ashamed to be well dressed and warm--one feels as though his heart was
as cold as their bodies.

In a world filled with millions and millions of acres of land waiting to
be tilled, where one man can raise the food for hundreds, millions are
on the edge of famine. Who can comprehend the stupidity at the bottom of
this truth?

Is there to be no change? Are "the law of supply and demand," invention
and science, monopoly and competition, capital and legislation always to
be the enemies of those who toil?

Will the workers always be ignorant enough and stupid enough to give
their earnings for the useless? Will they support millions of soldiers
to kill the sons of other workingmen? Will they always build temples
for ghosts and phantoms, and live in huts and dens themselves? Will they
forever allow parasites with crowns, and vampires with mitres, to
live upon their blood? Will they remain the slaves of the beggars they
support? How long will they be controlled by friends who seek favors,
and by reformers who want office? Will they always prefer famine in the
city to a feast in the fields? Will they ever feel and know that
they have no right to bring children into this world that they cannot
support? Will they use their intelligence for themselves, or for others?
Will they become wise enough to know that they cannot obtain their own
liberty by destroying that of others? Will they finally see that every
man has a right to choose his trade, his profession, his employment,
and has the right to work when, and for whom, and for what he will?
Will they finally say that the man who has had equal privileges with all
others has no right to complain, or will they follow the example
that has been set by their oppressors? Will they learn that force, to
succeed, must have a thought behind it, and that anything done, in order
that it may endure, must rest upon the corner-stone of justice?

Will they, at the command of priests, forever extinguish the spark that
sheds a little light in every brain? Will they ever recognize the fact
that labor, above all things, is honorable--that it is the foundation of
virtue? Will they understand that beggars cannot be generous, and that
every healthy man must earn the right to live? Will honest men stop
taking off their hats to successful fraud? Will industry, in the
presence of crowned idleness, forever fall upon its knees, and will the
lips unstained by lies forever kiss the robed impostor's hand?--North
American Review, March, 1887.




ART AND MORALITY.

ART is the highest form of expression, and exists for the sake of
expression. Through art thoughts become visible. Back of forms are the
desire, the longing, the brooding creative instinct, the maternity of
mind and the passion that give pose and swell, outline and color.

Of course there is no such thing as absolute beauty or absolute
morality. We now clearly perceive that beauty and conduct are relative.
We have outgrown the provincialism that thought is back of substance,
as well as the old Platonic absurdity, that ideas existed before the
subjects of thought. So far, at least, as man is concerned, his thoughts
have been produced by his surroundings, by the action and interaction
of things upon his mind; and so far as man is concerned, things have
preceded thoughts. The impressions that these things make upon us
are what we know of them. The absolute is beyond the human mind. Our
knowledge is confined to the relations that exist between the totality
of things that we call the universe, and the effect upon ourselves.

Actions are deemed right or wrong, according to experience and the
conclusions of reason. Things are beautiful by the relation that certain
forms, colors, and modes of expression bear to us. At the foundation of
the beautiful will be found the fact of happiness, the gratification of
the senses, the delight of intellectual discovery and the surprise and
thrill of appreciation. That which we call the beautiful, wakens into
life through the association of ideas, of memories, of experiences, of
suggestions of pleasure past and the perception that the prophecies of
the ideal have been and will be fulfilled.

Art cultivates and kindles the imagination, and quickens the conscience.
It is by imagination that we put ourselves in the place of another. When
the wings of that faculty are folded, the master does not put himself in
the place of the slave; the tyrant is not locked in the dungeon, chained
with his victim. The inquisitor did not feel the flames that devoured
the martyr. The imaginative man, giving to the beggar, gives to himself.
Those who feel indignant at the perpetration of wrong, feel for the
instant that they are the victims; and when they attack the aggressor
they feel that they are defending themselves. Love and pity are the
children of the imagination.

Our fathers read with great approbation the mechanical sermons in rhyme
written by Milton, Young and Pollok. Those theological poets wrote
for the purpose of convincing their readers that the mind of man
is diseased, filled with infirmities, and that poetic poultices and
plasters tend to purify and strengthen the moral nature of the human
race. Nothing to the true artist, to the real genius, is so contemptible
as the "medicinal view."

Poems were written to prove that the practice of virtue was an
investment for another world, and that whoever followed the advice found
in those solemn, insincere and lugubrious rhymes, although he might
be exceedingly unhappy in this world, would with great certainty be
rewarded in the next. These writers assumed that there was a kind of
relation between rhyme and religion, between verse and virtue; and that
it was their duty to call the attention of the world to all the snares
and pitfalls of pleasure. They wrote with a purpose. They had a distinct
moral end in view. They had a plan. They were missionaries, and their
object was to show the world how wicked it was and how good they, the
writers, were. They could not conceive of a man being so happy that
everything in nature partook of his feeling; that all the birds were
singing for him, and singing by reason of his joy; that everything
sparkled and shone and moved in the glad rhythm of his heart. They could
not appreciate this feeling. They could not think of this joy guiding
the artist's hand, seeking expression in form and color. They did not
look upon poems, pictures, and statues as results, as children of the
brain fathered by sea and sky, by flower and star, by love and light.
They were not moved by gladness. They felt the responsibility of
perpetual duty. They had a desire to teach, to sermonize, to point
out and exaggerate the faults of others and to describe the virtues
practiced by themselves. Art became a colporteur, a distributer of
tracts, a mendicant missionary whose highest ambition was to suppress
all heathen joy.

Happy people were supposed to have forgotten, in a reckless moment, duty
and responsibility. True poetry would call them back to a realization of
their meanness and their misery. It was the skeleton at the feast, the
rattle of whose bones had a rhythmic sound. It was the forefinger of
warning and doom held up in the presence of a smile.

These moral poets taught the "unwelcome truths," and by the paths of
life put posts on which they painted hands pointing at graves. They
loved to see the pallor on the cheek of youth, while they talked, in
solemn tones, of age, decrepitude and lifeless clay.

Before the eyes of love they thrust, with eager hands, the skull of
death. They crushed the flowers beneath their feet and plaited crowns of
thorns for every brow.

According to these poets, happiness was inconsistent with virtue. The
sense of infinite obligation should be perpetually present. They assumed
an attitude of superiority. They denounced and calumniated the reader.
They enjoyed his confusion when charged with total depravity. They loved
to paint the sufferings of the lost, the worthlessness of human life,
the littleness of mankind, and the beauties of an unknown world. They
knew but little of the heart. They did not know that without passion
there is no virtue, and that the really passionate are the virtuous.

Art has nothing to do directly with morality or immorality. It is its
own excuse for being; it exists for itself.

The artist who endeavors to enforce a lesson, becomes a preacher; and
the artist who tries by hint and suggestion to enforce the immoral,
becomes a pander.

There is an infinite difference between the nude and the naked, between
the natural and the undressed. In the presence of the pure, unconscious
nude, nothing can be more contemptible than those forms in which are
the hints and suggestions of drapery, the pretence of exposure, and the
failure to conceal. The undressed is vulgar--the nude is pure.

The old Greek statues, frankly, proudly nude, whose free and perfect
limbs have never known the sacrilege of clothes, were and are as free
from taint, as pure, as stainless, as the image of the morning star
trembling in a drop of perfumed dew.

Morality is the harmony between act and circumstance. It is the melody
of conduct. A wonderful statue is the melody of proportion. A great
picture is the melody of form and color. A great statue does not suggest
labor; it seems to have been created as a joy. A great painting suggests
no weariness and no effort; the greater, the easier it seems. So a great
and splendid life seems to have been without effort. There is in it no
idea of obligation, no idea of responsibility or of duty. The idea of
duty changes to a kind of drudgery that which should be, in the perfect
man, a perfect pleasure.

The artist, working simply for the sake of enforcing a moral, becomes
a laborer. The freedom of genius is lost, and the artist is absorbed in
the citizen. The soul of the real artist should be moved by this melody
of proportion as the body is unconsciously swayed by the rhythm of a
symphony. No one can imagine that the great men who chiseled the statues
of antiquity intended to teach the youth of Greece to be obedient
to their parents. We cannot believe that Michael Angelo painted his
grotesque and somewhat vulgar "Day of Judgment" for the purpose of
reforming Italian thieves. The subject was in all probability selected
by his employeer, and the treatment was a question of art, without
the slightest reference to the moral effect, even upon priests. We are
perfectly certain that Corot painted those infinitely poetic
landscapes, those cottages, those sad poplars, those leafless vines on
weather-tinted walls, those quiet pools, those contented cattle, those
fields flecked with light, over which bend the skies, tender as the
breast of a mother, without once thinking of the ten commandments. There
is the same difference between moral art and the product of true genius,
that there is between prudery and virtue.

The novelists who endeavor to enforce what they are pleased to
call "moral truths," cease to be artists. They create two kinds of
characters--types and caricatures. The first never has lived, and the
second never will. The real artist produces neither. In his pages you
will find individuals, natural people, who have the contradictions and
inconsistencies inseparable from humanity. The great artists "hold the
mirror up to nature," and this mirror reflects with absolute accuracy.
The moral and the immoral writers--that is to say, those who have some
object besides that of art--use convex or concave mirrors, or those with
uneven surfaces, and the result is that the images are monstrous and
deformed. The little novelist and the little artist deal either in the
impossible or the exceptional. The men of genius touch the universal.
Their words and works throb in unison with the great ebb and flow of
things. They write and work for all races and for all time.

It has been the object of thousands of reformers to destroy
the passions, to do away with desires; and could this object be
accomplished, life would become a burden, with but one desire--that is
to say, the desire for extinction. Art in its highest forms increases
passion, gives tone and color and zest to life. But while it increases
passion, it refines. It extends the horizon. The bare necessities of
life constitute a prison, a dungeon. Under the influence of art the
walls expand, the roof rises, and it becomes a temple.

Art is not a sermon, and the artist is not a preacher. Art accomplishes
by indirection. The beautiful refines. The perfect in art suggests the
perfect in conduct. The harmony in music teaches, without intention, the
lesson of proportion in life. The bird in his song has no moral purpose,
and yet the influence is humanizing. The beautiful in nature acts
through appreciation and sympathy. It does not browbeat, neither does
it humiliate. It is beautiful without regard to you. Roses would be
unbearable if in their red and perfumed hearts were mottoes to the
effect that bears eat bad boys and that honesty is the best policy.

Art creates an atmosphere in which the proprieties, the amenities, and
the virtues unconsciously grow. The rain does not lecture the seed. The
light does not make rules for the vine and flower.

The heart is softened by the pathos of the perfect.

The world is a dictionary of the mind, and in this dictionary of things
genius discovers analogies, resemblances, and parallels amid opposites,
likeness in difference, and corroboration in contradiction. Language
is but a multitude of pictures. Nearly every word is a work of art, a
picture represented by a sound, and this sound represented by a mark,
and this mark gives not only the sound, but the picture of something in
the outward world and the picture of something within the mind, and with
these words which were once pictures, other pictures are made.

The greatest pictures and the greatest statues, the most wonderful and
marvelous groups, have been painted and chiseled with words. They are as
fresh to-day as when they fell from human lips. Penelope still ravels,
weaves, and waits; Ulysses' bow is bent, and through the level rings
the eager arrow flies. Cordelia's tears are falling now. The greatest
gallery of the world is found in Shakespeare's book. The pictures and
the marbles of the Vatican and Louvre are faded, crumbling things,
compared with his, in which perfect color gives to perfect form the glow
and movement of passion's highest life.

Everything except the truth wears, and needs to wear, a mask. Little
souls are ashamed of nature. Prudery pretends to have only those
passions that it cannot feel. Moral poetry is like a respectable canal
that never overflows its banks. It has weirs through which slowly
and without damage any excess of feeling is allowed to flow. It makes
excuses for nature, and regards love as an interesting convict. Moral
art paints or chisels feet, faces, and rags. It regards the body as
obscene. It hides with drapery that which it has not the genius purely
to portray. Mediocrity becomes moral from a necessity which it has
the impudence to call virtue. It pretends to regard ignorance as the
foundation of purity and insists that virtue seeks the companionship of
the blind.

Art creates, combines, and reveals. It is the highest manifestation of
thought, of passion, of love, of intuition. It is the highest form of
expression, of history and prophecy. It allows us to look at an unmasked
soul, to fathom the abysses of passion, to understand the heights and
depths of love.

Compared with what is in the mind of man, the outward world almost
ceases to excite our wonder. The impression produced by mountains, seas,
and stars is not so great, so thrilling, as the music of Wagner.
The constellations themselves grow small when we read "Troilus and
Cres-sida," "Hamlet," or "Lear." What are seas and stars in the presence
of a heroism that holds pain and death as naught? What are seas and
stars compared with human hearts? What is the quarry compared with the
statue?

Art civilizes because it enlightens, develops, strengthens, ennobles. It
deals with the beautiful, with the passionate, with the ideal. It is the
child of the heart. To be great, it must deal with the human. It must be
in accordance with the experience, with the hopes, with the fears, and
with the possibilities of man. No one cares to paint a palace, because
there is nothing in such a picture to touch the heart. It tells of
responsibility, of the prison, of the conventional. It suggests a
load--it tells of apprehension, of weariness and ennui. The picture of
a cottage, over which runs a vine, a little home thatched with content,
with its simple life, its natural sunshine and shadow, its trees bending
with fruit, its hollyhocks and pinks, its happy children, its hum of
bees, is a poem--a smile in the desert of this world.

The great lady, in velvet and jewels, makes but a poor picture. There is
not freedom enough in her life. She is constrained. She is too far away
from the simplicity of happiness. In her thought there is too much of
the mathematical. In all art you will find a touch of chaos, of liberty;
and there is in all artists a little of the vagabond--that is to say,
genius.

The nude in art has rendered holy the beauty of woman. Every Greek
statue pleads for mothers and sisters. From these marbles come strains
of music. They have filled the heart of man with tenderness and worship.
They have kindled reverence, admiration and love. The Venus de Milo,
that even mutilation cannot mar, tends only to the elevation of our
race. It is a miracle of majesty and beauty, the supreme idea of the
supreme woman. It is a melody in marble. All the lines meet in a kind
of voluptuous and glad content. The pose is rest itself. The eyes are
filled with thoughts of love. The breast seems dreaming of a child.

The prudent is not the poetic; it is the mathematical. Genius is the
spirit of abandon; it is joyous, irresponsible. It moves in the swell
and curve of billows; it is careless of conduct and consequence. For a
moment, the chain of cause and effect seems broken; the soul is free. It
gives an account not even to itself. Limitations are forgotten; nature
seems obedient to the will; the ideal alone exists; the universe is a
symphony.

Every brain is a gallery of art, and every soul is, to a greater or less
degree, an artist. The pictures and statues that now enrich and adorn
the walls and niches of the world, as well as those that illuminate
the pages of its literature, were taken originally from the private
galleries of the brain.

The soul--that is to say the artist--compares the pictures in its own
brain with the pictures that have been taken from the galleries of
others and made visible. This soul, this artist, selects that which is
nearest perfection in each, takes such parts as it deems perfect, puts
them together, forms new pictures, new statues, and in this way creates
the ideal.

To express desires, longings, ecstasies, prophecies and passions in form
and color; to put love, hope, heroism and triumph in marble; to paint
dreams and memories with words; to portray the purity of dawn, the
intensity and glory of noon, the tenderness of twilight, the splendor
and mystery of night, with sounds; to give the invisible to sight and
touch, and to enrich the common things of earth with gems and jewels of
the mind--this is Art.--North American Review, March, 1888.




THE DIVIDED HOUSEHOLD OF FAITH.

"Let determined things to destiny hold unbewailed their way." THERE is
a continual effort in the mind of man to find the harmony that he knows
must exist between all known facts. It is hard for the scientist to
implicitly believe anything that he suspects to be inconsistent with a
known fact. He feels that every fact is a key to many mysteries--that
every fact is a detective, not only, but a perpetual witness. He knows
that a fact has a countless number of sides, and that all these sides
will match all other facts, and he also suspects that to understand one
fact perfectly--like the fact of the attraction of gravitation--would
involve a knowledge of the universe.

It requires not only candor, but courage, to accept a fact. When a new
fact is found it is generally denied, resisted, and calumniated by the
conservatives until denial becomes absurd, and then they accept it with
the statement that they always supposed it was true.

The old is the ignorant enemy of the new. The old has pedigree and
respectability; it is filled with the spirit of caste; it is associated
with great events, and with great names; it is intrenched; it has an
income--it represents property. Besides, it has parasites, and the
parasites always defend themselves.

Long ago frightened wretches who had by tyranny or piracy amassed great
fortunes, were induced in the moment of death to compromise with God
and to let their money fall from their stiffening hands into the greedy
palms of priests. In this way many theological seminaries were endowed,
and in this way prejudices, mistakes, absurdities, known as religious
truths, have been perpetuated. In this way the dead hypocrites have
propagated and supported their kind.

Most religions--no matter how honestly they originated--have been
established by brute force. Kings and nobles have used them as a
means to enslave, to degrade and rob. The priest, consciously and
unconsciously, has been the betrayer of his followers.

Near Chicago there is an ox that betrays his fellows. Cattle--twenty or
thirty at a time--are driven to the place of slaughter. This ox leads
the way--the others follow. When the place is reached, this Bishop
Dupanloup turns and goes back for other victims.

This is the worst side: There is a better.

Honest men, believing that they have found the whole truth--the real
and only faith--filled with enthusiasm, give all for the purpose of
propagating the "divine creed." They found colleges and universities,
and in perfect, pious, ignorant sincerity, provide that the creed, and
nothing but the creed, must be taught, and that if any professor teaches
anything contrary to that, he must be instantly dismissed--that is to
say, the children must be beaten with the bones of the dead.

These good religious souls erect guide-boards with a provision to the
effect that the guide-boards must remain, whether the roads are changed
or not, and with the further provision that the professors who keep and
repair the guide-boards must always insist that the roads have not been
changed.

There is still another side.

Professors do not wish to lose their salaries. They love their families
and have some regard for themselves. There is a compromise between their
bread and their brain. On pay-day they believe--at other times they have
their doubts. They settle with their own consciences by giving old words
new meanings. They take refuge in allegory, hide behind parables,
and barricade themselves with oriental imagery. They give to the most
frightful passages a spiritual meaning--and while they teach the old
creed to their followers, they speak a new philosophy to their equals.

There is still another side.

A vast number of clergymen and laymen are perfectly satisfied. They have
no doubts. They believe as their fathers and mothers did. The "scheme of
salvation" suits them because they are satisfied that they are embraced
within its terms. They give themselves no trouble. They believe because
they do not understand. They have no doubts because they do not think.
They regard doubt as a thorn in the pillow of orthodox slumber. Their
souls are asleep, and they hate only those who disturb their dreams.
These people keep their creeds for future use. They intend to have them
ready at the moment of dissolution. They sustain about the same relation
to daily life that the small-boats carried by steamers do to ordinary
navigation--they are for the moment of shipwreck. Creeds, like
life-preservers, are to be used in disaster.

We must also remember that everything in nature--bad as well as
good--has the instinct of self-preservation. All lies go armed, and
all mistakes carry concealed weapons. Driven to the last corner, even
non-resistance appeals to the dagger.

Vast interests--political, social, artistic, and individual--are
interwoven with all creeds. Thousands of millions of dollars have been
invested; many millions of people obtain their bread by the propagation
and support of certain religious doctrines, and many millions have been
educated for that purpose and for that alone. Nothing is more natural
than that they should defend themselves--that they should cling to a
creed that gives them roof and raiment.

Only a few years ago Christianity was a complete system. It included
and accounted for all phenomena; it was a philosophy satisfactory to the
ignorant world; it had an astronomy and geology of its own; it answered
all questions with the same readiness and the same inaccuracy; it had
within its sacred volumes the history of the past, and the prophecies of
all the future; it pretended to know all that was, is, or ever will be
necessary for the well-being of the human race, here and hereafter.

When a religion has been founded, the founder admitted the truth of
everything that was generally believed that did not interfere with his
system. Imposture always has a definite end in view, and for the sake of
the accomplishment of that end, it will admit the truth of anything and
everything that does not endanger its success.

The writers of all sacred books--the inspired prophets--had no reason
for disagreeing with the common people about the origin of things, the
creation of the world, the rising and setting of the sun, and the
uses of the stars, and consequently the sacred books of all ages have
indorsed the belief general at the time. You will find in our sacred
books the astronomy, the geology, the philosophy and the morality of
the ancient barbarians. The religionist takes these general ideas as his
foundation, and upon them builds the supernatural structure. For many
centuries the astronomy, geology, philosophy and morality of our Bible
were accepted. They were not questioned, for the reason that the world
was too ignorant to question.

A few centuries ago the art of printing was invented. A new world was
discovered. There was a complete revolution in commerce. The arts
were born again. The world was filled with adventure; millions became
self-reliant; old ideas were abandoned--old theories were put aside--and
suddenly, the old leaders of thought were found to be ignorant, shallow
and dishonest. The literature of the classic world was discovered
and translated into modern languages. The world was circumnavigated;
Copernicus discovered the true relation sustained by our earth to the
solar system, and about the beginning of the seventeenth century many
other wonderful discoveries were made. In 1609, a Hollander found that
two lenses placed in a certain relation to each other magnified objects
seen through them. This discovery was the foundation of astronomy. In
a little while it came to the knowledge of Galileo; the result was a
telescope, with which man has read the volume of the skies.

On the 8th day of May, 1618, Kepler discovered the greatest of his three
laws. These were the first great blows struck for the enfranchisement of
the human mind. A few began to suspect that the ancient Hebrews were not
astronomers. From that moment the church became the enemy of science.
In every possible way the inspired ignorance was defended--the lash, the
sword, the chain, the fagot and the dungeon were the arguments used by
the infuriated church.

To such an extent was the church prejudiced against the new philosophy,
against the new facts, that priests refused to look through the
telescope of Galileo.

At last it became evident to the intelligent world that the inspired
writings, literally translated, did not contain the truth--the Bible was
in danger of being driven from the heavens.

The church also had its geology. The time when the earth was created had
been definitely fixed and was certainly known. This fact had not only
been stated by inspired writers, but their statement had been indorsed
by priests, by bishops, cardinals, popes and ecumenical councils; that
was settled.

But a few men had learned the art of seeing. There were some eyes not
always closed in prayer. They looked at the things about them; they
observed channels that had been worn in solid rock by streams; they saw
the vast territories that had been deposited by rivers; their attention
was called to the slow inroads upon continents by seas--to the deposits
by volcanoes--to the sedimentary rocks--to the vast reefs that had been
built by the coral, and to the countless evidences of age, of the
lapse of time--and finally it was demonstrated that this earth had been
pursuing its course about the sun for millions and millions of ages.

The church disputed every step, denied every fact, resorted to every
device that cunning could suggest or ingenuity execute, but the conflict
could not be maintained. The Bible, so far as geology was concerned, was
in danger of being driven from the earth.

Beaten in the open field, the church began to equivocate, to evade, and
to give new meanings to inspired words. Finally, falsehood having failed
to harmonize the guesses of barbarians with the discoveries of genius,
the leading churchmen suggested that the Bible was not written to teach
astronomy, was not written to teach geology, and that it was not a
scientific book, but that it was written in the language of the people,
and that as to unimportant things it contained the general beliefs of
its time.

The ground was then taken that, while it was not inspired in its
science, it was inspired in its morality, in its prophecy, in its
account of the miraculous, in the scheme of salvation, and in all that
it had to say on the subject of religion.

The moment it was suggested that the Bible was not inspired in
everything within its lids, the seeds of suspicion were sown. The priest
became less arrogant. The church was forced to explain. The pulpit had
one language for the faithful and another for the philosophical, i. e.,
it became dishonest with both.

The next question that arose was as to the origin of man.

The Bible was being driven from the skies. The testimony of the stars
was against the sacred volume. The church had also been forced to admit
that the world was not created at the time mentioned in the Bible--so
that the very stones of the earth rose and united with the stars in
giving testimony against the sacred volume.

As to the creation of the world, the church resorted to the artifice
of saying that "days" in reality meant long periods of time; so that
no matter how old the earth was, the time could be spanned by six
periods--in other words, that the years could not be too numerous to be
divided by six.

But when it came to the creation of man, this evasion, or artifice, was
impossible. The Bible gives the date of the creation of man, because
it gives the age at which the first man died, and then it gives the
generations from Adam to the flood, and from the flood to the birth of
Christ, and in many instances the actual age of the principal ancestor
is given. So that, according to this account--according to the inspired
figures--man has existed upon the earth only about six thousand years.
There is no room left for any people beyond Adam.

If the Bible is true, certainly Adam was the first man; consequently,
we know, if the sacred volume be true, just how long man has lived and
labored and suffered on this earth.

The church cannot and dare not give up the account of the creation of
Adam from the dust of the earth, and of Eve from the rib of the man. The
church cannot give up the story of the Garden of Eden--the serpent--the
fall and the expulsion; these must be defended because they are vital.
Without these absurdities, the system known as Christianity cannot
exist. Without the fall, the atonement is a _non sequitur._ Facts
bearing upon these questions were discovered and discussed by the
greatest and most thoughtful of men. Lamarck, Humboldt, Haeckel, and
above all, Darwin, not only asserted, but demonstrated, that man is not
a special creation. If anything can be established by observation, by
reason, then the fact has been established that man is related to all
life below him--that he has been slowly produced through countless
years--that the story of Eden is a childish myth--that the fall of man
is an infinite absurdity.

If anything can be established by analogy and reason, man has existed
upon the earth for many millions of ages. We know now, if we know
anything, that people not only existed before Adam, but that they
existed in a highly civilized state; that thousands of years before the
Garden of Eden was planted men communicated to each other their ideas
by language, and that artists clothed the marble with thoughts and
passions.

This is a demonstration that the origin of man given in the Old
Testament is untrue--that the account was written by the ignorance, the
prejudice and the egotism of the olden time.

So, if anything outside of the senses can be known, we do know that
civilization is a growth--that man did not commence a perfect being, and
then degenerate, but that from small beginnings he has slowly risen, to
the intellectual height he now occupies.

The church, however, has not been willing to accept these truths,
because they contradict the sacred word. Some of the most ingenious
of the clergy have been endeavoring for years to show that there is no
conflict--that the account in Genesis is in perfect harmony with the
theories of Charles Darwin, and these clergymen in some way manage to
retain their creed and to accept a philosophy that utterly destroys it.

But in a few years the Christian world will be forced to admit that
the Bible is not inspired in its astronomy, in its geology, or in its
anthropology--that is to say, that the inspired writers knew nothing of
the sciences, knew nothing of the origin of the earth, nothing of the
origin of man--in other words, nothing of any particular value to the
human race.

It is, however, still insisted that the Bible is inspired in its
morality. Let us examine this question.

We must admit, if we know anything, if we feel anything, if conscience
is more than a word, if there is such a thing as right and such a thing
as wrong beneath the dome of heaven--we must admit that slavery is
immoral. If we are honest, we must also admit that the Old Testament
upholds slavery. It will be cheerfully admitted that Jehovah was opposed
to the enslavement of one Hebrew by another. Christians may quote the
commandment "Thou shalt not steal" as being opposed to human slavery,
but after that commandment was given, Jehovah himself told his chosen
people that they might "buy their bondmen and bondwomen of the heathen
round about, and that they should be their bondmen and their bondwomen
forever." So all that Jehovah meant by the commandment "Thou shalt not
steal" was that one Hebrew should not steal from another Hebrew, but
that all Hebrews might steal from the people of any other race or creed.

It is perfectly apparent that the Ten Commandments were made only for
the Jews, not for the world, because the author of these commandments
commanded the people to whom they were given to violate them nearly all
as against the surrounding people.

A few years ago it did not occur to the Christian world that slavery was
wrong. It was upheld by the church. Ministers bought and sold the very
people for whom they declared that Christ had died. Clergymen of the
English church owned stock in slave-ships, and the man who denounced
slavery was regarded as the enemy of morality, and thereupon was duly
mobbed by the followers of Jesus Christ. Churches were built with the
results of labor stolen from colored Christians. Babes were sold from
mothers and a part of the money given to send missionaries from America
to heathen lands with the tidings of great joy. Now every intelligent
man on the earth, every decent man, holds in abhorrence the institution
of human slavery.

So with the institution of polygamy. If anything on the earth is
immoral, that is. If there is anything calculated to destroy home, to do
away with human love, to blot out the idea of family life, to cover
the hearthstone with serpents, it is the institution of polygamy. The
Jehovah of the Old Testament was a believer in that institution.

Can we now say that the Bible is inspired in its morality? Consider for
a moment the manner in which, under the direction of Jehovah, wars were
waged. Remember the atrocities that were committed. Think of a war where
everything was the food of the sword. Think for a moment of a deity
capable of committing the crimes that are described and gloated over in
the Old Testament. The civilized man has outgrown the sacred cruelties
and absurdities.

There is still another side to this question.

A few centuries ago nothing was more natural than the unnatural.
Miracles were as plentiful as actual events. In those blessed days, that
which actually occurred was not regarded of sufficient importance to
be recorded. A religion without miracles would have excited derision.
A creed that did not fill the horizon--that did not account for
everything--that could not answer every question, would have been
regarded as worthless.

After the birth of Protestantism, it could not be admitted by the
leaders of the Reformation that the Catholic Church still had the power
of working miracles. If the Catholic Church was still in partnership
with God, what excuse could have been made for the Reformation? The
Protestants took the ground that the age of miracles had passed.
This was to justify the new faith. But Protestants could not say
that miracles had never been performed, because that would take the
foundation not only from the Catholics but from themselves; consequently
they were compelled to admit that miracles were performed in the
apostolic days, but to insist that, in their time, man must rely upon
the facts in nature. Protestants were compelled to carry on two kinds of
war; they had to contend with those who insisted that miracles had never
been performed; and in that argument they were forced to insist upon the
necessity for miracles, on the probability that they were performed, and
upon the truthfulness of the apostles. A moment afterward, they had to
answer those who contended that miracles were performed at that time;
then they brought forward against the Catholics the same arguments that
their first opponents had brought against them.

This has made every Protestant brain "a house divided against itself."
This planted in the Reformation the "irrepressible conflict."

But we have learned more and more about what we call Nature--about
what we call facts. Slowly it dawned upon the mind that force is
indestructible--that we cannot imagine force as existing apart from
matter--that we cannot even think of matter existing apart from
force--that we cannot by any possibility conceive of a cause without an
effect, of an effect without a cause, of an effect that is not also
a cause. We find no room between the links of cause and effect for a
miracle. We now perceive that a miracle must be outside of Nature--that
it can have no father, no mother--that is to say, that it is an
impossibility.

The intellectual world has abandoned the miraculous.

Most ministers are now ashamed to defend a miracle. Some try to explain
miracles, and yet, if a miracle is explained, it ceases to exist. Few
congregations could keep from smiling were the minister to seriously
assert the truth of the Old Testament miracles.

Miracles must be given up. That field must be abandoned by the religious
world. The evidence accumulates every day, in every possible direction
in which the human mind can investigate, that the miraculous is simply
the impossible.

Confidence in the eternal constancy of Nature increases day by day. The
scientist has perfect confidence in the attraction of gravitation--in
chemical affinities--in the great fact of evolution, and feels
absolutely certain that the nature of things will remain forever the
same.

We have at last ascertained that miracles can be perfectly understood;
that there is nothing mysterious about them; that they are simply
transparent falsehoods.

The real miracles are the facts in nature. No one can explain the
attraction of gravitation. No one knows why soil and rain and light
become the womb of life. No one knows why grass grows, why water runs,
or why the magnetic needle points to the north. The facts in nature are
the eternal and the only mysteries. There is nothing strange about the
miracles of superstition. They are nothing but the mistakes of ignorance
and fear, or falsehoods framed by those who wished to live on the labor
of others.

In our time the champions of Christianity, for the most part, take the
exact ground occupied by the Deists. They dare not defend in the open
field the mistakes, the cruelties, the immoralities and the absurdities
of the Bible. They shun the Garden of Eden as though the serpent was
still there. They have nothing to say about the fall of man. They are
silent as to the laws upholding slavery and polygamy. They are ashamed
to defend the miraculous. They talk about these things to Sunday schools
and to the elderly members of their congregations; but when doing battle
for the faith, they misstate the position of their opponents and then
insist that there must be a God, and that the soul is immortal.

We may admit the existence of an infinite Being; we may admit the
immortality of the soul, and yet deny the inspiration of the Scriptures
and the divine origin of the Christian religion. These doctrines, or
these dogmas, have nothing in common. The pagan world believed in God
and taught the dogma of immortality. These ideas are far older than
Christianity, and they have been almost universal.

Christianity asserts more than this. It is based upon the inspiration
of the Bible, on the fall of man, on the atonement, on the dogma of the
Trinity, on the divinity of Jesus Christ, on his resurrection from the
dead, on his ascension into heaven.

Christianity teaches not simply the immortality of the soul--not simply
the immortality of joy--but it teaches the immortality of pain,
the eternity of sorrow. It insists that evil, that wickedness, that
immorality and that every form of vice are and must be perpetuated
forever. It believes in immortal convicts, in eternal imprisonment and
in a world of unending pain. It has a serpent for every breast and a
curse for nearly every soul. This doctrine is called the dearest hope of
the human heart, and he who attacks it is denounced as the most infamous
of men.

Let us see what the church, within a few years, has been compelled
substantially to abandon,--that is to say, what it is now almost ashamed
to defend.

First, the astronomy of the sacred Scriptures; second, the geology;
third, the account given of the origin of man; fourth, the doctrine
of original sin, the fall of the human race; fifth, the mathematical
contradiction known as the Trinity; sixth, the atonement--because it was
only on the ground that man is accountable for the sin of another,
that he could be justified by reason of the righteousness of another;
seventh, that the miraculous is either the misunderstood or the
impossible; eighth, that the Bible is not inspired in its morality, for
the reason that slavery is not moral, that polygamy is not good, that
wars of extermination are not merciful, and that nothing can be more
immoral than to punish the innocent on account of the sins of the
guilty; and ninth, the divinity of Christ.

All this must be given up by the really intelligent, by those not afraid
to think, by those who have the courage of their convictions and the
candor to express their thoughts. What then is left?

Let me tell you. Everything in the Bible that is true, is left; it still
remains and is still of value. It cannot be said too often that the
truth needs no inspiration; neither can it be said too often that
inspiration cannot help falsehood. Every good and noble sentiment
uttered in the Bible is still good and noble. Every fact remains. All
that is good in the Sermon on the Mount is retained. The Lord's
Prayer is not affected. The grandeur of self-denial, the nobility of
forgiveness, and the ineffable splendor of mercy are with us still. And
besides, there remains the great hope for all the human race.

What is lost? All the mistakes, all the falsehoods, all the absurdities,
all the cruelties and all the curses contained in the Scriptures.
We have almost lost the "hope" of eternal pain--the "consolation" of
perdition; and in time we shall lose the frightful shadow that has
fallen upon so many hearts, that has darkened so many lives.

The great trouble for many years has been, and still is, that the clergy
are not quite candid. They are disposed to defend the old creed.
They have been educated in the universities of the Sacred
Mistake--universities that Bruno would call "the widows of true
learning." They have been taught to measure with a false standard; they
have weighed with inaccurate scales. In youth, they became convinced of
the truth of the creed. This was impressed upon them by the solemnity of
professors who spoke in tones of awe. The enthusiasm of life's morning
was misdirected. They went out into the world knowing nothing of value.
They preached a creed outgrown. Having been for so many years
entirely certain of their position, they met doubt with a spirit of
irritation--afterward with hatred. They are hardly courageous enough to
admit that they are wrong.

Once the pulpit was the leader--it spoke with authority. By its side
was the sword of the state, with the hilt toward its hand. Now it is
apologized for--it carries a weight. It is now like a living man to
whom has been chained a corpse. It cannot defend the old, and it has not
accepted the new. In some strange way it imagines that morality cannot
live except in partnership with the sanctified follies and falsehoods of
the past.

The old creeds cannot be defended by argument. They are not within
the circumference of reason--they are not embraced in any of the facts
within the experience of man. All the subterfuges have been exposed; all
the excuses have been shown to be shallow, and at last the church must
meet, and fairly meet, the objections of our time.

Solemnity is no longer an argument. Falsehood is no longer sacred.
People are not willing to admit that mistakes are divine. Truth is more
important than belief--far better than creeds, vastly more useful than
superstitions. The church must accept the truths of the present, must
admit the demonstrations of science, or take its place in the mental
museums with the fossils and monstrosities of the past.

The time for personalities has passed; these questions cannot be
determined by ascertaining the character of the disputants; epithets
are no longer regarded as arguments; the curse of the church produces
laughter; theological slander is no longer a weapon; argument must be
answered with argument, and the church must appeal to reason, and by
that standard it must stand or fall. The theories and discoveries of
Darwin cannot be answered by the resolutions of synods, or by quotations
from the Old Testament.

The world has advanced. The Bible has remained the same. We must go back
to the book--it cannot come to us--or we must leave it forever. In order
to remain orthodox we must forget the discoveries, the inventions,
the intellectual efforts of many centuries; we must go back until our
knowledge--or rather our ignorance--will harmonize with the barbaric
creeds.

It is not pretended that all the creeds have not been naturally
produced. It is admitted that under the same circumstances the same
religions would again ensnare the human race. It is also admitted that
under the same circumstances the same efforts would be made by the great
and intellectual of every age to break the chains of superstition.

There is no necessity of attacking people--we should combat error.
We should hate hypocrisy, but not the hypocrite--larceny, but not the
thief--superstition, but not its victim. We should do all within our
power to inform, to educate, and to benefit our fellow-men.

There is no elevating power in hatred. There is no reformation in
punishment. The soul grows greater and grander in the air of kindness,
in the sunlight of intelligence.

We must rely upon the evidence of our senses, upon the conclusions of
our reason.

For many centuries the church has insisted that man is totally depraved,
that he is naturally wicked, that all of his natural desires are
contrary to the will of God. Only a few years ago it was solemnly
asserted that our senses were originally honest, true and faithful, but
having been debauched by original sin, were now cheats and liars; that
they constantly deceived and misled the soul; that they were traps and
snares; that no man could be safe who relied upon his senses, or upon
his reason;--he must simply rely upon faith; in other words, that the
only way for man to really see was to put out his eyes.

There has been a rapid improvement in the intellectual world. The
improvement has been slow in the realm of religion, for the reason that
religion was hedged about, defended and barricaded by fear, by prejudice
and by law. It was considered sacred. It was illegal to call its truth
in question. Whoever disputed the priest became a criminal; whoever
demanded a reason, or an explanation, became a blasphemer, a scoffer, a
moral leper.

The church defended its mistakes by every means within its power.

But in spite of all this there has been advancement, and there are
enough of the orthodox clergy left to make it possible for us to measure
the distance that has been traveled by sensible people.

The world is beginning to see that a minister should be a teacher, and
that "he should not endeavor to inculcate a particular system of dogmas,
but to prepare his hearers for exercising their own judgments."

As a last resource, the orthodox tell the thoughtful that they are not
"spiritual"--that they are "of the earth, earthy"--that they cannot
perceive that which is spiritual. They insist that "God is a spirit, and
must be worshiped in spirit."

But let me ask, What is it to be spiritual? In order to be really
spiritual, must a man sacrifice this world for the sake of another?
Were the selfish hermits, who deserted their wives and children for
the miserable purpose of saving their own little souls, spiritual? Were
those who put their fellow-men in dungeons, or burned them at the state*
on account of a difference of opinion, all spiritual people? Did John
Calvin give evidence of his spirituality by burning Servetus? Were
they spiritual people who invented and used instruments of torture--who
denied the liberty of thought and expression--who waged wars for the
propagation of the faith? Were they spiritual people who insisted that
Infinite Love could punish his poor, ignorant children forever? Is it
necessary to believe in eternal torment to understand the meaning of the
word spiritual? Is it necessary to hate those who disagree with you,
and to calumniate those whose argument you cannot answer, in order to be
spiritual? Must you hold a demonstrated fact in contempt; must you deny
or avoid what you know to be true, in order to substantiate the fact
that you are spiritual?

What is it to be spiritual? Is the man spiritual who searches for the
truth--who lives in accordance with his highest ideal--who loves his
wife and children--who discharges his obligations--who makes a happy
fireside for the ones he loves--who succors the oppressed--who gives his
honest opinions--who is guided by principle--who is merciful and just?

Is the man spiritual who loves the beautiful--who is thrilled by music,
and touched to tears in the presence of the sublime, the heroic and the
self-denying? Is the man spiritual who endeavors by thought and deed to
ennoble the human race?

The defenders of the orthodox faith, by this time, should know that the
foundations are insecure.

They should have the courage to defend, or the candor to abandon. If the
Bible is an inspired book, it ought to be true. Its defenders must admit
that Jehovah knew the facts not only about the earth, but about the
stars, and that the Creator of the universe knew all about geology and
astronomy even four thousand years ago.

The champions of Christianity must show that the Bible tells the truth
about the creation of man, the Garden of Eden, the temptation, the
fall and the flood. They must take the ground that the sacred book is
historically correct; that the events related really happened; that the
miracles were actually performed; that the laws promulgated from Sinai
were and are wise and just, and that nothing is upheld, commanded,
indorsed, or in any way approved or sustained that is not absolutely
right. In other words, if they insist that a being of infinite goodness
and intelligence is the author of the Bible, they must be ready to show
that it is absolutely perfect. They must defend its astronomy, geology,
history, miracle and morality.

If the Bible is true, man is a special creation, and if man is a special
creation, millions of facts must have conspired, millions of ages ago,
to deceive the scientific world of to-day.

If the Bible is true, slavery is right, and the world should go back to
the barbarism of the lash and chain. If the Bible' is true, polygamy is
the highest form of virtue. If the Bible is true, nature has a master,
and the miraculous is independent of and superior to cause and effect.
If the Bible is true, most of the children of men are destined to suffer
eternal pain. If the Bible is true, the science known as astronomy is a
collection of mistakes--the telescope is a false witness, and light is
a luminous liar. If the Bible is true, the science known as geology is
false and every fossil is a petrified perjurer.

The defenders of orthodox creeds should have the courage to candidly
answer at least two questions: First, Is the Bible inspired? Second,
Is the Bible true? And when they answer these questions, they should
remember that if the Bible is true, it needs no inspiration, and that if
not true, inspiration can do it no good.--North American Review, August,
1888.




WHY AM I AN AGNOSTIC?

