CHAPTER V

Iron Sharpeneth Iron


Life is very jealous of its secrets, and it is only by irrepressible
questioning that man has read what he has read of the truth. The
insurgent “Why?” of our early years is perhaps the one childish
thing weought to cherish to our dying day. All sorts of
evil things--surface-familiarity, routine, but above all
self-satisfaction--combine to stifle and to end our curiosity; at length
we acquiesce in and forget our ignorance, and thereafter stand with our
prejudices cumbering the ground for those who would go further.
Questioning is health to the soul, and perhaps success is to be measured
not by the fulness of the answers we receive but by our eagerness in
asking.

Almost everyone knows that there is in the Bible a _Book of Proverbs_. A
few of its sayings are in daily use. Most men have read a chapter or
two. But at that point knowledge is apt to flag. What lack of
enterprise! It is like giving up an excursion at the first mile-stone.
Why should there be a _Book of Proverbs_? Why did men think it worth
transmitting, and why did they finally count it sacred literature? Why
has it just the form it has? How comes it, for instance, that single
sayings have sometimes blossomed into little essays, and brief
comparisons grown into finished pictures? What is the note of clear
intention which pervades the chapters and gives them a certain unity and
individuality? Zeal and energy characterise the Book. Zeal for what? The
previous chapter indicates that the answer to that last question may be
stated concisely in the one word “Wisdom,” the meaning of which
subsequent pages will unfold. The aim of the present chapter is to
discover an adequate reason for the _zeal_.

Not seldom it happens that enthusiasm for a cause is first provoked by
opposition. For example, belief that international relationships ought
to be governed by ethical principles was generally and genuinely held by
the vast majority of English-speaking people in 1914; but the belief
lacked energising force. It seemed enough to entertain it. Of the
existence of a fundamentally different conception--that Might is the
ultimate right in national affairs--we were of course aware, but the
knowledge did not disturb us greatly. We fondly imagined that after some
more debate, and a little more reflection, so unenlightened and
unneighbourly a notion must disappear. When, however, Germany suddenly
put false theory into infamous practice, mark how our amiable opinion
became not only an urgent and indispensable ideal, but a definite policy
which must at all costs be upheld and made effective, if humanity was to
be saved from the yoke of an utterly immoral tyranny. In a moment we
realised the awful immediacy of the issue that had been at stake. The
debate was not as we supposed, on paper. Here was no wordy strife. Nay!
the battle at our gates was not confined even to the quick bodies of
men; it penetrated to the very mind and spirit, so that almost St.
Paul’s words seemed again in place: “Ours is not a conflict with mere
flesh and blood, but with ... the spiritual hosts of evil arrayed
against us in the heavenly places.”[37]

Similarly it was an insistent menace that roused the fervour of the
Wise-men of Israel. Subtle but deadly opposition compelled them either
to champion their cause or see it fall. Wisdom in consequence acquired a
firmer outline. Because another Creed was in the air, it also became a
definite “Way of life.” The issues were clarified, the trend of things
revealed. It was felt there were but two paths for a man to choose, now
sharply defined and seen to lead in opposite directions:

    _Hear, O my son, and receive my sayings,
    And the years of thy life shall be many.
    I have taught thee in the way of Wisdom,
    I have led thee in paths of uprightness.
    When thou goest thy steps shall not be straightened,
    And if thou runnest thou shalt not stumble.
    Take fast hold of instruction; let her not go:
    Keep her, for she is thy life.
      Enter not into the paths of the wicked,
    And walk not in the way of evil men.
    Avoid it, pass not by it;
    Turn from it, and pass on.
    For they sleep not except they have done mischief;
    And their sleep is taken away unless they cause some to fall.
    For they eat the bread of wickedness
    And drink the wine of violence.
      But the path of the righteous is as the shining light,
    That shineth more and more unto the perfect day.
    The way of the wicked is as darkness
    They know not at what they stumble._ (Pr. 4^{10-19})[38].

What then, was Wisdom’s opponent? Not Folly in the perennial sense, else
where was the novelty of the situation? The foe was Folly masquerading
as Wisdom, a specious spurious Wisdom which, said the Jewish moralists,
despite appearances was No-Wisdom. But if it was not the reality, it was
very like it; for the false Wisdom was beautiful, brilliant, and
exceedingly effective, had all the rights of sovereignty save one, all
the qualities of permanence save one--a firm basis in morality. It
lacked only the “fear of the Lord,” which the Jew defined as “to depart
from evil,” and which he held to be the one possible foundation for the
truly wise life. Not having that, it was but the devil robed as an angel
of light, Folly of Follies, a Temple of Wisdom founded upon the sand.

In order to do justice to the efforts made by the Jews of the third and
second centuries B.C. to maintain an intellectual, moral and spiritual
independence in face of the new learning, or rather the new manner of
life we are about to describe, it is necessary to appreciate not only
the force of the attack but also the limited resources of the defence.
Let us begin therefore by striving to realise the position of the
Palestinian Jews in the ancient world.[39] The overwhelming religious
importance of the Jews has so distorted the proportions of that world
that even the professed student of antiquity finds it difficult to
recover the true perspective and realise their geographical and
historical insignificance. Without pausing to reflect, answer this
question, “Which were the chief nations of antiquity?” “The Jews, the
Greeks, the Romans,” is perhaps the reply that would rise most readily
to your lips. But as well might one classify the inhabitants of the
modern Western world into Manxmen, Europeans, and Americans! “Which were
the famous countries of the pre-Christian era?” “Palestine, Egypt,
Assyria, and Babylonia,” might be our response. But the Egyptians and
Babylonians did not hang with breathless interest on the fortunes of
Palestine, as we are naturally prone to imagine. They cared no more for
the fate of Jerusalem than modern Europe does for the fortunes of
Monaco. Now and again a king of Egypt marching north along the
Philistine plain, or a grand monarch of Babylon, sweeping south to the
borders of Nile, might turn aside a fraction of his host to ravage and
overcome the Judæan highlands. But, as a rule, Jerusalem, not being on
the main track of conquest, was not vitally affected by the coming and
going of the huge armies that issued periodically from the northern and
southern Empires.

And next consider how unimportant even in Palestine were the Jews of
post-exilic days. The history of that country is familiar to us only
from the records of the Jewish Scriptures. If with the same fulness we
could hear the story from the standpoint of Israel’s neighbours the
proportions of things might seem immensely changed. How hard it is to
remember that Solomon in all his glory had no authority in Philistine
towns thirty miles away; and that Hiram of Tyre doubtless considered
himself every whit as great a lord as the ruler of Jerusalem, and
perhaps more highly civilised, certainly his superior in the matter of
arts and crafts. In 722 B.C., with the capture of Samaria, the northern
kingdom of Israel passed out of history, and with the influx of alien
settlers into its desolated territory the district became semi-heathen.
In 586 B.C. a like fate befell the little kingdom of Judah, the Temple
of Jerusalem being burnt, the city walls destroyed and the upper classes
carried off to Babylonia. Thereafter for a period of a century and a
half Jerusalem existed only as an enfeebled, unfortified township. The
return of exiles from Babylon in the reign of Cyrus (537 B.C.), though
the fame of it bulked large in Jewish tradition, was no great increase
of strength, perhaps little more than the accession of a few influential
families. Not until a century later in the time of Nehemiah, about 432
B.C., did the Jews feel that their political history had recommenced;
and, even so, the work of Nehemiah was not the creation of a kingdom for
his people but the circumvallation of their one city. With its walls
restored Jerusalem might again be said to exist, a defenced city, no
longer dependent on the mercy of petty and jealous neighbours. But the
territories of the Jews remained much as before; namely the fields and
little villages to a distance of some ten or fifteen miles around
Jerusalem. Nor was there any considerable extension of purely Jewish
land until the successes of the Maccabees were gained in 166 B.C. To sum
up. Even after the work of Nehemiah had been accomplished, the Jewish
State in Palestine was still no more than an insignificant upland
community, a drop in the ocean of pagan races enclosing it; a tract some
fifteen miles in length and breadth with Jerusalem as its only city.
Doubtless the Jews were encouraged by the prosperity of their kinsfolk
in the great cities of Babylonia, Syria and Egypt. But that was a source
only of moral or financial help, not of physical protection: and to the
east were the wild nomadic tribes, and south of Jerusalem the
treacherous Edomites, and to the north the worse than alien Samaritans,
whose Temple on Mount Gerizim challenged Jerusalem’s last glory, its
spiritual pre-eminence. Galilee was heathen land; on the west were the
splendid heathen cities of the coast; and far to the distant south
beyond mysterious Nile and away to the most distant north ranged the
vast territories of heathen monarchs before whose military power and
worldly splendour Jerusalem was altogether less than nothing and vanity.

In 332 B.C. a thunderbolt smote all the countries of the near East. In
that year a European army, led by the young king of Macedonia, Alexander
the Great, invaded Asia Minor--with such astonishing effects that the
event marks the commencement of a distinct epoch in history, the Greek
or Hellenic age. Military conquests prove sometimes to be of small
consequence in the great movement of human affairs, and famous battles
often have decided no more than that so many thousand men should die
untimely deaths and that this royal house instead of that should hold
the throne: an almost meaningless result. Only those wars are decisive
which, like the present one, involve the dominance of one or other of
two divergent conceptions or ideals of human life. Now the conquests of
Alexander were of this latter character; and, that being so, their
significance has to be measured not only from the standpoint of events
but also from the history of ideas. At this point then--the coming of
the Greeks to the East--let our narrative be checked for a moment that
we may reach the same event by following up a different line of thought,
namely the history of the development of human society. What is the
significance of Alexander from that point of view? Our aim in examining
the question will have to be threefold; to present (of course, in
simplest outline) _first_, the ruling principles of the Eastern or
Oriental manner of life; _secondly_, the Western--that is, the Greek or
Hellenic--ideals; and _thirdly_, the attempt of Alexander and his
successors to impose this Hellenic culture upon the Easterns and, in
particular, upon the Jews in Palestine.

1. First, of ancient Oriental life. In a previous chapter it was said
that behind Palestine looms Arabia and beneath the Jew is the Arab. From
before the dawn of history the immense grass-lands of Arabia have been
peopled by small nomadic tribes who derived a sufficient livelihood from
the flocks they possessed and followed. All the organised life of the
Semitic races, with whom alone we are here concerned, has its instincts
rooted in this nomadic existence, about which much might profitably be
said; but only one point is essential, and to that our remarks will be
confined. It is that these pastoral communities have solved the problem
of life under existing circumstances. The rigid limitations of their
physical surroundings dictates a narrow circle of ambitions beyond which
they do not pass, so long as the conditions remain unchanged. For not
only have they discovered how to live, but they have found out the best
way of living, within their simple, monotonous world. Therefore they
continue, but they do not change. Progress was practically unthought of,
certainly undesired; and in fact the life of the modern Bedouin of
Arabia is still in its essentials the same as that depicted in the _Book
of Genesis_. But about 3000 B.C., for the first time though not the last
time in history, Arabia became overcrowded, in the sense that its
pasturage was insufficient to sustain the population, and multitudes of
nomads, hunger-driven, poured forth into the fertile territories
bordering the deserts. There the arts of agriculture and of building
were learnt, settled communities formed, tribal organisation yielded to
larger groups, kingdoms arose, and eventually great empires. But the
civilised life of the Semites proved to be as lacking in the instinct
for progress, whether material, moral or intellectual, as in its simpler
way the original pastoral existence has been. Life in Semitic towns
became richer and more complex up to a certain point, but there ambition
faded, and the ingrained habit of acquiescence in existing circumstances
prevailed, hindering and preventing further growth. Thus, politically,
this eastern civilisation was characterised by the mass of the people
seeking no share in their own government. They were content to be ruled
by authorities whom they seldom created and never effectively
controlled. It has been truly said that the kings of the East fought
over the heads of their subjects. The affairs of a baker in Jerusalem, a
merchant in Gaza, a craftsman in Tyre (provided the victorious army left
him alive) were unaltered by the rise and fall of his rulers. To the
bulk of the inhabitants of the Palestinian towns it mattered little
whether they were temporarily independent or were under the heel now of
Babylon, now of Egypt, now of Persia. Men hoped for no more than that
trade should be possible, food obtainable, and that the injustice in
the realm should be--not abolished (no one was so mad as to entertain
the notion) but--kept within tolerable bounds. For the rest, what more
could a man desire than to live as had his father before him? Ancestral
custom held the whole of life in its paralysing grasp, and choked
initiative. The potter sought no new patterns; what was wrong with the
old? Why devise a new method of ploughing, when the old way grew the
crops? Innovation was an altogether hateful thing. Hence, however
populous Eastern towns might grow, however active and prosperous their
commerce, life in them was essentially stationary, its ambitions
limited, its possibilities achieved. In all Palestine there was but one
spark of unexhausted thought; namely, the conception of God which the
great prophets of Israel had discovered and transmitted to their people.
Evidently a nation which remembered such words as these: _I hate, I
despise your feasts, and I will take no delight in your solemn
assemblies. Yea, though ye offer me your burnt offerings and meal
offerings I will not accept them: neither will I regard the peace
offerings of your fat beasts. Take thou away from me the noise of thy
songs; for I will not hear the melody of thy viols. But let justice roll
down like waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream_[40]--that nation
is not finished; it has living seed within its soil. Yes, but against
this confident assertion recall how shrunken and enfeebled the Jewish
community had become. Further, remember that in all things except their
religion and their morality these Jews were part and parcel of the
general Oriental civilisation. In their civil occupations, their
commercial and agricultural methods, they also were just as much slaves
of tradition and as content with their bondage, as were their
neighbours. “Slaves of tradition,” how much the words cover! If even
dimly we could realise the misery, disease and squalor of the poor, the
degradation of womanhood, in those tradition-ridden Eastern towns; if we
could taste like gall and bitterness in our own experience one
thousandth part of the injustice and cruelties of those “contented”
despotisms; “A stationary civilisation, having reached the limit of its
ambitions”--how easily the phrase is framed!--if we could feel how much
that meagre consummation left to be desired, the words would seem to be
written in blood and blotted with tears!

2. Meanwhile in Europe, across the blue seas of the Eastern
Mediterranean, a new thing had come to pass: an organisation of human
life different in form and in intention because different in mind and
spirit. By its means the intellectual powers and artistic achievements
of man were swiftly to be raised to an unimagined splendour, and, even
so, _to remain unexhausted_: we say “unexhausted” because the inspiring
and energising ideas which Greek genius was the first to realise and
accept have never ceased to operate, being in fact the intellectual
principles upon which Western civilisation has been constructed, and
providing the ideal towards which the development of society is still
directed. Doubtless there is terribly much to deplore in modern life; we
are far from wisdom, peace and true prosperity; it may be doubted
whether the conditions of the poor under modern industrialism are not,
in places, worse than anything even the East can show. And yet there is
one incalculable difference revolutionising the whole prospect. Unlike
the East, we do not acquiesce in existing evils. We are not exhausted,
not apathetically willing to accept things as they are. We spurn as
nonsense and cowardice any suggestions that the limit of human
development has been attained. Vehemently and hopefully we insist on the
achievement of better things. Not all the errors of the past and the
resultant evils of the present daunt us. We are rebels against our
failures, and our discontent is the measure of our vitality. This
instinct for improvement, which is the characteristic of Western life,
we owe--an infinite debt--to the people whose coming into history we
have now, briefly, to relate.

As early as before 2000 B.C., the islands of the Eastern Mediterranean,
together with certain parts of the mainland of Greece, were the home of
a vigorous sea-faring people, possessing remarkable artistic talent.
Their civilisation is now known by the name Minoan. Somewhere between
1200 and 1100 B.C. catastrophic disaster befel this race. Out of the
immense grass-lands which stretch from the plains of Hungary in Europe
eastward right across central Asia there issued a multitude of men,
moving southward with their wives and families. The invaders swept down
into Thessaly and Greece, filling the mainland and pressing onwards
across the sea to the Ægean Isles, massacring or enslaving the Minoan
inhabitants. But if the newcomers at first brought ruin to a more highly
developed race, they had their own virtues. They carried with them a
fresh vigour, like a breeze from the north. Hardy and simple, they were
not rude savages; they had learnt the use of wheeled vehicles, they had
tamed the horse, and above all they possessed, as individuals, a certain
sturdy independence and an uncommon open-mindedness. Fortunately, the
older population was not extinguished; large numbers survived as slaves,
and from these in time the “horse-tamers”--as the conquerors loved to
style themselves--learnt for themselves the secrets of the Minoan arts
and crafts. With astonishing rapidity they were to improve upon their
teachers.

Owing to the mountainous character of Greece and the indentations of its
coast, the invaders were split into many separate communities, each
easily controlling the small plains and valleys in the immediate
neighbourhood, but finding it difficult, if not unnatural, to extend its
rule beyond the mountain passes. For defensive purposes the members of
these small groups naturally tended to inhabit a single fortified town,
which became the all-absorbing centre of the tiny state; the town being,
as it were, a stronghold and its territories a garden round it. Thus
there came into existence what is known as “the Greek City-State.” Like
the Arabian tribes who also had passed from nomadism to settled life,
each of these new communities fell for a time under some form of
despotic government, now the rule of one man, a King or “Tyrant,” now of
a clique of rich and powerful persons, an Aristocracy. But there was
something in the character of the Greeks which proved intolerant of such
organisation, and, unlike the Arabians, they passed beyond that
experience and developed a novel and, as events were to prove, an
invaluable social system to which they gave the name “Democracy.” The
foundation principle of the democratic state lay in the conviction that
every adult free-born citizen, being an integral part of the state,
contributing to its prosperity and security, was entitled to a share in
its government. Slaves were outside the franchise, but all others
whether base-born or noble, rich or poor, clever or stupid, were
citizens--each with a vote and a voice in the direction of public
policy, internal and external. To this citizen-body belonged the power
of electing from among themselves officers, both civil magistrates and
military commanders, to whom administration was _temporarily_ entrusted,
and who were ultimately responsible for their actions to the
citizen-body. Under happy fortune this system was adopted as the
constitution of society in the leading Greek cities. Mark the mental and
moral qualities thereby engendered. In the first place men became
exhilaratingly conscious that they possessed individual freedom combined
with corporate strength. Each citizen felt himself to be of political
importance, an organic part of the state, entitled on the one hand to a
share in its glory and its privileges, and on the other responsible
himself for the general welfare. How can the epoch-making importance of
this fact adequately be emphasised? In primitive patriarchal society the
individual had been free but only within the narrow limits imposed by
the rigidity of custom and the bare simplicity of rudimentary life. And
civilised town-life of the Eastern type, as we have seen, was complex
and magnificent in many ways, but nevertheless had missed the secret of
advancing freedom. Intellectually it hated novelties. Politically it
made men either kings or the slaves of kings, giving them either too
great importance or none at all. Hence the larger the Eastern town, the
more powerful and extensive the State, the less was the mass of the
people personally concerned in their civil or military affairs.
“Freedom” in an Eastern city meant anarchy. The Greeks succeeded in
bringing freedom and civilisation into organic union. So far from
choking liberty, the connection of each Greek citizen with his city was
perceived to be the very cause of the freedom he enjoyed, the means by
which his privileges were multiplied and secured. Hence the greater the
organisation of society the greater the opportunities each citizen
acquired for the development of personal talent and inclination. It is
assuredly no exaggeration to describe such an achievement as
“epoch-making.”

Along with political freedom went mental freedom. Interchange of opinion
took place easily and continually between all grades of the free
community. The general obligation to promote the social, commercial, and
military well-being of the state stimulated discussion and gave to
debate the piquancy and solemnity of serious issues. A Greek might be
poor, but he could hold up his head with the richest as a member of the
citizen army and the citizen electorate; and in the citizen assembly he
need not be a gray-beard to be reckoned wise. Mental ability became the
test of worth, and the benumbing tyranny of tradition was overthrown; at
least its unquestioned rule was at an end. Custom must henceforth submit
to criticism and seek to justify itself. Enterprise, enquiry, innovation
became the order of the day. It was the emancipation of the human
intelligence.

Moreover, since the rough work of society was performed by the slave
population, Greek citizens found much leisure at their disposal. Herein
was obviously a danger, but also an opportunity; and fortunately the
genius of the people was not found wanting, so that, in the early days
the Greeks turned their leisure to good purpose, physical and
intellectual. Part of their leisure was devoted to physical exercises,
running, wrestling, boxing, throwing the _discus_, chariot-racing; and
in the healthful competition of these games in stadium and hippodrome
they found continual pleasure. But their ardour for mental exercise was
even keener. They began to think with restless energy and with brilliant
results; men of genius, poets, historians, philosophers, and artists, by
their matchless achievements raised the intellectual interests of their
contemporaries to an extraordinary extent. In general, the Greeks
acquired a wonderful feeling for proportion and natural rhythmic beauty.
“Nothing in excess” became their motto, but what was meant thereby was
no timid mediocrity, but an avoidance of extreme, wherever the extreme
was grotesque or foolish. Men sought an equipoise of perfection, and
felt infinite delight in the increasing measure of their success. Within
a few hundred years the Greeks had produced masterpieces of art and
literature which few nations have been able even to rival, none to
surpass.

In short, three characteristics distinguished Greek or Hellenic
civilisation: First, _Emulation_. Men vied one with another, vied with
their own past efforts. They sought to excel and achieved excellence.
Second, _Intellectualism_. The critical faculties of the mind were
increasingly released from the trammels of tradition. Reason became the
touchstone of life in all its aspects; and thus, just as in our own age,
the immense destructive and constructive energies of the free
intelligence were ceaselessly set to work. Third, _Patriotism_. This
third quality calls for fuller comment, for it was the main source of
Greek morality. Greek religion contributed something to the growth of
moral principles, but less than one might imagine. Its ethical interest
for the most part was limited to inculcating the fear lest Divine
vengeance should follow _gross_ outrage of the normal decencies of life.
Doubtless also the artistic sense fostered love of the good, since, as a
rule, what is wicked appears to men to be ugly; yet the fruits from this
source also were not much to boast of. But from the intense patriotism
fostered by the City-States came great moral consequences. The interests
of the State claimed men’s allegiance, and the claim was nobly answered.
Not only great-hearted leaders but also masses of ordinary men were
willing to set the public weal above their individual prosperity or
security. In striving to be noble citizens men became noble men.
Thousands and thousands were conscious that they could not live unto
themselves--without shame. Altruism was a searching reality in their
lives, and its burdens were loyally, even gladly, accepted. Men were
very zealous for their city, longing for its honour and renown, ready to
toil for it, to face hardship and peril on its behalf, and for its
safety to die unflinchingly. And no less measure of sacrifice was all
too frequently required from the citizens of these ambitious and
war-like little States. Let their own words tell how they met the
supreme call: “Through these men’s valour, the smoke of the burning of
wide-floored Tegea went not up to heaven, who chose to leave the city
glad and free to their children, and themselves to die in the forefront
of the battle.”[41] Or, best of all, take Simonides’ epitaph on the
Athenians fallen at Plataea:--

    “If to die nobly is the chief part of excellence,
    To us of all men Fortune gave this lot;
    For hastening to set a crown of freedom on all Hellas,
    We lie possessed of praise that grows not old.”

Surely no one can fail to hear in those words and in the spirit of this
Greek life the music of familiar things, things which we have taken to
our heart. That is because the thoughts of Hellas are the source from
which our own intellectual and social ideas have been derived.

But Hellenic life was not sunshine without shadow. For all its power and
brilliance Greek society was exposed to many perils and was guilty of
serious mistakes. These, however, we have here no need to discuss in
full. It is enough to note that, when-and-where-soever the necessity for
ardent patriotism was absent or unfelt the Greek conception of life
lacked adequate moral incentive, and sinister conditions which were a
very black shadow in a fair world could and did arise. Much might also
be said regarding the jealousies of the petty cities, whence came
warfare constant, embittered, and suicidal. Nevertheless it remains
absolutely true, that compared with the stagnation of Eastern
civilisation, Hellenism was life and health. Judge from one token, the
epitaphs just quoted. Men could not write like that in Palestine or
Babylon, because they never died for such a cause.

In the years between 359 and 338 B.C. the independent Greek cities were
all forced to admit the suzerainty, first of Philip II., king of
Macedon, and, after his assassination in 336, of his son Alexander, who
was to be remembered throughout history as Alexander the Great. The
humiliation was not in any way a crushing blow to the spirit of Greece.
To the yoke of Philip and Alexander the city-states could submit with a
good grace, for the Macedonians were of the same ancestry as the Greeks,
and for years had been to all intents and purposes a part of the Greek
world; and Alexander was wholly Hellenic in his upbringing and his
ideas. Had he not been educated by the great philosopher, Aristotle? In
334 B.C., the young king organised an army of Macedonians and Greeks and
set forth to make a grand assault upon the nations of the East: a
stupendous task, but the enterprise appealed to the Greeks as a poetic
requital of the awful peril one hundred and fifty years before when
Xerxes of Persia at the head of a horde of Orientals had crossed to
Greece and almost blotted out its rising life. If the task was colossal
and the force to achieve it tiny, the results staggered the imagination
of the world. The huge Persian Empire crumbled at the touch of Greek
military prowess, directed by the genius of Alexander. In three years
the young Macedonian had become absolute master of Western Asia Minor,
of Egypt, Syria, Babylonia, and Persia. In 326 B.C. he pushed his
conquests to the Punjab, and in 325 he died; but _Hellenism did not die
with him_. The East had seen many conquerors rise and sweep through its
lands in triumph, and had continued to dream its long dreams. But the
military achievements of Alexander were only the beginning of his work.
What stirred the East to its depths was the fascination of the ideas
that had accompanied him and that he deliberately sought to establish
among the conquered peoples; with what measure of success it now remains
to consider.

3. A stormy period followed Alexander’s death. Eventually his Eastern
dominions were divided between two of his generals; Ptolemy, who took
possession of Egypt, and Seleucus, who became ruler of Syria and the
Mesopotamian territories. Happily it is not necessary to follow
the confused struggles that ensued between them and their
successors--struggles in which Palestine, situated between the rival
kingdoms, was continually involved. The point to be observed is that
both Ptolemy and Seleucus were Hellenes, as also were most of their
leading men, and both they and their successors prosecuted, with all
possible energy, Alexander’s policy, the Hellenising of the East.
Consider the forces directed to the attainment of that object.

The powerful influences of the royal courts in Egypt and Syria saw to it
that throughout the length and breadth of their kingdoms places of
honour were reserved for Greeks and such Orientals as might show
themselves capable of appreciating and adopting Hellenic culture. To be
a Greek, if not by race, then by imitation, became the only avenue to
wealth or fame or royal favour.

Alexander, however, had seen that if Hellenism was permanently to subdue
and recreate the East it must touch not only the interests of such as
are clothed in soft raiment and in kings’ courts live delicately, it
must be made a reality daily affecting the life of common folk; and with
the foresight of genius he himself pointed the way to secure that end.
Realising the organic connection between the Greek ideals and the Greek
city, he established at strategic points of his Empire new cities
planned on the Hellenic model. The Ptolemaic and Seleucid kings
persevered in this scheme. New cities of the Grecian type were founded
in their realms, and the old towns were conformed to the new order of
things so far as might be. In all important centres the essential
accompaniments of Hellenic life were introduced: new political
organisation for the election of magistrates, and buildings to meet the
system; a hall for the Senate, shady pillared galleries where the free
citizens might gather to lounge and talk, baths and gymnasia, a stadium
and a hippodrome for the games, and for the drama a theatre. With such
interests and amusements the imagination of the common folk was stirred
and pleased. The youth of the cities became enthusiastic for the
gaieties and glories of the competitive games. Guilds of athletes were
formed and received the privilege of wearing a special dress, “a
broad-brimmed hat, a fluttering cloak broached about the shoulders, and
high laced boots.”[42] In great public processions these young men
marched as a special class, wearing crowns of gold, and bearing witness
to the wealth and pride of their respective cities by the colours and
rich embroideries of their attire. But staider folk than the young and
fashionable were also caught in the wide-spread nets of Hellenism. The
wealth of the Greek cities and the royal favour shown them attracted
commerce, and sleepy Eastern merchants discovered that if they wished to
do business they must conform to the prevailing tastes; so that Greek
became the language of the market-place as well as of the Court.
Finally, the learning and skill of the East confessed its conqueror.
Greek art and Greek literature, Greek science and philosophy made the
older Eastern styles seem worthless in comparison. Within two centuries
following the death of Alexander the near East had been transformed.
Hellenism had cast its spell over the whole of life.

The period is one of profound interest for the study of humanity. On the
one hand it did much to secure the perpetuation of the intellectual
methods of the Greeks, which might have perished had they not been
extended beyond the frontiers of the small Greek States in Europe; and
on the other hand it showed that the East can change. Human nature is
not, as some would have us believe, divided for ever into irreconcilable
sections. There are no unbridgeable gulfs between the Eastern and the
Western mind. If the modern Westernising movements in China or India
should fully succeed, they will but demonstrate anew what was proved
long ago in Asia Minor during the three critical centuries before
Christ. The challenge these facts present to those who suppose that
Christianity cannot become a universal faith is obvious. We must not
attempt to give a detailed picture of Hellenism. But even these outlines
are enough to show how thoroughly and dramatically the immemorial
fashions of the East had been upset and new ambitions kindled, so that
men must have felt as if they had been emancipated from the dead past
and told to make trial of a new form of life, one that was already
brilliant and delightful, but was most of all thrilling in its unknown
possibilities. The peoples that walked in darkness thought they had seen
a great light.

One fact, however, and that of prime importance, has been left out of
count in this description of the situation. Hellenism in the East had a
fatal deficiency; it lacked the keen patriotism that inspired the life
of the old Greek cities. In Athens men had known that only by the
maintenance of their best ideals could Athens lead the intellect of
Greece, only by discipline and self-sacrifice could the foe be driven
from Athenian fields, could Athens rule the seas, could Athens be free
and Athens glorious. But citizens of some Hellenised city of Syria
experienced no such sentiments. Their politics were urban not imperial,
academic not matter of life and death. To be a captain in the armies of
Ptolemy or Seleucus might be a convenient way of gaining a livelihood
and might lead to fame, fortune and favour; but after all, to fight in
those ranks was to fight for kings’ glories, not for hearth and home.
The ambitions of the petty states of Greece had had certain evil
aspects; strifes, jealousies, envyings were ever present among them,
bleeding the higher interests of their common civilisation. Nevertheless
the need for passionate devotion to one’s city had been the root of
Hellenic virtue, and _that_ not even Alexander’s genius could transplant
to Asiatic soil.

Moreover, even such faint assistance as Greek religion gave to morality
failed the Hellenism of the East. By Alexander’s time the early
conceptions of the gods had been riddled by criticism, and as yet
neither philosophy nor mysticism had discovered for morality a basis
intelligible and acceptable to ordinary men. The earnest spirits of the
day were aware of the danger ahead. They foresaw that, if society
continued on its present course unchecked, its moral bankruptcy must
bring disaster. For not all the Greeks were eating, drinking, and making
money: some were asking questions about life to which a _demoralised_
Hellenism could give no satisfying answer. And the problem was more than
merely intellectual. The perils and pains of actual life made the enigma
a personal agony for many men, who saw that “they were being carried
onward into a future of unknown possibilities, and whatever might lie on
the other side of death, the possibilities on the hither side were
disquieting enough. Even in our firmly ordered and peaceful society,
hideous accidents may befall the individual, but in those days when the
world showed only despotic monarchies and warring city-states, one must
remember that slavery and torture were contingencies which no one could
be sure that the future did not contain for him.” In the old days it had
been possible to appeal for succour to deities not wholly inhuman in
their ways and thoughts. “If now that hope faded into an empty dream,
man found himself left naked to fortune. With the mass of passionate
desires and loves he carried in his heart, the unknown chances of the
future meant ever-present fear.”[43] The situation called for remedy.
Hellenism itself evolved the Stoic philosophy as a possible solution for
its urgent problems.[44] Our contention is that in their own sphere and
in their own fashion the Jewish proverbs, as used at this period by the
Wise in Jerusalem, were, like Stoicism, an answer to the moral
instability which contemporary Hellenism had spread abroad.

But even if Hellenism could have entered Syria in its purest form, it
would have needed all its nobility to overcome the vices ingrained in
the East. When it came to the task with faith in the high gods shaken
and falling, with the spur of patriotism left behind in Greece, no
wonder that the ugly elements hitherto held in check in the city-states
fed themselves fat amid the ancient evils of the Oriental world.
Particularly in Syria did the baser tendencies of Hellenism run riot.
Life there did indeed become richer, richer in iniquity. If facts have
any meaning, then the history of Syria and Egypt in the Hellenic age
cries aloud in witness of the futility of a civilisation, however
brilliant, that lacks a basis of moral idealism: “Other foundation can
no man lay than that which is laid.” The fine culture of the Hellenised
lands was dependent on the wrongs and miseries of countless slaves; the
cities were filled with glittering, venal women; and the general
population sank deeper and deeper in corruption, gluttony, and license.
Even the games in Syria were made to pander to the base side of human
nature; and, although ideally the cult of athletics might be an
excellent thing, “in its actual embodiment it could show all degrees of
degradation.” Life in the Syrian towns became for the most part a
studied gratification of the grosser senses. Here is the accusation of
an eye-witness, a Syrian Greek named Poseidonius, who lived about 100
B.C.: “The people of these cities are relieved by the fertility of their
soil from a laborious struggle for existence. Life is a continual series
of social festivities. Their gymnasiums they use as baths, where they
anoint themselves with costly oils and myrrhs. In the public banqueting
halls they practically live, filling themselves there for the better
part of the day with rich foods and wines; much that they cannot eat
they carry away home. They feast to the prevailing music of strings. The
cities are filled from end to end with the noise of harp-playing.”

And yet it was a great and wonderful age. Although the nobler qualities
of the Greek cities could not be made to grow in the new soil, the
genius of the Greek intellectual attitude to life was rescued from the
bickerings and fatal factions of the little states and was successfully
communicated to the larger world, to become in time the priceless
heritage of Western civilisation. Rightly conceiving that the spiritual
aspect of human life is the supreme thing, we are accustomed to divide
history into the period before and the period after the birth of Christ;
but were attention to be confined solely to the mental development of
mankind, the dividing line would be found in the coming of the Hellenic
methods of thought.

The bearing of these facts upon our subject is not far to seek. In face
of the subtle influences that were transforming their environment how
fared it with the Palestinian Jews? Jerusalem was sheltered by its
outlying position from the full tide of Hellenism. Had it not been so,
its special characteristics could scarcely have been preserved; it would
have become as one of the cities of the coast. But if Jerusalem was not
swept away by the flood, that does not imply that the rain of new ideas
was not falling in its streets and markets. From 300 to 200 B.C.
Palestine was controlled by the Ptolemaic Kings of Egypt, from 198 B.C.
by the Syrian Seleucids. This change of authority imposed no check upon
the progress and vigour of the Hellenistic movement. Greek cities sprang
up throughout the land, and older towns were eager to adapt themselves
to the new models. Shortly after the death of Alexander, Samaria and
Ptolemais (Acco) had already become centres of Greek influence, and
there was a group of Greek cities beyond Jordan. Imagine too how quickly
and how effectively the ideas of the Jews in Jerusalem would be affected
by intercourse with the flourishing colonies of their brethren now
thoroughly at home in the great centres of Greek dominion in Egypt,
Syria and Babylon. It is not surprising therefore to find a Greek writer
about 250 B.C. observing that “many of the traditional ordinances of the
Jews are losing their hold.” And if any reader wishes further
confirmation, he need only turn to the works of _Josephus_, and note the
relish with which that writer tells the story of Joseph the son of
Tobiah, nephew of the High-Priest, who by his insolent wit won favour at
the Egyptian Court, and battened for a while on the extortionate taxes
he wrung from the towns of southern Syria: a repulsive character but
quite evidently a popular hero in the estimation of many of his Jewish
contemporaries. Picture the coming and going of Greek traders in the
bazaars of Jerusalem, and the journeying of Jewish merchants to and from
the markets of the Hellenic cities. Consider what it meant that the
immense mercantile centre of Alexandria, with its tempting opportunities
to the acute and enterprising Jew, lay only a few days’ journey to the
south. In short, Hellenism was swiftly becoming the very atmosphere men
breathed. Certainly its manifold allurements were only too visibly and
temptingly displayed before the eyes of the young and ambitious in
Jerusalem. And yet Hellenism had met its match in the strange city of
Zion. Greek met Jew, and in the struggle the Wise-men of Israel played
no insignificant part. For they marshalled and moulded their proverbs
till they represented the Wisdom of Israel set over against the
worldly-wisdom[45] of Greece. They counselled a way of life which was
_not_ the seductive Greek way. They sturdily opposed another doctrine to
the fashionable immorality of Hellenism with its overwhelming prestige
and ostensible success. For several generations the attack of the new
civilisation came by way of peaceful penetration, which was perhaps
harder to resist than open enmity, since nobody could deny the good in
Hellenism, its beauty, and its cleverness, if only it had been pure in
heart. Later, as we shall see, the campaign was to be conducted with all
the devices of reckless and inhuman violence. Hebraism against
Hellenism! All Egypt, Syria, and Persia had made scarcely an effort to
resist the spell of the new learning and the new ways. At first sight
then how unequal the contest! A stiff moralism preaching against the
pleasures of sin to hot-blooded, able, and ambitious men. A clique of
obscurantists arrayed not against a kingdom or an empire but against a
magnificent, world-conquering civilisation. The Jews maintain their
ground? Impossible! No, not wholly so; for this battle, like another
which touches us more closely, was ultimately spiritual; and because the
Jews held a conception of the nature and destiny of man deeper, truer,
than even the Greeks had found, Hebraism in the end proved stronger than
Hellenism with all its genius and all its works.




