CHAPTER XIX

Faith


Ben Sirach has a wise passage in recognition of the transcendent majesty
of God. He has been seeking to describe the marvels of the universe, and
words have failed him; how much more then if he should strive to declare
the glory of the Creator! Wonderful as the visible world may be, _Many
things are hidden greater than these, and we have seen but a few of His
works.... The Lord is terrible and exceeding great, and marvellous is
His power. When ye glorify the Lord praise him as much as ye can, for
even then will He surpass. When ye exalt him, put forth your full
strength; be not weary; for ye will never attain_ (E. 43^{29-32}). These
words give the reason why expressions of belief in God so often appear
to the unbelieving mere platitudes. Before the thought of the living
God, men of intense and sensitive faith are either silent, or at the
most will speak in simple language, being conscious that _we may say
many things, yet shall we not attain; and the sum of our words is “He is
all”_ (E. 49^{27}).

The Jewish proverbs recognise that God makes one fundamental demand from
men, namely Honesty of purpose--the very quality or attitude of soul
which, as we have just seen, is so essential to the growth of moral
character:

    _All the ways of a man are right in his own eyes,
    But God weigheth the heart_ (Pr. 21^{2}).

_He that sacrificeth of a thing wrongfully gotten, his offering is made
in mockery; and the mockeries of wicked men are not well-pleasing_ (E.
34^{18}).

Ben Sirach says of a sinner, confident in his wrong-doing because no man
seeth him--_But he knoweth not that the eyes of the Lord are ten
thousand times brighter than the sun, beholding all the ways of men, and
looking into secret places_ (E. 23^{19}).

And again he writes of the hypocritically pious:

_The Most High hath no pleasure in the offerings of the ungodly, neither
is He pacified for sins by the multitude of sacrifices_ (E. 34^{19}; cp.
Pr. 21^{27}).

It does not seem probable that the Almighty will be any the better
impressed, should the wicked offer up hymns instead of sacrifices.
Motive is still the criterion of worship: take heed how ye praise or
pray, lest your words be no more than the sound of a voice; take heed
how ye hear, lest, judging a sermon, you fail to hear God’s judgment of
you; and above all remember that the chief act of worship, without which
all else is in vain, must be rendered at home and in the city’s streets,
for--said a Wise-man on whom the spirit of the prophets had
descended--_to do justice and equity is more acceptable to the Lord than
sacrifice_ (Pr. 21^{3}). A plain commandment, but there is none greater:
“Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.”

And to them that are fain to keep the commandment God giveth gifts.
“But” says one, “how know you that they are _God’s_ gifts? Is there a
God to give? Faith is very difficult to attain.” Certainly faith is
difficult to the sophisticated in this and every age; but to the Wise it
has always seemed natural, and never impossible. Said a young Russian
modernist, “I find it difficult not to believe in God.” So much in
passing; we shall return to the question a little later. Meantime,
however, let us turn to what cannot be denied, the reality of the gifts
and the axiomatic truth of the assertion that they are from God in the
sense that they are the consequence of believing God is and is good.

To believe in the true God, the high and holy and merciful God of
Israel’s noblest thinkers, the God and Father of the Lord Jesus Christ,
certainly gives men confidence and courage, not because the dangers and
difficulties of life are removed, but because our strength being
increased, it becomes possible to overcome them: _The name of the Lord
is a strong tower; the righteous runneth into it and is safe_ (Pr.
18^{10}). Through the new spirit that is ours, life is lifted to a
higher plane where we feel that, when sorrow and pain and sin have had
their say, still the Lord reigneth; God is greater than His foes: _Whoso
feareth the Lord shall not be afraid and shall not play the coward; for
God is his hope_ (E. 34^{14}).

To them that seek Him God gives illumination. _Evil men understand not
justice, but they that seek the Lord understand it altogether_ (Pr.
28^{5})--which does not mean that the pious are omniscient, but does
mean that to follow after truth and goodness enlightens, whereas to seek
evil and pursue it makes men blind. Accordingly it is said, _There is no
wisdom nor understanding nor counsel against the Lord_ (Pr. 21^{30}),
and the truth of that great saying has been repeatedly displayed in the
rise and fall of mighty nations and empires, as well as in the lives of
individuals. Selfishness is always short-sighted, snatching greedily at
shadows and missing the best there is in life. Again, _The curse of the
Lord is in the house of the wicked, but He blesseth the habitation of
the righteous_ (Pr. 3^{33}); and that is true because it is seldom that
such things as passion, hatred, cruelty and haunting moral fears are
absent from the former, and, whatever the good man’s house may lack, it
will generally have love, joy, peace and all the fruits of the Spirit.

One remarkable proverb claims that _When a man’s ways please the Lord,
he maketh even his enemies to be at peace with him_ (Pr. 16^{7}); and
the value of the saying is perhaps increased in that, regarded
pedantically, the claim breaks down, whereas on a wider consideration it
seems to be subtly and profoundly true. Thus, our truthfulness may not
prevent some particular individual (our enemy) from deceiving us by a
lie, but it helps many, who might become false and some day deceive us,
to persevere in truthfulness; and if all men really were liars, heaven
help our race! Our honesty may not prevent a thief from breaking through
and stealing, but it does make it easier for other men to be honest and
so helps to reduce dishonesty in the world; and if all men were
deceivers, peaceful trade would cease. Mercy begets mercy; the kindness
of all true men who love God and follow Christ is making the world more
kind. In a word, the effect of righteous example is magnificently great.
What matter then if the truth be superlatively phrased? Let us affirm it
boldly: “When a man’s ways please the Lord, he maketh even his enemies
to be at peace with him.”

Here is a verse that sums up the whole topic:--

    _The eyes of the Lord are upon them that love Him,
    A mighty protection and strong stay,
    A cover from the hot blast and a shelter from the noonday,
    A guard from stumbling, and a succour from falling.
    He raiseth up the soul, and enlighteneth the eyes;
    He giveth healing, life, and blessing_ (E. 34^{16, 17}).

The gifts are good. But is there a Giver, a God who cares? Why not so
believe? It is neither impossible nor incredible. In the last chapter we
shall touch further upon the great question. For the moment our concern
is only with the answer to it that we find in the Jewish proverbs. That
answer is boldly affirmative. Let us begin, however, with a rather
hesitant saying; _A man’s goings are of the Lord, how then can he
understand his ways?_ (Pr. 20^{24}). Possibly the author intended not to
assert God’s guidance but only to complain of the baffling character of
our fortunes. If so, we will have none of it. If there be no God at all,
at least let us struggle to determine our path with such intelligence as
we can muster. In the following, however, there is no dubiety about the
affirmation of faith: _A man’s heart deviseth his way, but the Lord
directeth his steps_ (Pr. 16^{9}). Hard doctrine! theoretically possible
perhaps, but is it probable? Certainly it is hard to believe, almost
incredible, so long as it is considered merely from the critic’s chair.
But the sublime hope that God careth for men displays an astonishing
vitality; and the altogether amazing and significant fact is this, that
just where it ought most surely to die down and be extinguished, there
it always rises up and burns again--as now in the trenches.

Here is the witness of an educated man, who had long ceased to be a
Christian in the conventional usage of the term. He is writing freely to
one who had been more than a friend for Christ’s sake, and it is fair to
give his words, because death is no longer a mystery to him.
“Half-unconsciously I hummed the tune rather than the words of the
famous hymn [_When I survey the wondrous Cross_]; As I did so there
appeared before me, not a vision of Christ’s person, but of the meaning
of the glorious crown of thorns He wore. The King of Heaven, the Prince
of Peace, is a man--He took not upon Him the nature of angels. That
would have been easy but futile. It would not have linked Him with us
closely enough. So my vision told me. He must needs suffer for us....
And if suffering, and forgiveness, and love of our fellows, and general
self-forgetfulness be what is required of every one of us, how greatly
we all stand in need of His atonement. That was the lasting impression
of my vision: but, subsidiary, there was another. I felt, for a moment,
a sense of divine spectatorship, as if there was but God in the world
besides me; and God, all-seeing, all-understanding, with whom no words
were necessary[153].”

But also those whose training in the school of life has brought them no
such command of words as had the writer of the above, have their own way
of voicing the instinct, saying that “if a fellow’s name is written on a
bullet he’ll get it, and if it isn’t, he won’t.” Press the naïve
metaphor. Who writes the name on the bullet? Not Krupps; they are too
busy for that. Then is the writing the writing of God, graven upon the
bullet? Probably the man himself would say, Fate is the writer. “Fate”
on the lips of men who have nineteen centuries of Christian tradition
behind them is only another name, and imperfect, for God the Father.
There is fatalism and fatalism. The fatalism of men who, being conscious
(however dimly) that duty has drawn them into a war which is at bottom
an immense conflict of ideas and ideals regarding the use and abuse of
national power, feel somehow that they will not die except they were
appointed to lay down their life for others; _that_ fatalism is
separated by a hair’s breadth from explicit trust in the overshadowing
love of God. Belief in God’s providence may seem difficult to the
student at his ease, but it is high human doctrine. It was the doctrine
of Jesus; and keen and earnest thinkers, and simple men and women
innumerable, facing the sternest facts of life, have found it possible
to place their trust in it, and, trusting, have found themselves at
peace.

    _Be not afraid of sudden fear, nor of the desolation
         of the wicked when it cometh;
    For the Lord shall be thy confidence, and shall keep
         thy foot from being taken_ (Pr. 3^{25f}).

In conclusion, here is a proverb which needs a few words of
introduction. The graces and benefits of religion are frequently
associated in the Bible with “meekness” or “humility.” Now those English
words carry unfortunate associations which are absent from the Hebrew
they represent. The “humility” commended by the Prophets and Psalmists
is a certain frank simplicity of soul--a quality from which not a few of
the most effective and virile personalities in the world’s history have
derived their power. It has little or nothing to do with softness or
timidity of character; indeed courage is its hall-mark. Those who first
rallied round the Maccabean leaders in the struggle against an unclean
Hellenism were of “the meek ones of the earth.” The Russian peasant has
this Biblical “humility,” but the proudest military empire in the modern
world has tasted the fortitude of his soul. Wherefore we may claim that
this exquisite saying is not merely beautiful, but is also profound:

    _The prayer of the humble pierceth the clouds_ (E. 35^{17}).




