CHAPTER XII

Values


Our fathers required no volumes on the Humanism of the Bible. They felt
themselves close-linked with its heroes; Patriarchs, Judges, Warriors,
Kings, and Prophets were their kith and kin, not in blood, but in the
nearer relationship of human experience. Saul, in his pride, his
jealousy and desolate death, stood in warning beside them; David,
pattern of faith and fortitude in adversity, was at their right hand, so
that in their distresses men would take courage, remembering that David
also had cried unto the Lord and been delivered. But the perspective of
the years has ceased to be foreshortened, and between our generation and
the old world of the Bible a great gulf now seems fixed. Nevertheless
our fathers were right, and we are wrong. Saul and David and the men of
the Bible are not separated from us by 3,000 years, nor yet by one year,
for difference of race and custom are trivialities compared with the
fundamental conditions of life and the unalterable principles of
character. Our predecessors may have made too light of the differences,
but that is a small fault compared with the modern tendency to ignore
the resemblances: not to ask “What do these men and these events say to
us concerning the eternal things we share with them?” is to miss the one
thing needful.

To illustrate the argument, recollect that skeleton of dates, _William
the Conqueror_ 1066 ... which not so long ago did duty in our schools
for the record of the glory of England. What could have been more
ineffective for revealing the soul of history? Now-a-days, the tale is
better told but, even so, be the events narrated never so graphically,
unless they are conceived in relation to ourselves we are little
benefited. To use the famous simile of the prophet, bone may come to its
bone, and sinews be upon them, and flesh come up and skin cover them
above, until the very semblance of men rises before our eyes; but there
will be no breath in them. Only when it is realised how out of the
living past has grown the living present, only then enters the breath of
God into the men of old and they live and stand up upon their feet, an
exceeding great army--to our aid in the shaping of what is to be.
History is profitable in so far as its significance for the present is
understood.[100] Thus, with fine insight, the Jews perceived that even
their majestic Law would be of no avail if it were heard only as the
recital of words delivered long ago at Sinai, and accordingly the
exhortation ascribed to Moses in the _Book of Deuteronomy_ comes to its
climax in this deep saying: _The commandment is not too hard for thee,
neither is it far off. It is not in heaven, that thou shouldest say “Who
shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it down unto us, and make us
hear it, that we may do it?”... But the Word is very nigh thee, in thy
mouth and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it._[101]

And so also in like manner this account of the history behind the Jewish
proverbs has not been told in order to evoke for a brief moment
nerveless phantoms of the Wise in ancient Israel, but with the hope that
a voice would be heard saying even of this Word “It is very nigh thee,
in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it.” What is the
significance _for us_ of these men and their experiences?

Consider some of the features of this Movement, if so precise a term may
for convenience be applied to the easy, natural, teaching of Wisdom. In
the first place observe the thorough and effective contact established
by the teachers of Wisdom with the people they sought to reach. One of
the main problems confronting Christianity is the severance of the
potential influence of its Churches from the life of the people; verily
Mahomet sits waiting for the mountain. What then? Ought the Churches to
be abandoned, and men go a-worshipping in the market-place?
“Impractical--at the best it would soon lose its effect--the experiment
has been made, with sadly limited results”: a thousand valid objections!
But the problem must not be dismissed so lightly with a bare
consideration of its obvious difficulties, for the issues at stake are
too serious; the bulk of the population live perilously free from the
stimulus of any Ideal, whether self-sought or impressed from without by
the teaching of others. Seeing then that the Wise succeeded where we
have missed the mark, their ways must at least deserve a scrutiny; here
is a method by which the poor were preached to, and religion stood daily
in the streets and morals in the market-place; here is idealism put in
language the unlearned could both comprehend and recollect. Indeed the
proverb was wonderfully suited to their needs, for even its riddles were
easily solved, not darkening counsel but devised only to awaken
curiosity and so assist the slow and simple mind. Of course a slavish
imitation of the Wise-men’s procedure is out of the question in modern
circumstances, but slavish imitation is not suggested. Said Sir Joshua
Reynolds when urging the students of the Royal Academy to the study of
the Old Masters, “The more extensive your acquaintance is with the works
of those who have excelled, the more extensive will be your powers of
_invention_.” There is a force of idealism latent in almost all men, but
it requires to be brought to the surface, examined, criticised and
judiciously directed to the attainment of practical objects; otherwise
the greater part of its potential energy will never be brought into
action; and in this easy-going land of ours there is more than normal
scope for increased discipline of the mind. We can afford to think much
harder than we have ever yet done without losing the virtue of humorous,
tolerant good-nature. As Mr. Clutton Brock has said recently, “The fact
that some thinking is bad is not a reason why we should not think at
all. The Germans have been encouraged by their bad thinking to exercise
certain virtues perversely and to bad ends, but still to exercise them
in a manner which has astonished the world; while we have been little
encouraged by thinking, good or bad, to exercise any virtues.”[102]
There is ample room for more _outspoken_ interest in the ends and
principles of human life, more earnest and stringent consideration of
the problems of social organisation--provided our discussions be
undertaken, not in the spirit of silly contention, mere bolstering up of
unconsidered prejudice, but in a sincerity that will be both more
critical and yet more humbly eager, for truth’s sake, to learn one from
another. For it is not division of opinion, or even real conflict of
interest that prevents and retards reform, so much as the dead weight of
ignorance, of indifference and of paltry pride in argument--the very
sins which in the past were the prime cause of the evils that call for
remedy.

No less than the ancient Hebrews we moderns stand in need of the
exhortation to let Wisdom _enter into our hearts and knowledge be
pleasant unto our souls_ (cp. Pr. 2^{10}). Neither with all our heart,
nor even with all our mind, far less with all our soul, have we yet
sought her whose _ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are
peace_ (Pr. 3^{17}); nor have we understood sufficiently that _she is a
tree of life to all that lay hold on her, and happy is every one that
retaineth her_ (Pr. 3^{18}). Says a later Jewish proverb, _Lackest thou
Wisdom, what hast thou acquired? Hast acquired Wisdom, what lackest
thou?_ (C. 93.)

Secondly, the constant intimate contact that the Wise maintained with
the actualities of men’s ordinary experience was beneficial not only to
the taught but to the teachers. It kept the Wise in touch with
work-a-day problems (the most difficult of tasks for the idealistic
thinker), and so helped to make their toil productive. It taught them
how to bring Heavenly Wisdom down from the right hand of God that she
might dwell with men, and make their homes pure and loving, and their
business just, and their pleasures clean. And herein is a thought of no
little encouragement for preachers and teachers in these days of not
overcrowded Churches. Somehow it seems that personal contact is
invaluable in the moral and spiritual education of man. That is why the
leading article, with its scores of thousands of readers, may sometimes
have less effect than a good sermon heard by a few hundred. The Press
addresses us from an Olympian but distant Fleet Street, thundering at
us--but in cold print; whereas the parson and the teacher, if he is a
true man, somewhere and to some few is a neighbour and a friend. However
excellent the Manual of Ethics, it will not serve to influence the lives
of many. The Son of Man, it seems, must come eating and drinking and
teaching in our streets.

In the next place, this Movement is an interesting and important example
of independent as opposed to systematic instruction, illustrating both
the weaknesses as well as the strength of pronounced individualism, and
supporting the opinion that, if only one safeguard be present, the
advantages of individualism outweigh its dangers. Teachers less
restricted than the Wise it is difficult to imagine. Each was free to
develop his own opinions on the nature of life and the principles of
success and failure, even to the point of open agnosticism. What
prevents such licence from becoming chaos? The reply indicated by the
Wisdom Movement is that freedom, even extreme freedom, of judgment in
matters of conduct and faith will not result in chaos provided there is
an underlying unity of aim. All the Wise were lovers of Wisdom. They
conceived their theme in different fashions, but they had all the same
intention--to teach and to practise Wisdom and not Folly; hence, despite
the diversity in their proverbs, the shifting standpoints, the variety
of ethical standards, even the contradictions of advice, their teaching
was ultimately effective. If we had had space to consider their work in
relation to other movements in the intellectual life of that period,
both in Palestine and also in the wider world, it would have been easy
to show that the immaturities in the Wise-men’s thoughts, the
uncertainties of their faith and ethic (the very points on which the
cynical would pounce as evidence of failure) on a wider and wiser survey
of the facts were in reality co-operating influences, clearing the way
for a deeper, fuller, faith. Truth is eternal, but men’s apprehension of
it is progressive; and it should be insisted that, given the presence of
one fundamental purpose so that an ultimate unity of spirit must
necessarily exist, divergence of opinion, even on matters of high
importance, does not indicate weakness or indecision or decay, but
rather is a sign of vitality and hope. The reason for this is obvious.
Final statements can be made only with regard to the conceptions of the
abstract sciences, such as mathematics, or to the judgments we can
sometimes pass on lost causes; and on the other hand power to perceive
the imperfection of present attainment has ever been, and still is, the
prime condition of human progress: “God,” said John Robinson, minister
of the Pilgrim Fathers, “has yet more truth to break forth out of His
Word.”

The bearing on modern Christianity is not far to seek. A doctor recently
remarked to the present writer that one had only to enter the several
Churches of a certain town to discover that Christians were now in
hopeless confusion, ignorant as to what they did or did not believe, and
that if the professed followers of the faith could not state their
doctrine coherently, others might well be excused from attempting the
task of ascertaining what Christianity now meant. The argument is not
unusual, but it is profoundly mistaken. It might have been retorted that
divergencies of medical opinion (and many patients will bear witness
that they are neither slight nor few) are no indication whatever of the
essential unsoundness of the science of medicine, but rather the
guarantee of its advance into more accurate knowledge. Moreover had the
critic been in actual touch with the feeling and activities of the
Churches in question, he would have recognised that the points of
disagreement, though important, were not upon the vital question of
faith in God and general attitude towards life; so that whilst he
personally might still have been unable to accept Christian belief, he
could not possibly have formulated such an indictment as appears above.
The real peril of Christian theology has not been vagueness, but the
Hellenic tendency to essay the definition of all things to the last
_iota_. But from the perils inherent in that attitude Christianity has
been delivered by the passionate instinct of mankind for truth, and by
the reforming energy of great individuals; and will be delivered, so
long as the Church has faith in the guiding Spirit of God.

There is value in the Wise-men’s witness to the intimate relation
between faith and morality. The religion of Israel in its higher
development is magnificent in its clear recognition that the claim of
God upon man is absolute, complete and not partial--if there be one God,
Creator of heaven and earth, then certainly He besets us behind and
before and lays His hand upon us--and that the love of God and the love
of our fellow-men must be indissolubly related, faith being the
inspiration of morality, and moral action the necessary outcome of
faith. With these sublime beliefs, proclaimed by Prophets and Psalmists,
the Wise were in accord: they also in their more homely fashion
recognised the universality of the Divine claim, and its operation in
the realm of moral duty. Perhaps those thoughts may seem to some readers
only elementary and obvious ideas on spiritual things. But they ought to
be regarded not as elementary (and therefore of small account) but as
fundamental and vital conceptions. Every student of comparative religion
would testify how great and terrible a gulf in human life was crossed
when first a Hebrew Prophet conceived the thought that God desireth
mercy and not sacrifice, not ceremonial worship but _philanthropy_ (in
the true sense of the word), and how glorious a hope for the future of
religion then dawned upon our race. Moreover the fact remains that, even
if to many these thoughts of God and the nature of His service may be no
novelty, even if they have grasped the idea in its full significance and
are conscious of its exact bearing on manifold contemporary affairs,
there is still room for its reaffirmation. Said a soldier in France,
after a discussion about Christianity to which he had listened intently
and with some surprise, “But, as I understand it, religion is all talk
about heaven. What’s it got to do with morality?” Religion _has_ got to
do with morality, and morality, like the demand for truth and the
instinct for the beautiful, penetrates life through and through to its
least details. Christianity is not a bargain with the Deity entailing
magical immunity from hardship in this life and special privileges in
the next. It is such an attitude of the essential personality as should
wholly determine our activities in each and every aspect life can
present to us, both now and hereafter. The scope of religion is as wide
as our interests; and what could serve more happily to remind us of that
fact than these Jewish proverbs which, beginning with the fear of God,
range from kings to labourers, from merry men to broken hearts, from
dreams of perfect justice to cynical observations on the uses and
advantages of bribes? Wisdom is indeed ubiquitous: _Divers weights and
false balances are an abomination unto the Lord_, say the Wise in the
busy mart; and then in the hour of leisure and of plenty _It is not good
to eat much honey_--and all this in the name of transcendent Wisdom,
_whose fruit is better than gold, yea, than fine gold_; Wisdom that was
_set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was_.

Incidentally we have also to note how thoroughly these proverbs, by
reason of the range of interest of which we have just been speaking, and
by the sensible attitude they endeavour to preserve, illustrate the
Humanism of the Bible; for surely the most ungenerous of critics would
not accuse them of being unpractical or absorbed in supra-mundane
matters. The point has already been emphasised, and therefore we will
not dwell upon it again, except to remark its importance as one instance
of a general principle: that Idealism to be effective must needs grow
out of the soil of commonsense. There is a degree beyond which existing
facts must not be disregarded. For example, men have not mastered the
art of flight by ignoring gravitation, but by having studied its laws
and conquered the difficulties they present. In the admirable words of a
friend of the writer, “Christian opinion is peculiarly liable to the
danger of running counter to the average common sense in the midst of
which it finds itself; that is a natural alternative to simply falling
into line with current common sense views.... Thought that has its head
in the clouds must have its feet planted firmly in sound common sense,
if its heart is to be in the right place.... No one can think of Jesus
as the devotee of a faddist cult. He entered whole-heartedly into the
common joys and sorrows and into the common interests of the people:
their wedding-feasts and their mourning for dead friends and their
longing for freedom from the Roman yoke.... _He entered by the open door
of common sense, and led out the spirit of man into a larger life than
it had ever conceived._”[103] Omitting the superlative “ever,” these
words in italics are wonderfully apposite in reference to the genius of
the Wisdom Movement in Israel.

There is value for us in the confidence which the Wise-men showed in
their attitude towards life. They, like ourselves, lived in an age when
all things were being put to trial, and doubt and perplexity were rife.
They were aware that even their instinctive fundamental ideas were under
challenge, aware that the path they followed was unfinished; and yet, as
the general tone of the proverbs indicates, they lived with firmness and
decision, and therefore achieved much. They were wise indeed in that
they perceived the issue between good and evil to be clear enough for a
man to choose which of the twain he will pursue. Having chosen, these
men did not content themselves with expressing a timorous hope that the
moralistic view of life might ultimately be proved correct; they did
battle for righteousness, valiantly and practically. So with ourselves.
Stringent and systematic application of the test of reason is a most
necessary attitude to preserve, but it is not a whit less necessary,
despite our uncertainty regarding ultimate problems of existence, early
in life to form a definite idea whither we wish to direct our steps. To
do so is the only highway to an effective life. Nor is it unreasonable
to demand from men that much resolution, for Good and Evil do present
themselves quite distinctly as alternative routes. Of course, all the
coward in us and all the sluggard prompts a protest for delay: we see a
hundred reasons for postponing judgment, or for arranging a compromise
between the claimants; “our philosophy is unsettled; we have neither
proved God to our complete satisfaction, nor has He clearly justified
His ways to us: so that surely it is not reasonable to insist that we
make choice (and therefore, we take it, the subsidiary matter of our
unwillingness need not arise)--let us drift a little longer through
these puzzling mists.” Nothing but a bold decision for Wisdom or for
Folly ever clears those mists away. To shirk the challenge (as some do
all their lives) is easy and at first may seem the natural course to
adopt, but it entails a heavy penalty. It deprives us of any firm
criterion of judgment, and we must needs go fumbling with the golden
opportunities which come but return not. Take then the Wise for an
example. Uncertainty they felt, but uncertainty did not paralyse their
power, because they met perplexities in the open field of action. From
us, as from them, many secrets of creation are concealed; but some
things are certainly evil and some are pure and good. A blessing and a
curse are set before us, and the difference between them is in no way
obscure. We ought to choose the blessing; and then, in faith that the
Good is really and ultimately the True, act vigorously in support of our
belief. Wisdom we know and Folly we know; Christ we have seen and the
fruits of wickedness: in the name of sanity how much clearer need the
issue be?

Passing from the methods and manner of the Movement, it is encouraging
to turn for a moment to the thought of its success. When we measure the
might of the forces making against Wisdom, the numbers and influence of
those bent on pleasure or on riches with scant regard, or none at all,
for nobler possibilities in life, it is wonderful that the ideals of the
Wise should have become known to vast numbers of men in alien lands, and
that, enshrined in the Bible, their influence should still remain
unexhausted. Had the memory of them continued in honour only for a
century or two and been restricted to the limits of the Jewish
communities, even that would have been a result exceeding what had once
seemed probable. For Hellenism was a monstrous flood apparently
capable of sweeping away far larger obstacles than all Judaism
combined--priests, prophets, and Wise-men--could raise against its
onset. But Wisdom and Law and Prophets survived the deluge, quite
unharmed and indeed strengthened by the trial they had undergone. Why
was it so? How comes it to pass that the Wise after all do not toil in
vain; that the Crucified conquers; that St. Paul, who in his lifetime
can establish no more than a few struggling Churches, eventually
commands the intellect of Greece and subdues the power of Rome? Surely
because, in the words of yet another great passage in the Hebrew
Scriptures, Elisha’s vision in beleaguered Dothan was no mirage in the
eyes of a famine-haunted man, but truth of truth, and the mountains of
Reality which compass the City of Human Faith are full of the chariots
of the Lord of Hosts. Christianity is not dying, nor is the Church
doomed, nor is the work of idealists in this generation of no avail.
Rather he is blind that imagines so, blind to the armies that in the
soul of Man do battle for the one eternal God.

Such are some of the reflections prompted by the history of the Wisdom
Movement. We come now to what those unacquainted with the events we have
been describing may have imagined to be the only, as it is the most
obvious and perhaps the most important, gift the Jewish Sages have left
for our inheriting--the proverbs themselves, considered apart from their
origin or use in relation to any particular historical events. Not all
the sayings are of value in themselves, for some are trivial and some
are obsolete, some have been said better, and a few were better left
unsaid. But there remain many having permanent interest, and many that
speak deep and undying truth, truth which we, no less than our fathers,
have need to learn, and which those who come after us will have to learn
or suffer loss. Had we chosen to use such proverbs as texts whereon to
build discussion, illustration or enforcement of their thoughts and
counsels, they are enough to fill not one but many volumes of this size.
For stirring subjects would open up on every side. How shrewd, for
example, are these Jewish maxims in their insistence that principle
should precede practice, that success in life is won not by experiment
unguided by fixed purpose but by the early adoption of certain great
principles which our experiences will continually test and interpret,
clarify and confirm! How sensible in their demand for the use of
unsparing criticism--both the discipline of self-imposed criticism, and
the humility that will receive, and, if necessary, assent to the reproof
of others! How true the instinct which taught them to feel that real
Wisdom is not merely an intellectual affair; so that they bid men seek
not learning but rather the power to use it for right purposes, not
knowledge of fact so much as the understanding mind. It is of profound
importance in life this distinction between intelligence and knowledge.
As the late Lord Cromer remarked to one of his friends soon after the
outbreak of the European war, “I believe that Germany will live in
history as the supreme example of the failure to distinguish Wisdom from
Learning.” It is Wisdom that the Jewish Sages preached. And how wise
they were in the emphasis they lay on the necessity of application in
the difficult task of awakening and cultivating the dormant powers of
the mind.[104] Above all, how more than wise, how humane, are they in
depicting Wisdom in lovely colours, not as cold and repellent, but as
warm and welcoming, an infinitely desirable, compassionate Friend of
Humanity! How much we have still to learn from them in that respect, we
who are not yet wholly delivered from an age that of set purpose hid the
fascinating light of knowledge under a bushel of dull and unimaginative
discipline, making education seem a thing to be endured;--till we grew
up--and depicting Morality as an All-seeing Eye, unblinkingly on the
watch for our misdemeanours, a sort of inescapable Super-Spy! And again,
treating the proverbs from this general point of view, what
inexhaustible variety of themes would be at our disposal--education,
commerce, responsibility, virtue and vice, hardships, luxury, marriage
and friendship, idleness and diligence; in fact we might talk “of shoes
and ships and sealing-wax, of cabbages and kings”; an _embarras de
richesses_.

The remaining pages of this volume will be given to a review of certain
of the Jewish proverbs, grouped under several topics. The principle on
which these topics and the proverbs used in their illustration have been
selected is chiefly the avoidance of repetition, so far as has proved
reasonably convenient. Obviously, many most suitable subjects, such as
the personal virtues, and many sayings that might fittingly be quoted in
exposition of the themes actually chosen for the following pages, have
already been utilised in our account of the Wisdom Movement. These then,
with a few exceptions, will not be reproduced again, partly because
there is little need to draw upon them, the stock of Jewish proverbs
being far from exhausted, but mainly because it is to be hoped that
their wit and wisdom for ourselves and for all men did not pass
unnoticed and unconsidered in the historical setting. The sins of
omission of which the following pages are guilty are patent even to the
author. If they rouse the reader into making a better selection for
himself, good and again good.

To preserve a thread of connection with what precedes, we may commence
by reviewing first _Nature_ and then _Humour_ in the Jewish sayings,
both of which subjects have not only a certain general interest, but
will help further to show how the proverbs can contribute to our
realisation of the Humanism of the Bible.




