CHAPTER VI

A Sower went forth to Sow


Let us imagine two of the Wise-men meeting in the streets of Jerusalem
and conversing. That is easier proposed than effected: bold words, to be
followed by small performances. For the outlines of ancient Jerusalem
are none too clear, and again in what tongue shall our Wise-men
converse? In ancient Hebrew or in modern English? Modern English from
their lips will seem incongruous, and Hebrew is not so widely known as
it deserves. Before we can make so much as a beginning we are compelled
to compromise: let them talk in Hebraic English. But the difficulties
need not discourage us overmuch, for in this case even a half-done task
will be worth the doing, and there are some circumstances in our favour.
The topography of old Jerusalem may be uncertain, but our knowledge of
the influences, events and tendencies of the period in question is
considerable. Therefore although the conversation between the Wise-men
must be imaginary, it need not be fancy-free. We can make them say such
things as can be inferred from the historical situation, and the talk
can be so directed as to help our immediate purpose, discovering what
were the dominant fears and ambitions of the Wise. Moreover, however
imperfectly this aim be realised, the picture can hardly fail to help us
across the gulf which divides the abstract or general conception from
the concrete or particular embodiment, a matter of vital importance for
the comprehension of these Jewish proverbs. It is not sufficient to
imagine the Wise as a class. Doubtless most Wise-men conformed to a
type, and they were a class in the community in that they shared a
general attitude towards life; but this bond of union was loose enough
to leave room for great variety of interest, beliefs, and moral
qualities. And just this diversity within the unity is the point on
which stress should be laid; for it explains the individualism of the
Jewish proverbs, and is the secret of their broad humanity.

It is the month of June in the year 203 B.C. Ptolemy Philopator, the
ruler of Egypt, has died the previous year, and is succeeded on the
throne by Ptolemy Epiphanes, a child of four years old. The situation
points to the renewal of warfare between the great Empires. Embarrassed
by the weakness of its young king, Egypt is in obvious danger from the
restless ambition both of Philip of Macedonia and of Antiochus III of
Syria. But although the East is uneasy, the storm has not yet broken.
Palestine is still controlled by the Egyptians, and a garrison of
Ptolemy’s soldiers lives at ease in the citadel of Jerusalem. Zion is at
peace; her harvests of barley and wheat have been gathered in; the
first-ripe figs have fallen and already are on sale in the markets, and
there is prospect of a plentiful later crop. Imagine that we are
watching the city, as the day is about to break. The last hour of the
night is ending. Low down in the Eastern sky a faint tinge of blue
appears, with shades of purple and pink above it, fading upwards into
the dark of the night sky overhead. Soon the horizon flushes into red,
changing swiftly to deep yellow as the first rays of the sun rise over
the hills.[46]

The guard of the Levites on duty at the Temple stands watching for the
dawn, and as soon as the sunlight touches Hebron, just visible to the
south, they raise a shout, heralding the day and summoning the people to
hasten to the celebration of the morning sacrifice.[47] From the
citadel the trumpets of the soldiers take up the sound and call the
garrison from sleep. Soon the whole city is astir. Day has begun, and
its hours are precious before the sun grows hot beyond endurance. The
gates open, and first the cattle-dealers and money-changers begin to
pass along the narrow lanes, hurrying ahead of the people to the
Temple-court. Shopmen appear and busy themselves preparing their booths
in the bazaars. From his house in one of the narrow streets a dignified
man of rather more than middle age, Judah ben Zechariah, comes out and,
turning in the direction of the Temple mingles, with the stream of
worshippers who purpose to be present at the offering of the sacrifice.
Let us keep him in sight. When the ceremony at the temple is ended, he
makes his way without haste through the tangle of streets towards the
Northern wall and the Fish gate. There in the open space near the gate,
just inside the city, he stops, and stands watching the passers by. A
company of Tyrians, pagans all of them, files in through the gate,
bringing fish for Jerusalem from the Phoenician markets. They are
followed by a long caravan of forty or fifty mules laden with wheat from
the north, and their drivers, like the Tyrians, are also pagan. Judah is
Hebrew of the Hebrews, and the sight does not please him. After a while
as he stands there a friend approaches and gives him greeting--Joseph
ben Abijah, one who, like Judah, had reputation as a Wise-man. “Peace be
to thee, Judah.” “And may Jehovah bless thee, my brother,” answered
Judah, “and may He increase thee to a multitude; for truly there be few
this day in Israel such as thou, who keepest faith before God and before
men. Behold now this long time stand I here, Joseph, to see them that
pass by, and I swear unto thee that for one man of Israel there be nine
from the ends of the earth, worshippers of strange gods. Men call this
city Zion; but where are Zion’s children? From end to end the streets
are full of these Gentiles. Moreover, look yonder!” (a company of the
garrison came swinging down to change guard at the Gate)--“these
soldiers of Ptolemy! Mark well their heathen insolence, their pride and
their contempt for us. Are we not the bondservants of Egypt, even as our
fathers were? I tell thee, Joseph, it is not well with Israel.”

“Nay! thou art over-anxious, Judah. The land is at peace. The harvests
are good, trade prospers and extends; we and our wives and our children
dwell in safety. None hinders us in our worship. Why then take so sore
to heart these Gentiles? _They_ are the slaves, who in their folly
worship dumb and senseless images. Is not Israel free in her God?
Moreover--a word in thine ear--how thinkest thou, Judah? Will Ptolemy
much longer lord it over us in Zion? Or are his times come near to an
end?”

“Hush! see that none hear thee. I also think his day is at an end. But
for what then shall we look? For the dreams of the prophets? For the Day
of the Lord? Ah, would that the Lord might rend the heavens and come
down, but I, for one, do not look for these things to come to pass at
this time, Joseph. And except the Lord deliver us wherein shall we hope?
Nay, Zion, is still far from salvation. We shall change the bondage of
Egypt for the yoke of Syria, and her little finger will be thicker than
the loins of Egypt. Antiochus is ten times more Greek than Ptolemy.
Verily, the whole world becometh Greek. Traders and talkers, how they
throng in our streets and multiply in our midst! And whether they be
rich and noble or poor and the servant of servants, behold how they
despise us and make mock of us, the people of the one true God! And how
with their vainglory and their wicked wisdom--for, as the Lord liveth,
’tis not the wisdom of God--they do bewitch fools and entice them away.
Thou sayest, ‘Israel is free in its God’; but I say ‘How long shall God
find faith in Israel?’ If then Ptolemy be cast down and Antiochus be
lifted up over us, wherein is our advantage? How wilt thou save this
people from following wholly after the thoughts and customs of the
Greeks? Again, thou speakest of peace and good harvests, but how long
shall peace and prosperity be permitted us? If that whereof we speak
should come to pass, it shall not be without war and desolation. Who
knows but that Jerusalem shall soon be a besieged and captured city? As
for the Day of the Lord, the prophet hath said ‘The Lord will hasten it
in His time’ and his word is good; but alas! I fear that ours is better:
_Hope deferred maketh the heart sick_.”

Said his friend, “I also--thou knowest it, Judah--am not of the
dreamers, and know well that they who in our days see visions are
prophets in name and not in truth. And the true prophets did not live
for ever. Nevertheless their word liveth; and have not we that are Wise
learnt from them that fear of Jehovah which is to turn from evil and do
good, so that in measure their mantle is fallen upon us and we are
become their successors, and according to their commandments so we
teach? Yea, I say that their word _hath_ overtaken this people, not for
evil but for good; since of all the Jews who is there that doth not from
the heart know that the Lord our God is one God, and that the gods of
the heathen are nought and their images wood and stone? Wherefore,
Judah, I fear not the Greeks so much as thou. For if a Jew from among us
go forth unto them and learn their skill and follow their fashions, yet
he will not reverence their gods. Moreover, remember, Judah, those that
fight for us in the strife. If God hath not raised up a prophet in
Israel these many years, are not the Priests and Levites become a strong
tower of defence? In all their interpretation of the Law of Moses, they
do well: for they seek to establish justice and mercy between a man and
his brethren, and to confirm the fear of Jehovah’s Name. It is written,
_The Law of the Lord is perfect, making clean the heart_; and these men
love its statutes wholly. Thou dost not think that _they_ will become
Greeks?”

“Not all of them, Joseph; yet of the great priests many are evil. They
live for place and power, not for the pure service of their God, and if
the day come when it shall profit them these would surpass the Greeks in
the fashions of the Greeks. But concerning the Levites and the Scribes
thou sayest right; for they truly have set their hearts upon their work:
albeit zeal for the Law will not save Israel. If only the ritual be
observed and the services in the Temple maintained, if the feasts be
duly kept, they deem all things are well. They would have all men more
Levite than themselves. But what answer is that to the young who crave
for fortune, favour, and fulness of pleasures like the unbridled
heathen? Some it may satisfy, but thou knowest that more turn empty
away; and all of them understand that the Greeks will feed their desires
full. Come now: tell me, I pray thee: this very year how many are gone
hence to seek fortune in the markets of Ptolemais? How many to the court
of Antiochus, aye! from the noblest of our families? How many to be made
captains in his armies and in Ptolemy’s? Perchance it is well for thee,
Joseph, whose son is a scribe well spoken of and one day will be counted
a Wise-man and a fearer of God even as thou, his father, art: but my
son, my son, is in Alexandria, though I besought him with tears that he
would not go.”

“Judah, I verily knew that it was for this cause thine heart was sad.
Nevertheless I would comfort thee, my friend. Hear now my words. They
are not all lost to Zion that are gone forth from Zion’s gates. Thou
knowest there is no evil in thy son. Take heart. Are not the families of
our people there in Egypt many and prosperous? Thy son will be a loyal
Jew in Egypt, not forsaking his father’s faith. I am persuaded he will
send his tribute to the Temple when the time comes round. Aye! and thine
eye shall see him again ere long returning to keep the feast at
Jerusalem and to make glad thine heart. My brother, hear thou the
thought which the Lord hath given me concerning this thing. It is
written that all flesh shall come to worship before the Lord in His holy
hill; but how shall this thing come to pass? They chant in the Temple of
His outstretched arm and His mighty acts. What if the stretching out of
His arm is in the going forth of these His children unto the ends of the
earth; seest thou not how that already praise is offered to His Name in
many lands, and His glory is exalted among the heathen? In the Temple
they sigh for the day when all peoples shall come crouching to Zion; but
what if thy son, and others even as he, have gone to prepare the way of
the Lord and to make straight His paths, and in Alexandria, Babylon, and
Antioch are beginning the victory of our God, a victory which shall be
(as saith Zechariah) ‘_not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit,’
saith the Lord_? So shall thy son’s going be turned to God’s glory, and
perchance it hath happened in accordance with His will. Saith not Isaiah
that _His ways are not our ways, nor His thoughts as our thoughts_? And
when thou sayest of the priests and scribes that all their care is for
the Law and the Temple, and that they know not how to speak unto the
heart of these young men, in truth thy reproach is just. But herein is
our work. _We_ have the answer for this need in Israel. Have we not
counsel for success in life _with_ allegiance to our God; so that our
words are from the Lord, though we praise not the Law daily neither make
mention of the prophet’s hopes? If then we be found faithful and our
task well done, none in Israel shall reckon that Wisdom is of the Greeks
only, but rather that their Wisdom is found folly in the latter end.
Honour, long life, and riches are in our words and they that hearken
unto us shall find them and yet shall not depart from justice nor hate
mercy. He that heareth our words and learneth our Wisdom shall even
dwell with the Greeks and be wiser than they, being delivered from the
snares of their iniquities and the vanity of their faiths. So shall it
be with thy son, my brother. He will not forget thy instruction. And
like him there shall be many who, though they go forth from Jerusalem,
will yet give diligent heed unto our precepts, and with them shall go
Wisdom to be a guide unto their feet that they shall not stumble. Yea,
even of those that in Zion seem to heed us not, some perchance shall
remember in a distant land, and so be saved from falling. But, come,
thou knowest this even as I, though sorrow for a moment had hidden it
from thine eyes. With the blessing of God we do not labour in vain.”

“Friend, thou comfortest well; and in my soul I know that these thy
words are true, and that our work is of God, and that our children’s
children shall see the reward of all our labours. But as for this
generation many there be that scorn and few that hear.”

“Be our zeal the greater then!” responded Joseph, “What saith the
prophet?--_Precept on precept, line upon line_; and for us therefore
‘Proverb on proverb,’”

The older man smiled at him gently, pleased by the words and spirit of
his friend: “Thou art a true friend and wise counsellor, ben Abijah. And
now let us leave this place, and, if it seem good to thee, let us pass
through the streets and take note of them that buy and sell; for the
heat is not yet upon us and the markets are full this day. Comest thou
with me?”

“I come gladly. Thou shalt see--we shall find one here, one there, that
hath need of our wisdom; and perhaps to-day we shall even catch the ear
of the multitude, and many will give heed both to hear and to receive
our teaching.”




