CHAPTER II

The Proverbs of the Jews


Of the facts we have been considering one is specially relevant to the
subject, not only of this volume but of the series in which it forms a
part--namely, the intimately human quality of proverbs. Mr. Morley has
called them “The guiding oracles which man has found out for himself in
that great business of ours, of learning how to be, to do, to do without
and to depart.[9]” The Humanism of the Bible ought therefore to be
visible nowhere more clearly than in Israel’s proverbs, _if_ these are
to be found within its pages. But stay! What right have we to expect
their presence? Surely little or none, if the Bible is what many persons
conceive it to be--only a book of religious teachings. For consider the
reasonable expectation, and contrast the extraordinary facts. In such a
book we might reasonably expect to find a few proverbs: that a king
should quote a saying to suit his purpose, a counsellor press home his
wisdom with some well-known maxim, or a prophet edge his appeal by the
use of a popular phrase--that would be quite natural, and indeed occurs.
But actually (and here is the astonishing matter) there are proverbs by
tens and by hundreds, gathered together in one Book of the Bible,
following verse by verse, chapter by chapter, till they choke one
another through sheer profusion, like flowers in an unkept garden. Thus
in five chapters of the _Book of Proverbs_ (13-17) there are 154
separate adages. So strange a phenomenon challenges attention. It might
be supposed that the Hebrew language had been ransacked for proverbs,
but that suggestion will not stand scrutiny. On investigation, the Book
proves to be no deliberate, systematic, attempt to collect the Hebrew
proverbs. Thus, when we look for the few, but famous, popular sayings
that occur in the historical and prophetic writings of the Old
Testament, we find that _not one_ of them is included. As for system, a
casual glance will demonstrate its absence. In most chapters of
_Proverbs_ not even an effort is made to classify the material. The Book
cannot be explained as an anthology of Hebrew sayings--the most witty or
worldly-wise, the most moral or religious. Whatever the explanation,
here assuredly is something less artificial than an anthology. Good,
bad, and indifferent proverbs alike are present. Many of the sayings
unmistakably reflect a conception of morality more practical than
exalted, and some appear grossly utilitarian. Time and again the
consequences of sin are naïvely presented as the reasons for avoiding
it, whilst the rewards of virtue are emphasised unduly. Later on we
shall find reasons for holding that the utilitarian attitude is not
fundamental, and therefore not so destructive of the ethical value of
these proverbs as it might seem. But until both the circumstances which
gave rise to the proverbs and the ends they were meant to serve are
understood, until (as it were) we have seen the men who spoke the maxims
and the people who repeated them, that more generous judgment is
scarcely possible; and meantime, be it freely admitted, there are many
things in the Book not agreeable to modern ethical taste. Religiously,
too, the _Book of Proverbs_ is on the surface disappointing. Neither the
fire of the Prophets’ faith is visible, nor the deep passion of the
Psalmists’ longing after God. Who amongst us, seeking spiritual help,
would choose a chapter in _Proverbs_ when the Gospels or the Letters of
St. Paul are open to him? So then on literary, ethical, and religious
grounds there are plain reasons why this Book has lost something of its
former favour. Contrast the estimation in which it was held only two
generations ago. Ruskin records that four chapters of _Proverbs_, the
third, fourth, eighth and twelfth, were amongst those portions of the
Bible which his mother made him learn by heart and “so established my
soul in life”; they were, he declares, “the most precious and on the
whole essential part of all my education.” Not so long ago, _Proverbs_
was a text-book in many schools; probably it is nowhere so used
to-day.[10]

Even if neglect of this part of the Scripture is partly chargeable to
heightened standards of ethics or theology, the loss incurred is great.
As a matter of fact, depreciation of its ethical temper is often based
on inaccurate notions, often is exaggerated. In comparison with our
fathers, who without commentaries read through their Bibles from cover
to cover, we have not gained as we should; for, whilst we pride
ourselves (with what measure of justice is uncertain) on being more
sensitive to religious values, they were far better acquainted with the
religious facts. They at least knew the contents of Scripture; we, who
have at our disposal abundance of interpretative help whereby to learn
the nature of the Bible and with instructed minds consider its spiritual
worth, too often are ignorant both of text and commentary. Doubtless the
fault is due to certain characteristics of our time. This is a feverish
impatient age; if our mental fare is not served us like our daily
information, put up into easy paragraphs, so that he who runs may read,
we will not stay to seek it; and the Old Testament is not an easy book,
though it answers patience with astonishing rewards. Candidly, how does
it stand with knowledge of the Bible at the present time? In charity let
the question be addressed only to those who have a genuine interest in
the Christian religion, desiring to rule their lives by its ideals and
cherishing its promises. Even to such persons what is the Bible? A few
there are who have found or made opportunity for serious consideration
of its Books, and these have certainly felt the fascination of the vast
and varied interests that have won and retained for biblical study the
life-long service of many brilliant scholars. But to the others, and
obviously they are thousands of thousands, the Bible is essentially the
book of religion. As such, the New Testament means the Gospel
narratives, some immortal chapters from St. Paul, a few verses in
_Hebrews_, and St. John’s vision of that City where _death shall be no
more_. And what--religiously--in similar fashion is the Old Testament,
except a few, comforting, beautiful Psalms; some childhood memories of
Abraham, Joseph, Moses, generous David and brave Daniel; a tale or two
of Elijah; a procession of Kings, and an uncharted sea of grand but most
perplexing Prophets? Asked for a more general account, some would
describe the Old Testament as a record of the laws, history, and
religious ideas of the Hebrew people; others would answer that it is
“part of the Word of God,” but they might all be at a loss to say what
is the religious value of _Leviticus_, what the spiritual relation
between _Genesis_ and the _Gospel_, between _Kings_ and _Chronicles_,
between _Job_ and _Revelation_. Probably the great majority of men at
the present time would be quite willing to confess that their knowledge
of the Bible is vague and insufficient, but few, we believe, would
suspect that there is anything wrong with the basis from which their
thinking proceeds: so firmly is it fixed in men’s minds that the Bible
is merely the book of religion. The Bible is that, but more also, more
and yet again more. And how easily we might have realised the fact!
Ought not the presence of these surprisingly heterogeneous proverbs
alone to have stirred our curiosity, and so compelled the enlargement of
our thoughts about the Old Testament? Without needing to be urged, men
should, of their own accord, have perceived the astonishing range of
interest and the wealth of literature the Bible contains, and should
have seen in this variety a clue that would lead them by pleasant paths
to treasures artistic and intellectual as well as religious. Thereby no
loss could ensue religiously, but on the contrary gain. The greater our
recognition of the artistic qualities of the sacred literature, the more
exact and full our understanding of the history of the Jews and of their
beliefs and interpretation of life, so much the more wonderful will the
actual development of religion in Israel be seen to be. This is the
point to which the above remarks are meant to lead. If the Biblical
proverbs compel as a first conclusion the recognition of how much more
the Old Testament is than a text-book for theology, that is a minimum
and an initial discovery; our appreciation of its meaning will assuredly
not end there. The growth, in Israel, of the knowledge of God into a
high and holy faith is an indisputable fact. Increase your comprehension
of the circumstances attending this development, and your faith in the
reality of a self-revealing God should increase also.

So much for the presence of these proverbs in the Bible. Now consider
the affirmation with which the first chapter concluded: that proverbs
have once been literature. That claim may be advanced on behalf of the
sayings of the _Book of Proverbs_ and _Ecclesiasticus_. It is of course
obvious that the difficulty which has to be overcome is the essential
independence of proverbial sayings: each is so relentlessly complete in
itself. How can they be so related to each other as to acquire the
higher unity indispensable for literature? The lack of system in the
_Book of Proverbs_ has already been admitted frankly; but the point must
again be emphasised. So far from the five chapters with the 154 maxims,
referred to above, being exceptional they are typical of the greater
portion of the Book. Continually we encounter the same astonishing
disregard for consecutive, or even cognate, thought in the grouping of
the proverbs. And yet, despite this fact, the attentive reader will
become conscious of a subtle unity pervading the Book. The impression
will grow that the confusion is not absolute; somehow it is being held
within bounds, whilst here and there chaos has evidently yielded to the
command of a directing purpose. Obstinate independents as proverbs are,
one discovers that here their masses, unruly though they still may be,
have nevertheless become an army, a host sufficiently disciplined to
serve a common end. As with a complicated piece of music through the
intricacies of the notes runs ever an underlying theme, so here through
the medley of disparate sayings can be heard the preaching of one great
thought--“Wisdom.” Behind the proverbs, behind the Book, we discover
men, preachers and teachers of an Idea, enthusiasts for a
Cause--“Wisdom.” Just what that phrase implied, just what manner of men
those advocates of Wisdom were, we shall see in due course. The point
for the moment is that these Jewish proverbs were not gathered
haphazard, nor simply as _a_ collection of Jewish proverbs; but for the
express purpose of illustrating, developing, and enforcing the
conception of Wisdom. Thus, through the influence of this specific
intention, they received in sufficient measure the unity of literature.
This fact is of the utmost importance for our subject, for it means that
these proverbs may be considered not merely one by one but in their
totality; that is, in their combination as text-books inculcating
Wisdom. So regarded, they afford a glimpse of a remarkable class of men
in the intensely interesting century or two when the intellectual
foundations of Western civilisation were being laid down. No doubt each
proverb bears the impress of reality and has its individual interest, is
(as it were) a coin struck out of active experience; but the same may be
said of the collected proverbs _as a whole_, and because the whole has
its own significance, the parts acquire a meaning and value they would
not otherwise possess. The Jews are an astonishing people. St. Paul
perceived that they had a genius for religion, but they have had genius
for many other things besides, as their strange fortunes testify. Their
hand prospers, whithersoever it is turned. Who but the Jews can claim to
have had a Golden Age in proverbs? In utilising their popular sayings
for a definite purpose, and in thus making them literature, the Jews
succeeded in a feat that other nations have scarcely emulated, far less
equalled. Moreover in the process the Jews made their proverbs
superlatively good. Some think that for wit and acuteness the ancient
sayings of the Chinese are unsurpassed; for multitude and variety those
of the Arabs and the Spaniards. But the Jewish proverbs of this “Wisdom”
period excel all others in the supreme quality of being possession of
all men for all time. They are marvellously free from provincial and
temporary elements; and this is the more remarkable in that the Jews
were intensely nationalistic, and their literature, as a rule, is
steeped in racial sentiment. Of these proverbs, however, very few must
be considered Hebraic in an exclusive sense, or indeed Oriental. The
mass of them have been at home in many lands and many centuries, because
they speak to the elemental needs of men. Again and again they touch the
very heart of Humanity. They are universal. But that is the
characteristic of genius. If therefore proverbs be our study, we could
ask no better subject than these proverbs of the Jews.

Even so our theme is far from easy. Life, when visible before us, can
with difficulty be portrayed. Harder by far is it to recall life from
literature, translating the symbols of letters into the sound of speech
and looking through words into the colour and movement of the scenes
that by the magic of human language are there preserved, accurately
enough, yet only like pale shadows of the reality. Hardest of all is it,
when the documents to be studied are records of a far-past age and the
life that of an alien people. But how well worth every effort is the
task! “Many of us,” writes Mark Rutherford, “have felt that we would
give all our books if we could but see with our own eyes how a single
day was passed by a single ancient Jewish, Greek, or Roman family; how
the house was opened in the morning; how the meals were prepared; what
was said; how the husband, wife, and children went about their work;
what clothes they wore, and what were their amusements.”[11] Information
so detailed as Mark Rutherford desired will not be afforded by the
Jewish proverbs. Nevertheless they are full of frank, intimate, comment
on the ways of men and women, and of reflection on the experiences we
all suffer or enjoy, and certainly should learn how best to encounter.
If they yield less than might be wished for, still what they show is
shown in the naïve and homely fashion that is so illuminating. Such
being the difficulty of our task, and such the encouragement to pursue
it, the reader will perhaps permit at the outset a short statement
mentioning the writings where Jewish proverbs are to be found, and
giving somewhat fuller information regarding the dates and composition
of the two works from which the material of the following chapters will
chiefly be derived.


THE SOURCES OF JEWISH PROVERBS

I. OCCASIONAL PROVERBS. In the historical and prophetical Books of the
Old Testament there are to be found some popular sayings current in
early Israel. Though few in number, they possess considerable interest,
and will therefore be discussed in Chapter IV.

II. THE BOOK OF PROVERBS. This Book is the principal “source” of the
proverbs considered in this volume. Unlike modern writings, which are
usually the work of one author and will rarely require a longer period
than five or ten years for their composition, many of the Books of the
Bible have reached their _present form_ as the outcome of a protracted
process of compilation and revision perhaps extending over many
generations and involving the work of numerous writers. The words of
earlier authors were utilised again and again in later times by others
who, having somewhat similar ideas and purposes in view, exercised
complete liberty in reproducing, or modifying, or adding to the material
they found to hand.[12] Such a book is _Proverbs_. The consequence is
that the question of date and authorship cannot be answered in a
sentence. The problem of the _structure_ of the Book rises as a
preliminary subject.[13]

(a) _Structure._ The _Book of Proverbs_ in its present form represents
the combination of five originally independent collections of the single
proverbs which are of course the ultimate material of the Book. There is
some evidence that these five collections were themselves built out of
still smaller groups of proverbs, but such subdivisions cannot be traced
with certainty, and for our purpose may be neglected. The five main
sections are as follows:--(_a_) In chs. 1-9, a number of epigrams,
sonnets, and discourses in praise of wisdom. (_b_) In chs.
10^{1}-22^{16}, a collection of two-line (“unit”) proverbs. (_c_) In
chs. 22^{17}-24^{22} and 24^{23-34}, two very similar collections of
four-line (“quatrain”) proverbs. (_d_) In chs. 25-29, a collection of
two-line proverbs. (_e_) In chs. 30, 31, epigrams, sonnets, and an
acrostic poem.

(b) _Date and Authorship._ Both in its component parts and as a
composite whole the _Book of Proverbs_ is an anonymous work. It is true
that titles, such as “The proverbs of Solomon, the son of David, king of
Israel” (Pr. 1^{1}), are prefixed to several portions of the Book[14],
but they do not imply authorship, although to those unacquainted with
the nature of ancient books that may seem the necessary meaning. Their
significance will be considered later, on p. 71.

The date of origin and the authorship of single proverbs are seldom
discoverable: a tantalising circumstance for those who would write about
them. And yet, perhaps, their reticence is wise. It may be that some of
the noblest sayings have sprung from the lips of a poor man in a peasant
home; and there are fools who would thenceforth despise them for their
birth. Of the individual sayings in the _Book of Proverbs_ a few, in
matter if not in exact phrase, may go back to ancient days; some may be
due to Solomon himself or date from his period; but the vast
majority[15], for cogent reasons of style, language, tone, ethical and
social customs and so forth, are post-exilic--that is, not earlier than
about 450 B.C.; nor on the other hand are they later than about 200
B.C., by which time the several sections had been combined to form
substantially the present Book.[16]

Something may be said concerning the relative priority of the five
sections of the Book. Internal evidence points to sections _b_ and _d_
as the oldest portions, then section _c_; sections _a_ and _e_ (_i.e._,
chs. 1-9, 30, 31) being probably the latest groups. But of the precise
date when these collections were severally formed and combined, and of
the names of the men by whom the work was done, we are unaware.
Fortunately our ignorance of detail is but a negligible trifle compared
with our firm knowledge of the general fact that _in their present form
these proverbs belong to the period_ 350-200 B.C., _and their authors
and compilers were men who styled themselves “The Wise,” and were known
in the Jewish community by that term_. A hundred and fifty years may
seem a wide margin, but it is a mistake to wish it less; if anything, it
ought to be increased. For the point to be grasped is that _Proverbs_
represents the thoughts and ideals of the Wise throughout that whole
period (350-200 B.C.) and even longer. The exact dates of the
combination and final revision of the component collections of sayings
are therefore questions of minor importance. The Book is not to be
treated as a fixed literary product of any one particular year, but as
representative of the teachings of the Wise during very many years.

To the same class of men we owe, besides _Proverbs_, other famous
writings, of which two, _Job_ and _Ecclesiastes_, were also included in
the Old Testament Canon, and two are to be found in the Apocrypha,
namely, _Ecclesiasticus_ (or, as it is often called, _The Wisdom of Ben
Sirach_) and the _Wisdom of Solomon_. Of these four writings the two
first, _Job_ and _Ecclesiastes_, are considered in other volumes of this
series,[17] and therefore, except for one or two quotations, will not be
utilised here, although they both contain a number of proverbial
sayings. The _Wisdom of Solomon_ also will seldom be noticed in this
book: it is much later in date than _Proverbs_, and is not a collection
of proverbs, but a set of discourses in praise of Wisdom.

III. Ecclesiasticus. On the other hand, the book of _Ecclesiasticus_ or
_The Wisdom of Ben Sirach_, is--next to _Proverbs_--the source from
which we shall derive most material. Like _Proverbs_ it is a storehouse
of sayings about Wisdom, but fortunately, unlike _Proverbs_, it is not
anonymous, and can be dated with some exactitude. The author or compiler
of the book was one, Jesus ben (_i.e._, Son of) Sirach, who lived in
Jerusalem about 250-180 B.C., his volume being finished about 190 B.C.
Some fifty years later his grandson, then living in Egypt, translated it
into Greek, and until recently the book was known to us only in its
Greek form. Now, however, a large part of the original Hebrew text has
been recovered, with the happy result that the Greek version can
frequently be checked and obscurities be removed by means of the Hebrew.

Besides the single, “unit,” proverbs, there are in _Ecclesiasticus_, and
in _Proverbs_ also though to a less extent, a number of short sonnets
and essays. These longer passages will be freely referred to, but
perhaps a word in justification will here be in place. It has been said
with truth, that “often a parable is an elaborate proverb, and a proverb
is a parable in germ.” That comment excellently indicates the nature of
the passages in question; most of them are expansions of some brief
gnomic phrase[18]. When, for example, in E. 20^{14^{f}} we read, “=The
gift of a fool shall not profit thee, for his eyes are many instead of
one=; _he will give little and upbraid much and he will open his mouth
like a crier; to-day he will lend and to-morrow he will ask it again:
such an one is a hateful man_....” it is obvious that the verse is only
an elaboration and explanation of the enigmatic proverb printed in heavy
type.

IV. THE NEW TESTAMENT. Scattered through the pages of the New Testament
are more allusions to popular sayings than one would readily expect.
Almost all offer interesting comment on the life and manner of the
times; but, unfortunately, they will fall outside the scope of this
book, except for occasional references.

V. Finally, a great number of Jewish proverbs are mentioned in the
post-Biblical RABBINICAL writings--the tractates of the _Mishna_, the
_Midrashim_, and _Talmuds_. Embedded in a vast and difficult literature
(how difficult only those know who have attempted seriously to study
it), these later Jewish sayings have been somewhat inaccessible to
Gentile students. They are interesting in many ways, but the development
of our subject in this volume will give opportunity for the mention only
of a few. Should any reader desire to know more of these Rabbinic
sayings, he can now be referred to a small but trustworthy collection
recently made by A. Cohen and published under the title _Ancient Jewish
Proverbs_.

The question is, What can the Jewish proverbs tell us about human life?
The conclusion of the first chapter left us perplexed by indicating too
many paths that might be followed. This chapter solves the difficulty by
suggesting that these proverbs will have a great deal to say to us, if
we choose to treat them in their historical aspect. To do so is to
follow the king’s highway; but when the plain road promises an
interesting journey, it is folly to search for bypaths. The human story
seems naturally to divide into past and present; and, because the
present immediately concerns us, we are all tempted to ignore the past
and count it negligible. To the uneducated man the past is dead; and he
fails to perceive that, if the facts of history are unknown, the
present, though it may fascinate, will prove bewildering. The truth is
that history is one and continuous, the present is organically related
to the past, and the division between them in our thought is artificial
and perilously misleading. Nothing is of greater practical value than to
learn and ponder the narrative of the past, provided heart and mind are
kept alert to discern the guidance it continually offers to ourselves.
To neglect its lessons is to starve the power of judgment in the
present. Much that by our own unaided trials can only be learnt slowly,
painfully, and at great hazard, may be discovered swiftly and securely
by observation of the experience of other men. In this spirit let our
studies of the Jewish proverbs be first of the _past_: what glimpses of
former days are discernible in their homely words?

Let us commence as if we had some leisure at our disposal, and let us
use it by following up occasional traces of very ancient times. Then we
shall proceed to the more strenuous and more rewarding task of
recovering a picture of the stirring years when Wisdom was moulding the
Jewish proverbs to her urgent needs. Always, however, as the records
yield up these tales of byegone days we are to keep in mind ourselves
and our own generation, striving so to interpret the fortunes of men of
old that we in our turn may learn from them how to avoid folly, endure
trials, use success, and discover the secret of content. Finally we
shall gather such of the proverbs as may please our fancy, and briefly
consider them in themselves for their perennial, as opposed to their
original or historical, interest.




