CHAPTER IV

The Day of Small Things


Popular as the custom of making and of hearing “wise words” may have
been in ancient Israel, it is not surprising that only five or six
proverbial sayings are recorded in the early writings of the Old
Testament. For proverbs are not likely to receive mention in literature.
They are too plain for the poet, too vague for the historian, too
complaisant for the law-maker. And even these five or six, it appears,
have been preserved not for any merit they possess as proverbs: one is
of local interest only, two are picturesque, but obscure, two are the
merest truisms. The right question, therefore, is not “Why are there so
few?”, but “Why have _these_ sayings been rescued from oblivion?”; and,
being preserved, “Why should they receive our attention?”

Suppose that in Britain fifty or a hundred years hence men should quote
“It’s a long, long way to Tipperary,” when they seek an expression for
the pathos and heroism that mark the acceptance of a difficult and
perilous task--if those words live, why will they live? Obviously for no
intrinsic merit, but for the undying memory of men who counted not their
lives dear unto themselves. So with these early proverbs in the Bible.
Each of them came into quickening contact with a great personality, or
played a part in one of those fateful moments when the fortunes of a
people or the trend of human thinking has been determined this way or
that. They have lived because each has been touched by the passion of
humanity. Therefore we have to study them not in isolation from the
context, but in close connection with the scene or circumstance that
gave them unexpected immortality.

       *       *       *       *       *

(1) In days when Jerusalem was not yet Jerusalem, City of David, but
only _Jebus_, a stronghold of the Canaanites, there had been built in
the limestone uplands of Judæa an Israelitish village, _Gibeah_,
situated (as the name implies), on a hill-top, doubtless for such
security as the rising ground afforded.

At the time we are concerned with, Israel stood in sore need of every
protection her settlements could find. Baffled by the great Canaanite
fortresses, the invading Hebrews had never become absolute masters of
the land, and of recent years their fortunes had altogether failed under
the counter-pressure of new invaders, the Philistines, who had seized
the coast of Canaan and whose restless armies came sweeping up the
valleys that lead to the highlands from the plain along the sea. The
raiders harried the Judæan villages, slaying the men and carrying the
women, children and cattle captive to the lowlands. The villages were an
easy prey, and the spirit of the Israelites was broken by the miseries
of these repeated ravages. Wandering bands of religious devotees,
preaching remembrance of the power of Jehovah, kept the embers of
corporate feeling from flickering out; but, at the best, their wordy
warfare must have seemed a feeble answer to the mail-clad giants of the
Philistine hosts.

Imagine that we are standing on the hill of Gibeah, looking down the
steep pathway which leads up to the village. A few days ago a young man,
accompanied by a servant, went out to search the countryside for some
strayed animals. All in Gibeah know him well, Saul, the son of Kish, a
proper man, tall and powerful, one who in happier days might have been
a leader in Israel. Saul and his servant are returning and have almost
reached the foot of the ascent to the village. Last night they were with
Samuel at Ramah, and at day-break secretly the seer had anointed the
youth to be king over Israel; but of these events we are ignorant as
yet; we do not know that the Saul who went out will return no more. Idly
watching from the hill-top, we observe a company of devotees, who have
spent the night in Gibeah, descending the slope towards Saul. As they
approach, Saul stops and, to our faint surprise, is seen to be in speech
with them. Question and answer pass. Suddenly our listless attention
changes to astonishment. Below, excitement is rising, and on none has it
fallen more than on Saul! He begins to talk and gesticulate like a man
inspired. We raise a shout and the folk come running, and, as they see
beneath them Saul now in an ecstasy, the incredulous cry breaks forth
_Is Saul also among the prophets?_

What is the interest of this famous scene? That a proverb was born that
day in Israel? That it marked the commencement of a new stage in the
national life of Israel? More than that. The real interest is in the
transformation effected by the recognition of a personal duty. Young men
like the Saul who went out to seek the lost animals are useful members
of a State, but, had Saul remained unaltered, what waste of his latent,
unsuspected power! Saul had met devotees many times before, but their
words had roused no energies in him. One touch of the faith of Samuel,
one illuminating moment of consciousness that _to him_ God had spoken,
and--Saul was a king, and Israel again a people; despair became hope,
and hope achievement. It has always been so, whenever men have listened
to the summons of personal religion. We go upon our ordinary path a
hundred times and return as we went, uncomprehending; but if once God
meets us on the way, whether He speak by the mouth of a prophet, or, as
now, by the shock of war, the miracle is effected: we are changed into
another man.

(2) The scene of the second of these early proverbs is the steep and
rugged country that mounts from the floor of the Dead Sea valley near
Engedi. But the setting of the incident matters little; its point is all
in the play of character between two great personalities--Saul, now
nearing the dark finish of his reign and haunted by the thought that at
his death the throne will pass from his house; and David, with youth and
a good conscience to support him but fleeing for his life from the
jealous king and hard pressed by the royal soldiery. Saul has entered a
cave, unaware that David is hiding in its recesses. David suffers him to
go out unharmed and still ignorant of his peril; but quietly he follows
Saul to the sunlight at the cave’s mouth, and standing there, as the
King moves off, he calls, “O my lord the King!” At the clear, musical,
voice of the man he half-loves, half-hates, and cannot kill, Saul in
astonishment turns to hear these words: “_Wherefore hearkenest thou to
men’s words saying ‘Behold David seeketh thy hurt’? Behold this day the
Lord had delivered thee into mine hand in the cave: and some bade me
kill thee; but mine eye spared thee and I said ‘I will not put forth
mine hand against my lord, for he is the Lord’s anointed.’ Moreover, my
father, see, yea, see the skirt of thy robe in my hand: for in that I
cut the skirt of thy robe and killed thee not, know thou and see that
there is neither evil nor transgression in my hand, and I have not
sinned against thee, though thou huntest after my soul to take it. The
Lord judge between me and thee, and avenge me of thee: but mine hand
shall not be upon thee. As saith the proverb of the ancients_, Out of
the wicked cometh forth wickedness: _but mine hand shall not be upon
thee_.” We can see how David meant it, that proverb of the ancients. It
leapt to his lips in eager protestation. How could Saul deem him
capable of a deed of foulest treachery? Why could he not see that only
out of the basest of men could such dire wickedness proceed? But into
the mind of Saul the saying sank with double edge. What had _he_ done
towards the making of this scene--that red mist of passion when he flung
the javelin; those cold and cunning plots to lure David into adventure
that would be his death; the unrelaxing hunt to catch and kill? Saul for
an instant saw his soul laid bare by the ancient proverb: he at least
was a man from whom great wickedness had come, and “A good tree cannot
bring forth corrupt fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good
fruit.” _And Saul lifted up his voice and wept. And he said to David,
“Thou art more righteous than I, for thou hast rendered unto me good,
whereas I have rendered unto thee evil.”_ A few years later the King lay
dead and vanquished on Mount Gilboa. From that day to this men have not
ceased to find in him a text for moralising, with some justice but with
strangely little sympathy, seeing that he sinned in one thing and paid a
heavy penalty. Which was the real Saul? The King crazy with murderous
hatred, or the man who answered David’s generosity in those noble words,
who once “was among the prophets,” who had made Israel again a people
and so long time had held the Philistines at bay? It does not greatly
matter if men reply “the mad Saul, who died believing himself forsaken
of God”; and so push their moralisings home. But on which Saul does the
Divine judgment pass? One man, more than all others, had reason to
condemn, and he did more than pardon. He sang of Saul slain on Gilboa,
_How are the mighty fallen?... Saul and Jonathan were lovely and
pleasant in their lives, and in their deaths they were not divided._

(3) In the books of Jeremiah and Ezekiel two popular sayings are
mentioned, which may be considered together, for their burden is one.

(_a_) _Behold, everyone that useth proverbs shall use this proverb
against thee saying_, =As is the mother, so is the daughter= (_Ezekiel_
16^{44}).

(_b_) _But it shall come to pass that like as I have watched over them
to pluck up and to break down and to overthrow and to destroy and to
afflict; so will I watch over them to build and to plant, saith the
Lord. In those days they shall say no more_, =The fathers have eaten sour
grapes, and the children’s teeth are set on edge=. _But every one shall
die for his own iniquity: every man that eateth the sour grapes his
teeth shall be set on edge_ (_Jeremiah_ 31^{28-30}); and to the same
effect, this from Ezekiel, _The word of the Lord came unto me saying,
What mean ye that ye use this proverb concerning the land of Israel,
saying_, =The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children’s teeth
are set on edge=? _As I live, saith the Lord God, ye shall not have cause
any more to use this proverb in Israel. Behold, all souls are Mine: as
the soul of the father so also the soul of the son is Mine: the soul
that sinneth, it shall die. But if a man be just, and do that which is
lawful and right ... hath spoiled none by violence, hath given his bread
to the hungry, and hath covered the naked with a garment ... he is just,
he shall surely live, saith the Lord God_ (_Ezekiel_ 18^{1^{ff}}).

Heredity, the question at issue in these passages, presents a more
complex and stringent problem to the modern mind than to the ancient.
But it would be a great error to suppose that the Jewish thinkers were
less concerned about it, or that its consequences seemed to them less
bitter. Indeed for the Hebrews the problem had a sinister back-ground
which for us has sunk far out of sight. The solidarity of the tribe or
family was a fearsome reality in days when for the sin of one member
vengeance would fall upon the whole community or household. Recollect
the story of Achan, who stole from the sacred spoil a Babylonish mantle,
silver, and a wedge of gold: _Wherefore Joshua and all Israel with him
took Achan_ AND _his sons and his daughters and his oxen and his asses
and his sheep and his tent and all that he had, and burned them with
fire and stoned them with stones_.[30] There was a grim wisdom in the
ancient procedure. Man has had a stern fight for existence. How far can
he tolerate “handicaps” in the contest? What can be expected from
children of corrupt and vicious parents? Good citizens? “Men do not
gather grapes of thorns.” Yet who could fail to see that the children
were so far innocent; and therefore, whilst Achan died unpitied and
forgotten, perhaps their young voices and terror-stricken looks remained
an uneasy memory in the minds of those who stood consenting unto their
death? Was it necessary that the child should be irretrievably ruined
through his father’s guilt?

By the time of Jeremiah and Ezekiel, as the quotations show, the problem
had deepened and become general. In the perils, hardships, and disasters
which marked the decline and fall of the Judæan kingdom men felt that
the whole nation was suffering the consequences of their fathers’
iniquities, and bitterly they quoted the saying _The fathers have eaten
sour grapes, and the children’s teeth are set on edge_. That way lay
despair: Let us too eat of the grapes and drink of their wine and be
merry, since to-morrow we die! Even the prophets experienced the
temptation to hopelessness; as when Ezekiel, wrestling with Judah sunk
in the old sins, thinks that in future days men will still have to cast
at her the charge of idolatries handed down from the ancient Canaanites:
_as is the mother so is the daughter_. But Jeremiah and Ezekiel both
fought their way through to a new conception of life, and this it is
which is proclaimed in the two chief passages quoted above. Deliverance
from the entail of evil is, they declare, possible; man is not
immovably fastened in chains which his ancestors have forged.

So stands religion to-day, claiming power in the building of human
character. Fuller recognition and much deeper comprehension of the works
of heredity (as also of environment) are desirable and are not inimical
to a religious interpretation of human nature. Religion lays stress on
these two points. First, the fact that if there is an entail of evil
there is also an entail of good, together with the judgement that the
inheritance of good is the greater and ought to be made supreme: that as
St. Paul insisted _Where sin did abound, grace doth much more
abound_[31]. And, secondly, religion insists on the reality of that
power of self-determination which would seem to be characteristic of
every living being and in Man to be of primary importance. All that we
may become does not follow inexorably from what we now are. What we have
become was not wholly involved in what we were. Crude determinism is
either an Eastern idleness or a pedant’s nightmare, and freedom, though
it slips through the meshes of our clumsy analysis is a reality. To each
in measure it is given, though one may misuse it into the atrophy of
evil habit, whilst another may use it unto the liberty of the children
of God. We inherit, but, inheriting, we also originate. We are created,
but are also creators. We are pressed by our environment, but our
environment may become Christ, whose service is perfect freedom.

(4) One other embedded proverb occurs in a passage of _Ezekiel_ (12^{21,
22}): _And the word of the Lord came unto me saying, “Son of man, what
is this proverb that ye have in the land of Israel saying_, =The days are
prolonged, and every= =vision faileth=?” Other lands besides Israel have
echoed those despairing words. It is hard not to feel in a
city-settlement that “the days are prolonged”; hard in a half-filled
church not to wonder if “every vision faileth.” But a true man will
still hold to the instinct that somehow his hopes are certainties, and
will make answer with Israel’s prophet thus: _Tell them therefore, “Thus
saith the Lord God: I will make this proverb to cease, and they shall no
more use it as a proverb in Israel; but say unto them, ‘The days are at
hand, and the fulfilment of every vision.’”_

A man who finds himself without confidence in God or man might save
himself from pessimism by a study of the intellectual, moral and
spiritual achievements of the Hebrew prophets.[32] Looking back on
Jewish history it is manifest that the spiritual longings of these great
personalities were realised to a wonderful extent and in ways impossible
for themselves or their contemporaries to perceive or anticipate. Things
did work together for good to those Jews who sought to discover the will
of God and, despite perplexity and hardship, refused to abandon their
imperfect but advancing faith. Thus even the Exile, apparently the
dissolution of Israel’s life, proved to be the very means of its
preservation and subsequent extension to a position of world-wide
influence. No one who has realised on the one hand the overwhelming
difficulties against which the prophets had to contend, the frankness
with which they faced the naked facts, their own agonising struggle of
soul against doubt and despair, and on the other side the ultimate
vindication of their faith; no one with that knowledge clear before him
will find it easy wholly to despair of men, or to cast from him for ever
the hope of God.

       *       *       *       *       *

Besides these few incidental proverbs, the pre-exilic literature of the
Old Testament fortunately has preserved occasional glimpses of the
_makers of proverbs_ in Israel, and to these we now turn. We shall then
be prepared to study the special development of Jewish proverbs which
furnishes the chief interest of our subject. It will be convenient first
to set down the evidential passages consecutively, and afterwards to
consider their significance.

(_a_) The narrative in _2 Samuel_ 14^{1^{ff}} relating the stratagem by
which Joab succeeded in reconciling King David to his son Absalom begins
thus: _Now Joab the son of Zeruiah perceived that the king’s heart was
towards Absalom. And Joab sent to Tekoa and fetched thence_ =a wise
woman=.

(_b_) The second passage is in _2 Samuel_ 20^{16-22}--Joab, as David’s
general, having pursued the rebel Sheba into the North of Israel, has
compelled him to take refuge in the town of Abel, and is on the point of
breaching the wall and capturing the city, when _there cried unto him_ =a
wise woman= _out of the city ... and she said unto him “There is a
saying_, =To finish your business ask counsel at Abel=.”[33] _Thou seekest
to destroy a city and a mother in Israel. And Joab answered and said,
“Far be it from me that I should swallow and destroy. But ... Sheba the
son of Bichri ... deliver him only, and I will depart from the city.”
And the woman said unto Joab, “Behold, his head shall be thrown to thee
over the wall.”_ =Then the woman went unto all the people in her wisdom.=
...

(_c_) The famous passage in which the wisdom of King Solomon is
extolled, _1 Kings_ 4^{29-34}: _And God gave Solomon wisdom and
understanding exceeding much and largeness of heart, even as the sand
that is on the sea shore_. =And Solomon’s wisdom excelled the wisdom of
all the children of the East= (_i.e._ Arabia) =and all the wisdom of
Egypt=. _For he was wiser than all men: than Ethan the Ezrahite, and
Heman, and Calcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol: and his fame was in
all the nations round about._ =And he spake three thousand proverbs=: _and
his songs were a thousand and five. And he spake of trees, from the
cedar that is in Lebanon unto the hyssop that springeth out of the wall;
he spake also of beasts and of fowl and of creeping things and of
fishes._

(_d_) _Isaiah_ 29^{13, 14}: _And the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people
draw nigh with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have
removed their heart far from me and their fear of me is a commandment of
men which hath been taught them; therefore behold I will again do a
marvellous work among this people ... and_ =the wisdom of their wise men=
_shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid_.

(_e_) _Jeremiah_ 18^{18} (cp. 8^{8} and 9^{23}): _Then said they, Come
and let us devise devices against Jeremiah; for the law shall not perish
from the priest, nor_ =counsel from the wise=, _nor the word from the
prophet_.

Of these passages the first two show that there was a “Wisdom” in Israel
before Solomon, that it was concerned with prudential counsel as to the
conduct of life, and was associated with the use of maxims, some of
which had passed into well-known proverbs; and further that certain
persons (often, perhaps generally, women) were recognised as of
pre-eminent skill in this giving of advice; and that townships
(doubtless with a shrewd eye to the increase of their commerce) vied one
with another in vaunting their respective sages. Slight as this evidence
may be, it is sufficient, because it is in accord with the facts of
later periods and with that liking for sententious talk which we have
noted as characteristic of the Semites from very early ages. Observe
also how in the third passage the wisdom of Solomon is not regarded as a
quality peculiar to himself. True, he possessed wisdom in a rare or
superlative degree, but it was _comparable_ with the “Wisdom of the
East” (Arabia) and the “Wisdom of Egypt.” Nor was Solomon alone in his
wisdom. To him the first place; but he had great rivals whose names
posterity thought worth preserving. One suspects that the King’s
reputation for sagacity may have been enhanced by his royal estate, and
that in the passage quoted from the _Book of Kings_ we see him through
the haze of grandeur with which later generations encircled his reign.
Even so, the tradition of his wisdom stands, and like all firm
traditions has a basis in fact. What inferences should we draw? Not that
the three thousand proverbs with which tradition credited Solomon are
those preserved in the _Book of Proverbs_, despite the fact that the
main sections of the Book are prefaced by titles ascribing them to
him.[34] A few of the proverbs may have been spoken by Solomon himself
or at his court by persons renowned for sagacity, but nothing more than
that is probable.[35] Two positive conclusions seem tenable. First,
that King Solomon made a profound impression on his contemporaries by
reason of his subtle judgment, and his ability to express his thoughts
in just such moralistic maxims, comparisons, parables, and fables, as
the Wise were wont to use. In fact, the King was a Wise-man and a
Wise-man was King.[36] No wonder that his renown grew until he became,
so to speak, the patron saint of Wisdom in Israel, with whose authority
any “Wise” words might fittingly be associated. But further in view of
the aptitude shown by the King for the art of the Wise, it is reasonable
to believe that their prestige at this period must have been greatly
enhanced in the estimation of all classes. The man of Wisdom was
_persona grata_ at Court. And what more is needed to secure a
reputation?

Hence it is not unexpected, though very interesting, to find two or
three centuries later that when Isaiah and Jeremiah speak of the Wise
they refer to them as an influence in the land ranking with the prophets
and the ceremonial religion. To the true prophets it appeared to be an
influence not always for good, or even inimical to their moral idealism.
Thus Isaiah declares that in the glorious day when Jehovah reveals His
truth _the Wisdom of the wise men shall perish_ (_Isaiah_ 29^{14}); and
Jeremiah gives as the reason why his enemies consider that his death or
imprisonment would be small loss to the nation their belief that “_the
law shall not perish from the priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the
word from the prophet_” (_Jer._ 18^{18}).

This evidence might be augmented by passages in the _Book of Job_,
where, for instance, the wisdom of Israel is described as an ancient,
though living, tradition: it is _that which wise men have told from
their fathers_ (_Job_ 15^{18}.) But enough has been said. To sum up, it
appears that the Hebrews, like their near kinsmen the Arabs, loved to
listen to the conversation of those, who, having ripe experience, shrewd
wits, and a sharp tongue, were able to cast their reflections on life
into parables and maxims which the hearer could readily remember.
Persons with an aptitude for such discourse were acknowledged among
their fellows as “wise.” Anyone with the necessary intelligence and
dignity might acquire this reputation. The Wise were never sharply
differentiated from the rest of the community; they did not become a
strict order or a caste like the priests, but remained a type or class;
a class, however, of such importance that it could be spoken of in the
same breath with the prophets and the priests. Egyptian analogies
suggest that the Wise may have taken on themselves duties in the
instruction of the young: but just what these early sages said and
thought we cannot ascertain. Nor is it likely we have lost much in
consequence. Some of their favourite sayings may eventually have been
incorporated in the _Book of Proverbs_, but the antagonism of the great
prophets shows that they were not enthusiasts for reform, and doubtless
the bulk of their maxims were prudential counsels suitable to the
standards of the age. In short, their teaching must have been desultory,
lacking the inspiration of a definite purpose and a clearly conceived
ideal. Thus far we find nothing that matters to the modern world,
nothing to awaken more than a flicker of our interest. No reason has yet
appeared to prompt the hope that Israel would make more of her Wisdom
than Edom or Egypt of theirs, and that was little enough. In all this we
find only “the Day of Small Things,” and need dwell no longer on its
trifles. But equally we ought to avoid the folly of despising it. The
Hebrews, after all, were not precisely as their neighbours of Philistia,
Edom, or Egypt. Behind them they had, as a people, an astonishing
history, and in their midst a succession of amazing men, the prophets
who had prophesied to them words which it was not possible should die,
seeds of the ultimate Wisdom. In Judah there was growing up a capacity
for faith, a spiritual interpretation of life and an enlightenment of
moral conscience unique in the ancient world. Hence Israel’s Wise-men
were not as other Wise-men; they had great potentialities. At length,
after the exile, circumstances came to pass which favoured the
development of latent genius in these men. All that had been needed was
an immediate stimulus, a liberating idea, a flash to kindle the flame.




