CHAPTER XI

Harvest


We have seen the Wise at work, breaking up the hard ground, ploughing
the field and scattering the seed. Came ever their toil to harvest? And
since the world is the field, to what place in the wide world, what
point of time in the world’s long story, ought our search to be
directed? “They that sow in tears,” said a brave man long ago, “shall
reap in joy; though he goeth on his way weeping bearing forth the seed,
he shall come again rejoicing bringing his sheaves with him,”--and his
words encourage us to search for effects of the Wise-men’s teaching in
the immediate history of their times. No matter how often the Psalmist’s
expectation has gone unfulfilled, something in us cries assent to his
daring, and we shall therefore follow his guidance; nor shall we look in
vain. But one knows that the proverb Jesus quoted to His disciples, _One
soweth and another reapeth_, is more often true to the facts of life;
and therefore, following its warning, we must be prepared also to seek
traces of the Wise-men’s influence in times and places unforeseen by
them.

So wide a range of human history thus opens for consideration that the
task we are attempting in this chapter is necessarily difficult. It is
still further complicated by the problem of analysis. For example, to
say bluntly that in the modern determination to remedy existing evils in
our social organisation the Christian Church may see the harvest of its
labours is ultimately true, but it is not the whole truth, and because
there is so much more to be said on the matter the statement might be
challenged as actually untrue by those whose thoughts leap at once to
the chequered official record of the Church in the last few centuries.
But the opposition with which such cut-and-dry assertions are received
often requires only a more careful analysis for its removal. Quite
certainly, despite the antagonism of certain professed Christians, the
penetrative influence of the regular preaching and teaching of
Christianity, especially during the last generation or so, has done more
towards rousing and enlightening the national conscience regarding
social conditions than can easily be measured; but the social movement
of to-day also owes much to the rise of ambitions that naturally
accompany the increase of wealth, to scientific invention, to popular
education, and to other factors that might be mentioned. The progress of
mankind is the product of many influences that have worked together for
good, and the ethical and intellectual condition of a people at any
given period is like a garment woven from many threads but without seam.
Analysis of history is desirable; but to attempt an analysis so subtle
that we can say, “Just so much is due to this influence from the past,
so much to that,” is always difficult, if not impossible. In part of
what follows we must be content to describe certain events and
circumstances concerning which we make no greater (but also no less) a
claim than that the Wise were a _contributory_ cause, their words and
their example having co-operated with the work of others in producing
the result described.

Where then, may it be said, that the seed they sowed took root and
ripened? One general answer may be given instantly--Wherever the Bible
has been known and read: a result immeasurably exceeding the utmost
expectations of the Wise. Who among them ever hoped that their proverbs
would receive a place in a Book destined to exercise pre-eminent moral
and spiritual force throughout the world, and that through all these
centuries the best part of their wisdom, wit, and idealism would be
known and esteemed in a myriad Gentile homes?

For closer consideration three themes may profitably be singled out; the
first being that of immediate Jewish history in Palestine, by which is
meant the critical centuries 350 to 150 B.C. This topic will first be
discussed generally, and then attention will be concentrated on certain
events during the years 200 to 150 B.C., when the struggle between
Judaism and Hellenism came to a climax and was decided.


I

(_a_) Less than justice is done to the Wise in the picture of
post-exilic Judaism usually presented to students. They are not wholly
ignored, but their value as a formative influence in the community of
Jerusalem and Judæa, we venture to think, has been insufficiently
appreciated. For this misjudgment there are several plain reasons which
will prove to be well worth examining.

In the first place, the absence of theological fervour in the proverbs,
their matter-of-fact standpoint, and the doubtful propriety of certain
sayings have been disappointing and even disconcerting to many readers
of the Bible. Judged too hastily by the superficial features of their
writings, the Wise have been dismissed either as altogether wanting or,
at best, as of small moral and religious importance. But how serious an
error that method of rough-and-ready judgment may induce, can readily be
imagined. It is much as if some future historian, attempting to estimate
the value of Christianity to this generation, had to derive his opinion
from a survey of the volumes of sermons published, many of which he
might be inclined to criticise on the ground that they were concerned
with the inculcation of commonplace moral duties. There is far more
behind such a book as _Proverbs_ than can appear in it. The Wise have
been considered too much from the literary point of view, too little
from the human.

But, secondly, it is not surprising that the attractive, “human” aspect
has been overlooked or underestimated. We miss the warmth of personal
history in the proverbs. One’s interest is stirred so much more deeply
by persons than by things or even ideas; and the proverbs are so coldly
impersonal that only close scrutiny, such as we have here attempted,
reveals the Wise as men. They _may_ often have been pompous,
self-satisfied folk, but it cannot be denied that in their writings they
were anything but self-advertising, saying many things about Wisdom and
next to nothing about themselves.

Even more serious for their repute than this praiseworthy self-reticence
is, thirdly, the fact that the Wise soon vanish from the surface of
Jewish affairs, apparently as completely as the prophets. But again
appearance is misleading, and the explanation that can be found for this
fact deserves to be set forth at some length, because it is likely to
help us further in the understanding of our subject. Commencing perhaps
as early as the latter part of the fifth century, B.C., there developed
in the loyal Jewish community, alongside of the elaborate worship of the
Temple, a custom of meeting together for purposes of religious
exhortation and prayer, and, above all, for study of the great Law which
was increasingly felt to be the strength and heart of Judaism. At these
meetings, or _Synagogues_, the delivery of a moral discourse would be
appropriate, perhaps was formally arranged, and the speaker selected for
this purpose must often have been one of those known as the Wise. But
commendation and exposition of the Law was even more in place on these
occasions, and this duty would naturally be entrusted to one of those
who were making the exact interpretation of the Law a life-long interest
and indeed a profession; that is, to one of those who are familiar to
us by the title “Scribe.” Now it is easy to see that the functions of
the Wise and of the Scribes were not far sundered, and these “synagogue”
meetings must have done much to promote and hasten the approximation of
the two classes.[86] Indeed the process of fusion can be watched in the
pages of Ben Sirach’s book. From it we learn that Ben Sirach, prominent
as a Wise-man, was himself professionally a Scribe, and he praises that
occupation as the best of all careers, the one most suitable for a
disciple of Wisdom (E. _Prologue_ and 39^{1-3}). What more was needed
than that the Sages should recognise in the Law of Moses the mysterious
Wisdom which they served? And we find this very identification expressly
made by Ben Sirach, who declares (in reference to certain wonders of
Wisdom he has set forth in previous verses) that _All these things are
the book of the covenant of the most high God, even the Law which Moses
commanded us_ (E. 24^{23}; cp. 15^{1}, 19^{20}, etc.). What happened is
clear. From about the beginning of the second century B.C. the functions
of moral exhortation--the special sphere of the Wise, at least in
public--were discharged by persons who were Scribes; henceforth, to put
it briefly, the Wise were mostly Scribes, and the Scribes were mostly
Wise. The disappearance of the Wise-men is thus explained; seated in
Moses’ seat, they have passed out of our sight and so out of mind; or,
if dimly recognised by us in their new character, they have been
involved in the Scribes’ not wholly merited disfavour.[87]

In the fourth place, the Wise have also suffered unduly from the
overwhelming prestige customarily assigned to the Law in post-exilic
times. Many scholars have so sat in its shadow that they seem to lose
sight of all other elements in the situation, nay! even to have
forgotten the sunny side of the Law itself. Jerusalem is sometimes
pictured as a city of ecclesiastical lawyers, and the Jews as a
congregation clustered round a book of rules; an exaggeration and
misconception that might never have gained favour, had the mass of
spiritual exposition and reflection embodied in early Rabbinical
literature been more accessible to Christian students. It is a question
of proportion. Without denying that the Law had become the
rallying-point of distinctive Judaism and was destined to obtain a
paramount place in Jewish life and thought, we have to insist that it
held no monopoly of influence in the period before 150 B.C., when the
Wise were still distinctively the Wise. Jewish legalism may already have
become an important fact in the national consciousness, but plenty of
room remained for Jewish humanism. We would insist that whilst the Law
had one great rival--the spirit of indifference to all its teaching
which the growth of Hellenic fashions favoured--it had also coadjutors.
There were other spiritual influences at work, moulding the standards
and ideals of the Jews; one of these was the study and appreciation of
the writings of the great Prophets of Israel, whence before long came
the high aspirations of the Apocalyptic school of thinkers; and another
was the example and teaching of the Wise. Consider the point in view of
the normal qualities of human nature. What impresses ordinary folk? How
do they learn new knowledge? Men are impressed by worth and dignity in
their teachers, the Easterns in particular paying even undue deference
to age and prosperity. And most men learn by small degrees: as Isaiah
put it, they need to be taught precept upon _precept, line upon line,
here a little, and there a little_. Is not that exactly what the Wise
were best fitted to give them--precept upon precept? Here were some of
the most honourable and prosperous citizens of the day, not keeping
their Wisdom jealously to themselves, but counting it their serious duty
to impart the secrets of success; now teaching chosen pupils; now
mingling in the open with all sorts and types of men (Did not Wisdom cry
aloud and utter her voice in the broad places, and cry her message in
the chief place of concourse, even at the entering in of the gates, cp.
Pr. 1^{20}, 8^{1-3}?); everywhere upholding reverence towards God and a
standard of morality, if not perfect, at least far superior to average
attainments. Day in, day out, the social and personal idealism, and the
wholesome vigorous commonsense of these proverbs were being instilled
into the ears of the people by teachers whose prosperous respectability
alone was enough to gain them popular attention. Must it not be that all
this had effect, and great effect, on the Jewish community? The Law no
doubt enlisted the prime devotion of the pious, the prophets appealed
most to the enthusiast, but the Wise must have had the ear of the
ordinary folk--that is, of the majority of men.

(_b_) Detailed proof of the conclusion thus drawn from general
considerations is of course not available. There is, however, one
direction in which immediate evidence of the Wise-men’s influence may be
sought, namely in the issue of the struggle between Judaism and
Hellenism. To this end let us briefly pass in review certain events of
the years 200 to 150 B.C. It will already be clear to the reader how
slight was the chance of the older Jewish habits persisting in face of
the full tide of new life and thought, which was steadily smoothing them
away as waves will melt sandcastles on the shore. By the end of the
third century the infection of Hellenism was rife, not only in the upper
classes, but in all grades of Jewish society; “even in the very
strongholds of Judaism it modified the organisation of the State, the
laws, public affairs, art, science and industry, affecting even the
ordinary things of life and the common associations of the people.”[88]
Black as was the outlook for Judaism at this date, it was soon to grow
much worse. Early in the second century the leading families of
Jerusalem had become thoroughly Hellenic in their point of view, and,
worst of all, in 174 B.C. the office of the High Priesthood fell by
intrigue into the grasp of an unscrupulous man, Joshua or (to use the
Greek name which he adopted and preferred) Jason. This Jason, to curry
favour with the Syrian king, set to work to complete the transformation
of Jerusalem into a Grecian city. Accordingly a gymnasium was now built,
and so popular was the High Priest’s policy, so forgotten the
old-fashioned sentiment, that even the Priests were found willing to
participate actively in the competitions of the public athletic games.
The unholy zeal of the more ardent Hellenists, however, crystallised
into definite shape such opposition as still existed. A body of men,
convinced upholders of strict Judaism, now drew together and became
known as _Hasidim_, _i.e._, “The Conscientious” or “The Faithful”; but
their ranks were recruited largely from the poorer classes, they lacked
intellectual prestige, and no doubt their opposition to Hellenism in
some respects had the weakness of mere unreasoning conservatism. The
party did not seem fitted either to grow in numbers or to continue
through many years, and with its passing the old Jewish piety bade fair
to perish finally.

But at this stage occurred one of the most astonishing _dénouements_ in
history. In 175 B.C. Antiochus IV Epiphanes began to reign over the
Syrian dominions: a remarkable but dangerous man, eccentric to the verge
of insanity; inordinately vain, yet endowed with great ability, energy,
and ambition. Soon after his accession certain tumults took place in
Jerusalem. The rioting was directed against Syrian authority, but did
not amount to anything which could fairly be construed as rebellion,
being in fact mere faction-fighting. None the less Antiochus, whose
exchequer happened to be in sore straits for money, made the occurrence
a pretext, first, for plundering the Temple of its treasures and, two
years later, for inflicting on the Jews a cruel punishment. Entering the
city in 168 B.C. he razed its walls, and desecrated the Temple in an
abominable fashion, sacrificing swine on the altar and converting it
into a sanctuary for Hellenic worship. Still more important, however,
was his resolve once and for all to stamp out any obscurantists among
the Jews who might presume any longer to follow their ancestral customs
and oppose the Greek culture. Then began throughout the Jewish province
a fierce persecution. In all towns and villages men and women were
sought out and slain--whosoever was found guilty of practising Jewish
observances, or possessed a copy of the Jewish Law, or refused to offer
worship at a heathen shrine. The position of the loyal Jews soon became
desperate. The threat of torture and death was stamping out relentlessly
the last flicker of resistance. Many of the _Hasidim_, refusing to make
the great surrender, died for their faith, and the small companies who
escaped to the deserts for refuge, though steadfast in determination to
resist, were in despair, feeling that Jehovah had forsaken His people
utterly. A famous passage in 1 Maccabees (2^{29-38}) relates how one
thousand of them, men, women and children, pursued into the wilderness
by the Syrian troops, were overtaken on a Sabbath day, and how (rather
than violate the laws of the Sabbath by fighting) they sought neither
to escape their enemies by flight nor yet to defend themselves, but
stood and met death in heroic silence.

Such was the condition of affairs when suddenly a change came over the
character of the Jewish resistance. A certain Mattathias, a priest of
the village _Modein_, with his five sons (one of whom was the famous
_Judas_, afterwards surnamed _Maccabeus_), indignant at what was taking
place, and convinced of the futility of such passive martyrdom as had
led to the massacre just mentioned, struck a blow for freedom, and began
to organise active opposition. The _Hasidim_ fell in with the new
policy, and men rallied to the support of Mattathias and his sons. It
was as if the latent patriotism of the Jews had waited only for a spark
to kindle it, had required only action on lines of sufficient common
sense to offer a faint chance of success in combating Antiochus. The new
army that sprang dramatically into being was fortunate in its commander.
Under the brilliant leadership of Judas Maccabeus surprising victories
were gained, and after vicissitudes of fortune which it is not in point
here to record, there emerged a Jewish State, free from the tyranny of
Syria, and eager to preserve the essence of that moral monotheistic
faith which had been Israel’s one unique glory.

But whence this astonishing revival? The _Hasidim_ were none too
numerous, and if, as is entirely probable, a large proportion of their
men were advanced in years, they can hardly have been the most efficient
portion of the Maccabean armies from a military point of view. Victories
in war are won by young, vigorous men, and the swift triumph of the
Maccabees implies the adhesion to their cause of numbers of young Jews
from within and without Jerusalem; and that again is explicable only by
the presence in the nation of a strong undercurrent of respect for the
older, distinctive Judaism. Things were not quite so desperate as they
had seemed. Hellenism had progressed far; but it had not eaten out the
heart of the people. Obviously if all the young Jews had been convinced
Hellenists, content to follow the lead of the high-priestly party to any
lengths and wholly contemptuous of Israel’s former piety, they would
have looked on with indifference, or even approval, while the last
remnants of the puritanical _Hasidim_ and the villagers of Modein were
being blotted out. But from that attitude they had evidently been saved,
and it is fair to acknowledge that the Wise must have done much to
achieve that consummation. Their broadminded outlook, their sensible but
genuine piety, their solid worth of character, their shrewd yet earnest
and at times enthusiastic teaching, all had helped effectively to
maintain regard for the old-fashioned interpretation of life that rested
on “the fear of the Lord.” With the example of the Wise-men before them,
there must have been many who, though they felt that Hellenism was
wonderful, yet knew in their soul that Judaism also was great and wise.
So soon therefore as the vileness of a bloody and remorseless
persecution clarified the moral issue and compelled a choice, men were
found who could make the right resolve to fight for their liberty and
their fathers’ God. The result of the Maccabean conflict was a real
decision; the tide had turned, and the losing battle was not lost.
Hellenic thought and method would in days to come mould and modify the
Jewish people in many ways, but its strangle-hold on the vital point of
Jewish religion was loosened, never to be renewed. The spiritual genius
of Judaism could breathe again. Henceforth, to quote a memorable saying
of Wellhausen, “in a period when all nationalities and all bonds of
religion and national customs were being broken up in the seeming cosmos
and real chaos of the Græco-Roman Empire, the Jews stood out like a rock
in the midst of the ocean. When the natural conditions of independent
nationality all failed them, they nevertheless artificially maintained
it with an energy truly marvellous, and thereby preserved for
themselves, and for the whole world, an eternal good.”


II

The second field in which one may reasonably look for signs of the
Wise-men’s labours is of course subsequent Jewish history, the question
being, “Did the teaching of the Wise slip out of sight and memory when
the crisis we have described was ended, and when the professors of
Wisdom became the Scribes and were more and more absorbed in purely
scribal interests, or did it escape oblivion and continue a living
influence in the life of the Jews?” The ground that must furnish an
answer to our question is chiefly the presence or absence of references
to these proverbs, or of imitations and echoes of them, in the later
Jewish literature. To begin with, however, there is one clear,
independent proof of the esteem in which at any rate the _Book of
Proverbs_ came to be held, and that is its inclusion in the Hebrew
Bible. This fact alone is irrefutable and sufficient testimony that the
thoughts of the Wise never ceased to influence the minds and characters
of loyal Jews. So much for _Proverbs_, but what of _Ecclesiasticus_? It
also was far from being forgotten. Though it failed to secure a place in
the Hebrew Canon, it was included in the Septuagint[89], the Bible of
the Greek-speaking Jews of Egypt. The Talmud in one ultra-orthodox
passage forbids quotations to be made from Ben Sirach’s book, but
actually there are quotations from it in the Talmud itself! In fact, a
vast number of references might be adduced from the whole range of
Jewish literature testifying both to the popularity of these two great
treasuries of the Sages’ sayings, and to the steady appreciation of
proverbs old and new, which the Jews displayed.

To set forth proof of this assertion even in barest outline would
involve technicalities that might be wearisome. We give therefore but
two or three points in illustration. Perhaps the most interesting, and
for Gentile readers the most accessible, source of evidence is a work of
the first and second century A.D., a compendium of the ethical ideas and
ideals of certain famous Jewish teachers, bearing the title _Pirke
Aboth_, that is _The Sayings of the Fathers_.[90] Throughout this
treatise the influence of the Wisdom writings is clearly indicated by
the sententious style that characterises the several _Sayings_, as well
as by the numerous direct references to _Proverbs_. A few quotations
will bring this out, and at the same time illustrate the high ideals,
curiously but often very attractively expressed, of which the book is
full:--

_Ben Zoma said, “Who is mighty? He who subdues his nature, for it is
written ‘He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty’_ (Pr.
16^{32})._”_[91]

_Antigonous of Soko used to say, “Be not like servants who work for
their Lord with a view to receiving recompense, but be as slaves that
minister without seeking for reward, and let the fear of heaven be upon
you.”_[92]

_Rabbi Chananiah said_--something that might have averted the European
war, and made Germany a blessing instead of a curse, had her rulers and
thinkers accepted his deep counsel!--_“Whenever in any man his fear of
sin comes before his wisdom his wisdom endures, but whensoever a man’s
wisdom comes before his fear of sin his wisdom doth not endure._”[93]

_Rabbi Judah ben Thema said, “Be bold as a leopard, and swift as an
eagle, and fleet as a hart, and strong as a lion to do the will of thy
Father which is in heaven.”_[94]

And there was Rabbi Samuel the Little, who chose for his life’s motto
just one verse of _Proverbs_ (24^{17}), and added thereto no word in
comment: “_Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth, and let not thine heart
be glad when he stumbleth_.”[95]

So the topic might be pursued, and from _Midrash_ and _Talmud_ might be
drawn examples in plenty, both references to the ancient proverbs and
quotations of new ones--words of wit and humour, of prudence and fine
idealism--applied to all manner of human intercourse, and witnessing
abundantly that in Israel Wisdom was still known of her children. Space
must be found for just these three observations on married life:

     _Whose wife dies in his lifetime, the world becomes dark for him_
     (C. 55)[96].

     _He who loves his wife as himself and honours her more than
     himself_ ... it is _of him the Scripture saith “Thou shalt know
     that thy tent is in peace”_ (C. 55).

And, lastly, this gentle and subtle saying:--

     _If thy wife be short, bend down and whisper to her_ (C. 55).

If Wisdom is an influence at all, it is always an intimate influence
working in homes and individual consciences as well as in street and
market-place, so that besides noting the frequent mention of proverbs in
the literature, consideration should also be paid to the vigour of
Jewish morality in the Christian era. Perhaps the simplest and most
human point at which to test the matter briefly will be the ethic of the
Jewish home. Dispossessed of their native land and scattered to a
thousand different cities, the Jews were compelled to work out their own
salvation under great and increasing difficulties.[97] _God_, says a
significant Talmudic comment, _dwells in a pure and loving home_; and no
one, aware of the evils that were rampant in the decaying paganism of
the Græco-Roman Empire and persisted, still powerful though not
unrebuked, in the slowly developing society of nominally Christian
Europe, would deny that the isolated and often harassed communities of
the Jews did their utmost to make that noble saying a reality,
maintaining with amazing courage and pertinacity a splendid ideal of
family and communal existence. A discussion of the topic in the _Jewish
Encyclopædia_ concludes with the following affirmation: “Throughout
these centuries of persecution and migration the moral atmosphere of the
Jewish home was rarely contaminated, and it became a bulwark of moral
and social strength, impregnable by reason of the religious spirit which
permeated it.” And in elucidation of what was involved in the
persecution referred to let this one grim statement speak: From the
sixteenth century, and earlier, regulations were enforced compelling the
Jews of numerous large cities to reside in certain confined areas,
“ghettos.” Nevertheless the dreadful overcrowding to which this led
resulted in no serious moral evils: “The purity of the Jewish home-life
was a constant antidote to the poisonous suggestions of life in slums,
and it was even able to resist the terrible squalor and unhealthiness
which prevailed in the miserable and infamous Roman ghetto, where at one
time as many as 10,000 inhabitants were herded into a space less than a
square kilometre. In the poorer streets of this ghetto several families
occupied one and the same room. The sufferings of the Jews in that hell
upon earth were not diminished by the yearly overflowing of the Tiber
which made the Roman ghetto a dismal and a plague-stricken swamp.”[98]

Of course many things worked together to sustain the morality of the
Jewish people--the long-suffering of the Psalmists, the golden promises
of the mighty Prophets, and the strength of the ancient Law. But surely
also that store of homely, yet stirring and challenging, proverbs which
the Wise-men had created, may claim a real share in the magnificent
result? And if, quite rightly, it be insisted that the Law, with its
fascination of hallowed customs and manifold spiritual suggestions,
played the all-important part, then in reply we may still enter the plea
that, as Ben Sirach had felt and said, for the Jew the Law was Wisdom
and Wisdom had become the Law.


III

In the third place, the words of the Wise were given an honoured place
in the mind of the Lord Jesus Christ. To some that may be an unexpected
statement. It is well-known that Jesus was intimately familiar with the
doctrine of the Prophets, and many have perceived how conscious He was
of all that is admirable in the Law, the spiritual essence of which He
fulfilled. But, though His interest in the Wise is seldom noted, it is
no less true that He had considered deeply and sympathetically the idea
of the Divine Wisdom, and was familiar with the famous proverbs that
sought to apply its guidance alike to the greatest and the least of our
affairs. Just how often a memory of Wisdom is traceable in the recorded
words of Jesus cannot be determined with certainty. _Verbatim_ allusions
are rare, perhaps because the ideas of the Wise and their more memorable
sayings had become so familiar in our Lord’s time as to be common ground
between hearer and teacher, so that often it was only the point made by
the Wise that was hinted at, or caught up and given some new turn and
emphasis. But echoes from the thoughts and images of the proverbs are so
frequent in the Gospels that together they furnish ample evidence of His
having known and valued the ancient treasury of Wisdom. The evidence is,
of course, cumulative, and its strength must not be judged by the
following few illustrations.[99]

No fewer than seven of the eight Beatitudes (_Matt._ 5^{3ff}) recall
proverbs of the Wise; what had been, as it were, a seed of thought in
the proverb finding ripe expression in the Beatitude. For instance,
_Blessed are the poor_ (_i.e._, humble) _in spirit, for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven_, said Jesus--_Better_, said the Wise, _is it to be of
a lowly spirit with the poor, than to divide the spoil with the proud_
(Pr. 16^{19}). With Jesus’ condemnation of mischievous talk, _Every idle
word that men shall speak they shall give account thereof in the day of
judgement; for by thy words shalt thou be justified, and by thy words
thou shalt be condemned_ (_Matt._ 12^{36, 37}), compare Pr. 18^{20, 21}
_Death and life are in the power of the tongue; and they that love it
shall eat the fruit thereof_ (also Pr. 13^{2}, 15^{4}, 21^{23}, etc.).
With the teaching, _Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon the earth
... but in heaven_, compare Pr. 11^{4, 28}, 15^{16}, 16^{8}, etc. _Give
us this day our daily bread_ seems to echo Pr. 30^{8}: _Give me neither
poverty nor riches; feed me with the bread that is needful for me_. In
the command for generous dealing, _Give to him that asketh thee, and
from him that would borrow of thee turn not away_ (_Matt._ 5^{42}),
there is perhaps a precise reminiscence of Pr. 3^{28}: _Say not unto thy
neighbour, “Go and come again” when thou hast it with thee_ (cp. also
Pr. 19^{17} with _Matt._ 25^{40}); and again when Jesus encouraged His
disciples saying _Be not anxious how or what ye shall speak.... For it
is not ye that speak but the spirit of your Father which speaketh in
you_ (Matt. 10^{19, 20}), perhaps the very words of Pr. 16^{1} were in
His memory: _The plans of the heart belong to man, but the answer of the
tongue is from the Lord_?

Some of the immortal images in our Lord’s parables may have been painted
from the thought suggested by a proverb. In the parable of _Luke_
14^{7-11}, the command not to seek the highest seats at the banquet may
originate in the saying of Pr. 25^{6} as much as in the concrete
examples of the failing which contemporary life no doubt afforded. So
also the famous parable of the two houses, one built on rock, the other
on sand, perhaps goes back to the seed-thought in Pr. 12^{7}: _The
wicked are overthrown and are not, but the house of the righteous shall
stand_; and the proverb _Boast not thyself of to-morrow, for thou
knowest not what a day will bring forth_, Pr. 27^{1}, might be text for
Christ’s parable of the rich man and his barns (_Luke_ 12^{16-21}).
Again when Jesus, speaking of the kingdom of heaven, likens it to a
marriage feast (_Matt._ 22^{1-14}; etc.) and elsewhere compares it in
its infinite value to a hidden precious pearl, there are details in the
language used which suggest that the picture of Wisdom’s banquet (Pr.
9^{1-5}), and the proverbs on the incomparable worth of Wisdom were not
far distant from His mind.

More important than even the certain or possible verbal reminiscences of
the proverbs is the resemblance between the manner of Jesus’ teaching
and the manner of the Wise. Like them, He also taught in the streets,
seeking the people where they were most easily to be found; and though
His words were infinite in depth of insight and spiritual grandeur, He
was wont to clothe them in simple language--now quoting a telling
proverb, _Physician, heal thyself_, now kindling imagination by a
familiar but graphic metaphor or comparison that went home to the heart,
and challenged the conscience, and was comprehensible to learned and
unlearned equally. Like the Wise, He spoke constantly on those simple
but supreme issues which concern every man that cometh into the world;
and His highest doctrine was often cast, like the lessons of ancient
Wisdom, in brief sentences that refused to be forgotten: _Blessed are
the pure in heart, for they shall see God--He that findeth his life
shall lose it, and he that loseth his life for My sake shall find it_.
Many readers will realise that the deepest thing concerning the relation
between Jesus Christ and Wisdom has not yet been referred to, but that
we deliberately reserve. Enough has been said for the present purpose.

Who in face of all these facts would dare to maintain that the Wise-men
toiled to no purpose. Their love’s labour was not lost. In the issue of
the struggle with Hellenism and the revival of the Jewish national
consciousness with its unique moral and religious features, some of them
witnessed a result such as their teaching, whether they were fully
conscious of the fact or not, had tended to achieve.

But also there came gradually in later generations, and in lands of
which they had not so much as heard, a rich reward of which the end is
not yet in sight. Could they but have foreseen even a small corner of
this ultimate harvest field, how completely depression would have
vanished, and all mistrust of God’s dealings with faithful men been
lifted from their minds! Their proverbs were laid on the foundation of a
religious and ethical idealism, and if some have proved to be only wood,
hay and stubble, others were gold, silver and costly stones, and these
have obtained a place in the temple of eternal Truth. Doubtless the
imperfections of the Wise were great and their failures and
disappointments many, but all the time they were building far better
than they knew. Is it not always so with every courageous effort after
righteousness, every honest search for the kingdom of the living God?




