
                            STUDIES IN LIFE
                         FROM JEWISH PROVERBS




                            STUDIES IN LIFE

                                 FROM

                            JEWISH PROVERBS

                                  BY

                        W. A. L. ELMSLIE, M.A.,

                 Fellow of Christ’s College, Cambridge

                                LONDON

            JAMES CLARKE & CO., 13 & 14 FLEET STREET, E.C.




                                  To

                                MY WIFE

                “Forsan et hæc olim meminisse juvabit”




PREFACE


A writer of many books once said to me that he regretted every preface
he had written. Seeing that I have the highest respect for his talents,
I am constrained to take to heart the moral, which (particularly in a
book on proverbs) would seem to be “least said, soonest mended.” But
whatever else he may choose to leave unsaid, an author is expected to
give away his secret in the preface, making known his intentions as
discreetly as he can but still explicitly. That duty accomplished, he is
at liberty to give thanks, and so conclude.

The greater part of this volume (Chapters V. to XII.) is occupied with a
study of the teaching of “Wisdom” among the Jews in Palestine during the
Hellenistic Age, so far as the subject is represented in the two great
collections of Jewish sayings, the _Book of Proverbs_ and
_Ecclesiasticus_. It would be too much to claim that in these chapters
the book breaks new ground, for the importance of the Hellenistic period
is recognised by students of history, and there have been many
commentaries on the _Book of Proverbs_, nor has _Ecclesiasticus_ been
without its expositors. But the historian devotes himself to the
relation of events, and the commentator is busy with the thoughts of the
several proverbs or with the textual difficulties they present, rather
than with their precise historical setting. Here an endeavour has been
made to bring the proverbs into close connection with the history, and
it is hoped that not only do the proverbs thereby acquire fresh
interest, but also that there emerges a picture of the men who made them
and used them in the furtherance of morality and faith. Even to
professed students of Jewish history the makers of the “Wisdom” proverbs
are apt to remain distant and shadowy figures; but we cannot afford to
neglect any of the makers of the Bible, and I venture to think that the
method followed in this volume makes it possible to appreciate the
outlook of these men, to realise their difficulties, and if not to
sympathise wholly with their views, at least to feel that they were very
human. Whether this brief sketch is successful in attaining its object
or not, it is certain that the subject deserves more attention than it
has hitherto received.

Besides the numerous maxims in _Proverbs_ and _Ecclesiasticus_, there
are some interesting popular proverbs in the historical and prophetical
books of the Old Testament. To these a part of Chapter IV. will be
devoted. Occasional references will also be made, especially in the
second half of the book, to proverbial sayings taken from the Rabbinical
literature of the Jews. The titles of Chapters XIII. to XX. sufficiently
indicate the nature of their contents, and require no further comment
here.

In translating the proverbs the Revised Version has been used as a
basis, but liberty has been exercised in making any alterations that
seemed desirable on textual or literary grounds. Most of the changes
thus introduced will readily explain themselves to those who are
acquainted with the original texts or may care to consult modern
commentaries, such as that of Professor Toy on _Proverbs_
(International Critical Commentary) and of Dr. Oesterley on
_Ecclesiasticus_ (Cambridge Bible Series).

Any volume, such as this, that touches a wide range of subjects must
have correspondingly many obligations. I welcome this opportunity of
recording my gratitude to the authors whose writings are referred to in
the following pages, and in particular I desire to acknowledge my
indebtedness to the Right Rev. E. L. Bevan’s illuminating work on the
Hellenistic period, to the writings of Professor Toy and Dr. Oesterley
mentioned above, and to Professor C. F. Kent’s short study and analysis
of _Proverbs_ in his book _The Wise Men of Ancient Israel_.

                                                              W. A. L. E.

Christ’s College, Cambridge.




CONTENTS





CHAPTER                                                             PAGE

I THE CHARACTERISTICS OF PROVERBS                                     13

II THE PROVERBS OF THE JEWS                                           28

III FORGOTTEN YEARS                                                   43

IV THE DAY OF SMALL THINGS                                            60

V IRON SHARPENETH IRON                                                75

VI A SOWER WENT FORTH TO SOW                                         100

VII MEN AND MANNERS                                                  108

VIII THE IDEAL                                                       136

IX THE EXALTATION OF WISDOM                                          166

X THE HILL “DIFFICULTY”                                              178

XI HARVEST                                                           194

XII VALUES                                                           214

XIII NATURE IN THE PROVERBS                                          229

XIV HUMOUR IN THE PROVERBS                                           237

XV FROM WISDOM’S TREASURY                                            245

XVI THE BODY POLITIC                                                 248

XVII A CHAPTER OF GOOD ADVICE                                        261

XVIII CONDUCT                                                        265

XIX FAITH                                                            273

XX THE GIFT OF GOD                                                   280




CHAPTER I

The Characteristics of Proverbs


Most writers on proverbs have thought it necessary to attempt a
definition of their subject, but the task is difficult, and the phrase
that will silence criticism has yet to be produced. Lord Russell’s
epigram describing a proverb as “The wisdom of many and the wit of one”
is as good as any, but it leaves so much unsaid that as a definition it
is certainly inadequate. On the other hand, it is a true remark, and the
facts it emphasises may conveniently be taken as the point from which to
begin this study.

No saying is a proverb until it has commended itself to a number of men;
the wisdom of one is not a proverb, but the wisdom of many. Countless
fine expressions well suited to become proverbial have perished in the
speaking, or lie forgotten in our books. To win wide acceptance and then
to keep pace with the jealous years and remain a living word on the lips
of the people is an achievement few human thoughts have compassed; for
thousands that pass unheeded only one here or there, helped by some
happy quality, or perhaps some freak of fortune, is caught from mouth to
mouth, approved, repeated and transmitted. Every accepted proverb has
therefore survived a searching test, all the more severe because
judgment is not always passed upon the merits of the case. Popular
favour is at the best capricious, and often an admirable saying has died
out of use and a worse become famous. But of one thing we can be
certain: general recognition is never won except by that which expresses
the beliefs, or appeals to the conscience, or touches the affections of
average men. However many the defects of any given proverb may happen to
be, it is sure to possess some quality of human interest.

In the second place, it is generally true that, although proverbs have a
sovereign right to utter commonplace, there is no such thing as a dull
proverb. No matter how pedestrian may be its doctrine, somewhere in its
expression will be manifest the “wit of one”--a flash of insight or
imagination, a note of pathos or power. Of course, many sayings through
age and the changes of fashion have lost their savour for us, but--the
point is important--even these are not inevitably dull. _All_ were once
piquant. If we could but recapture the attitude of the men who made the
phrase proverbial, its interest would be felt again. But although it
thus appears that proverbs are essentially human and generally witty,
the study of them is attended by certain difficulties. It is wise,
therefore, to acknowledge at the outset the obstacles that will beset
our path; to be forewarned is to be forearmed.

Many proverbs have achieved popularity, not on account of what they say,
but of the way they say it; the secret of their success has been some
spice of originality or of humour in their composition. Originality,
however, is a tender plant, and nothing fades more quickly than humour.
A graphic or unexpected metaphor will delight the imagination for a
little while, but how swiftly and inexorably “familiarity breeds
contempt”; a phrase which is itself a case in point. Whenever therefore,
in studying the Jewish proverbs, we come upon famous and familiar words,
we must endeavour to let the saying for a moment renew its youth, by
deliberately quickening our sympathy and attention, by counting it
certain that words which have not failed through so many centuries to
touch the hearts and minds of men deserve from us more than a passing
glance of recognition.

Many proverbs speak truth, but a true word can be spoken too often.
Every preacher in Christendom knows how little, through much iteration,
the words “Hope” and “Love” may convey to his hearers, although most men
are conscious that of the realities of Hope and Love they cannot possess
too much. So also with the truths expressed in proverbs. For example,
many excellent men have lacked only promptitude to win success, and we
have need to be warned thereby; but when the fact is put before us in
the words “Procrastination is the thief of time,” what copybook boredom
rises in our indignant soul! We will not learn the lesson from so stale
a teacher. Every effort to indicate the genius of proverbs is attended
by this disadvantage of verbal familiarity; and, of course, it is the
finest sayings that suffer most. But just here the tragedy of the great
European War lends unwelcome aid. The intensity of human experience has
been raised to a degree not known for centuries; and, as a recent writer
in the _Spectator_ admirably puts it, “In all times of distress dead
truisms come to life. They confront the mind at every turn. We are
amazed at the vividness of our thoughts, and confounded at the banality
of their expression. We imagined that only fools helped themselves out
with the musty wisdom of copybooks, but now it seems that even a fool
may speak to the purpose. There is nothing so new as trouble, nothing so
threadbare as its expression. ‘All is fair in love and war’.... How
vividly that falsehood has been impressed upon us by our enemies. Yet
how dull and indisputable it seemed such a little while ago. Even those
of us who have least personal stake in the war grow terribly impatient
at its slow movement. Almost every man who buys an afternoon paper
thinks of the ‘watched pot.’ How many people have lately known the
heart-sickness of ‘hope deferred’? ‘Dying is as natural as living’: that
is a dull enough expression of fact, when death is far off: but, when it
is near, it cuts like a two-edged sword.”[1] Life for the present
generation has verily been transformed; it is both more terrible and
more inspiring, more poignant in its sorrows, more thrilling in its
achievements and its joys: all things are become new. Once we could say
glibly, “The heart knoweth its own bitterness,” using the phrase to
point a trivial trouble, but not now; and perhaps never again in our
life-time. Thank God, it is not only the sorrowful sayings which rise in
our heart with new meaning, but also those which speak of courage and
strength, of loyalty and faith.

There is a third danger against which we require to be on guard.
Proverbs cannot be absorbed in quantity. Like pictures in a gallery,
they stand on their rights, each demanding a measure of individual
attention and a due period for reflection. Many chapters in the _Book of
Proverbs_ are unpalatable reading, not because they are prosy, but
because they are composed of independent maxims connected by no link of
logical sequence or even of kindred meaning. To read consecutively
through a series of these self-contained units is to impose an
intolerable strain on the mind. The imagination becomes jaded, the
memory dazed by the march of too swiftly changing images. The
disconnected thoughts efface one another, leaving behind them only a
blurred confusion. This will appear the more inevitable the more clearly
we realise what a proverb is. For consider: not one nor two but
countless observations of men and things have gone to the making of a
single proverb; it is the conclusion to which a thousand premisses
pointed the way; it is compressed experience. And further, a proverb
usually gives not just the bare inference from experience, but the
inference made memorable by some touch of fancy in the phrasing. Hence
the meaning of a proverb is not always obvious, that it may seem the
sharper when perceived. Some curious comparison, some pleasing
illustration, is put forward to catch and hold attention until, from the
train of thought thus raised, a truth leaps out upon us or a fact of
life confronts us, familiar perhaps but now invested with fresh dignity.
A proverb is not, as it were, a single sentence out of the book of human
life, but is rather the epitome of a page or chapter; or, if you please,
call it a summary, now of some drama of life, now of an epic or lyric
poem, now again of a moral treatise. From a literary point of view
proverbs are rich, over-rich feeding. They cloy. There is in the _Book
of Proverbs_ a remark that adroitly puts the point:

    _Hast thou found honey?
    Eat so much as is convenient for thee_ (Pr. 25^{16}).

It follows that frequent quotation of proverbs will be apt to fatigue
the reader, yet the danger is one which cannot wholly be avoided in this
volume. Something, however, can be done by setting limitations on the
scope of our subject, and in the following pages no attempt will be made
to present any systematic survey of the whole immense field of Jewish
proverbs, ancient, mediæval, and modern. Attention will be given chiefly
to two pre-Christian collections--the _Book of Proverbs_ and
_Ecclesiasticus_--and, even so, many good sayings in those books will be
left unnoticed. Moreover, proverbs are not quite chaotic, for all their
natural independence. They are like a forest through which many paths
conduct; by following now one, now another topic it is possible to
penetrate in various directions, as inclination prompts. But, even so,
the peril of wearying the reader by over-many proverbs will only be
lessened not removed; wherefore again--’tis a word of high
wisdom--_Hast thou found honey? Eat so much as is convenient for thee._

Enough of difficulties and dangers! Woe to him who goes “supping sorrows
with a long spoon”! A happier task, however, does remain, before we set
sail upon our quest: we have still to count our blessings. What are the
virtues of proverbs? What the interests we may hope to find in our
subject?

The proverb does for human life something that science does for the
world of Nature: it rouses the unseeing eye and the unheeding ear to the
marvel of what seems ordinary. As for Nature, most of us who are not
scientists are still deplorably blind to her perfections, but popular
text-books have so far succeeded that we confess our ignorance with
shame, and some are even penitent enough to desire that they might grow
wiser. We are at least aware that there is nothing in the world not
wonderful. We used to pass the spider’s web in our gardens with never a
thought, but now--is not Le Fabre whispering to us of “rays equidistant
and forming a beautifully regular orb,” of “polygonal lines drawn in a
curve as geometry understands it.” “Which of us,” says he, pricking our
human vanity, “would undertake, off-hand, without much preliminary
experiment and without measuring instruments to divide a circle into a
given quantity of sectors of equal width. The spider, though weighted
with a wallet and tottering on threads shaken by the wind, effects the
delicate division without stopping to think.”[2] The astronomer does not
guard his secrets like the jealous astrologer of old; so that now-a-days
many a man who possesses neither the higher mathematics nor a telescope
knows more than his eyes can show him of the marvels of the stars and
the mystery of space. Professor J. A. Thompson writes of _The Wonder of
Life_, and behold! even he that hath no skill in biology may learn that
the barren seashore is a teeming world, more strange than fairyland.
Science does not make Nature marvellous; she lifts the veil of ignorance
from our mind. Proverbs perform the same service for the life of man.
Taking the common incidents of experience, they point out their meaning.
Perceiving the principles in the recurrent facts of life, they discover
and declare that the commonplace is more than merely common. That is a
task greater and more difficult than at first sight may appear: as has
been well said, “There is no literary function higher than that of
giving point to what is ordinary and rescuing a truth from the obscurity
of obviousness.”[3] Most men are slow, desperately slow, to perceive the
significance of the experiences they encounter daily; yet from the iron
discipline of these things none of us can escape. They are our life-long
schoolmaster, and woe betide the man who from that stern teacher learns
nothing or learns amiss. Nor is it sufficient that the facts should be
brought before us. As a rule, the truth requires to be pushed home. Ask
us not to observe that the reasoning faculties of the human being are
seriously and sometimes disastrously perturbed by the impulses of
affection; but tell us “Love is blind,” and--perhaps--we shall not
forget.

Proverbs are superlatively human. Suffer the point to have a curious
introduction. In certain ancient colleges it is the custom on one Sunday
in each year to hold in the chapel a service of Commemoration, when the
names of all those who were benefactors of the college are read aloud.
Few ceremonies can convey more impressively the continuity of the
generations, the actual unity between the shadowy past and the vivid
present which seems to us the only _real_ world. The roll may begin far
back in the fourteenth or fifteenth centuries, commencing with the
names of the Founder and a few mediæval Benefactors (some of them famous
men), but steadily and swiftly the years move onwards as the roll is
read, until, listening, we realise that in another moment what is called
the past will merge into the present. Somehow the magical change takes
place; the past is finished, and the record is telling now “the things
whereof we too were part,” ending perhaps with the name of one whom we
called “friend,” who sat beside us in the chapel--was it only a year ago
to-day? On these occasions the lesson is usually taken from a chapter in
_Ecclesiasticus_ known as _The Praise of Famous Men_:--_Let us now
praise famous men and our fathers that begat us. The Lord manifested in
them great glory, even his mighty power from the beginning. Such as did
bear rule in their kingdoms and were men renowned for their power,
giving counsel by their understanding; such as have brought tidings in
prophecies; leaders of the people by their counsels, and by their
understanding men of learning for the people--wise were their words in
their instruction; such as sought out musical tunes, and set forth
verses in writing; rich men furnished with ability, living peaceably in
their habitations: all these were honoured in their generations, and
were a glory in their days. There be of them that have left a name
behind them, to declare their praises. And some there be which have no
memorial; who are perished as though they had not been and are become as
though they had not been born._ What! even of those who were _famous_
men?... _perished as though they had not been and become as though they
had not been born_. The verdict is too hard. Granting that they missed
genius, did they not live nobly, speak wisely, make many beautiful
things, do generous deeds, giving of themselves the best they had to
give? But ... _as though they had not been_. Surely they merited some
kinder fate than that? And what of the multitudes of the unrenowned? If
the famous are nothing, then the rest of men are less than nothing and
vanity, and, dying, they certainly can leave no trace behind them, no
word to carry the tale of how once they laboured, loved, hoped, endured.
All their exquisite human longings, all their pleasant thinking, must be
for ever lost? No! for proverbs are the memorial of ordinary men; their
very accents; record of their intimate thoughts and judgments, their
jests and sorrowings, their aspirations, their philosophy. And this even
from distant ages! There are proverbs old as the Iliad. Men of genius
have not a monopoly of immortal words. Perhaps at the start one man of
keen wit was needed to invent the happy phrase or the smart saying, but
before it became a proverb countless ordinary folk had to give it their
approval. We know that every popular proverb has seemed good to a
multitude of men. Essentially therefore it has become their utterance,
and is filled with their personality. And, of course, proverbs are not
only a memorial of the unknown dead; they are equally a language of the
unknown and unlearned living. The humblest of men experience deep
emotions which, however, they cannot articulate for themselves.
Proverbs, we repeat, come to the rescue of the unlettered, supplying
words to fit their thoughts, unstopping the tongue of the dumb. Just
what effects this simple treasury of speech has had in history who can
calculate, but that it has not been slight is dexterously suggested by
these words of anger and chagrin which Shakespeare makes Coriolanus
speak:

                            “Hang ’em,
    They said they were an hungry, sighed forth proverbs;
    That _hunger broke stone walls_, that _dogs must eat_,
    That _meat was made for mouths_, that _the gods sent not
    Corn for the rich men only_; with these shreds
    They vented their complainings.”

Poor wretches! with their “meat was made for mouths.” Doubtless they
should have prepared for the most noble Coriolanus a treatise setting
forth their preposterous economics, and humbly praying that in due
course their petition might be brought before the Senate. But--“dogs
must eat.” Faugh! “No gentleman,” said Lord Chesterfield, “ever uses a
proverb.” Perhaps not, in an age of false gentility. But men of genius
in many a century have taken note of their rich humanism and their value
as a real, though undeveloped, science of life. Aristotle, Bacon,
Shakespeare, Montaigne, Cervantes, Hazlitt, Goethe, thought fit to use
them. Despite my Lord Chesterfield, let us continue the subject.

In the third place, proverbs are like a mirror in which the facts and
ideals of society may be discerned. This is so obvious a truth that its
importance may be under-estimated until it is realised how clear and
detailed the reflection is. Proverbs prefer the concrete to the
abstract. They contain many allusions[4] that are like windows opening
on to the land of their birth and offering glimpses of its life and
scenery--the rain and the sunshine ripening its fields and vineyards;
the valleys and mountains, the open country, the villages, and towns.
The activities and interests of the inhabitants are still more clearly
disclosed. Manners and morals are laid bare, all the more faithfully
because the witness is often unintentional. “Proverbs,” said Bacon,
“reveal the genius, wit, and character of a nation.” In them Humanity,
all reticence forgotten, seems to have cried its thoughts from the
housetops and proclaimed its hidden motives in the market-place. Suppose
that almost all other evidence for the history of Italy or Spain were
blotted out but the national sayings were left us, there would still be
rich material for reconstructing an outline of the characteristics and
not a little of the fortunes of those peoples. In respect of national
disposition how terribly would the lust for vengeance appear as the
besetting sin of Italy: _Revenge is a morsel fit for God_--_Revenge
being an hundred years old has still its sucking teeth_. From the
copious store of Spanish proverbs could be substantiated such facts as
the Moorish occupation of Spain, the power and pride of her mediæval
chivalry, and the immense influence for good and evil which the Church
of Rome has wielded in the length and breadth of the country.

Archbishop Trench lays stress upon this quality of proverbs. Speaking of
Burchardt’s _Arabic Proverbs of the Modern Egyptians_, he remarks,[5]
“In other books others describe the modern Egyptians, but here they
unconsciously describe themselves. The selfishness, the utter extinction
of all public spirit, the servility, which no longer as with an inward
shame creeps into men’s lives but utters itself as the avowed law of
their lives, the sense of the oppression of the strong, of the
insecurity of the weak, and generally the whole character of life, alike
outward and inward, as poor, mean, sordid, and ignoble ... all this, as
we study these documents, rises up before us in truest, though in
painfullest, outline. Thus, only in a land where rulers, being evil
themselves, feel all goodness to be their instinctive foe, where they
punish but never reward, could a proverb like the following, _Do no good
and thou shalt find no evil_, ever have come to the birth”: altogether a
black picture of Mohammedan society. It is a healthier, happier scene
that the Jewish proverbs will unfold to us.

The last general characteristic of proverbs, to which we need pay
attention, is their inexhaustible variety. The world is their province.
Religion and ethics, politics, commerce, agriculture, handicrafts,
riches and poverty, diligence and idleness, hope and contentment, unrest
and despair, laughter and tears, pride and humility, love and hatred:
what is there you can name that we cannot set you a proverb to match it?
Proverbs enter the palace unsummoned, take stock of his Majesty, and
then inform the world what they think of his doings. They sit with my
Lord Justice on the bench, and he shall hear further of the matter if he
judge with respect of persons. But lo and behold! they also keep company
with highwaymen and thieves, and the tricks of most trades are to them
no secret. Proverbs are at home with men of every degree: they dine at
the rich man’s table, they beg with Lazarus by the gate; and shrewdly do
they analyse the world from both points of view. Chiefly, however, they
have dwelt in a myriad normal homes, where neither riches nor poverty is
given, but where a hard day’s work, a sufficient meal, and a warm fire
in the evening have loosened tongues and opened hearts. Whereupon these
unconscionable guests proceed to criticise the family. They interfere
between husband and wife, parents and children, and teach all of them
manners with an unsparing frankness. They play with the children,
counsel their parents, and dream dreams with the old. Again, proverbs
are both country-dwellers and town-dwellers. Have they not observed the
ways of wind and water, sunshine and silvery starlight, seen the trees
grow green and the seeds spring into life, the flowers bloom and the
harvest ingathered? Yet also they have spent the whole year in the city,
walking its streets early and late, strolling through the markets and
bargaining in the shops. Ubiquitous proverbs! There is nothing beyond
their reach, nothing hid from their eyes.

The advantages of this abundant variety are clear. Almost any topic of
human interest will find sufficient illustration in proverbs. Frequently
a saying will be found useful from more than one standpoint: vary the
topic and the same material may appear in new and unexpected guise. On
the other hand, whatever subject be chosen, a serious difficulty will be
encountered. As soon as the proverbs bearing upon it have been gathered
together, an extreme confusion of opinion will be apparent. The trumpet
gives a most uncertain sound! Thus, let ethics be our starting-point.
Many, no doubt, will be the maxims that breathe an easy, practical
morality, and these, being careful not to be righteous overmuch, may
seem tolerably compatible one with another; but then in violent contrast
will be some that soar to the very heavens, and some also that surely
emanate from hell. These will suffice from the devil’s forge: _Dead men
tell no tales_--_Every man has his price_--or this Italian proverb,
_Wait time and place for thy revenge, for swift revenge is poor
revenge_. For the heavenly, here are two from ancient Greece, _The best
is always arduous_[6]--_Friends have their all in common_[7]; or this
tender English one, _The way to heaven is by Weeping-Cross_, or this
strong Scottish phrase, _The grace of God is gear enough_[8]. Verily,
proverbs do battle one against another. Trench quotes the following:
_The noblest vengeance is to forgive_ compared with the infamous _He who
cannot avenge himself is weak, he who will not is vile_. _Penny wise
pound foolish_ is cried in our one ear; _Take care of the pence, and the
pounds will take care of themselves_ in the other. Could anything be
more disconcerting to our hope of investigating the ethical system of
proverbs? But in like manner their social teaching at first sight seems
a wilderness of contradiction, their theology a babel of conflicting
tongues. The natural perplexity thus occasioned can, however, be
resolved very simply. Two points must be kept in mind. First, that when
with rough and ready justice men are classified as pious or wicked,
clever or stupid, generous or miserly, hopeful or despondent, rich or
poor, young or old, wise or ignorant, and so forth, these terms do
represent real distinctions between persons, although perhaps no one
category suffices fully to describe any given individual; and second,
that a proverb necessarily expresses a sentiment shared by a number of
people. It follows that what we ought to seek in proverbs is not one
point of view but many. We shall find the attitude of various classes
and types of men. We shall see life as it appears now in the eyes of the
just and the merciful, now of the evil and the cunning. Here in one
group of sayings will be the way the world looks to a lazy man, here
again are the convictions of the unscrupulously shrewd. Here is some
complacent merchant’s view of social questions, here the exhortations of
an idealistic soul. When once this fact about proverbs is recognised,
the difficulty of their contradictoriness instantly is removed. Instead
of feeling that they speak in hesitating accents, we discover that they
are answering our questions, not with _one_, but with many voices, far
from uncertain in their tone. The confusion vanishes. We find ourselves
listening to the speech of men who, differing sometimes profoundly one
from another, have sharply defined ideas, and can utter their thoughts
with brevity, force, and wit.

It will be seen that our object is wide and deep, and that there are
many avenues of approach to it. One road, however, would seem to be
impossible--proverbs as literature. That an occasional popular saying
would have some touch of literary value, is, of course, to be expected.
But a winged word now and then, a lovely image flitting once in a while
across the plains, will not justify the topic, “Proverbs as literature.”
The individual proverb failing, what hope is there that a collection of
them will come nearer the mark? Suppose the very best of our English
proverbs were gathered together, there might be much to interest, amuse,
or edify our minds, but literature such an assemblage would assuredly
not be. The vital element of unity would be lacking. As well string the
interjections and conjunctions of our language into verse, and call the
result a poem! And yet the incredible has happened. Once a collection of
proverbs was so made as to be literature--but where and when must be
left for the next chapter to relate.




