CHAPTER XVIII

Conduct


This chapter will prove less ambitious than its title suggests. As the
remarks made a few pages back, on _The Body Politic_ were meant to be
taken in conjunction with what was said in Chapter VIII. regarding
social and family conduct, so here also only a few reflections will be
given in summary or in supplement of the Wise-men’s ideal of personal
character. It is perhaps as well that it seems superfluous to
recapitulate the various attributes that the proverbs say are to be
chosen or eschewed by the perfect man; for when the Vices have been
assembled they form a dismal and depressing crowd, and when the Virtues
are lined up over against them, they are a celestial host but they
glitter on high beyond a modest man’s attainment. Moreover the art of
noble living is best practised not by those who go spelling out the
details, as if the Virtues were meant to be acquired singly or the Vices
attacked and conquered one by one, but by those who from sound instinct
or a wisely-trained intelligence have mastered a few great thoughts and
assented to follow their guidance in the maze of life. It is the purpose
of these pages to touch only on certain of these controlling facts,
principles, or ideals of conduct. The task before us is therefore
neither intricate nor long. It is simple, yet (for all its simplicity)
serious.

There is one quality that is not so much a part of character as the very
soil out of which it grows--_Honesty of purpose_; if absent or only
fitfully present, moral growth is either stunted or cut off; if
present, then a multitude of imperfections are found pardonable. Wise
therefore is the Jewish proverb that says of _Deceitfulness_, using a
realistic metaphor more eloquent than many words, _Bread of falsehood is
sweet to a man, but afterwards his mouth shall be filled with gravel_
(Pr. 20^{17}). Over against it set this strong simple plea for
_Sincerity: Strive for the truth, unto death, and the Lord God shall
fight for thee_ (E. 4^{28}); and then consider the implication in the
contrast of those maxims--that Evil is first sweet then bitter, and Good
first painful then joyous. Sometimes those propositions are visibly,
demonstrably, true in their entirety; sometimes the second part of them
to be credited requires faith in the spiritual nature of man. But of the
first part there can be no question; ’tis a matter of universal
experience--moral victories at the first are difficult, moral defeats
easy, _The way of sinners is smooth without stones, but at the end
thereof is the pit of Hades_ (E. 21^{10}), a glissade to the precipice
and over; _facilis descensus Averno_.

Setting aside for the moment the influence of religious belief on
conduct (the next chapter will have something to say upon the point), it
would seem that there is one outstanding quality to which the Jewish
proverbs recur again and again, as if to tell us that here is the
supreme secret. That quality may be called _Receptivity_, but it has
many aspects for which other titles might more fittingly be used: it is
the willing mind, the open eye and the hearing ear; in youth it is zeal
to learn, in manhood more often the grace to profit by mistake. So from
teachableness it is wont to pass into penitence, the recognition of
error and imperfection--not passive penitence, however, but the active
desire to improve--and then from this virile penitence it should rise
into that disposition of Charity or Love towards others, which is the
highest virtue, without which a man may have many talents and yet profit
nothing. Let us trace the sequence in the proverbs, commencing with the
desire for knowledge:

    _The fear of the Lord is the chief part of knowledge,
    But the foolish despise wisdom and instruction.
    My son, hear the instruction of thy father,
    And forsake not the teaching of thy mother;
    For they shall be a chaplet of grace unto thy head
    And ornaments round thy neck_ (Pr. 1^{7-9}).

    _Yea, if thou cry after discernment,
    And lift up thy voice for understanding;
    If thou seek her as silver
    And search for her as hid treasures ...
    Then shalt thou understand righteousness and judgement,
    And equity, yea, every good path_ (Pr. 2^{3, 4, 9}).

To him that is willing to learn, the proverbs promise rich and wonderful
reward, and the New Testament repeats the promise:

    _God scorneth the scorners,
    But He giveth grace to the lowly_ (Pr. 3^{34}).[149]

    _If thou desire wisdom, keep the commandments,
    And the Lord shall give it unto thee freely_ (E. 1^{26}).[150]

Thus far the subject is familiar. Twice already reference has been made
to this virtue of Learning-Ever. Impenitently we bring it up again,
seeing that the Jewish proverbs are most urgent on the matter and also
that men to-day stand in no small need of the counsel. For all its
vaunted liberty of thought, our age is by no means patient of personal
criticism, doubtless because owing to the swift and amazing increase in
control of material resources it has been peculiarly successful in
certain directions (not, however, the most important); and the success
has made us vain. To know a little about the universe (and we know no
more) is a very dangerous thing.

But observe how from the initial grace of an eager, receptive attitude
towards life, other virtues naturally appear. Frankly and patiently to
recognise one’s errors is to increase in wisdom, to learn before it is
too late, to see the pitfalls one has narrowly escaped, and so to be
humbled, to feel the sense of a great forgiveness vouchsafed to the
simple-hearted, and accordingly to be grateful and to be happy:

    _He that covereth his transgressions shall not prosper:
    But whoso confesseth and forsaketh them shall obtain mercy.
    Happy is the man that feareth alway:
    But he that hardeneth his heart shall fall into calamity_
    (Pr. 28^{13, 14}).

This experience, if at all intense, has a profound effect on character;
he that knows he has been forgiven much will love much, and his
gratitude towards the Giver of all mercy will spontaneously show itself
in mercy towards other men. Others will wrong him and disappoint him
often, but, remembering his own imperfections, he will want to judge
them gently and never to despair of helping them; to him it seems as if
“they know not what they do.” But this is the very disposition required
of us in the prayer “Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that
trespass against us,” and the question must surely be rising in the
reader’s mind, What relation can possibly be discovered between these
high thoughts and the Jewish proverbs? This surprisingly intimate
relation--that whilst the manifestation of perfect forgiveness in
Christ’s own Person made His Prayer a new power in the world, the
thought in this petition was not new; it goes back to these words of Ben
Sirach, _He that taketh vengeance on his neighbour will meet vengeance
from the Lord, and his sins will surely be confirmed. Forgive thy
neighbour the hurt that he hath done thee, and then shall thy sins be
pardoned when thou prayest_ (E. 28^{1, 2})! Who dares withhold his
approval from the condition in the abstract? If we are Christians at
all, our conscience must welcome its eternal justice, recognising that
we can ask no greater mercy to be extended us by God. And so we are wont
to repeat the Prayer willingly without reservations or misgivings ...
just until the day come when “our neighbour” has gotten him a name and
we lie dazed and bleeding from the hurt that he hath dealt us. _That_ is
the moment for which these words were spoken--_Let not mercy and truth
forsake thee, bind them upon thy neck_ (Pr. 3^{3}). Know that--_By mercy
and truth iniquity is purged away, and by the fear of the Lord men
depart from evil_ (Pr. 16^{6}). By the time a man has schooled himself
to put those exhortations into practice, he will be in no danger of
treating forgiveness lightly: true forgiveness is conditioned by the
Moral Law, is no futile shutting-of-the-eyes to uneradicated sin, and
may therefore call for faithfulness unto death and necessitate the
greatest sacrifice earth knows, even the Cross of Christ.

And with the thought let us return to that saying of Ben Sirach, _Strive
for the truth unto death_. “The Truth” is here to be interpreted in the
fullest sense of the term; it means Righteousness or Justice; it denotes
sincerity in things great and small, in thought word and deed. The
proverb then may serve as a reminder of the uncompromisingly stern and
perilous element in human experience. Until three years ago many men had
no lively sense of that aspect of things. The sinister possibilities
were not absent, but often they were fallaciously concealed. When a man
catches the same train to town day after day and his outward
circumstances are uneventful and regular as some slow-moving stream, he
may easily be deluded into thinking that his inner, spiritual self is
likewise pursuing the even tenor of its way; whereas in reality it may
be waging a desperate battle against increasing pride, prejudice,
hardness of heart, and a whole battalion of the Fiend’s picked
legionaries. The Prosperous, consulting his bankbook, may easily be
betrayed into saying “I shall not want,” whilst the soul within him is
choking. If our essential life is spiritual and consists in our love of
the True, the Good, the Beautiful, riches are likely to prove a thin
armour against the enemy. But three long and terrible years of war have
transformed the situation, and there are few to-day who do not know that
there is “a striving for the truth unto death.” Little need now to
emphasise the dark side of life; myriads are but too well acquainted
with its tragedies.

The Jewish proverbs offer no philosophy of Suffering; for that one must
go to the Christian religion, which has faced the worst of the problem
and is unique in having found a reassuring answer. When, however, we
turn to the immediate question, how best to meet and deal with hardship,
physical or mental, behold! Christianity is content to appropriate the
language of a Jewish proverb and reiterate its counsel, though with a
glorious new confidence: _Therefore let us also, seeing we are compassed
about with so great a cloud of witnesses, lay aside every weight, and
the sin that doth so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the
race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus, the author and perfecter
of our faith.... For consider Him who endured such gainsaying of sinners
against himself that ye wax not weary, fainting in your souls. Ye have
not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin, and ye have forgotten
the exhortation which reasoneth with you as with sons,_

    _My son, regard not lightly the discipline of the Lord
    Nor faint when thou art reproved of him;
    For whom the Lord loveth He disciplines,
    And chasteneth[151] every son whom He receiveth_ (Pr. 3^{11, 12}).

_It is for discipline that ye endure; God dealeth with you as with sons;
for what son is there whom his father doth not discipline?_ (_Hebrews_
12^{1-7}). To use or to refuse this idea of the educative opportunity in
suffering makes an amazing difference to life. Says a commentator of the
older school writing upon this passage in _Proverbs_: “First, _Despise
not_ the discipline.... Do not meet sorrow by a mere hardihood of
nature. Let your heart flow down under trouble, for this is human: let
it rise up also to God, for this is divine. And secondly, _Faint
not_.... This is the opposite extreme. Do not be dissolved, as it
were--taken down and taken to pieces by the stroke. You should retain
presence of mind and exercise your faculties. If the bold would see God
in his afflictions, he would not despise; if the timid would see God in
them, he would not faint.... The same stroke may fall on two men and be
in the one case judgement, in the other love. You may prune branches
lying withered on the ground, and also branches living in the vine. In
the two cases the operation and instrument are precisely alike; but the
operation on this branch has no result, and the operation on that branch
produces fruitfulness.”[152]

    _My son, if thou comest to serve the Lord,
    Prepare thy soul for trial.
    Set thy heart aright and with constancy endure,
    And be not terrified in time of calamity....
    For gold is tried in the fire,
    And acceptable men in the furnace of humiliation,
    Put thy trust in God and He will help thee;
    Order thy ways aright and set thy hope on Him_ (E. 2^{1-6}).

Never in living memory has there been greater need for wise and
persuasive advice how to conduct oneself in time of anxiety and
affliction. In the gales of life many a ship is flung on the rocks for
lack of a little good seamanship on board. But ships need care even when
they are sailing summer seas; and so, because one hopes that brighter
days are coming to the world and coming soon, there is room for one more
counsel in conclusion. Religion, and particularly Christianity, has been
robbed of half of its power over men’s souls, by reason of the absurd
and tragical notion that it bears chiefly on the woes of man and very
little on his joys. On this score also the Jewish proverbs preach a
useful and pleasant sermon, with their natural honest desire for the
good things of life and their strong and salutary conviction that in
Wisdom--being that fear of the Lord which is to depart from evil--will
be found a never-failing source of refreshing happiness:

    _The fear of the Lord is glory and exultation
    And gladness and a crown of rejoicing.
    The fear of the Lord shall delight the heart,
    And shall give gladness and joy and length of days_
         (E. I^{11, 12}; cp. Pr. 2^{10}, 3^{16}).




