CHAPTER III

Forgotten Years


The past of human life offers an unimaginably long vista for our
contemplation. Vastly many more are the years that have been forgotten
than those that are remembered. Mr. Stephen Graham is therefore quite
right when, in his book _The Way of Martha and the Way of Mary_, he
insists that Christianity after nineteen hundred years is still a young
religion, its doctrines imperfectly understood, its possibilities not
yet unfolded. But for that matter history itself is young, since history
knows at the most some six or seven thousand years of human history, and
Man has been on earth hundreds of thousands of years. Glimpses of human
life in those dim and distant ages are occasionally possible (as we are
about to observe in the Jewish proverbs) and have a certain fascination;
but their interest is apt to be overwhelmed by the disquieting ideas
which the thought of so vast a stretch of time naturally raises in our
mind. In comparison, our personal hopes seemed dwarfed into utter
insignificance, and it is no comfort when a Psalmist (more than twenty
centuries ago) suggests that to the Deity time may be a very little
thing: _Thou turnest man to destruction, and sayest, Return, ye children
of men. For a thousand years in Thy sight are but as yesterday when it
is past, and as a watch in the night_. God may expend so many myriad
years as seemeth good to Him in the making of sun, moon, and stars,
earth and sea--what matter? But when the living bodies of men are racked
with pain, when tyranny endures and love and liberty are delayed, then
what is the millenial patience of God but terrifying? _We_ cannot wait
for its slow maturing. Does He not know that we who would see the
salvation of the Lord in the land of the living are ready to faint?

Perhaps, however, our distress arises from the adoption of a mistaken
standpoint. For, first, let the question be considered not from the
point of view of God’s patience but of His greatness, and the infinitely
long development will seem less dreadful. The immensity of time may then
be regarded, not as a token of God’s indifference to man, but as a
measure of His eternal majesty, and as evidence of an intention sublime
beyond our present power to apprehend, yet not antagonistic to the value
of the individual being--as indeed the author of _Isaiah_ 40 perceived:
_Why sayest thou, O Jacob, and speakest, O Israel, My way is hid from my
God and my glory is forgotten by my God? Hast thou not known? hast thou
not heard? the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the
earth, fainteth not, neither is weary; there is no searching of His
understanding._ And, secondly, there is something to be said regarding
the brevity of our bodily existence, to which an analogy will furnish
the best introduction. Suppose that men were able to perceive the world
of Nature only in its immensities, seeing the oceans but not the
tumbling waves, seeing the plains but not each green or golden field,
would they not fail to perceive an incalculably great portion of earth’s
beauty? How unutterably more wonderful are all natural objects when the
microscope reveals the marvel of every particle. The tree is loveliest
to him who has an eye to see the perfection of each leaf or knows the
miracle of its growth from a single seed or shoot. Is it not possible
that something similar is true of the human spirit in its apprehension
of reality? Suppose that our personality was unable to taste life except
on the grand scale, so that for man a thousand years were only a
passing moment, experienced only “as a watch in the night,” would not
the half of life’s glory then be hidden from those who were ignorant of
what _one_ year can be? May not participation in reality on a small
scale--time felt as a day, an hour, a minute--be indispensable if the
human spirit is to grasp the amazing fulness of conscious life?
Apparently circumscribed by the limit of our three score years and ten,
are we here to learn that consciousness, even when measured in days and
minutes, is of eternal worth and pure delight? For we do learn that
lesson. We do discover that an instant of perfect and unselfish
tenderness may be of immeasurable value. Perchance Man can never love
God till he has loved his brother, never know with the Divine knowledge,
until in faith, hope, and charity he has desired to win the knowledge
which is in part. The cup of cold water must first be given lovingly
unto the least of His brethren, or we shall never comprehend to give it
into the hand of Christ Himself. “He that is faithful over a few
things,” said Jesus, “shall be set over many.” Perhaps only to those who
have sought to find Heaven in life _sub specie temporis_ can life _sub
specie eternitatis_ be imparted; for to know life fully must be to know
not only its infinite extension and its Divine splendour, but also the
exquisite perfection of its fleeting moments.


I

Proverbs are one of the most ancient inventions of Man, far older than
history. Four centuries before the birth of Christ, Aristotle, gazing as
far into the past as his glance could reach, saw proverbs still
beckoning him back. He spoke of them as “fragments of an older wisdom
which on account of their brevity or aptness had been preserved from the
general wreck and ruin.” Even the _Book of Proverbs_, late as it is in
date, has features which, if we follow out their significance, will
lead us back to the life of men in long forgotten years. The signs, of
course, are slight, but they are none the less real; and even a faint
trace may be a sure thread of guidance. Only some grooves upon the
surface of the rock, but the lines were indubitably made by the movement
of ice in the glacial age. Only a piece of jagged flint, but the edge we
finger was chipped by human hands for an object conceived in a human
brain. See how the conical marks where each stroke of the hammer fell
are still as clear and purposeful as on the day when they were made.
Flaking a flint is skilled work: the blows must be cunningly aimed and
exactly struck, or the stone will be shattered instead of sharpened.
This one, being well wrought, is doubtless a Neolithic weapon. But here
is a specimen more rude and primitive. It is probably a thousand years
older than the one we have just examined. Nevertheless, we know that it
also was worked by man, and that human eyes chose it and human hands
held it, and fashioned it, in days when man shared Europe with the
mammoth.

What faint but real traces of a far antiquity can be seen in the Jewish
proverbs?

(1) The first trace is to be found in the Numerical Sayings, a curious
type of aphorism, half proverb and half riddle. Four of these occur in
_Proverbs_ 30.

FOUR THINGS UNSATISFIED.

    _Three things there be unsatisfied,
    Yea! four that say not “Enough”--
    The land of death; the barren womb;
    Earth unsated with water;
    And fire that says not “Enough”_ (Pr. 30^{15b, 16}).

FOUR SMALL WISE THINGS.

    _There be four things upon the earth small but exceeding wise_:

    _The_ ANTS--_a people little of strength, but in summer
         they store up food_:

    _The_ CONIES--_these be a feeble folk, but they make their
         homes in the rock_:

    _The_ LOCUSTS--_are they that have no king, but they march
         in an ordered host_:

    _The_ LIZARDS--_on which thou canst lay thine hand, though
         they dwell in his majesty’s court_ (Pr. 30^{24-28}).

FOUR THINGS UNBEARABLE.

    _Beneath three things the earth doth tremble,
    Yea beneath four it cannot bear up--
    Beneath a slave become a monarch;
    Beneath a fool that is filled with meat;
    Beneath an old-maid that hath found a husband;
    Beneath a handmaid heir to her mistress_ (Pr. 30^{21-23}).

FOUR STATELY THINGS.

    _There be three things of stately step,
    Yea, four of stately gait--
    The_ LION, _that is the strongest beast,
    And flees before no foe;
    The ...; the_ HE-GOAT _too;
    And the_ KING, _when_ ...[19](Pr. 30^{29-31}).

Simple as these riddles may be, they imply or make definite allusion to
many things; a settled community, a king, an army trained and
disciplined, economic foresight, dramatic changes in social rank, laws
of natural inheritance, acute reflections on the fate of man and on
human character--surely a picture too elaborate for pre-historic years?
Certainly, and for these particular proverbs, no such claim is advanced:
the lingering trace of a forgotten world is in their form, _numerical_
proverbs. Those just quoted are, as it were, links in a long chain,
which we may follow backwards or forwards. The former process will lead
to the result we seek; but first, for convenience and in further
illustration, let us notice some, still later, examples of these
proverbs. Two more are included in the Book of Proverbs, one of which
will be quoted below (p. 51): here is the other.

SEVEN HATEFUL THINGS.

    _There be six things Jehovah hates,
    Yea, seven which he abominates--
    Haughty eyes, a lying tongue,
    And hands that innocent blood have shed,
    A mind devising wicked plans,
    Feet that be swift to do a wrong,
    A witness false declaring lies,
    And he who stirs up friends to strife_ (Pr. 6^{16-19}).

Though cast in the same mould, this saying with its insistence on
justice, truth, honesty of purpose and humility of spirit, certainly
reflects a later and more complex stage of thought than the naïve
conundrums quoted above from Pr. 30. Indeed, it may be no earlier than
the third century, the golden age of proverb-making, to which period
belongs also the following sentence from Ben Sirach’s book: _There be
nine things that I have thought of and in my heart counted happy, and
the tenth I will utter with my tongue_--_A man whose children give him
joy: a man that liveth to see his enemies fall: happy is he whose wife
hath understanding, and he that hath not slipped with his tongue, and he
that hath not had to serve an inferior man: happy is he that hath found
prudence: and he that discourseth in the ears of them that listen. How
great is he that hath found wisdom! And above him that feareth the Lord
is there none. The fear of the Lord surpasses all things; and he that
holdeth it, to whom shall he be likened?_ (E. 25^{7-11}).[20]

Turn next to the _Sayings of the Fathers_, a treatise of Jewish ethical
reflections, compiled in the first and second centuries A.D., and in the
fifth chapter will be found a series of “numerical” observations. It
must suffice to quote but one: _There are four types of moral character.
He that saith “Mine is mine and thine is thine” is a character neither
good nor bad, but some say ’tis a character wholly bad.[21] He that
saith “Mine is thine and thine is mine” is a commercially minded
man.[22] He that saith “Mine and thine are thine” is pious: “Mine and
thine are mine,” the same is wicked._ For a last and latest example a
modern saying current among the Jews and Arabs of Syria, can be cited:
_There are three Voices in the World--that of running water, of the
Jewish Law, and of money_.

So much for the later links in the chain, but what of its beginning? Why
give thoughts in stated number? Is it a writer’s trick to catch our
fancy? _That_ it may be in the later, but certainly not in the early
instances. There is only unconscious art in such an unsophisticated,
child-like verse as the FOUR STATELY THINGS. “Child-like,” that is the
word we require to describe these riddles. True; but when were the Jews
and their Semitic ancestors children? Before Abraham was called, when
almost the world itself was young.

For a moment permit your thoughts to be drawn back a very great way, and
consider the rude and inefficient life of early man. Unaided by the
numberless resources, mental and material, that enrich our civilised
life, dwelling in forests, caverns and rude huts of stone or earth,
well-nigh defenceless against the larger animals, haunted and harried by
a thousand perils real and imaginary, so man once lived and worked and
thought, and by his thinking accomplished marvels. “From the moment,”
writes A. R. Wallace, “when the first skin was used as a covering, when
the first rude spear was formed to assist in the chase, when fire was
first used to cook his food, when the first seed was sown or shoot
planted, a grand revolution was effected in Nature, a revolution which
in all the previous ages of the earth’s history had had no parallel; for
a being had arisen who was no longer necessarily subject to change with
the changing universe--a being who was in some degree superior to
Nature, inasmuch as he knew how to control and regulate her action, and
could keep himself in harmony with her, not by a change in body, but by
an advance in mind.”[23] But it was not enough that the individual
should think. The secret of human success has lain in the ability to
communicate ideas. Yet, to this day, with what effort we find words to
body forth our thoughts and feelings! Try to conceive how difficult was
the formulation and transmission of ideas in those forgotten centuries.
Imagine the tribesmen gathered home for the day and seated around their
fire. Here is one who has had a thought when out hunting, which would
amuse or interest the rest, if only it could be made articulate. But
none can read, and none can write, and language is in its infancy. How
then can he find a way to tell it, and they perceive his meaning, and
all _remember_? By means of proverbs; not the neat epigram of later
ages, but yet sayings which for all their simplicity were embryonic
proverbs. Earliest and easiest type of all was the bare
comparison--_this is like that_--a type which, it is interesting to
note, may be illustrated by one of the oldest phrases in the Bible:
_Like Nimrod a mighty hunter before the Lord_ (Gen. 10^{9}). And the
method of comparison never ceased to be a favourite mould for the
formation of proverbs, as some polished examples from _Proverbs_ will
serve to show: _As the swallow ever flitting and flying, so the curse
that is groundless alighteth not_ (Pr. 26^{2}). _The way of the wicked
is like the darkness: they know not whereon they stumble_ (Pr. 4^{19}).
Another device for communicating thought and storing wisdom was the
riddle, and this also, under slight disguise, has its lineal descendants
in the Biblical proverbs. Thus Pr. 16^{14}, _Pleasant words are as an
honeycomb, sweetness to the soul and health to the body_, was once most
probably a reply to the question, _What is sweet as honey?_ Another
example is Pr. 22^{1}: someone would ask, _What is worth more than
gold?_ and when the listeners had guessed in vain give his answer, _A
good repute_. But better than any one comparison, more memorable than
the single question, was the _numerical_ riddle; for instance
this--_What four things are beyond our power to calculate?_

    _There be three things too wonderful for me,
    Yea, four which I do not comprehend--
    The way of an eagle in the air;
    The way of a serpent upon a rock;
    The way of a ship in the midst of the sea;
    And the way of a man with a maid._--(Pr. 30^{18, 19}).

By sayings such as these were thought and experience acquired and
transmitted in forgotten years. When complex thinking was impossible,
when minds were dull and expression feeble, these primitive proverbs by
the barb of their wit or fancy, fixed themselves deep in the memories of
men.

(2). The last quotation has in early Indian literature a close parallel
beginning thus:

    _The paths of ships across the sea,
    The soaring eagle’s flight, Varuna knows_....

and another of the numerical sayings from the same chapter of _Proverbs_
has an even closer parallel:

    _There be three things unsatisfied,
    Yea, four that say not “Enough”:
    Death, and the barren womb,
    Earth, never sated with water,
    And fire that says not “Enough.”_ (Pr. 30^{15, 16}),

compared with:

    _Fire is never sated with fuel;
    Nor Ocean with streams;
    Nor the God of death with all creatures;
    Nor the bright-eyed one (i.e., woman) with man._ (Hitopadeça 2, 113).

These resemblances of thought and phrase between India and Palestine
provide another hint of far-past days by raising the question of the
wandering of proverbs. Variations of the same tales and sayings occur
among so many different peoples throughout Europe and Asia, that the
possible rise of similar ideas, finding somewhat similar expression, in
the various races, seems insufficient to account for the phenomena;
rather we must suppose that tales and phrases circulated from tribe to
tribe over an amazing stretch of territory and in very early times.
What, for example, may be inferred from the correspondence between these
Jewish and Indian sayings? Does it preserve a glimpse of some one man,
interested in the reflections and questionings of his people, who once
ages ago travelled out of India, following the immemorial trade-routes
westwards across Arabia till he reached Palestine, and in the mind of
some kindred soul left a memory of his wise words? Either that, or
perhaps many minds were needed to transmit the thought from East to West
or West to East; so that almost one might think of the words as having
had wings on which they flew from camp to camp along the routes,
alighting wherever men gathered for trade and found time for friendly
intercourse. The subject might be developed at some length; but, try as
we may, the details of these migrations hide themselves in the mists of
a too distant past, and we catch but a glimpse of scenes we can never
more make clear. It is better to give more time to certain general
characteristics of the Jewish proverbs.


II

The abnormal aptitude of the Jews for proverb-making and their love of
concrete expression are ultimately due to the conditions of early
centuries. Of these two features it will be convenient to consider the
second first.

The land of Palestine, home of the Jews from about 1200 B.C., lies
between an ocean of water and an ocean of sand: on the west its coasts
are washed, but not threatened, by the Mediterranean Sea; on the east
and on the south it has to wage incessant warfare against the indrifting
sands. The country is an oasis snatched from the great deserts and kept
from their insidious grasp only by the toil and ingenuity of man. Behind
Palestine looms Arabia, and beneath the Jew is the Arab. Throughout the
last five thousand years the population of Palestine (excepting the
Philistines on the coast) has been formed by layer after layer of
Arabian immigrants, who have invaded the fertile lands, sometimes by the
rush of sudden conquest, but also by steady, peaceful infiltration.
Despite much intermarriage with the earlier Canaanites there was always
a passionate strain of the desert in Jewish blood, and throughout its
whole history in Palestine Israel had to live in uneasy proximity to its
kinsfolk, the wild nomads who roamed the deserts to the east and south.
Consequently the ultimate back-ground of the Old Testament writings is
not Palestine but Arabia, a land which sets a deep and lasting impress
on its children. A life wild yet monotonous in the extreme, rigid in
its limitations but unbridled in its licence within those limitations:
such is the rule imposed by the vast wilderness on the men who have to
wander its blazing solitudes. Arabia produces four paradoxes in the
intellect and characters of its nomadic tribes.[24] First, “the
combination of strong sensual grossness with equally strong tempers of
reverence and worship.” Second, “a marvellous capacity for endurance and
resignation broken by fits of ferocity: the ragged patience bred by
famine. We see it survive in the long-suffering, mingled with outbursts
of implacable wrath, which characterises so many Psalms. These are due
to long periods of moral famine, the famine of justice.” Third,
ingenuity of mind and swift perception, but without that power or
inclination for abstruse or sustained argument which the Western world
has inherited from the Greeks. Fourth, a subjective attitude to the
phenomena of nature and history, combined with an admirable realism in
describing these phenomena.

For thousands of years before Israel entered Canaan and became a nation
its ancestors were nomads of Arabia. It would be strange indeed if the
great desert which so subtly and irresistibly sets its spell upon the
human spirit had left no trace on Jewish proverbs. Yet the trace is not
evident in points of detail. Most of the sayings we shall study in this
volume represent the thoughts of certain post-exilic Jews. Where then
does the mark of the desert linger? First in the peculiar _concreteness_
of the proverbs. All proverbs tend to concrete expression, but in this
respect the Jewish ones are only equalled by those of the Arabs
themselves; and this quality is shown not only in the early but also in
the later sayings. Let us illustrate the point before suggesting its
ultimate cause. The Jew said, “Two dogs killed a lion,”[25] where we
say, “Union is strength.” We say, “Familiarity breeds contempt”; they
said, “The pauper hungers without noticing it.”[26] Our tendency is to
consider riches and poverty, but they talked of the rich man and the
poor. The most remarkable example of this tendency is the conception
that gives unity to the _Book of Proverbs_, namely the idea of Wisdom.
Here, if anywhere, one would expect the abstract to be maintained. But
the individualising instinct has conquered, and in the loftiest passages
of _Proverbs_ we shall find Wisdom praised, not as an idea, but as a
person, represented as a woman of transcendent beauty and nobility. Such
abnormally concrete thinking may have its disadvantages, but at least it
will have one satisfactory quality--_humanism_. Men who thought not in
generalisations but in particular instances, who saw not classes but
individuals, could not help being great humanists. If now we ask whence
the Jewish mind received this tendency, our thoughts will have to travel
back till we discern a group of black hair-cloth tents out in the
Arabian Wilderness. In the tents are men who have learnt to pass safely
across the deserts and are at home in them as a seaman on the seas; wild
men and strong and confident, yet never careless, knowing that they can
relax vigilance only at the risk of life. For these wastes are not empty
but treacherous; apparently harmless, in reality full of peril. Security
in the desert depends on acute and untiring observation. No amount of
abstruse reasoning, no ability in speculative thought, will save life
and property there, if the first sign of a lurking foe is passed
unnoticed in the trying and deceitful light. Every faculty must be
trained to the swift perception of concrete facts, faint signs of
movement, the behaviour of men and beasts. The great sun in heaven may
be trusted to rise and set: why speculate on the mystery? While we are
lost in thought the sons of Ishmael may fall upon us. “The leisure of
the desert is vast, but it is the leisure of the sentinel.... To the
nomad on his bare, war-swept soil few things happen, but everything that
happens is ominous.”

Keen observation, then, more than any other quality, is required by
Arabia from its children. But observation is the quintessence of the art
of proverb-making, provided it be combined with practice in the
expression of one’s thoughts. As for practice in talk, one might readily
suppose that the solitudes would have made their peoples tongue-tied. In
point of fact the contrary is true, and the skill of the Jews in the
devising of proverbs, no less than their love of concrete expression,
goes back to habits engendered by this desert existence. Arabian life
provided not only long leisure for reflection but also opportunity for
social intercourse in the small tribal groups; so that the nomads came
to have a passion for story-telling and for all manner of sententious
talk, witness the customs of the Bedouin to this day and the immense
collections of Arabian proverbs. Hour after hour, with Eastern
tirelessness, the tribesmen, gathered at the tent of their sheikh, would
listen approvingly to the eloquence bred of large experience and shrewd
judgment. Here is the scene painted in the words of Doughty’s _Arabia
Deserta_: “These Orientals study little else [than the art of
conversation and narrative], as they sit all day idle in their male
societies; they learn in this school of infinite human observation to
speak to the heart of one another. His tales [referring to a Moorish
rogue, Mohammed Aly], _seasoned with saws which are the wisdom of the
unlearned_, we heard for more than two months; they were never-ending.
He told them so lively to the eye that they could not be bettered, and
part were of his own motley experience.” The Israelites carried this
habit with them from Arabia into their settled homes in Canaan. Here is
a similar scene in the hall of a modern Palestinian village-sheikh: “We
were seated on mats, spread with little squares of rich carpet round
three sides of a hollow place in the floor, where a fire of charcoal
burned, surrounded by parrot-beaked coffee pots. This was the hearth of
hospitality, whose fire is never suffered to go out; near it stood the
great stone mortar in which a black slave was crushing coffee-beans. The
coffee, deliciously flavoured with some cunning herb or other, was
passed round. But the conversation which followed was the memorable part
of that entertainment. In the shadow at the back the young men who had
been admitted sat in silence. The old men, elders of the village
community, sat in a row on stone benches right and left of the door. The
sheikh made many apologies for not having called on us at the tents--he
had thought we were merchantmen going to buy silk at Damascus. Then
followed endless over-valuation of each other, and flattery concerning
our respective parents and relations.... The elders sat silently leaning
upon their staves, except now and then, when one of them would slowly
rise and expatiate upon something the sheikh had said--perhaps about
camels or the grain crop--beginning his interruption almost literally in
the words of Job’s friends: “Hearken unto me, I also will show mine
opinion. I will answer also for my part, I also will show mine opinion.
For I am full of matter, the spirit within me constraineth me.”[27] So
has it been in Palestine time out of mind, and it is in settings of this
description that we must imagine the art of proverb-making developing in
Israel.

Such, then, is the significance of these features which we have been
considering--the numerical proverbs, parallels with sayings of other
nations, the love of the Jews for proverbs with their consequent skill
in making them, and their remarkable _penchant_ for concrete expression.
Otherwise, antiquity has left few traces in the Jewish proverbs. That,
however, is but natural, since proverb-making was a living art among the
people. New maxims kept coming into use, and they crowded out of memory
the favourites of byegone generations. Doubtless a few of the sayings in
the _Book of Proverbs_ are ancient, though just how old we cannot tell.
For example, P. 27^{20}, _Sheol and Abaddon are never filled, and the
eyes of man are never sated_ may be co-æval with the fear of death and
the passion of greed. Cheyne discovers a relic of “that old nomadic love
of craft and subtlety” in the saying (Pr. 22^{3}), _A shrewd man sees
misfortune coming and conceals himself, whereas simpletons pass on and
suffer for it_; but his interpretation of the verse seems somewhat
forced. The following, however, in matter and perhaps in form also may
be nearly as ancient as the settled occupation of the land:

  _Remove not the ancient landmark which thy fathers set up._ (Pr. 22^{28}).

Nothing could well be easier than the removal of those
landmarks--insignificant heaps of stone, set at the end of a wide
furrow. But from earliest times the East has counted them adequate
guardians of the fields, and from generation to generation, by consent
of all decent-minded men, they have stood inviolate. Other nations, as
well as Israel, called them sacred. Greece, and Rome too, gave them a
god for their protection, Hermes of the Boundary, beside whose shrine of
heaped-up stones travellers would stay to rest, and, rested, lay an
offering of flowers or fruit before the kindly deity:

     “_I, who inherit the tossing mountain-forests of steep Cyllene
     stand here guarding the pleasant playing-fields, Hermes, to whom
     boys often offer marjoram and hyacinths and fresh garlands of
     violet._”[28]

Even the thief and murderer, we are told, would hesitate before the
wickedness of moving these simple, immemorial heaps of stone: such was
their sanctity. What unutterable contempt for the laws of God and man is
therefore revealed in the multiple witness of the Old Testament[29]
against the rich and powerful in Israel, that _they_ scrupled not to
remove the landmarks of their poorer brethren? Thieves and murderers
would have kept their hands clean from such pollution:

    _Remove not the landmark of the widow,
    Into the field of the orphan enter not;
    For mighty is their Avenger,
    He will plead their cause against thee_ (Pr. 23^{10, 11}).




