CHAPTER IX

The Exaltation of Wisdom


Continuing the criticism of the ideal or ideals of the last chapter, it
may be said that the morality commended is not unusual nor markedly
superior to that of other peoples. Do not many of these proverbs state
the merest _a b c_ of ethical sentiment, for which any civilised nation
could produce a parallel in its proverbs? The charge is not only true in
a general way, it has special force in view of the circumstances of the
fourth to the second centuries B.C. For there is evidence of a
widespread tendency to sententious moralising in that period, and, had
we so desired, this Jewish movement might have been considered only as
part of a larger whole.[71] Among the Greeks, especially in Asia Minor,
this was the age when several gnomic poets, such as Menander and
Phocylides, won fame and popularity by their moral aphorisms, and indeed
the Jewish proverbs have many opinions in common with contemporary
Hellenic sayings. In Egypt also there was current a collection of
ethical observations, the Precepts of Ptah-hotep and the Maxims of Aniy,
so closely resembling the form and sentiment of the average Jewish
proverb that it has been suggested that the Sages of Palestine were
directly influenced by these Egyptian teachings. Certainly the
resemblances are striking. These Egyptian books “inculcate the study of
Wisdom, duty to parents and superiors, respect for property, the
advantages of charitableness, peaceableness and content, of liberality,
chastity, and sobriety, of truthfulness and justice; and they show the
wickedness and folly of disobedience, strife, arrogance and pride, of
slothfulness, interference, unchastity, and other vices. “What then? Is
the idealism of the Jews decreased in value because other nations also
had moral ambitions? Judging from the facts of history, the elements of
morality, and of commonsense, too, need constant iteration in all
languages and all periods, not excluding the present. To discover that
most of the Jewish proverbs are far from unique is no real loss, indeed
the danger lies rather in the other direction. If it could be shown that
these maxims were unlike those current elsewhere among men, the
accusation would be serious, for then this volume must needs be written,
not on the humanism, but on the unhumanism of a part of the Bible. The
charge that the Jewish maxims are not unusual is to be admitted
and--dismissed.

More disquieting would be the contention, which the number of
self-regarding maxims readily suggests, that the general moral tone of
these proverbs is not merely normal but actually low. There is no
denying the unblushing utilitarianism that at times crops out. It is
said: _I (Wisdom) walk in the paths of righteousness, in the midst of
the paths of judgement, that I may cause those that love me to inherit
substance and that I may fill their treasuries_ (Pr. 8^{21})--_The
reward of humility and the fear of the Lord is riches and honour and
life_ (Pr. 22^{4}). This sounds even more reprehensible than the famous
definition of Christianity as “doing good for the sake of the kingdom of
heaven.” It seems suspiciously like doing good for the sake of the
kingdoms of this earth! But, hear the defence. First it has already been
urged that general judgments on the proverbs _as a whole_ require most
careful handling, if they are to be even moderately fair: let the
utilitarian sage bear his own sin; his brother who said, “Love covereth
all transgressions,” ought not to be implicated in his fall. Secondly,
there is the sensible, though not lofty, argument that since the Wise
were dealing with men tempted to throw off even ordinary moral restraint
in the burning desire to get all possible prosperity and enjoyment out
of life, if they had pitched their key much higher it is very probable
they would have received no hearing at all. Modern students of ethics
are well aware that pleasure, however often it may accompany good
conduct, cannot be made the motive for virtue. But the Wise were less
sophisticated than ourselves, and it was therefore easy for them to make
the mistake of expressing in too commercial a fashion their conviction
that “honesty is the best policy”[72]; and even if they did sometimes
over-emphasise the thought of external reward, we should remember that
perhaps it was the only way to catch the ear of certain men and draw
them back from the hot pursuit of Folly. The third point will be
surprising to those who are not aware how late in Jewish history was the
development of a worthy conception of immortality and the just judgment
of the soul after death. Compared with the Christian, who starts from
the belief that “God is not the God of the dead, but of the living”, and
that the consequences of good or evil conduct reach onwards beyond the
grave, the Wise-men of Israel were cruelly handicapped in their
consideration of the moral problem. Oesterley with justice pleads in
extenuation of Ben Sirach’s stress on the worldly advantages of Wisdom,
“This is natural in a writer whose whole attention is concentrated on
the present life, and who has nothing but the vaguest ideas about a life
hereafter.”[73] Fourthly, the Wise were not conscious of their
utilitarianism. Of course it is bad to be utilitarian at all, but it is
better to be so unintentionally than deliberately. The ancients did
not, could not, speak or write with that precise realisation of the
implications of words, which often does, and certainly should,
characterise a modern thinker. While therefore the Wise cannot be
exonerated from blame in this respect, there is not a little to be said
in mitigation of their offence.

But the last plea we have to advance on their behalf is the best; and
indeed it is the main apology we wish to make for all their
shortcomings--

A man’s utterances are often an inadequate expression of his soul. Our
final estimate ought to be based, not on the proverbs themselves, singly
or collectively, but on what is behind them, the character of the
speakers. The question is, Were these sayings just verbal piety and
respectable commonplace, or were they, so to speak, waves borne on the
swell of an advancing tide, having beneath and behind them the deep
impulse of a live enthusiasm? What manner of men were the Sages at
heart--mere talkers, seeking the mental satisfaction of turning a neat
phrase and sunning themselves in popular esteem, or men genuinely
concerned for the moral welfare of their fellows? One we have already
considered and not found him altogether wanting. Much can be forgiven if
only the majority of the Wise were like Ben Sirach, in earnest about
their task. We ventured to describe him as a typical Wise-man, but what
ground is there for that assertion?

Now this vital question is not an easy one to investigate and answer,
since concerning the individual Sages, except Ben Sirach, no personal
information has been transmitted, and we have therefore only their
sayings from which to draw a conclusion. Even so the material is perhaps
sufficient. Surely there is a valuable hint to be found in the “strict
attention to business” of _Proverbs_ as well as _Ecclesiasticus_; both
of these books preach at us incessantly from their text “Wisdom.” Why is
it that every word they contain is directed to the end of moral
improvement? Must there not have been a remarkable concentration on
moral interests to account for the comparative absence of what one might
describe as the neutral, non-moral observations on life, which are
common in the proverbs of every other nation?[74] Fortunately however,
there is one much stronger piece of evidence available. It has been
explained that the abstract conception “Wisdom” represented the teaching
of the Wise in epitome, and was the unification in thought of their
manifold opinions. It follows that what they said, or left unsaid, about
“Wisdom” furnishes an admirable test of their sincerity, revealing the
presence or absence of enthusiasm for their work. Wisdom was the Cause
they championed against Folly: it will be easy to tell whether they
truly loved it. If they had been only clever people, content to parade
their shrewdness, or comfortable upholders of law and order, proclaiming
the maxims of respectability with a business eye to the security of
their own possessions, then inevitably they would have betrayed
themselves by giving an exposition of Wisdom coldly intellectual. But
the opposite is what has happened, and the warmth and passion as well as
the reverence, of their words in honour of Wisdom bear eloquent,
unconscious testimony to the admiration and affection in which the Sages
held their calling. Hear then the Praises of Wisdom--

_Happy is the man that findeth Wisdom, and the man that getteth
understanding; for the merchandise of it is better than silver, and the
gain thereof than fine gold. She is more precious than rubies, and none
of the things that thou canst desire are comparable unto her...._ (Pr.
3^{13-15}): surely a disconcerting verse for upholders of the supposed
utilitarianism of the proverbs? Again, _How much better is it to get
Wisdom than gold! Yea to get understanding is to be chosen rather than
silver_ (Pr. 16^{16}, cp. 8^{10})--so much for the Sages’ notion of
comparative values. In chapter 9 of _Proverbs_, by a touch of fine
imagination, Wisdom is daringly pictured as a noble Lady, bidding guests
to her banquet. She is the counterpart of Madam Folly, who also gives a
banquet and who thus invites a passer-by: _Stolen waters are sweet, and
bread eaten in secret is pleasant_, (to which the Wise add in caustic
comment as they see the foolish one enter: _But he knoweth not that the
dead are there, that her guests are in the depth of Sheol_, Pr. 9^{17,
18}). But, in contrast, Wisdom--_Wisdom hath builded her house, she hath
hewn out her seven pillars: she hath killed her beasts, she hath made
ready her wine, and furnished her table. She hath sent forth her
maidens; on the highest parts of the city she crieth aloud, “Whoso is
ignorant, let him turn in hither”; and to him that is void of
understanding she speaketh, “Come, eat ye of my bread, and drink of the
wine which I have made ready”_ (Pr. 9^{1-5}). Ben Sirach knew that
Wisdom was high, and he does not disguise that only by long, unwearying
efforts can her favour be attained. But the reward, says he, outweighs
the toil, and he bids men seek her: _At the first she will bring fear
and dread upon a man and torment him with her discipline, until she can
trust his soul and has tested him by her judgements_ (E. 4^{17}; cp. E.
6^{19-25}). Nevertheless, he says, _Come unto her with all thy soul, and
keep her ways with thy whole power. Search and seek, and she shall be
made known unto thee, and when thou hast hold of her, let her not go.
For in the end thou shalt find her to be rest, and she shall be changed
for thee into gladness. Her fetters shall be to thee a covering of
strength, and her chains a robe of glory_ (E. 6^{26-29}).

Wisdom is the source of all right and noble conduct, the principle that
in all things ought to regulate men’s lives. Casting behind him the grim
facts of Hellenistic courts, and perhaps of high society in Jerusalem
also, one wise man, seeing in vision the world as it should be, put
these glowing, optimistic words into the mouth of Wisdom: _By me kings
reign, and princes decree justice. By me princes rule, and nobles, even
all the judges of the earth_ (Pr. 8^{15, 16}).

But all these praises are slight compared with the thoughts inspired by
the supreme conviction that Wisdom itself is derived from God and dwells
in His Presence: “The Wisdom that illumines the lives of the good is a
reflection of the full-orbed wisdom of God.”[75] It is the ineffable
counsel of the Almighty, the power by which He created heaven and earth
(Pr. 3^{19f}), the principle through which the universe is still
sustained. In face of this belief praise rose into exultation, and
Wisdom was reverently but enthusiastically conceived as that which had
been ordained of God from eternity to be His counsellor in the work of
Creation and His daily delight:

    _Jehovah formed me first of His creation,
      Before all his works of old.
    In the earliest ages was I fashioned,
      Even from the beginning, before the earth.
    When there were no depths was I brought forth,
      When there were no fountains brimming with water.
    Before the mountains were sunk in their bases,
      Before the hills was I brought forth;
    Or ever He had made the earth and the fields,
      Or the first clods of the world.
    When He established the heavens I was there,
      When he drew the circle over the abyss;
    When He made firm the skies above,
      And set fast the fountains of the deep;
    When He gave the sea its bounds,
      And fixed the foundations of the earth,
    Then was I with Him as a foster-child,
      And daily was I His delight,
    As I played continually before His eyes,
      Played o’er all the habitable world.
    So now, my children, hearken unto me,
      Receive my instruction and be wise;
    For happy is the man that heareth me,
      Happy are those that keep my ways,
    Watching daily at my gates,
      And waiting at my gate-posts.
    For he that findeth me findeth life,
      And winneth favour from Jehovah;
    But he that misseth me wrongeth himself:
      All that hate me love death._ (Pr. 8^{22-36}).[76]

In similar language Ben Sirach imagines Wisdom proclaiming her glory in
the very presence of God Himself:

    _I came forth from the mouth of the Most High,
      And like a cloud I covered the earth;
    I had my dwelling in the high places,
      And my throne was in the pillar of cloud;
    I alone compassed the circuit of heaven
      And walked in the depth of the abysses,
    In the waves of the sea and through all the earth;
      And in every people I got me a possession.
    With all these I sought for a resting-place--
      “In whose lot shall I find a lodging?”
    Then the Creator of all commanded me,
      Even he that formed me, pitched my tent
    And said, “In Jacob be thy dwelling,
      And in Israel thine inheritance.”
    In the beginning, before the world, He fashioned me,
      And to all eternity shall I fail not.
    In the holy tabernacle I ministered before Him,
     And thus was I established in Zion;
    Yea, in the beloved city He gave me resting-place,
     And in Jerusalem was my dominion_ (E. 24^{3-11})[77].

Such words would have set the Greeks, as they set us, asking questions:
“Is it implied that Wisdom is an entity distinct from God?”; “How far is
it fair to see Greek influence in this apparent ascription of
personality to Wisdom?” Both questions may be considered together. Too
much stress cannot be laid on the firm hold which Monotheism had
obtained in post-exilic Judaism; to the Jews of the Hellenic age the
unity of God was a fundamental tenet. But the Jewish mind was as yet
unphilosophical, not from lack of intelligence but from lack of
inclination or initial suggestion. Hebrew thought started from the
existence of God as an axiom, and was content to use the fact of
conscience as the key to the interpretation of life, whereas Greek
thought had naturally inclined towards making intellectual speculation
the basis of its endeavour to attain through truth, morality, and beauty
to the secret of life and the knowledge of God. Consequently many
utterances that inevitably raise metaphysical questions in our minds,
and would have philosophical meaning if spoken by a Greek, were put
forward by the Jews most simply, without consideration of inherent
intellectual problems. Of this character are the praises of Wisdom:
although language is used that would fittingly be applied to a personal
being, there was no intention to personify Wisdom as some kind of
sub-divine Being other than God. The Wise intended only to declare
their fervent belief that the Wisdom they studied, loved, and trusted,
was transcendently great, was _God’s_ Wisdom, was “from above.” Wisdom
in these proverbs was not consciously deemed to be more than an
attribute of God, and phrases that seem to us to overstep the bounds and
confer personality are to be regarded as an enthusiasm of the heart not
implying metaphysical conclusions as to the ultimate nature of Deity.[1a]
This is the language not of philosophy but of affection and reverent
esteem. From an early age there was a strong tendency in Hebrew thought
towards clothing abstract and collective terms in the warm language of
personal life, and the books of _Proverbs_ and _Ecclesiasticus_ may
fairly be considered a natural development of pure Hebrew tradition.[2a]
And yet there are “signs of the times” about them. The description of
Wisdom we are discussing would read strangely in pre-exilic Hebrew
books; and so the question of Greek influence may still be pressed. In
the opinion of the present writer the influence, if any, is confined to
a slight unintentional colouring. Seeing that the Wise stood out against
the pressure and menace of unscrupulous, secular Hellenism, and that
they lived at a period when Greek intellectual prowess had not yet
brought its full weight to bear on Palestinian, or at least on Judæan,
thought, it is a reasonable conjecture that any trace of new philosophy
in the proverbs has been introduced unwittingly and unwillingly. The
general soundness of this opinion becomes vividly apparent, if the two
passages quoted above are compared with the eulogy given in a Jewish
work of considerably later date, the _Wisdom of Solomon_. There Wisdom,
Artificer of all things, is described as

    _A spirit, quick of understanding, holy,
    Only-begotten, manifold, subtle, mobile,
    Pure, undefiled, clean,
    Inviolable, loving the good....
    For Wisdom is more mobile than any motion,
    Yea, she pervadeth and penetrateth all things
    By reason of her pureness;
    For she is a breath of the power of God,
    And a pure effulgence of the Almighty._

    (_Wisdom of Solomon_, 7^{22ff}).

and in one verse (W.S. 9^{4}) Wisdom is actually called _She that
sitteth beside Thee on Thy throne_, astonishing words from a Jew. The
atmosphere of Hellenic philosophy being here unmistakable, the contrast
between the language of this passage and the restrained phraseology of
_Proverbs_ and _Ecclesiasticus_ is accordingly significant.

As the _Book of Job_ is treated in another volume of this series, the
reference to it must here be brief, but a chapter on the Exaltation of
Wisdom must not close without some mention of the wonderful poem in that
Book, where also confession is made of the sublimity of Wisdom, but it
is insisted that Wisdom dwells far beyond the reach of mortals, unknown
and unknowable, save to the inscrutable Deity who wills not to reveal
its secrets unto suffering man. Each section of this great passage
begins with the haunting question, _But Wisdom--whence cometh it, and
where is the place of understanding?_ We quote the last stanza only.

    _But Wisdom--whence cometh it,
      And where is the place of understanding?
    It is hid from the eyes of all creatures,
      And concealed from the fowls of the air.
    Abaddon and Death acknowledge:
      “But a rumour thereof have we heard.”
    God alone hath perceived the way to it,
      He knoweth the place thereof--
    Even He that made weights for the wind
      And meted the waters by measure,
    When He made a law for the rain,
      And a way for the flash of the thunders.
    Then did He see it and mark it:
      He established and searched it out_ (Job 28^{20-27}).[78]

“The Humanism of the Bible”--who would ask finer acknowledgment of one
aspect of life, its profound mystery; who could fail to hear in those
grand but desolate words the pathos of our mortal ignorance voicing its
immortal longing? Happier than this poet, and more in accord with
ordinary human experience, were the Wise-men of _Proverbs_; for theirs
was the faith that, though Wisdom might dwell in the innermost light of
God’s presence, the boon of its guidance was not wholly denied to men.
They praised its exceeding great glory, acknowledging its transcendence,
yet quietly rejoicing in the measure of knowledge they were conscious of
receiving:

    _Wisdom is the principal thing,
      Therefore get Wisdom:
    Yea! with all that thou hast gotten
      Get understanding_ (Pr. 4^{7}).




