CHAPTER III.

THE RELATION OF GOD TO NATURE.


We have already said that evolution does not differ essentially from
other laws of Nature in its bearing on religious belief. It only
reiterates and enforces with additional emphasis what Science, in all
its departments, has been saying all along. The difficulties in the
way of certain traditional views have pressed with ever increasing
force upon the thoughtful mind ever since the birth of modern science.
All along, an issue has been gathering, but put off from time to time
by compromise, until now, at last, the issue is forced upon us and
compromise is exhausted. The issue (let us look it squarely in the
face) is: Either God is far more closely related with Nature, and
operates it in a more direct way than we have recently been accustomed
to think, or else (mark the alternative) Nature operates itself and
needs no God at all. There is no middle ground tenable.

Let us trace rapidly the growth of this issue. The old idea and the
most natural to the religious mind was the direct agency of God in
every event and phenomenon of Nature. This view is nobly expressed
in the noblest literature in the world--in the Hebrew and Christian
Scriptures: “He looketh on the earth and it trembleth. He toucheth
the hills and they smoke.” “He maketh his sun to rise on the evil and
on the good, and sendeth his rain on the just and on the unjust.” But
now comes Science and explains all these phenomena by natural laws and
resident forces, and we all accept her explanation. Thus, one by one
the phenomena of Nature are explained by the operation of resident
forces according to natural laws, until the whole course of Nature,
as we now know it, has been, or will be, or conceivably may be, thus
explained.

Thus has gradually grown up, without our confessing it, a kind of
scientific polytheism--one great Jehovah, perhaps, but with many agents
or sub-gods, each independent, efficient, and doing all the real work
in his own domain. The names of these, our gods, are gravity, light,
heat, electricity, magnetism, chemical affinity, etc., and we are
practically saying: “These be your gods, O Israel, which brought you
out of the land of Egyptian darkness and ignorance. These be the only
gods ye need fear, and serve, and study the ways of.”

What, then, is practically the notion which most people seem to have of
the relation of Deity to Nature? It is that of a great master-mechanic
far away above us and beyond our reach, who once upon a time, long
ago, and once for all, worked, created matter, endowed it with
necessary properties and powers, constructed at once out of hand this
wonderful cosmos with its numberless wheels within wheels, endowed
it with forces, put springs in it, wound it up, set it a-going, and
then--_rested_. The thing has continued to go of itself ever since.
He might have not only rested but _slept_, and the thing would have
gone of itself. He might not only have slept but _died_, and still
the thing would have continued to go of itself. But, no, I forget.
He must not sleep or die, for the work is not absolutely perfect.
There are some things too hard even for Him to do in this masterful,
god-like way. There are some things which even He can not do except in
a ’prentice-like, man-like way. The hand must be introduced from time
to time to repair, to rectify, to improve, especially to introduce new
parts, such as new organic forms.

Such was the state of the compromise until twenty-five years ago.
Nature is sufficient of itself for its _course_ and continuance, but
not for _origins_ of at least _some_ new parts. Such was the state of
the compromise until Darwin and the theory of evolution. But, now,
even this poor privilege of occasional interference is taken away.
Now, origins, as well as courses, are reduced to resident forces
and natural law. Now, Nature is sufficient of itself, not only for
sustentation, but also for creation. Thus, Science has seemed to push
Him farther and farther away from us, until now, at last, if this view
be true, evolution finishes the matter by pushing Him entirely out of
the universe and dispensing with Him altogether. This, of course, is
materialism. But this is no new view now brought forward for the first
time by evolution. On the contrary, evolution only finishes what
science has been doing all along.

See, then, how the issue is forced. Either Nature is sufficient of
itself and wants no God at all, or else this whole idea, the history
of which we have been tracing, is radically false. We have here given
by science either a demonstration of materialism or else a _reductio
ad absurdum_. Which is it? I do not hesitate a moment to say it is a
reductio ad absurdum. And I believe that evolution has conferred an
inestimable benefit on philosophy and on religion by forcing this issue
and compelling us to take a more rational view.

What, then, is the alternative view? It is the utter rejection with
Berkeley and with Swedenborg of the independent existence of matter
and the real efficient agency of natural forces. It is the frank
return to the old idea of direct divine agency, but in a new, more
rational, less anthropomorphic form. It is the bringing together
and complete reconciliation of the two apparently antagonistic and
mutually excluding views of _direct agency_ and _natural law_. Such
reconciliation we have already seen is the true test of a rational
philosophy. It is the belief in a God not far away beyond our reach,
who once long ago enacted laws and created forces which continue of
themselves to run the machine we call Nature, but a God _immanent_,
a God resident _in_ Nature, at all times and in all places directing
every event and determining every phenomena--a God in whom in the most
literal sense not only we but all things have their being, in whom all
things consist, through whom all things exist, and without whom there
would be and could be nothing. According to this view the phenomena of
Nature are naught else than objectified modes of divine thought, the
forces of Nature naught else than different forms of one omnipresent
divine energy or will, the laws of Nature naught else than the regular
modes of operation of that divine will, invariable because He is
unchangeable. According to this view the law of gravitation is naught
else than the mode of operation of the divine energy in sustaining
the cosmos--the divine method of sustentation; the law of evolution
naught else than the mode of operation of the same divine energy in
originating and developing the cosmos--the divine method of creation;
and Science is the systematic knowledge of these divine thoughts and
ways--a rational system of natural theology. In a word, according to
this view, there is no real efficient force but spirit, and no real
_independent_ existence but God.

But some will object that this is pure _Idealism_. Yes, but far
different from what usually goes under that name. The ideal philosophy
as usually understood regards the external world as having no real
objective existence outside of _ourselves_--as objectified mental
states of the _observer_--as literally such stuff as dreams are made
of--as a mere phantasmagoria of trooping shadows having no real
existence but in the mind of the dreamer, and each dreamer makes his
own world. Not so in the idealism above presented. According to _this_
the external world is the objectified modes, not of the mind of the
observer, but of the mind of God. According to this, the external world
is not a mere unsubstantial figment or dream, but for _us_ a very
substantial objective reality surrounding us and conditioning us on
every side.

Again, it will be objected that this is pure _Pantheism_. Again, we
answer “yes.” Call it so if you like, but far different from what goes
under that name, far different from the pantheism which sublimates
the personality of the Deity into all-pervading unconscious force,
and thereby dissipates all our hopes of personal relation with him.
Properly understood, we believe this view completely reconciles the
two antagonistic and mutually excluding views of impersonal pantheism
and anthropomorphic personalism, and is therefore more rational than
either. The discussion of this most important point can only come up
after the next chapter, because the argument for the personality of
Deity is derived, not from without by the study of Nature, but from
within in our own consciousness. We therefore put off its discussion
for the present.

But, finally, some will object, “We can not live and work effectively
under such a theory unless, indeed, we escape through pantheism.” It
may, alas! be true that this view brings us too near Him in our sense
of spiritual nakedness and shortcoming. It may, indeed, be that we can
not live and work in the continual realized presence of the Infinite.
It may, indeed, be that we must still wear the veil of a practical
materialism on our hearts and minds. It may, indeed, be that in our
practical life and scientific work we must still continue to think
of natural forces as efficient agents. But, if so, let us at least
remember that this attitude of mind must be regarded only as our
ordinary work-clothes--necessary work-clothes it may be of our outer
lower life--to be put aside when we return _home_ to our inner higher
life, religious and philosophical.




