CHAPTER II.

THE RELATION OF LOUIS AGASSIZ TO THE THEORY OF EVOLUTION.


In order to clear up the conception of evolution, it is necessary
to give a brief history of the idea, and especially to explain the
relation of Louis Agassiz to that theory. This is the more necessary,
because there is a deep and wide-spread misunderstanding on this
subject, and thus scant justice has been done our great naturalist,
especially by the English and Germans; and also because this relation
is an admirable illustration of an important principle in scientific
philosophy.

Like all great ideas, we find the first germs of this in Greek
philosophy, in the cosmic speculations of Thales and Pythagoras.
Next (about 100 B. C.) we find it more clearly expressed by the Roman
thinker, Lucretius, in his great philosophic poem entitled “De Rerum
Natura.” After a dormancy of nearly eighteen centuries it next emerges
with still more clearness in the theological speculations of Swedenborg
and the philosophical speculations of Kant. All these we pass over with
bare mention, because these thinkers approached the subject from the
philosophic rather than the scientific side--in the metaphysical rather
than the scientific spirit.

The first serious attempt at scientific presentation of the subject was
by the celebrated naturalist, Lamarck, in a work entitled “Philosophie
Zoölogique,” published in 1809. It is not necessary, in this rapid
sketch, to give a full account of Lamarck’s views. Suffice it to say
that the essential idea of evolution, viz., the indefinite variability
and the derivative origin of species, was insisted on with great
learning and skill, and illustrated by many examples. With Lamarck,
the factors of evolution or causes of change of organic forms were--1.
Modification of organs in function and therefore in structure, by a
changing environment--external factor; and, 2. Modification of organs
by _use_ and _disuse_--internal factor. In both cases the modifications
are inherited and increased from generation to generation, without
limit. This second factor seems to have taken, in the mind of Lamarck,
the somewhat vague and transcendental form of aspiration or upward
striving of the animal toward higher conditions. These are acknowledged
to-day as true factors of evolution, but the distinctively Darwinian
factor, viz., “divergent variation and natural selection,” was not then
thought of. The publication of Lamarck’s views produced a powerful
impression, but only for a little while. Pierced by the shafts of
ridicule shot by nimble wits of Paris, and crushed beneath the heavy
weight of the authority of Cuvier, the greatest naturalist and
comparative anatomist of that or perhaps of any time, it fell almost
still-born. I believe it was best that it should thus perish. Its birth
was premature; it was not fit to live. The world was not yet prepared
for a true scientific theory. Nevertheless, the work was not without
its effect upon some of the most advanced thinkers of that time; upon
Saint-Hilaire and Comte in France, and upon Goethe and Oken in Germany.
It was good seed sown and destined to spring up and bear fruit in
suitable environment; but not yet.

The next attempt worthy of attention in this rapid sketch is that
of Robert Chambers, in a little volume entitled “Vestiges of a
Natural History of Creation,” published in 1844. It was essentially a
reproduction of Lamarck’s views in a more popular form. It was not a
truly scientific work nor written by a scientific man. It was rather an
appeal from the too technical court of science to the supposed wider
and more unprejudiced court of popular intelligence. It was therefore
far more eloquent than accurate; far more specious than profound.
It was, indeed, full of false facts and inconsequent reasonings.
Nevertheless, it produced a very strong impression on the thinking,
popular mind. But _it_ also quickly fell, pierced by keen shafts of
ridicule, and crushed beneath the heavy weight of the authority of all
the most prominent naturalists of that time, with Agassiz at their
head. The question for the time seemed closed. I believe, again, it was
best so, for the time was not yet fully ripe.

I know full well that many think with Haeckel that biology was kept
back half a century by the baneful authority of Cuvier and Agassiz;
but I can not think so. The hypothesis was contrary to the facts
of science _as then known and understood_. It was conceived in the
spirit of baseless speculation, rather than of cautious induction; of
skillful elaboration rather than of earnest truth-seeking. Its general
acceptance would have debauched the true spirit of science. I repeat
it: the time was not yet ripe for a scientific theory. The ground
must first be cleared and a solid foundation built; an insuperable
_obstacle_ to hearty rational acceptance must first be removed, and an
inductive _basis_ must be laid.

=The Obstacle removed.=--The obstacle in the way of the acceptance
of the derivative origin of species was the then prevalent _notion
concerning the nature of life_. We must briefly sketch the change which
has taken place in the last forty years in our ideas on this subject.

Until about forty years ago, the different forces of Nature, such
as gravity, electricity, magnetism, light, heat, chemical affinity,
etc., were supposed to be entirely distinct. The realm of Nature was
divided up into a number of distinct and independent principalities,
each subject to its own sovereign force and ruled by its own petty
laws. About that time it began to be evident, and is now universally
acknowledged, that all these forces are but different _forms_ of one,
universal, omnipresent energy, and are transmutable unto one another
back and forth without loss. This is the doctrine of correlation of
forces and conservation of energy, one of the grandest ideas of modern
times. But _one_ force seemed still to be an exception. Life-force
was still believed to be a peculiar, mysterious principle or entity,
standing above other forces and subordinating them; not correlated
with, not transmutable unto, nor derivable from, other and lower
forces, and therefore in some sense supernatural. Now, if this be true
of living _forces_, it is perfectly natural, yea, almost necessary,
to believe that living _forms_ are wholly different from other forms
in their origin. New forms of dead matter may be derived, but new
living forms are _underived_. Other new forms come by natural process,
new organic forms by supernatural process. The conclusion was almost
unavoidable. But soon vital force also yielded to the general law of
correlation of natural forces. Vital forces are also transmutable into
and derivable from physical and chemical forces. Sun-force, falling on
the green leaves of plants, is absorbed and converted into vital force,
disappears as _light_ to reappear as _life_. The amount of life-force
generated is measured by the amount of light extinguished. The same
is true of animal life. As in the steam-engine the locomotive energy
is derived from the fuel consumed and measured by its amount, so in
the animal body, the animal heat and animal force are derived from and
measured by the food and tissue consumed by combustion. Thus, vital
force may be regarded as so much force withdrawn from the general fund
of chemical and physical forces, to be again refunded without loss at
death. This obstacle is, therefore, now removed. If vital force falls
in the same category as other natural forces, there is no reason why
living forms should not fall into the same category in this regard
as other natural forms. If new forms of dead matter are derived from
old forms by modification, according to _physical_ laws, there is no
reason why new living forms should not also be derived from old forms
by modification according to _physiological_ laws. Thus, at last, the
obstacle was removed--the ground was cleared.

=The Basis laid.=--But Science is not content with removal of _a
priori_ objections. She must also have positive proofs. The ground
must not only be cleared, but a true inductive basis of facts, and
especially of laws and methods, must be laid. _This was the life-work
of Agassiz._ Yes, as strange as it may seem to some, it is nevertheless
true that the whole inductive basis, upon which was afterward built
the modern theory of evolution, was laid by Agassiz, although he
himself persistently refused to build upon it any really scientific
superstructure. It is plain, then, that all attempts at building
previous to Agassiz’s work must, of necessity, have resulted in an
unsubstantial structure--an edifice built on sand, which could not
and ought not to stand. I must stop here in order to explain somewhat
fully this important point, and thus to give due credit to the work of
Agassiz.

The title of any scientist to greatness must be determined, not so much
by the multitude of new facts he has discovered as by the new laws he
has established, and especially by the new methods he has inaugurated
or perfected. Now, I think it can be shown that to Agassiz, more
than to any other man, is due the credit of having _established the
laws of succession of living forms_ in the geological history of the
earth--laws upon which must rest any true theory of evolution. Also,
that to him, more than to any other man, is due the credit of having
_perfected the method_ (method of comparison) by the use of which alone
biological science has advanced so rapidly in modern times. This is
high praise. I wish to justify it. I begin with the method.

Scientific methods bear the same relation to _intellectual progress_
that tools, instruments, machines, mechanical contrivances of
all sorts, bear to _material progress_. They are intellectual
_contrivances_--indirect ways of accomplishing results far too hard
for bare-handed, unaided intellectual strength. As the civilized man
has little or no advantage over the savage in bare-handed strength of
muscle, and the enormous superiority of the latter in accomplishing
material results is due wholly to the use of mechanical contrivances
or machines; even so, in the higher sphere of intellect, the scientist
makes no pretension to the possession of greater unaided intellectual
strength than belongs to the uncultured man, or even perhaps to the
savage. The amazing intellectual results achieved by science are due
wholly to the use of intellectual contrivances or scientific methods.
As in the lower sphere of material progress the greatest benefactors of
the race are the inventors or perfecters of new mechanical contrivances
or _machines_, so also in the higher sphere of intellectual progress
the greatest benefactors of the race are the inventors or perfecters of
new intellectual contrivances or _methods of research_.

To illustrate the power of methods, and the necessity of their use,
take the case of the _method of notation_, so characteristic of
mathematics, and take it even in its simplest and most familiar form:
Nine numeral figures, having each a value of its own, and another
dependent upon its position; a few letters, _a_ and _b_, and _x_ and
_y_, connected by symbols, + and-and =: that is all. And yet, by the
use of this simple contrivance, the dullest school-boy accomplishes
intellectual results which would defy the utmost efforts of the
unaided strength of the greatest genius. And this is only the simplest
tool-form of this method. Think of the results accomplished by the use
of the more complex machinery of the higher mathematics!

Take next the method of experiment so characteristic of physics and
chemistry. The phenomena of the external world are far too complex and
far too much affected by disturbing forces and modifying conditions to
be understood at once by bare, unaided intellectual insight. They must
first be simplified. The physicist, therefore, contrives artificial
phenomena under ideal conditions. He removes one complicating condition
after another, one disturbing cause and then another, watching
meanwhile the result, until finally the necessary condition and the
true cause are discovered. On this method rests the whole fabric of the
physical and chemical sciences.

But when we rise still higher, viz., into the plane of life, the
phenomena of Nature become still more complex and difficult to
understand directly; and yet just here, where we are the most powerless
without some method, our method of experiment almost wholly _fails
us_. The phenomena of life are not only far more complex than those
of dead matter, but the conditions of life are so nicely adjusted,
the equilibrium of forces so delicately balanced, that, when we
attempt to introduce our clumsy hands in the way of experiment, we
are in danger of overthrowing the equilibrium, of destroying the
conditions of the experiment, viz., life; and then the whole problem
falls immediately into the domain of chemistry. What shall we do?
In this dilemma we find that Nature herself has already prepared
for us, ready to hand, an elaborate series of simplified conditions
equivalent to experiments. The phenomena of life are, indeed, far too
complex to be at once understood--the problem of life too hard to be
solved--in the higher animals; but, as we go down the animal scale,
complicating conditions are removed one by one, the phenomena of life
become simpler and simpler, until in the lowest microscopic cell or
spherule of living protoplasm we finally reach the simplest possible
expression of life. The equation of life is reduced to its simplest
terms, and now, if ever, we begin to understand the true value of the
unknown quantity. This is the natural history series, or _Taxonomic_
series, already spoken of on page 10. Again, Nature has prepared, and
is now preparing daily before our eyes, another series of gradually
simplified conditions. Commencing with the mature condition of one of
the higher animals--for example, man--and going backward along the
line of individual history through the stages of infant embryo, egg
and germ, we find again the phenomena of life becoming simpler and
simpler, until we again reach the simplest conceivable condition in
the single microscopic cell or spherule of living protoplasm. This, as
already explained, is the embryonic or _Ontogenic_ series. Again, that
there be no excuse for man’s ignorance of the laws of life, Nature has
prepared still another series; and this the grandest of all, for it is
the cause of both the others. Commencing with the plants and animals of
the present epoch, and going back along the track of geological times,
through Cenozoic, Mesozoic, Palæozoic, Eozoic, to the very dawn of
life--the first syllable of recorded time--and we find again a series
of organic forms growing simpler and simpler, until, if we could find
the very first, we would undoubtedly again reach the simplest condition
in the lowest conceivable forms of life. This, as we have already seen,
is the geologic or evolution, or _Phylogenic_ series. We have already
explained these three series, only in this connection it suits our
purpose to take the terms backward.

Now, it is by _comparison_ of the terms of each of these series going
up and down, and watching the first appearance, the growth, and the
perfecting of tissues, organs, functions, and by the comparison of
the three series with one another term by term--I say it is wholly
by comparison of this kind that biology has in recent times become a
true inductive science. This is the “_method of comparison_.” It is
the great method of research in all those departments which can not be
readily managed by the method of experiment. It has already regenerated
biology, and is now applied with like success in sociology under the
name of _historic method_. Yes; anatomy became scientific only through
comparative anatomy, physiology through comparative physiology, and
embryology through comparative embryology. May we not add, sociology
will become truly scientific only through comparative sociology, and
psychology through comparative psychology?

Now, while it is true that this method, like all other methods, has
been used, from the earliest dawn of thought, in a loose and imperfect
way, yet it is only in very recent times that it has been organized,
systematized, perfected, as a true scientific method, as a great
instrument of research; and the prodigious recent advance of biology is
due wholly to this cause. Now, among the great leaders of this modern
movement, Agassiz undoubtedly stands in the very first rank. I must try
to make this point plain, for it is by no means generally understood.

Cuvier is acknowledged to be the great founder of comparative anatomy.
He it was that first perfected the method of comparison, but comparison
only in one series--the _Taxonomic_. Von Baer and Agassiz added to
this comparison in the ontogenic series also, and comparison of
these two series with each other, and therefore the application of
embryology to the classification of animals. If Von Baer was the
first announcer, Agassiz was the first great practical worker by this
method. Last and most important of all, in its relation to evolution,
Agassiz added _comparison in the geologic or phylogenic series_. The
one grand idea underlying Agassiz’s whole life-work was the essential
identity of the three series, and therefore the light which they must
shed on one another. The two guiding and animating principles of his
scientific work were--1. That the embryonic development of one of the
higher representatives of any group repeated in a general way the
terms of the Taxonomic series in the same group, and therefore that
embryology furnished the key to a true classification; and, 2. That the
succession of forms and structure in geological times in any group is
similar to the succession of forms and structure in the development of
the individual in the same group, and thus that embryology furnishes
also the key to geological succession. In other words, during his
whole life, Agassiz insisted that the laws of embryonic development
(ontogeny) are also the laws of geological succession (phylogeny).
Surely this is the foundation, the only solid foundation, of a true
theory of evolution. It is true that Agassiz, holding as he did the
doctrine of permanency of specific types, and therefore rejecting the
doctrine of the derivative origin of species, did not admit the causal
or natural relation of phylogenic succession to embryonic succession
and taxonomic order as we now believe it--it is true that for him the
relation between the three series was an intellectual not a physical
one--consisted in the preordained plans of the Creator, and not in
any genetic connection or inherited property; but evidently the first
and greatest step was the discovery of the relation itself, however
accounted for. The rest was sure to follow.

But more. Not only did Agassiz establish the essential identity of the
geologic and embryonic succession, the general similarity of the two
series, phylogenic and ontogenic, but he also announced and enforced
all the formal laws of geologic succession (i. e., of evolution), as
we now know them. These, as already stated and illustrated, are the
law of differentiation, the law of progress of the whole, and the law
of cyclical movement, although he did not formulate them in these
words. No true inductive evidence of evolution was possible without
the knowledge of these laws, and for this knowledge we are mainly
indebted to Agassiz. He well knew also that they were the laws of
embryonic development and therefore of evolution; but he avoided the
word evolution, as implying the derivative origin of species, and
used instead the word _development_, though it is hard to see in what
the words differ. Thus, it is evident that Agassiz laid the whole
foundation of evolution, solid and broad, but refused to build any
scientific structure on it; he refused to recognize the legitimate, the
scientifically necessary outcome of his own work. Nevertheless, without
his work a scientific theory of evolution would have been impossible.
Without Agassiz (or his equivalent), there would have been no Darwin.

There is something to us supremely grand in this refusal of Agassiz to
accept the theory of evolution. The opportunity to become the leader of
modern thought, the foremost man of the century, was in his hands, and
he refused, because his religious, or, perhaps better, his philosophic
intuitions, forbade. To Agassiz, and, indeed, to all men of that time,
to many, alas! even now, evolution is materialism. But materialism is
Atheism. Will some one say, the genuine Truth-seeker follows where she
seems to lead _whatever be the consequences_? Yes; whatever be the
consequences to one’s self, to one’s opinions, prejudices, theories,
philosophies, but not to _still more certain truth_. Now, to Agassiz,
as to all genuine thinkers, the existence of God, like our own
existence, is more certain than any scientific theory, than anything
can possibly be made by proof. From his standpoint, therefore, he was
right in rejecting evolution as conflicting with still more certain
truth. The mistake which he made was in imagining that there was any
such conflict at all. But this was the universal mistake of the age. A
lesser man would have seen less clearly the higher truth and accepted
the lower. A greater man would have risen above the age, and seen that
there was no conflict, and so accepted both. All thinking men are
coming to this conclusion now, but none had done so then.

Now, then, at last, the obstacle of supernaturalism in the realm of
Nature having been removed by the establishment of the doctrine of
correlation of natural forces, and the extension of this doctrine
to embrace also life-force; and now also a broad and firm basis of
carefully-observed facts and well-established laws of succession
of organic forms having been laid by Agassiz, when again, for the
third time, the doctrine of origin of species “by derivation with
modifications” was brought forward by Darwin in a far more perfect
form, with more abundant illustrative materials, and with a new
and most potent factor of modification--viz., divergent variations
and natural selection--it found the scientific world already fully
prepared, and anxiously waiting. I say _anxiously_ waiting--for the
supposed supernatural origin of species had been the one exception
to the otherwise universal law of cause and effect, or the law of
continuity. It was therefore in open contradiction to the whole drift
of scientific thought for five hundred years. Is it any wonder,
then, that the derivative origin of species was welcomed with joy by
the scientific world? For five hundred years, scientific thought,
like a rising tide which knows no ebb, had tended thitherward with
ever-increasing pressure, but kept back by the one supposed fact of
the supernatural origin of species. Darwin lifted the gate, and the
in-rushing tide flooded the whole domain of thought.

What, then, is the place of Agassiz in biological science? What is the
relation of Agassiz to Darwin--of Agassizian development to Darwinian
evolution? I answer, it is the relation of formal science to physical
or causal science. Agassiz advanced biology to the _formal_ stage;
Darwin carried it forward, to some extent at least, to the _physical_
stage. All true inductive sciences in their complete development pass
through these two stages. Science in the one stage treats of the _laws_
of phenomena; in the other, of the _causes_ or explanation of these
laws. The former must precede the latter, and form its foundation;
the latter must follow the former, and constitute its completion. The
change from the one to the other is always attended with prodigious
impulse to science.

To illustrate: Until Kepler, astronomy was little more than
an accumulation of disconnected facts concerning celestial
motions--abundant materials, but no science; piles of brick and stone,
but no building. Kepler reduced this chaos to beautiful order and
musical harmony by the discovery of the three great laws which bear his
name, and therefore he has been justly called the legislator of the
heavens--_the lawgiver of space_. But, had he been asked the _cause_
of these beautiful laws, he could only have answered, “The _first
cause_--the direct will of the Deity.” A good answer and a true, but
not scientific; because it places the question beyond the domain of
science, which deals only with second or physical causes. But Newton
comes forward and gives a _physical cause_. He shows that all these
beautiful laws are the necessary result of gravitation; and thus
astronomy becomes a physical science. So, until Agassiz, the facts
of geological succession of organic forms were in a state of lawless
confusion. Agassiz by establishing the three great laws of succession,
which ought to bear his name, reduced this chaos to order and beauty;
and, therefore, he might justly be called the legislator of geological
history--the _lawgiver of time_. But, when asked the cause of these
laws, he could only answer, and did indeed answer, “The plans of the
Creator.” A noble answer and true, but not scientific. Darwin now comes
forward and gives, partly at least, the cause of these laws. He shows
that all these beautiful laws are explained by the doctrine of “origin
of species by derivation with modifications”; that these laws are
not ultimate, but derivative from more fundamental laws of life; and
thus biology is advanced one step, at least, toward the causal stage.
Newton and Darwin substituted second causes for first cause--natural
for supernatural. They each in his own department broke the bonds of
supernaturalism in the domain of Nature.

One more important reflection: There are two, and only two, fundamental
conditions of material existence--_space_ and _time_. There are,
therefore, two, and only two, cosmoses--space-cosmos and time-cosmos.
These have been redeemed from confusion and reduced to law and order
and beauty--changed from chaos to cosmos--by science. For this result
we are chiefly indebted, in the one case, to Kepler and Newton; in the
other, to Agassiz and Darwin. The universal law, in the one cosmos, is
the _law of gravitation_; in the other, the _law of evolution_. Traced
by analysis to its deepest roots of philosophic truth, the one law
may be called the divine mode of sustentation; the other, the divine
process of creation.

Or again: we have all heard of the “music of the spheres”--a beautiful
and significant name used by the old thinkers for the divine order of
the universe--a music heard not by human ear, but only by the attentive
human spirit. Harmonic relation apprehended by _reason_ we call _Law_,
and its embodiment Science; the same apprehended by the imagination
and æsthetic sense, we call _Beauty_, and its embodiment _Art_,
_music_. Now, in music there are two kinds of harmony, simultaneous
and consecutive--chordal harmony and melody. These must be combined
to produce the grandest effect. So in cosmic order, too, there are
two kinds of harmonic relation--the _co-existent in space_ and the
_consecutive in time_. The law of gravitation expresses the universal
harmonic inter-relation of _objects_ co-existent in space, the law of
evolution, the universal harmonic relation of _forms_ successive in
time. Of the divine spheral music, the one is the chordal harmony, the
other the consecutive harmony or melody. Combined they form the divine
chorus which “the morning stars sang together.”




