PART III.

_THE RELATION OF EVOLUTION TO RELIGIOUS THOUGHT._




CHAPTER I.

INTRODUCTORY.


From what has preceded, the reader will perceive that we regard the
law of evolution as thoroughly established. In its most general
sense, i. e., as a law of continuity, it is a necessary condition of
rational thought. In this sense it is naught else than the universal
law of necessary causation applied to forms instead of phenomena. It
is not only as certain as--it is far more certain than--the law of
gravitation, for it is not a contingent, but a necessary truth like the
axioms of geometry. It is only necessary to conceive it clearly, to
accept it unhesitatingly. The consensus of scientific and philosophical
opinion is already well-nigh, if not wholly, complete. If there are
still lingering cases of dissent among thinking men, it is only because
such do not yet conceive it clearly--they confound it with some special
form of explanation of evolution which they, perhaps justly, think not
yet fully established. We have sometimes in the preceding pages used
the words evolutionist or derivationist; they ought not to be used any
longer. The day is past when evolution might be regarded as a school
of thought. We might as well talk of gravitationist as of evolutionist.

If, then, evolution as a law be certain, if, moreover, it is a law
affecting not only one part of Nature--the organic kingdom--and one
department of science--biology--but the whole realm of Nature and every
department of science, yea, every department of thought, changing our
whole view of Nature and modifying our whole philosophy, the question
presses upon us, “What will be its effect on religious belief, and
therefore on moral conduct?” This is a question of gravest import.
To answer it, however imperfectly, is the chief object of this work.
Except for this, it would probably never have been undertaken. All that
goes before is subsidiary to this.

But I will doubtless be met at the very threshold by an objection
from the scientific side. Some will say--because it is the fashion
now to say--that as simple, honest truth-seekers, we have nothing to
do with its effect on religion and on life. They say we must follow
Truth wherever she leads, utterly regardless of what may seem to us
moral consequences. This I believe is a grave mistake, the result of a
reaction, and on the whole a wholesome and noble reaction, against the
far more common mistake of sacrificing truth to a supposed good. But
the reaction, as in most other cases, has gone much too far. There is
a true _philosophic_ ground of justification for the reluctance with
which even honest truth-seekers accept a doctrine which seems harmful
to society. Effect on life is, and ought to be, an important element
in _our estimate of the truth of any doctrine_. It is necessary for me
to show this, in order to justify this part of my work.

=Relation of the True and the Good.=--There is a necessary and
indissoluble connection between truth and usefulness. We all at once
admit this connection in one direction. We all admit that a truth must
eventually have its useful application. It may not be _now_, nor in ten
years, nor in a century, nor even in a millennium, but some time in the
future it will vindicate its usefulness. No truth is trivial or useless
in its relation to human life, for man is a part of Nature, and his
life must be in accordance with the laws of Nature. Every one admits
this, but not every one admits the converse proposition, viz., that
whatever doctrine or belief, in the long run and throughout the history
of human advancement, has tended to the betterment of our race, must
have in it an element of truth by virtue of which it has been useful;
for man’s good can not be in conflict with the laws of Nature. Also,
whatever in the long run and in the final outcome tends to the bad in
human conduct, ought to be received, even by the honest truth-seeker,
with distrust as containing essential error. The reason of this will
now be further explained.

=Relation of Philosophy to Life.=--There are three primary divisions
of our psychical nature, viz., sensuous, intellectual, and volitional
or moral. There are three corresponding primary processes necessary
to make a complete rational and satisfactory philosophy: (1) There
is first the _instreaming_ of the external world through the senses,
as impressions. These we call facts or phenomena. (2) The elaboration
of these facts within, by the _intellect_, into a compact, consistent
structure. This we call knowledge. (3) The outgoing of this knowledge
by the _will_ into the world as right or wise conduct. Now these three
are all equally necessary. All these three portions of our complex
nature are equally urgent to be satisfied.[39] But, unfortunately,
scientific workers are too apt to think only 1 and 2 necessary--that
true facts elaborated into consistent theory are all we need care for.
Theologians and metaphysicians, on the other hand, seem to think only 2
and 3 necessary. They elaborate a theory consistent in all its parts,
exquisitely woven in beautiful and delicate pattern, and apparently
satisfactory in its application to the right conduct of life, but are
less careful to inquire whether it is in harmony with facts derived
from the senses. But, we repeat, all three are equally necessary. The
first gathers the materials, the second constructs the edifice, the
third, by _use_, by practical application, _tests_ whether it be a fit
building to live in, whether it is constructed on sound architectural
principles. The tendency of the olden time was to neglect the first,
the tendency of the present time is to neglect the third. But we repeat
with stronger emphasis that this third element is equally necessary.
All admit that successful application in art is the surest test of
the truth of science. Now, social conduct is the art corresponding to
our philosophy of life, and therefore is the sure test of its truth.
It follows, therefore, that unless all these three primary divisions
of our nature are satisfied by any doctrine, there must result an
ineradicable confusion and discord in our psychical nature, and
cordial acceptance is not only impossible but irrational. We insist
upon this the more because it has become the fashion in these latter
days of dominance of science, to say that to inquire into effects on
society is inconsistent with the scientific spirit, and unworthy of the
honest truth-seeker. But, observe, I am speaking of effects on society
only as a _test of truth_. I would not swerve a hair’s breadth from
absolute devotion to truth. It is necessary, indeed, to inquire into
effects on society, but we must inquire only in the patient spirit
characteristic of the truth-seeker. Whatever is really true will surely
vindicate itself by its beneficence, if we will only wait patiently for
final results. Evolution is no exception to this universal truth. It
will surely vindicate its beneficence, but we must wait yet a little
while--not very long.

So much it was necessary to say in justification of the inquiry which
constitutes this third part of our work. But, after this justification,
the question returns with additional emphasis, “What will be the effect
of the universal acceptance of the law of evolution on religious
thought, and through this on the right conduct of life?”

There can be no doubt that evolution, as a law affecting all science
and every department of Nature, must fundamentally affect the whole
realm of thought, and profoundly modify our traditional views of
Nature, of God, and of man. There can be no doubt that we are now on
the eve of a great revolution. But, as in all great revolutions, so
in this, the first fears as to its effects are greatly exaggerated.
To many, both friends and foes of Christianity, evolution seems to
sweep away the whole foundation, not only of Christianity, but of all
religion and morals, by demonstrating a universal materialism. Many are
ready to cry out in anguish, “Ye have taken away our gods, what have we
more? Ye have destroyed our dearest hopes and noblest aspirations, what
more is left worth living for?” But I think all who are at all familiar
with the history of the so-called conflict between religion and science
will admit this is not the first time this cry has been raised against
science. They have heard this danger-cry so often that they begin
to regard it as little more than a wolf-cry--scientific wolf in the
religious fold. It may not be amiss, then, to stop a moment to trace
rapidly the main points of this conflict--to discuss the various forms
of this scientific wolf.

First, then, it came in the form of the _heliocentric theory of
the planetary system_. We once thought the earth the center of the
universe, and so firm that it can not be moved. But science shows that
it moves about the sun, and spins unceasingly on its axis. Every one
has heard of the terror of the sheep produced by this discovery, and
the nearly tragic results to the bold scientist. But now we look back
with wonder that there should have been any trouble at all. Would any
Christian now consent to give up the grand conceptions of Nature and
of God thus opened to the human mind--the idea of infinite space full
of worlds, of which our earth is one, moving in silent harmony as in a
mystic dance? Verily, this wolf has proved itself a harmless, nay, a
very noble beast, and lies down in peace with the lambs.

Next, it came in the shape of the _law of gravitation_, as sustentation
of the cosmos by law and resident forces. The effect of this on
religious thought was even more profound, though less visible on the
surface, because only perceived by the most intelligent. It seemed
at that time to remove God from the course of Nature. This was the
real ground of the skepticism of the last century, and also the real
motive of Voltaire’s ardent advocacy of Newton’s views before these
were generally accepted in France. But now, who would give up this
grand idea--this conception of law pervading infinite space--the same
law which controls the falling of a stone guiding also the planetary
orbs in their fiery courses? This is indeed the divine spheral music,
inaudible but to the ear of science, accompanying the celestial dance.

Next, it came in the form of the _antiquity of the earth_ and of the
cosmos. The earth which we had fondly thought made specially for us
about six thousand years ago; sun, moon, and stars, which we had vainly
imagined shone only for our behoof--these, science tells us, existed
and each performed its due course inconceivable ages before there was a
man to till the ground or contemplate the heavens. Some of my readers
may still remember the horror, the angry dispute which followed the
promulgation of these facts. But now, who would consent to give up the
noble conception of infinite time thus opened to the human mind and
become forever the heritage of man?

Next, it came in the form of the _antiquity of man_. It is probable,
nay, certain, that man has inhabited the earth far longer than we had
previously supposed we had warrant for believing. The controversy on
this question and the dread of its result has indeed not yet entirely
subsided. Some timid people still look askance at this wolf, but I
think all intelligent people accept it and find it harmless.

Next, and last, it comes now in the form of _evolution_--of the origin
of all things, even of organic forms, by _derivation_--of _creation
by law_. We are even now in the midst of the terror created by this
doctrine. But what is evolution but law throughout infinite time? The
same law which now controls the development of an egg has presided
over the creation of worlds. Infinite space and the universal law
of gravitation; infinite time and the universal law of evolution.
These two are the grandest ideas in the realm of thought. The one is
universal sustentation, the other universal creation, by law. There is
one law and one energy pervading all space and stretching through all
time. Our religious philosophy has long ago accepted the one, but has
not yet had time to readjust itself completely to the other. A few more
years, and Christians will not only accept, but love and cherish this
also for the noble conceptions it gives of Nature and of God.

But some will exclaim, “Noble conceptions of God, say you! Why, it
utterly obliterates the idea of God from the mind. All other conflicts
were for outworks--this strikes at the citadel. All others required
only readjustment of claims, rectification of boundaries betwixt
science and religion--this requires nothing less than unconditional
surrender. Evolution is absolute materialism, and materialism is
incompatible with belief in God, and therefore with religion of any
kind whatsoever!” Before proceeding any further, it becomes necessary
to remove this difficulty out of the way.




