CHAPTER V.

THE RELATION OF GOD TO MAN.


In the two preceding chapters we have discussed the relation of God
to Nature and of man to Nature. There is still another relation, if
possible, of still more vital importance to us, viz., the _relation of
God to man_. This, of course, introduces the question of revelation--a
subject which I approach with some reluctance. I feel I am treading
on holy ground, and must do so with shoes removed. If it be asked,
How is evolution concerned with the subject of revelation? I answer
Evolution emphasizes and enforces the reign of law taught by all
science, and makes it at last _universal_. Many conclude, therefore,
that, if evolution be true, a belief in the possibility of any form
of revelation is irrational. I do not think this follows, and I will
give my reasons. I do so, however, very briefly, because we are not yet
ready to formulate our views except in the most general way.

If man be indeed something more than a higher species of animal; if
man’s spirit be indeed a spark of Divine energy individuated to the
point of self-consciousness and recognition of his relation to God; if
spirit embryo, developing in the womb of Nature through all geological
time, came to birth and independent spirit-life in man, and thus man
alone is a _child of God_ as well as a product of Nature--if all this
be true, then it is evident that this wholly _new_ relation requires
also a wholly different mode of Divine operation. If God operates on
Nature only by regular processes, which we call _natural laws_, then he
_must_ operate on spirit in a different and a more direct way, and this
we call _revelation_. If to the student of Nature it is inconceivable
that He should operate on Nature except by natural laws (for this is
the name we give to His chosen mode of operation there), then to the
student of theology it is equally inconceivable, if our view of man
be true, that He should not operate on spirit in some more direct and
higher way, i. e., by revelation.

But some will ask, Is not this a palpable violation of law? I think
not. All divine operations are, must be, according to reason, i. e.,
according to law. The operation of the divine on the human spirit,
i. e., revelation, must therefore be according to law, but a higher
law than that which governs Nature, and, therefore, from _the point
of view of Nature_, supernatural. There is nothing wholly unique in
this. Life is a higher form of force than the physical and chemical.
Life-phenomena are therefore super-physical, and if we confined the
term Nature to dead Nature they would be supernatural. So the free,
self-determined acts of spirit on spirit, even of the spirit of man
on the spirit of man, much more of the Spirit of God on the spirit
of man, may be according to law, and yet from the natural point of
view be supernatural. It is true that, in the complex of phenomena,
material and spiritual inextricably woven together, which go to make
up human life, Science must ever strive to reduce as much as possible
to material laws, for this is her domain, and she is bound to extend
it; but, if our view of man be true, there will always remain a
large residuum of phenomena--a whole world of phenomena--which will
never yield, because clearly beyond her domain. Standing on the
lower material plane, these phenomena are wholly super-material, and
therefore incomprehensible from the material point of view. We must
rise and stand on the higher plane before these also are reduced to
law, but a higher law than that operating on the lower plane. If,
therefore, science insists on banishing the supernatural from the realm
of Nature, theology may reasonably insist on its necessity, _in this
sense_, in the realm of morals and religion.

If, then, the direct influence of the Spirit of God on the spirit of
man be what we call revelation, then there is evidently no other kind
of revelation possible; and, furthermore, such revelation is given to
all men in different degrees. It is given to all men as conscience;
in greater measure to all great and good men as clearer perception of
righteousness; in pre-eminent measure to Hebrew prophets and Christian
apostles; but supremely and perfectly to Jesus alone. But there is, and
in the nature of things there can be, _no test of truth but reason_.
We _must_ fearlessly, but honestly and reverently, try all things,
even revelations, by this test. We must not regard, as so many do,
the spirit of man as the passive amanuensis of the Spirit of God.
Revelations to man must of necessity partake of the imperfections of
the medium through which it comes. As pure water from heaven, falling
upon and filtering through earth, must gather impurities in its course
differing in amount and kind according to the earth, even so the pure
divine truth, filtering through man’s mind, must take imperfections
characteristic of the man and of the age. Such filtrate must be
redistilled in the alembic of reason to separate the divine truth from
the earthy impurities.




CHAPTER VI.

THE OBJECTION, THAT THE ABOVE VIEW IMPLIES PANTHEISM, ANSWERED.


It will be observed that the views presented in the last three
chapters are closely connected with one another, and all conditioned
on the “Relation of God to Nature,” urged in Chapter III. Now it will
doubtless be objected to this view, especially as applied in Chapter IV
on the “Relation of Man to Nature,” that it is naught else than pure
pantheism; that it destroys completely the personality of Deity, and
with it all our hopes of communion with him, and all our aspirations of
love and worship toward him; that, according to this view, God becomes
only the soul or animating principle of Nature, operating everywhere
but unconsciously like the vital principle of an organism; that the
whole cosmos becomes in fact a great organism, developing under the
operation of _resident_ force according to _necessary_ law, only that
_we_ apotheosize this omnipresent force and call it God; and finally,
that God is naught else than an abstraction, created like other
abstractions or general ideas wholly by the human mind, and having no
objective existence. Furthermore, it will be said, that according to
this view, this omnipresent unconscious energy individuates itself by
necessary law of evolution more and more until it reaches, _for the
first time in man_, self-consciousness and immortality, and thus that
man himself is the only self-conscious immortal being in existence, and
therefore the only being worthy of reverence and worship. Thus, this
view leads to humanity-worship or rather to _self-worship_.

I feel the full force of this objection. I answer it as follows: I
freely admit that, following up this scientific line of thought alone,
we are carried strongly in the direction of pantheism. But there is
nothing strange or exceptional in this. In all the deepest questions,
single lines of thought inevitably carry us to extreme one-sided views.
This seems to be the necessary result of the essentially two-fold
nature of man, self-conscious spirit in a material body, the relation
between which is, and must ever be, inscrutable. On this account
there is and must be a fundamental antithesis in human philosophy,
i. e., two lines of thought, the material and spiritual, which lead
to two apparently irreconcilable views.[46] We have already seen
that a rational philosophy, whenever we are able to reach such, is
always found in a higher and more comprehensive view, which includes,
combines, and reconciles two one-sided, partial, and mutually excluding
views. But spirit and matter, or mind and brain, or God and Nature,
is _the_ fundamental antithesis which underlies and is the cause of
all other lesser antitheses. This antithesis, therefore, is absolutely
fundamental, and therefore forever irreconcilable. We must accept
both sides, even though we can not clearly perceive the nature of
their relation. We must be content with compromise where we can not
effect complete reconciliation. We must frankly acknowledge that the
antagonism is apparent only, and the result of the limitation of our
faculties, and believe that, if we could only rise to a high enough
point of view, like all other antitheses, this also would disappear in
a rational philosophy.

Now, to apply these principles. No one, we admit, can form a clear
conception of how immanence of Deity is consistent with personality,
and yet we must accept both, because we are irresistibly led to each
of these by different lines of thought. Science, following one line of
thought, uncorrected by a wider philosophy, is naturally led toward the
one extreme of pantheistic immanence; the devout worshiper, following
the wants of his religious nature, is naturally led toward the other
extreme of anthropomorphic personality. The only rational view is to
accept both immanence and personality, even though we can not clearly
reconcile them, i. e., immanence without pantheism, and personality
without anthropomorphism. We have already seen in the third chapter,
how following the scientific line of thought, we are logically driven
to immanence. We wish now to show how, following another line of
thought, we are as logically driven to personality. On this most
difficult subject, however, all we are prepared to do is to throw out
some brief suggestions, in the hope that they may be carried out more
perfectly by some thoughtful reader; scatter some seed-thoughts, in the
hope that, falling haply on good soil, they may spring up and bear more
fruit than I have been able to produce.

1. In the gradual individuation of the universal Divine energy
described in Chapter IV, there must of course be a corresponding growth
of a kind of independent self-activity which reaches completeness
in man, and in fact constitutes what we call self-consciousness
and free will. The exact nature of the relation of Deity or of the
general forces of Nature to this gradually individuated portion, I do
not undertake to define. And how this idea of partial self-activity
comports with the absoluteness of Deity we can not clearly understand.
But this fact need not specially disturb us here; for this is only one
branch of the wider question of the moral agency of man in relation to
the absolute sovereignty of God, or the freedom of man in relation to
necessary law in Nature.

2. =Personality behind Nature.=--We have already shown that, if the
brain of a living, thinking man were exposed to the scrutiny of an
outside observer with absolutely perfect senses, all that he would
or could possibly see would be molecular motions, physical and
chemical. But the subject himself, the thinking, self-conscious spirit,
would experience and observe by introspection only consciousness,
thought, emotion, etc. On the _outside_, only physical phenomena;
on the _inside_ only psychical phenomena. Now, _must not the same
be necessarily true of Nature also?_ Viewed from the outside by the
scientific observer, nothing is seen, nothing can be seen, there is
nothing else to be seen, but motions, material phenomena; but behind
these, on the other side, on the _inside_, must not there be in this
case also psychical phenomena, consciousness, thought, will; in a word,
_personality_?[47] In the only place where we do get behind physical
phenomena, viz., in the brain, we find psychical phenomena. Are we not
justified, then, in concluding that in all cases the psychical lies
behind the physical? The human brain is a wonderful instrument, by
means of which, in some inscrutable way, viz., in our own experience,
we do get behind, on the other side, on the inside of some material
phenomena, and in so far become partakers of the Divine nature. But
behind other phenomena of Nature we may never hope to penetrate either
by observation or experience, but only in dim way by highest reason.
Science, even in the case of the brain, can not pass from the one kind
of phenomena to the other. If she would study the _inside_ she must
abandon the _outside_--she must abandon the microscope and take to
introspection. If she would study the phenomena of the higher platform,
she must leave the lower and climb up and stand on the higher. If this
be true of the brain where the two kinds of phenomena are brought
so close together, how much more is it true of the phenomena of the
cosmos. We can never hope, either by observation or by experience,
to pass beyond the veil. We must abandon the methods of science and
reach it, if at all, in some other way. Not the clear-sighted but the
pure-hearted shall see God in Nature.

Thus, then, we see that our own self-conscious personality behind
brain phenomena compels us to accept consciousness, will, thought,
personality behind Nature. Now I assert that, once get this abstract
idea in the mind, and by a necessary law of thought it gradually
expands without limit, and eventually reaches the form of infinite
consciousness, will, thought, etc., and therefore of an infinite
person. This law of indefinite expansion may be illustrated by
the ideas of space and time. The animal, and, indeed, the infant,
understands space and time only in their relation to itself, but has
not yet abstracted these from their contents. This comes only with
the birth of self-conscious personality. But, so soon as the abstract
idea of space is acquired, by a necessary law of mental activity
it expands without limit, and finally becomes the idea of infinite
space. Similarly, so soon as the idea of time as abstracted from its
contents is conceived, it inevitably expands without limit and grows
into the idea of infinite time. So is it precisely with the idea of
self-conscious personality. The animal or the very young child is
indeed conscious of its body and of external objects in their mutual
relations, but not of self, as abstracted from its contents. The
animal never attains it, the child does. Now, so soon as this idea of
self-conscious personality--of a spiritual entity underlying material
phenomena--appears, by a necessary law of mental activity it expands
without limit, and inevitably reaches the idea of an infinite self, an
infinite person, God, behind the phenomena of Nature.

But some will object that this idea of infinite personality
is inconceivable. True enough; but _the opposite is far more
inconceivable_. The ideas of infinite space and infinite time are
also inconceivable, yet we must accept them, because the idea of all
space or all time being limited is still more inconceivable; for
if we think of space or time as limited, immediately there comes
the question, “What is there beyond the limit?” There is therefore
this wide difference between these two inconceivables: the one is
so only in the sense of transcending the power of our mind, but the
other is unthinkable, self-contradictory, absurd. So also is it with
self-conscious personality. The idea of an infinite self, i. e., God,
is indeed inconceivable, but only in the sense of transcending our
power of comprehension; but the idea of the consciousness behind the
cosmos as being limited or finite is more than inconceivable, it is
unthinkable, self-contradictory, absurd; for immediately comes the
question, “What is there beyond which limits it?” To the Greek mind
Zeus was limited; therefore of necessity came also the idea of Fate,
superior to and limiting Zeus himself. To them, therefore, Fate was the
real God--the absolute.

3. _Divine Personality._--I have used the word personality as
expressing the nature of God. But let me not be misunderstood. I
well know we can not conceive clearly of an infinite, unconditioned
personality. Deeply considered, it seems nothing short of a
contradiction in terms. All I insist on is this: In our view of the
nature of God, the choice is not between personality and something
_lower_ than personality, viz., an _unconscious force_ operating
Nature by _necessity_, as the materialists and pantheists would have
us believe; but between personality as we know it in ourselves and
something inconceivably _higher_ than personality. Language is so
poor that we are obliged to represent even _our_ mental phenomena by
physical images. How much more, then, the Divine nature by its human
image! Self-conscious personality is the highest thing we know or can
conceive. We offer him the very best and truest we have when we call
him a Person; even though we know that this, our best, falls far short
of the infinite reality.

4. =Cause in Nature.=--We have thus far spoken only or principally
of self-consciousness, but the same precisely is true of another
essential attribute of personality, viz., _free-will_. Every one
admits causative force or forces operating in Nature. Science has shown
that all the different kinds of force are but different forms of one
omnipresent energy. Now, looking abroad on Nature from the outside,
this omnipresent energy seems to modern science as simply resident,
inherent in matter itself, and therefore as operating unconsciously
and by necessity. But the question occurs, “Whence did we get the idea
of force, energy, _causation_?” I answer unhesitatingly: We get it
not from without by observation of Nature, but from within through
consciousness; not from the outside view, but from, the inside view of
phenomena. We can not conceive of phenomena without force, of effects
without cause, because we are intensely conscious of being ourselves
through our wills an active cause of external phenomena. If we were
merely passive observers, not active causers of changes in the external
world, then these external phenomena would seem to us merely to shift
and change and succeed each in a certain order. We might note the
order and determine the laws of sequence, and thus form a science;
but it would never enter into our minds to imagine any causal or
dynamical nexus between them. In the mind of such passive observer,
but not doer--thinker, but not worker--would be completely realized
the only thorough-going and consistent materialistic philosophy,
i. e., a philosophy in which, like Comte’s, cause and force have no
place--are in fact banished as a superstition from science. But the
clear consciousness of essential energy, of causative force within, the
certainty that we ourselves, through our wills and by the conscious
exertion of force do determine changes in the external world, compels
us to attribute all changes to causative force of some kind, and
naturally enough, until the interference of science, to a personal will
like our own. Thus by a necessary law we project our internal states
into external Nature.

But see now the steps of evolution of this idea. At first, i. e.,
in the uncultured races, and also in childhood, external forces
take the form of a personal will like our own residing in _each
object_, and controlling its phenomena as our wills control our bodily
movements (fetichism). Then, as culture advances, it takes next
the form of several personal wills controlling each the phenomena
of a different department of Nature (polytheism). Finally, in the
highest stage of culture, it takes the form of one personal will
controlling the phenomena of the whole cosmos (monotheism). To the
religious but unscientific mind in all these stages the personal
will is anthropomorphic. But we have already seen (Chapter III) how
anthropomorphism has been driven by science from one department after
another, until now at last by evolution it is driven out of Nature
entirely, and to those following this line of thought alone, the
phenomena of Nature are relegated to forces inherent in matter, and
operating by laws necessary and fatal; and not only so, but material
forces are made to invade even the realm of consciousness, and reduce
this also to material laws. Thus the savage _e_jects his own conscious
personal will into every separate object of Nature; the modern
materialist _in_jects material forces into the realm of consciousness.
But, as already seen, a rational philosophy admits these two antithetic
views, and strives to combine and reconcile them. This reconciliation,
as far as it is possible for us, is found in a personal will immanent
in Nature, and determining directly all its phenomena.

Thus it is evident that the idea of a causal nexus between successive
phenomena is a primary conception, and therefore ineradicable and
certain. Even from the purest evolution point of view it must be true,
for, if man’s mind grew out of the forces of Nature, this idea must
represent a fact in Nature. Also, analysis shows that all causative
force originates in _will_. Lastly, culture and reason, by a necessary
law of expansion, carry us upward to the conception of one infinite
sustaining and creative will. Science may sometimes obscure but can
not destroy this idea. Evolution, which was supposed by some to have
destroyed it for ever, has only temporarily obscured it in the minds
of the unreflecting, by the supposed identity of evolution with
materialism. From this temporary eclipse it now emerges with still
greater clearness and far greater nobleness. For, observe: All the
effects known to us in Nature are finite; therefore a personal will,
which determines these _separately_ by successive acts, as we do, must
also be finite like ourselves. But a will, which by _one eternal_ act
ever-doing, never done, determines the evolution and the sustentation
of an infinite cosmos, must itself be infinite. Thus only in the
doctrine of universal evolution do we rise to a just conception of God
as an infinite cause.

5. =Design in Nature.=--As the idea of _cause_ and force is related
to _will_, so precisely is the idea of _design_ related to _thought_.
We get this also, not from without, but from within. Adaptation of
means to ends is in our experience the result of thought, and we can
not conceive it to result otherwise. The effect of science can not be
to destroy this primary conception--which, indeed, like all primary
conceptions, is ineradicable, and already more certain than anything
can be made by proof--but only to exalt and purify our conceptions
of the designer. For, observe: In any case of _adaptive_ structure,
whether in the animal body or in planetary relations, the evidence of
design is not in the materials, but in the _use_ of the materials; not
in the _parts_, but in the _adjustment_ of the parts for a purpose.
Design, purpose, adjustment, _adaptation_, are not material things,
but relations or intellectual things, and therefore perceivable only
by thought, and conceivable only as the result of thought. It is
simply impossible to talk about such adaptive structures without using
language which implies design. The very word “_adaptive_” implies it.
It is impossible even to think of such structures without implicitly
assuming intelligence as the cause. It makes no particle of difference
_how_ the material originated, or whether it ever originated at all;
it matters not whether the adaptation was done at once out of hand,
or whether by slow process of modification; it matters not whether
the adaptive modification was brought about by a process of natural
selection, or by pressure of a physical environment; whether without
law or according to law. The removal of the result from man-like
directness of separate action can not destroy the idea of design,
but only modify our conception of the Designer. What science, and
especially evolution, destroys, therefore, is not the idea of design,
but only our low anthropomorphic notions of the mode of working of the
Designer.

Precisely the same change takes place here under the influence of
science as has taken place in all our notions concerning God. The
uncultured savage sees a _separate_ god in every object. As culture
advances, his gods become fewer and nobler, until, in the most advanced
states, man recognizes but one infinite God, the creator and sustainer
of all. God is still in every phenomenon, but no longer as a separate
God, but only as the separate manifestation of the One. Thus culture
takes away our gods, but only to compel us to seek him in nobler forms
until we reach the only true God. But, even after the conception of the
one God is reached, how many seem to regard him as altogether such a
one as ourselves; but science shows us that his ways are not like our
ways, nor his ends as our ends. Thus science, more than all other kinds
of culture, simplifies while it infinitely ennobles and purifies our
conceptions of Deity.

Again, the same change takes place in our sense of _mystery_. I
suppose most people imagine that it is the special mission of science
to destroy all mystery. Many seem to think that superstition, or even
religion, is inseparably connected with ignorance and mystery, and
all must disappear together before the light of science. But not so.
There is only a gradual progressive change--an evolution in the form of
mystery as well as in the form of religion. To the savage everything is
a _separate_ mystery. The function of science is, indeed, to destroy
these separate mysteries, by explaining them; but, in doing so, it only
reduces them to fewer and grander mysteries, and these again to still
fewer and grander, until, in an ideally perfect science, all separate
and partial mysteries are swallowed up in the one all-embracing
infinite mystery--the mystery of existence. There is still mystery
in each object, but no longer a separate mystery--only a separate
manifestation of the one overwhelming mystery.

Or, again, and finally: The same change occurs in our ideas of
_creation_. At first every object is a separate creation--a
manufacture. With advancing science these separate, creative acts
become fewer and nobler, until now, at last, in evolution, all
are embraced and swallowed up in _one eternal_ act of creation--a
never-ceasing procession of the divine energy. Every object is still a
creation, but not a separate creation--only a separate manifestation of
the one continuous creative act.

Now, precisely the same change must take place in our conception of
design in Nature. To the uncultured there is a distinct and separate
design in every separate work of Nature. But, as science advances, all
these distinct, separate, petty, man-like designs are merged into fewer
and grander designs, until, finally, in evolution at last, we reach
the conception of the one infinite, all-embracing design, stretching
across infinite space, and continuing unchanged through infinite time,
which includes and predetermines and absorbs every possible separate
design. There is still design in everything, but no longer a separate
design--only a separate manifestation of the one infinite design.

Thus, then, our own self-consciousness and will and thought give rise,
necessarily, to the conception of an infinite self-consciousness, will,
and thought--i. e., God. The necessity to believe in self-conscious
spirit behind bodily phenomena compels us to believe also in an
infinite self-conscious spirit behind cosmic phenomena. Looking at the
operations of this ever-active spirit, whether in the one case or the
other, _from the outside_, it looks like unconscious energy inherent
in matter itself, and therefore like necessity, or fate. But, looked
at from the inside _in the one case_, the brain, we perceive only
self-conscious, free activity of spirit. Therefore, we are compelled
to acknowledge in the other case, the cosmos, also, the same source
of all activity, the same cause of all phenomena. We are compelled to
acknowledge an infinite immanent Deity behind phenomena, but manifested
to us on the outside as an all-pervasive energy. But some portion of
this all-pervasive energy again individuates itself more and more, and
therefore acquires more and more a kind of independent self-activity
which reaches its completeness in man as self-consciousness and
free-will. We said, “_a kind of_ independent self-activity.” How this
comports with the absoluteness of God we can not understand, any more
than we can understand how it comports with invariable law in Nature.
We simply accept them both as primary truths, even though we can never
hope to reconcile them completely, because we can not understand the
exact nature of the relation of spirit to matter. We can not look at
the outside and the inside at the same time. If we could understand
the relation of psychical phenomena to brain-changes, then might
we hope to understand far more perfectly than now the relation of
God to Nature. But as in the one case, the brain, although we can
not understand the _nature_ of the relation, yet we are sure of the
intimacy of the connection of the two series, psychical and physical,
term for term; so in the other case, the cosmos, although we can not
understand the exact _nature_, we are sure of the intimacy of the
connection, _term for term_--every material phenomenon and event with a
corresponding psychical phenomenon as its cause.




