CHAPTER IV.

THE RELATION OF MAN TO NATURE.


There are two widely distinct views concerning the relation of man
to Nature; the one as old as the history of human thought, the other
only now urged upon us by modern science. According to the one, man
is the counterpart and equivalent of Nature. He alone has--in fact
is--an immortal spirit, and therefore he belongs to a world of his
own. According to the other, man is but a part, a very insignificant
part of Nature, and connected in the closest way with all other parts,
especially with the animal kingdom. He has no world of his own, nor
even kingdom of his own: he belongs to the animal kingdom. In that
kingdom he has no department of his own: he is a vertebrate. In the
department of vertebrates he has no privileged class of his own: he is
a mammal. In the class of mammals he has no titled order of his own:
he is a primate, and shares his primacy with apes. It is doubtful if
he may enjoy the privacy of a family of his own--the Hominidæ--for the
structural differences between man and the anthropoid apes are probably
not so great as between the sheep family and the deer family.

Now it is evident that these two are only views from different points,
psychical and structural. From the psychical point of view it is simply
impossible to exaggerate the wideness of the gap that separates man
from even the highest animals. From this point of view man must be
set over as an equivalent, not only to the whole animal kingdom, but
to the whole of Nature besides. From the structural point of view,
on the contrary, it is impossible to exaggerate the closeness of the
connection. Man’s body is identified with all Nature in its chemical
constituents, with the body of all animals in its functions, with all
vertebrates, especially mammals, in its structure. Bone for bone,
muscle for muscle, ganglion for ganglion, almost nerve-fiber for
nerve-fiber, his body corresponds with that of the higher animals.
Whether he was derived from lower animals or not, certain it is that
his structure even in the minutest details is precisely such as it
would be if he were thus derived by successive slight modifications.

Now, of these two views, the latter has been in recent times enormously
productive in increasing our knowledge. Anatomy has become truly
scientific only through comparative anatomy; physiology through
comparative physiology; embryology through comparative embryology.
Sociology is fast following in the same line, and becoming scientific
through comparative sociology. Is not the same true also of psychology?
Will not psychology become truly scientific only through comparative
psychology, i. e., by the study of the spirit of man in relation to
what corresponds to it in lower animals? But this view and this method,
when pushed to what seems to many their logical conclusion, end in
identification of man with mere animals, of spirit with mere physical
and chemical forces, immortality with mere conservation of energy,
and thus leads to blank and universal materialism. Thus, while it
increases our knowledge, it destroys our hopes. Is there any escape?
There is. The two extreme views given above are not irreconcilable. As
already said, they are only views from different points, and therefore,
although both true, are equally one-sided and partial, and a true and
rational philosophy, in this as in all other cases of vexed questions,
is found only in a higher view, which combines and reconciles these
mutually excluding extremes. Can we find such a view? I think we can.

Let us first, however, trace some of the stages of this scientific
materialism. There are two main branches of the argument for
materialism: one derived from _brain-physiology_, the other from
_evolution_. As we wish to be perfectly fair, we will present and even
press the argument in both these directions, although the latter alone
bears directly on the subject in hand.

In recent times, physiology has made great and, to many, startling
advances in the direction of connecting mental phenomena with
brain-changes. Physiologists have established the correlation of
vital with chemical and physical forces,[40] and probably in some
sense, at least, of mental with vital forces. They have proved, in
every act of perception, first a physical change in a nerve-terminal,
then a propagated thrill along a nerve-fiber, and then a resulting
change, physical or chemical, in the brain; and in every act of
volition, a change first in a brain-cell, then, a return thrill along
a nerve-fiber, and a resulting contraction of a muscle. Even the
velocity of the transmission to and fro has been measured, and the
time necessary to produce brain-changes estimated. They have also
established the existence of physical and chemical changes in the
brain corresponding to every change of mental state, and with great
probability an exact quantitative relation between these changes of
brain and the corresponding changes of mind. In the near future they
may do more: they may localize all the different faculties and powers
of the mind, each in its several place in the brain, and thus lay the
foundations of a truly scientific phrenology. In the far-distant future
we may possibly do much more. We may connect each kind of mental state
with a different and distinctive kind of brain-change. We may find, for
example, a right-handed rotation of atoms associated with _love_, and
a left-handed rotation associated with _hate_, or a gentle sideways
oscillation associated with _consciousness_, and a vertical pounding
associated with _will_. Now, suppose all this, and even much more, be
done in the way of associating, both in degree and in kind, mental
changes with brain-changes. What then? “Why,” say the materialists,
“we thereby identify _mind_ with _matter_, mental forces with material
forces. Thought, emotion, consciousness and will become products of the
brain, in the same sense as bile is a product of the liver, or urea a
product of the kidneys.”

Such is, in brief, the argument. Now, the answer: We may do all
we have supposed and much more. We may push our knowledge in this
direction as far as the boldest imagination can reach, and even
then we are no nearer the solution of this mystery of the relation
of brain-changes and mental changes than we are now. Even then it
would be impossible for us to conceive _how_ brain-changes produce
mental changes or _vice versa_. Physical changes in sense-organs,
transmitted along nerve-fibers, determine changes in brain-substance.
So much is intelligible. But now there appear--how it is impossible
to imagine--consciousness, thought, emotion, etc.--phenomena of an
entirely different order, belonging to an entirely different world. So
different, that it is impossible to imagine the nature of the nexus
between, or to construe the one in terms of the other. Brain-cells are
agitated and thought appears: Aladdin’s lamp is rubbed, and the genie
appears. There is just as much intelligible causal relation between the
two sets of phenomena in the one case as in the other.

Now, this mystery is not of the nature of those which disappear under
the light of knowledge. On the contrary, science only brings it out in
sharper relief, and emphasizes its absolute unsolvableness. Suppose
an absolutely perfect knowledge, perfect in degree, but human in kind.
Suppose an ideally perfect science--a science which has so completely
subdued its domain, and reduced it to such perfect simplicity, that
the whole cosmos may be expressed in a single mathematical formula--a
formula which, worked out with plus signs, would give every phenomenon
and event which shall ever occur in the future, and with minus signs
every phenomenon and event which has ever occurred in the past. Surely,
this is an ideally perfect science. Yet, even to such a science, the
relation of brain-changes to mental states would be as great a mystery
as now. It would even come out in stronger relief, because so many
other apparent mysteries would disappear. Like the essential nature of
matter or the ultimate cause of force, this relation lies evidently
beyond the domain of science. It requires some other _kind_ of
knowledge than human to understand it.

But materialists insist so much on the identity of brain-physiology
with psychology, that even at the risk of tediousness we will multiply
illustrations in order, if possible, to make this point still clearer.
Suppose, then, we exposed the brain of a living man in a state of
intense activity. Suppose, further, that our senses were absolutely
perfect, so that we could see every change, of whatever sort, taking
place in the brain-substance. What would we see? Obviously nothing but
molecular changes, physical and chemical; for to the outside observer
there is absolutely nothing else there to see. But the subject of
this experiment sees nothing of all this. His experiences are of a
different order, viz., consciousness, thought, emotions, etc. Viewed
from the _outside_, there is--there can be--nothing but motions; viewed
from the _inside_, nothing but thought, etc.--from the one side, only
_physical_ phenomena; from the other side, only _psychical_ phenomena.
Is it not plain that, from the very nature of the case, it must ever
be so? Certain vibrations of brain molecules, certain oxidations with
the formation of carbonic acid, water, and urea on the one side,
and there appear on the other sensations, consciousness, thoughts,
desires, volitions. There are, as it were, two sheets of blotting-paper
pasted together. The one is the brain, the other the mind. Certain
ink-scratches or blotches, _utterly meaningless_ on the one, soak
through and appear on the other as _intelligible writing_, but how we
know not, and can never hope to guess. But when the paste dissolves,
_shall the writing remain_? We shall see.

But some will object. There is nothing specially strange and unique
in all this, for the same mystery underlies the essential nature of
all kinds of force and matter, and therefore all phenomena. True
enough, but with this difference. Physical and chemical forces and
phenomena are indeed incomprehensible in their essential nature; but
once accept their existence, and all their different forms are mutually
convertible, construable in terms of each other and all in terms of
motion. But it is impossible by any stretch of the imagination to
thus construe mental forces and mental phenomena. It may, indeed, be
impossible to conceive _how came_ the plane of material existence, but,
standing on that plane, all phenomena fall into intelligible order. But
there is another plane above this one, having no intelligible relation
with it. We must climb up and stand on this before its phenomena fall
into intelligible order. In a word, material forces and phenomena are,
indeed, a mystery, but only of the _first order_. But mental and moral
forces and phenomena are a mystery even from the standpoint of the
other, and are therefore a mystery of the _second order_--a mystery
within a mystery.

We repeat, then, with additional emphasis after this examination, that
we can not imagine between physical and psychical phenomena a relation
of cause and effect _in the same sense_ in which we use these terms
in physical science, although in some sense there is doubtless such a
relation. If man were the only animal we had to deal with, there would
be no standing ground left for materialism. But there is still another
difficulty which sticks deeper. It is that suggested by the _law of
evolution_ and enforced by the _comparative method_.

=Relation of Man to Animals.=--Man, we say, is endowed with, _is_, in
fact, an immortal spirit. What is spirit? We know things only by their
phenomena; what are the phenomena of spirit? Consciousness, will,
intelligence, memory, love, hate, fear, desire--surely these are some
of them. But has not a dog or a monkey all these? Pressed with this
difficulty, some have indeed felt compelled to accord immortal spirit
to higher animals. But we can not stop here. If to these, then also to
all animals; for we have here only a sliding scale without break. Can
we stop now and make it coextensive with sentiency? No; for the lowest
animals and lowest plants merge into each other so completely that no
one can draw the line between them with certainty. We must extend it to
plants also. Shall we stop here and make immortal spirit coextensive
with life? We can not; for life-force is certainly correlated with,
transmutable into, and derivable from, physical and chemical forces. We
must extend it into dead nature also. Therefore, everything is immortal
or none. Our boasted immortality by continued extension becomes
thinner and thinner until it evaporates into thin air. It becomes
naught else than _conservation of energy_, and not, as we had hoped,
conservation of _self-conscious personality_. This may be interesting
as a scientific fact; but of what value to us personally is a continued
existence of our spiritual forces as heat, light, electricity, or
any other form of unconscious force? Thus, then, if once we pass the
gap between man and the higher animals, there is no possibility of a
stopping-place anywhere.

Such is the difficulty presented by comparison in the _taxonomic_
series. Take now the _embryonic_ series. Each one of us, individually,
was formed gradually by a process of evolution, from a microscopic
spherule of protoplasm undistinguishable in structure from the lowest
forms of protozoal life. Now, in this gradual process of evolution,
where did immortal spirit come in? Was it in the germ-cell? Then why
deny it to the protozoan? Was it at the quickening, or at the birth,
or at the moment of first self-consciousness, or at some later period
of capacity of abstract thought? Again, when it did come in, was it
something superadded or did it grow out of something already existing
in the embryo or the infant?

Or take the _evolution series_ from protozoan to man. This we have
already seen is similar in outline to the other two. Now, in the
gradual evolution of the animal kingdom throughout all geological time,
terminating in man, when did immortal spirit come in? Did it enter with
life, or with sentient life, or somewhere in the ascending scale of
animals, or with the advent of man? If with man, was it some new thing
added at once out of hand, or did it grow out of something already
existing in animals?

This last, we are persuaded, is the only tenable view--the only view
that can effect that reconciliation between the two extreme, mutually
excluding views now usually held, which, as already seen, is the true
test of a rational philosophy. I believe that the spirit of man _was_
developed out of the _anima_ or conscious principle of animals, and
that this, again, was developed out of the lower forms of life-force,
and this in its turn out of the chemical and physical forces of Nature;
and that at a certain stage in this gradual development, viz., with
man, it _acquired_ the property of immortality precisely as it now,
in the individual history of each man at a certain stage, acquires
the capacity of abstract thought. This is, in brief, the view which I
wish to enforce. The reader must understand, however, that this is _my
own view_ only, a view for which I have earnestly contended for twenty
years. It appeals, therefore, not to authority, but only to reason. I
wish now to present it as briefly as possible.

First, then, I would draw attention to the fact that there is nothing
wholly exceptional in such transformation with the sudden appearance of
new powers and properties; but, on the contrary, it is in accordance
with many analogies in the lower forces, and therefore _a priori_
not only credible but probable. For example, force and matter may
be said to exist _now_ on several distinct planes raised one above
another. There is a sort of taxonomic scale of force and matter. These
are, 1, the plane of elements; 2, the plane of chemical compounds;
3, the plane of vegetal life; 4, the plane of animal life; and 5,
the plane of rational and, as we hope, immortal life. Each plane has
its own appropriate force and distinctive phenomena. On the first
operates physical forces, producing physical phenomena only--for the
operation of chemical affinity immediately raises matter to the next
plane. On the second plane operates, in addition to physical, also
chemical forces, producing all those changes by action and reaction,
the study of which constitutes the science of chemistry. On the
third plane, in addition to the two preceding forces, with their
characteristic phenomena, operates also life-force, producing the
distinctive phenomena characteristic of living things. On the fourth
plane, in addition to all lower forces and their phenomena, operates
also a higher form of life-force characteristic of animals, producing
the phenomena characteristic of sentient life, such as sensation,
consciousness, and will. On the fifth plane, in addition to all the
preceding forces and phenomena, we have also the forces and phenomena
characteristic of rational and moral life.

Now, although there are doubtless great differences of level on each
of these planes, yet there is a very distinct break between each.
Although there are various degrees of the force characteristic of each,
yet the difference between the characteristic forces is one of kind
as well as of degree. Although energy by transmutation may take all
these different forms, and thus does now circulate up and down through
all these planes, yet the passage from one plane upward to another is
not a gradual passage by sliding scale, but _at one bound_. When the
necessary conditions are present, a new and higher form of force at
once appears, _like a birth_ into a higher sphere. For example, when
hydrogen and oxygen are brought together under proper conditions, water
is born--a new thing with new and wholly unexpected properties and
powers, entirely different from those of its components. When CO2, H2O,
and NH3 are brought together under suitable conditions, viz., in the
green leaves of plants, in the presence of sunlight, living protoplasm
is then and there born, a something having entirely new and unexpected
powers and properties. It is no gradual process but sudden, like birth
into a higher sphere.

Now, there is not the least doubt that the same is true of the order
and manner of the _first appearance_ of the natural forces in the
phylogenic series. In the history of the evolution of the cosmos,
the forces of Nature have appeared successively and suddenly when
conditions became favorable. There was a time in the history of the
earth when only physical forces existed, chemical affinity being held
in abeyance by the intensity of the heat.[41] By gradual cooling,
chemical affinity at a certain stage came into being--was born, a
new form of force, with new and peculiar phenomena, though doubtless
derived from the preceding. Ages upon ages passed away until the
time was ripe and conditions were favorable, and life appeared--a
new and higher form of force, producing a still more peculiar group
of phenomena, but still, as I believe, derived from the preceding.
Ages upon ages again passed away, during which this life-force
took on higher and higher forms--in the highest foreshadowing and
simulating reason itself--until finally, when the time was fully ripe
and conditions were exceptionally favorable, spirit, self-conscious,
self-determining, rational, and moral, appeared--a new and still higher
form of force, but still, as I am persuaded, derived from the preceding.

Now, that these forces are really of derivative origin is proved by the
fact that we see every step of this process taking place daily under
our very eyes. I pass over the conversion of physical into chemical
force because this is admitted on all hands. I begin, therefore, with
vital force. Sunlight falling on green leaves disappears as light
and reappears as life--is consumed in doing the work of decomposing
CO2, H2O, and NH3, and the C, H, O, and N thus set free from
previous combination unite to form living protoplasm.[42] Again, in
the embryonic history of every animal we see the next change take
place--i. e., the emergence of the psychic out of the vital. In the
germ-cell, in the egg, and even in the early stages of the embryo,
there is no distinctive animal life--i. e., no consciousness, nor
volition, nor response of any kind to stimulus. At a certain stage
distinctive animal or psychic life appears. We call it quickening.
Materials for psychology are now present for the first time. In man
alone, and that only some time after physical birth, we see the last
change. The new-born child has animal life only. The emergence of
self-consciousness--a change so wonderful that it may well be called
the birth of spirit--takes place only at the age of two to three years.
Now for the first time we have phenomena distinctive of humanity.

But some will ask, “How is this consistent with immortality?” In
answer, let me again remind the reader that with every new form of
force, with every new birth of the universal energy into a higher
plane, there appear new, unexpected, and, previous to experience,
wholly unimaginable properties and powers. This last birth is of course
no exception. Why may not immortality be one of these new properties?
But this point is so important that we must treat it more fully.

Remember, then, the view of the relation of God to Nature, already
explained. Remember that the forces of Nature are naught else than
different forms of the one omnipresent Divine energy. Remember that, as
just shown, this Divine omnipresent energy has taken on successively
higher and higher forms in the course of cosmic time. Now this upward
movement has been wholly by _increasing individuation_, not only
of matter, but also _of force_. This universal Divine energy, in a
generalized condition, _unindividuated_, diffused, pervading all
Nature, is what we call physical and chemical force. The same energy in
higher form, individuating matter, and itself individuated, but only
yet very imperfectly, is what we call the life-force[43] of plants. The
same energy, more fully individuating matter and itself more fully
individuated, but not completely, we call the _anima_ of animals. This
anima, or animal soul, as time went on, was individuated more and more
until it resembled and foreshadowed the spirit of man. Finally, still
the same energy, completely individuated as a separate entity and
therefore self-conscious, capable of separate existence and therefore
immortal, we call the spirit of man.

According to this view, the vital principle of plants and the anima
of animals are but different stages of the development of spirit in
the womb of Nature: _in man at last it came to birth_. In plants and
animals it was in deep embryo sleep--in the latter, quickened, indeed,
but not viable--still unconscious of self, incapable of independent
life, with physical, umbilical connection with Nature; but now at last
in man, separated from Nature, capable of independent life, born into
a new and higher plane of existence. Separated, but not wholly: Nature
is no longer _gestative_ mother, but still _nursing_ mother of spirit.
As the _organic embryo_ at birth reaches independent _material_ or
_temporal_ life, even so _spirit embryo_ by birth attains independent
_spiritual_ or _eternal_ life.

Although birth is its truest correspondence and best illustration, yet
we may vary the illustration in many ways:

1. Nature may be likened to a level water-surface. This represents
unindividuated physical and chemical force. On this surface some
individuating force pulls up a portion of the water into a _commencing_
drop. This represents the condition of spirit in plants. Or by greater
force the surface may be lifted higher into a nipple-like eminence
_simulating a drop_, or even into an almost complete drop with only
a neck-like connection with the general surface. This represents the
condition of spirits in the higher animals. In all these cases, even
though the drop be nearly completed, if we remove the individuating
or lifting force, the commencing drop is immediately drawn back by
cohesion and refunded into the general watery surface. But, once
complete the drop, and there is no longer any tendency to revert, even
though the lifting force is removed. This represents the condition of
spirit in man.

2. Or Nature may, again, be likened to a water-surface beneath which
the anima of animals is deeply and tranquilly submerged, wholly
unknowing of any higher, freer world above. In man spirit emerges above
the surface into a higher world, looks down on Nature beneath him,
around on other emerged spirits about him, and upward to the Father of
all spirits above him. Emerged, but not wholly free--head above, but
not yet foot-loose.

3. Or, again: As a planet must break away from physical, cohesive
connection with the central sun (planet-birth) in order to enter into
higher gravitative relations, which thenceforward determine all its
movements in beautiful harmony; as the embryo must break away from
physical umbilical connection with the mother in order to enter into
higher spiritual bonds of love, which thenceforward determine all
their mutual relations--even so spirit must break away from physical
and material connection with the forces of Nature, which are but the
omnipresent Divine energy, in order thereby to enter into higher
relations of filial love to God and brotherly love to man.

4. As the new-born child differs little in grade of physical
organization from the mature but unborn embryo, but at the moment
of birth there is a sudden and complete change, not so much in the
grade of organization but in the whole plane of existence--a change
absolutely necessary for further advance, for another cycle of life;
even so at the moment of the origin of man, howsoever this may have
been accomplished, there may have been no great change in the _grade_
of _psychical_ structure, but yet a complete change in the _plane_ of
psychical life--a change absolutely necessary for further advance, for
another cycle of evolution. In both cases there is a sudden entrance
into a new world, the sudden appearance of a new creature with entirely
different capacities--a passing out of an old world, a waking up in
a new and higher. According to this view, man alone is a _child_ of
God, capable of separate spirit-life--separate but not yet wholly
independent of Nature. As already said, Nature is no longer gestative
mother, but still nursing mother of spirit--we are weaned only by
death.

5. Or, again: As in passing up the _organic_ scale, we find all grades
of completeness of organic individuality, an increasing individuation
of bodily form which completes itself as a perfect organic individual
only in the higher animals, so, also, in passing up the _dynamic_
scale, force or energy is individuated more and more until the process
reaches completeness as a spirit-individual or dynamic individual--a
person only in man. _Organic_ individuality completes itself in
animals. _Psychic_ individuality only in man.

6. One more illustration and the last. The animal body may be likened
to an exquisitely adjusted instrument of communication between two
worlds--the material world without and the spiritual world within. The
key-boards of this marvelous instrument are the nerve-terminals of the
sense-organs in contact with the material world, and the brain-cells
in touch with the spirit-world. External Nature plays on the one by
sensation and determines changes in spirit. Spirit plays on the other
by will and muscular contraction, and determines changes in external
Nature. Now, in animals spirit is fast asleep or at most dreaming, or
even perhaps somnambulistic, but at least unconscious of _self_, and
acts only by stimulus--only responds in some sense automatically as
sleepers do. In man spirit is wide awake and may respond automatically
like animals, or may choose not to respond at all. Moreover, it acts
freely in its own domain--the world of ideas--_without external
stimulus_; or of its own free-will may _initiate_ changes in the
external world. With God all phenomena commence at the _spirit-end_.
In animals all commence at the _matter-end_, and by automatic response
terminate in the same. Man alone lives in both worlds, partakes of both
natures, and acts according to either method.

The more we reflect on this subject, the more we shall be convinced
that completed spirit individuality explains, as nothing else can, all
that is characteristic of man. It is this which constitutes person, or
the self-acting ego. It is this which constitutes self-consciousness,
free-will, and moral responsibility. And out of these, again, grows,
the recognition of relations to other moral beings and to God, and
therefore ethics and religion. Out of these, also, grows the capacity
of indefinite voluntary progress. This also means separate life,
spirit-viability, or immortality. Self-consciousness especially seems
to me the simplest sign of separate entity or spirit-individuality,
and its appearance among psychical phenomena _the very act of
spirit-birth_. We may imagine man to have emerged ever so gradually
from animals: in this gradual development the moment he became
conscious of self, the moment he turned his thoughts inward in wonder
upon himself and on the mystery of his existence as separate from
Nature, that moment marks the birth of humanity out of animality.
All else characteristic of man followed as a necessary consequence.
I am quite sure that, if any animal, say a dog or a monkey, could be
educated up to the point of self-consciousness (which, however, I am
sure is impossible), that moment _he_ (no longer _it_) would become a
moral responsible being, and all else characteristic of moral beings
would follow. At that moment would come personality, immortality,
capacity of voluntary progress; and science, philosophy, religion,
would quickly follow.

We have emphasized self-consciousness as the most fundamental sign of
spirit-individuality; but a difference of exactly the same kind is
found running through the whole gamut of human faculties as compared
with corresponding faculties in animals. As animal consciousness is
related to human self-consciousness, so exactly is animal will to human
free-will, animal intelligence to human reason, animal sign-language to
rational grammatical speech of man, constructive art of animals to true
rational progressive art of man. In every one of these the resemblance
is great, but the difference is immense, and not only in degree but
also in kind. In every case it is like shadow and substance, promise
and fulfillment, or, still better, it is like embryo and child. The
change from one to the other is like to a birth into a higher sphere,
the beginning of another cycle of evolution. We would like to follow
this idea out in detail, but it would lead us beyond the scope of this
work. Those who desire to do so we would refer to an article by the
author on the “Psychical Relation of Man to Animals.”[44]

But it will be objected that there are other births of energy from
lower to higher condition; but such births do not insure continued
existence in the higher condition. In the gradual evolution of energy
described on page 316, when a portion rises from physical to chemical,
from chemical to vital, or from vital to sentient, it does not remain
ever after in the higher condition--there is no immortality on the
higher plane. On the contrary, all these lower forms of energy are
continually ascending and descending; transformation is downward as
well as upward. Why should there be an exception in this last birth?
In these successive upward metamorphoses of energy why should the last
only be permanent? I answer: Because it reaches at last its final goal,
viz., complete individuation, as free, self-acting spirit; it reaches
again the spiritual plane from which it sprang, and becomes thereby
a partaker of the Divine nature; because it comes at last into moral
relations with the absolute--the Divine--and therefore above the plane
of shifting changes. If the scale of energy be likened to a ladder with
many rounds, reaching from the plane of matter to the plane of spirit,
then so long as energy is on the ladder it ascends and descends; but,
once it reaches the plane of free spirit, it is in a wholly new world
in which eternal ascent is the law.

Perhaps I can best bring out the reasonableness of my view by comparing
it with other possible alternative views.

There are three possible views as to the nature, the origin,
and the destiny of the human spirit: (1.) That it pre-existed
always--uncreated, underived, eternal, both ways--backward as well
as forward. Therefore, as it never began, so it will never end. It
is _immortal of its own right_. This is substantially the view of
Plato, of Leibnitz, and perhaps some other philosophers. (2.) That
it is derived from God _directly_--created at once _without natural
process_; that at the moment of creation of the first man Adam, and
at some unknown time and in some inscrutable way in the history of
each individual, it was _injected into the body from the outside_,
and at the same time _endowed_ with immortality. This, I take it, is
the orthodox view. (3.) That it was indeed derived from God, but not
directly; created indeed, but only by natural process of evolution;
that it indeed pre-existed, but only as embryo in the womb of Nature,
slowly developing through all geological times, and finally coming
to birth as _living_ soul in man. Thus it _attains_ immortality at a
certain stage of development, viz., at spirit-birth. This is the view I
have striven to enforce.

I hold up these three views: Which is the more rational? The view of
Plato--that of self-existent, uncreated, eternal spirit--I think few
will entertain at this time of the world’s day. The usual orthodox
view I have shown is surrounded with insuperable difficulties; is
wholly unscientific and irrational. What is there left but the view
presented above? Plato is right in asserting pre-existence, but wrong
in denying creation. The usual view is right in asserting creation, but
wrong in denying natural process. The view I have presented asserts
pre-existence in embryo and creation by natural process. It therefore
combines and reconciles the two extreme views, and is more rational
than either.

=Some General Conclusions.=--There are still two or three thoughts so
closely connected with what we have already said that we can not pass
them over:

1. We have seen that every mental state corresponds with a particular
brain state, and every mental change with a brain change. We have,
therefore, here, two series, physical and psychical, corresponding
with each other, term for term. For every change in the one there is
a corresponding change in the other, both in kind and amount. Now, is
not this the test of the relation of cause and effect? It certainly is.
Yes, there must be a causal relation here, even though we are not able
to understand the nature of the causal nexus. But which is cause and
which effect? If the view above presented be correct, then in animals
_brain changes_ are in all cases the _cause_ of psychical phenomena.
In man alone, and only in his higher activities, _psychic_ changes
precede and determines brain changes. In man alone brain changes
are determined not only by external but by _internal_ impressions.
Man alone perceives not only objects--_material things_--but also
relations and properties _abstracted_ from the objects, i. e., _ideal
things_; and, moreover, not only relations between objects, but also
relations between relations or ideas. In man alone there is an inner
world--microcosm--the _things_ of which are _thoughts_, ideas, etc.
This _self-acting power_ of spirit on _the things of itself_, instead
of merely reacting as played upon by external nature, is characteristic
of man, and is a necessary result and a sign of severance, partial at
least, of physical bond with Nature.

2. Again, I have used the term vital _principle_. I must justify it.
I know full well that it is the fashion to ridicule the term as a
remnant of an old superstition which regards vital force as a sort of
supernatural entity unrelated to other forces of Nature. No one has
striven more earnestly than myself to establish the correlation of
vital with physical and chemical forces;[45] and yet, if the view above
presented be true, there is a _kind_ of justification even for the
term vital _principle_--much more, vital _force_. There is a kind of
reason and true insight in the personification of the forces of Nature,
and especially of vital force. All forces, by progressive dynamic
individuation, are on the way toward entity or personality, but fully
attain that condition only in man.

3. Again, to perceive relations and properties abstracted from material
things, to form abstract or general ideas, to form not only _per_cepts
but also _con_cepts, is admitted to be a characteristic of man--a
characteristic on which all our science and philosophy rest. From time
immemorial the vexed question has been debated, “Have such abstract
or general ideas any _real_ existence, or are they mere _names_ of
figments of the mind?” This is the famous question of _realism_ and
_nominalism_. Now, if our view be correct, then there is one most
fundamental abstraction, viz., _self_, which is indeed a _reality_.
Self-consciousness is the direct recognition of the one reality,
spirit, of which all others are the sign and shadow--the true reality
which underlies and gives potency to all abstractions or ideas. Do
we not find in this view, then, the foundation of a true realism, or
rather a complete reconciliation of realism and nominalism?

4. Thus, then, Nature, through the whole geological history of the
earth, was gestative mother of spirit, which, after its long embryonic
development, came to birth and independent life and immortality in man.
Is there any conceivable meaning in Nature without this consummation?
All evolution has its beginning, its course, its end. Without
spirit-immortality this beautiful cosmos, which has been developing
into increasing beauty for so many millions of years, when its
evolution has run its course and all is over, would be precisely as if
it had never been--an idle dream, an idiot tale signifying nothing. I
repeat: Without spirit-immortality the cosmos has no meaning. Now mark:
It is equally evident that, _without this gestative method of creation
of spirit_, the whole geological history of the earth previous to man
would have no meaning. If man’s spirit were made at once out of hand,
why all this elaborate preparation by evolution of the organic kingdom?
The whole evolution of the cosmos through infinite time is a gestative
process for the birth of spirit--a divine method of the creation of
spirits.

Thus, again, man is born of Nature into a higher nature. He therefore
alone is possessed of two natures--a lower, in common with animals,
and a higher, peculiar to himself. The whole mission and life-work of
man is the progressive and finally the complete dominance, both in the
individual and in the race, of the higher over the lower. The whole
meaning of sin is the humiliating bondage of the higher to the lower.
As the _material_ evolution of Nature found its goal, its completion,
and its significance in man, so must man enter immediately upon a
higher _spiritual_ evolution to find its goal and completion and its
significance in the ideal man--the Divine man. As spirit, unconscious
in the womb of Nature, continued to develop by _necessary_ law until
it came to birth and independent life in man, so the new-born spirit
of man, both in the individual and in the race, must ever strive by
_freer_ law to attain, through a newer birth, unto a higher life.




