PART II.

_EVIDENCES OF THE TRUTH OF EVOLUTION._




CHAPTER I.

GENERAL EVIDENCES OF EVOLUTION AS A UNIVERSAL LAW.


Let us again remind the reader that evolution means, first of all,
_continuity_. The law of evolution, although it doubtless means much
more, means, first of all, a law of continuity, or _causal relation
throughout Nature_. It means that, alike in every department of Nature,
each state or condition grew _naturally_ out of the immediately
preceding. In a word, it means that, in the course of Nature, nothing
appears suddenly and without natural cause, but, on the contrary,
everything is the natural and usually the gradual outcome of a previous
condition. This is _now_ admitted by every one in regard to _nearly_
everything: evolutionists apply it to the whole course of Nature.
I said this is _now_ admitted by every one in regard to _nearly_
everything; but this has not always been so. The world has come to its
present position on this subject only by a very gradual process. Let
us then trace rapidly the history of the gradual change, for it will
prepare us for much that follows.

There was a time (and that not many decades ago) when all things, the
origin of which transcends our ordinary experience, were supposed to
have originated suddenly and without natural process--to have been made
at once, out of hand. There was a time when, for example, mountains
were supposed to have been made at once, with all their diversified
forms, of beetling cliffs and thundering waterfalls, or gentle slopes
and smiling valleys, just as we now find them. But _now_ we know that
they have become so only by a very gradual process, and are still
changing under our very eyes. In a word, they have been formed by a
_process of evolution_. We know now the date of mountain-births; we
trace their growth, maturity, decay, and death; and find even, as it
were, the fossil bones of extinct mountains in the crumpled strata
of their former places. There was a time when continents and seas,
gulfs, bays, and rivers, were supposed to have originated at once,
substantially as we now see them. _Now_, we know that they have been
changing throughout all geological time, and are still changing. Not,
however, change back and forth in any direction indifferently and
without goal, but gradual change from less perfect to more perfect
condition, with more and more complex inter-relations--i. e., by a
_process of evolution_. We are able now, though still imperfectly,
to trace some of the stages of this evolution. There was a time when
rocks and soils were supposed to have been always rocks and soils; when
soils were regarded as an original clothing made on purpose to hide the
rocky nakedness of the new-born earth. God clothed the earth so, and
there an end. _Now_ we know that rocks rot down to soils; soils are
carried down and deposited as sediments; and sediments re-consolidate
as rocks--the same materials being worked over and over again, passing
through all these stages many times in the history of the earth. In
a word, there was a time when it was thought that the earth with
substantially its present form, configuration, and climate, was made
at once out of hand, as a fit habitation for man and animals. _Now_
we know that it has been changing, preparing, becoming what it is by
a slow process, through a lapse of time so vast that the mind sinks
exhausted in the attempt to grasp it. It has become what it now is
by a _process of evolution_. The same change of view has taken place
concerning the origin of all the heavenly bodies. We may, therefore,
confidently generalize--we may assert without fear of contradiction
that _all inorganic forms_, without exception, have originated by a
process of evolution.

The proof of all this we owe to geology--a science born of the present
century. This science establishes the law of _universal continuity_ of
events, through infinite _time_, as astronomy does that of _universal
inter-relation_ of objects through infinite _space_. How great the
change these two sciences have made in the realm of human thought!
Until the birth of modern astronomy the intellectual _space-horizon_
of the human mind was bounded substantially by the dimensions of
our earth; sun, moon, and stars, being but inconsiderable bodies
circulating at a little distance about the earth, and for our behoof.
Astronomy was then but the geometry of the curious lines traced by
these wandering fires on the concave blackboard of heaven. With the
first glance through a telescope the phases of Venus and the satellites
of Jupiter, revealed clearly to the mind the existence of other
worlds besides and like our own. In that moment the idea of _infinite
space_, full of worlds like our own, was for the first time completely
realized, and became thenceforward the heritage of man. In that moment
the _intellectual horizon of man was infinitely extended_. So also
until the birth of geology, about the beginning of the present century,
the intellectual _time-horizon_ of the human mind was bounded by six
thousand years. The discovery about that time of vertebrate remains,
all wholly different from those now inhabiting the earth, revealed
the existence of other time-faunas, besides our own and the idea of
infinite time, of which the life of humanity is but an epoch, was
born in the mind of man; and again the intellectual horizon of man
was infinitely extended. These two are the grandest ideas, and their
introduction the grandest epochs, in the intellectual history of man.
We have long ago accepted and readjusted our mental furniture to the
requirements of the one, but the necessary readjustment to the other is
not yet complete.

All inorganic forms, then, it is admitted, have come by evolution. But
how is it with organic or living forms? Let us see.

Every one knows, because it is within the limits of ordinary
experience, that every _individual_ organism _now_ originates and
gradually becomes what we see it, by a natural process--that is, by
evolution. If, then, there be any exception, it must be only the _first
of each kind_. But what kind? There are many kinds of kinds; classes,
orders, families, genera, species, varieties. Now, many of these kinds
can be shown to have become what we see them by a gradual process
similar, at least, to evolution. Take for example, classes. The class
of fishes and the class of reptiles are _now_ widely distinct and
have little in common except a vertebrate structure; but, as already
shown, page 12, this extreme difference has not always existed. On
the contrary, the earliest representatives of these two classes so
merged into one another that each seemed either. From this common stock
the two classes were gradually separated, each going its own way and
becoming more and more widely distinct even to the present day. There
can be no doubt, therefore, that _these two classes_, as we now know
them, _have become_ what they are by a gradual process. Again: In the
whole realm of Nature there is not a class more distinctly separate
from every other and without intermediate links than birds. But this
has not always been so. They have gradually become so. The earliest
birds were so reptilian in structure and appearance that if we could
see them now we would be in doubt whether we should call them birds or
reptiles. Birds have gradually separated themselves from the reptilian
stem, becoming more and more bird-like from age to age, until now, at
last, the two classes are wholly separated and the intermediate links
destroyed. So far as external characters are concerned, birds may be
said to have finally and wholly released themselves from entangling
alliance with any other class.

Classes, then, it will be admitted, have undoubtedly become what we
now know them by a very gradual process following laws identical (as
we have already seen, page 19) with the laws of evolution. Shall we
try orders? Of the class Mammalia there are two well-recognized and
widely-distinct _orders_, viz., the Carnivores and the Herbivores. We
all know how widely diverse these are in form, in structure, in habits,
and in food. Has it always been so? Have these been made so at once?
By no means. They have gradually become so. The earliest mammals were
neither the one nor the other distinctively. They were _omnivores_,
completely intermediate in food, habits, form, and structure. From this
common stock the two orders have gradually separated, the carnivores
becoming more and more adapted to one mode of life and the herbivores
to another, by a process following the laws of evolution, as already
explained. Shall we try _families_ and _genera_? Marsh and Huxley have
shown us how completely the horse family (_Equidæ_) and the horse-genus
(_Equus_) illustrate the process of gradual becoming and the law of
evolution. Under their guidance, we see that the earliest traceable
ancestor of the horse family, before it was distinctively a horse
family at all, had on the fore-foot five toes in the Lower Eocene,
four toes in the Upper Eocene, and three toes in the Miocene; then we
see the two side-toes shortening up more and more in the Pliocene and
becoming rudimentary splints, leaving only one toe in the Quaternary
and present epochs. Thus, the side-splints in the foot of the modern
horse tell the story of its three-toed ancestry. Similar gradual
changes are clearly traceable in size, shape, structure of limbs, of
teeth, and of brain. In all respects the members of the horse family
have become more and more horse-like in the course of time.

This subject will be taken up and more fully illustrated, under the
head of special evidences, in a subsequent chapter. We here touch it
only sufficiently to illustrate this universal law of gradual becoming.

We have taken only a few examples, but the same is undoubtedly true of
all Taxonomic groups _above species_. Passing over these last for the
moment, we take next _races_ and _varieties_. These smaller groups are
admitted by all to be formed by a natural process, because not only
can we make them artificially, but all the intermediate links may be
found in Nature. So we have only _species_ remaining. Yes; species are
imagined by the old-school naturalist and by the anti-evolutionist of
to-day as the _ultimate elements_ of Taxonomy. This, then, is the _last
ditch_ upon which the defense of supernaturalism in the realm of Nature
is made. “Other groups,” they say, “may have gradually become what they
now are by the successive introduction of specific forms according
to a preordained plan which is well expressed by the formal laws of
evolution. But _species_ are without transition forms. _They_ come in
suddenly, remain unchanged while they continue, and finally pass out
suddenly, so far as specific characters are concerned. New species come
in their places by direct act of creation--by _substitution_, not by
transmutation.” This, then, is the last intrenchment. Can we give any
good evidence of gradual formation of species? I believe we can.

First, then, it is admitted that we can easily make varieties and
races artificially. We will not _now_ describe the process; we are all
familiar with the results, viz., the varieties of domestic animals
and of useful and ornamental plants; the extremely different breeds
of horses, cattle, sheep, dogs, pigeons, etc.; of wheat, cabbages,
turnips; of roses, dahlias, etc., etc. No one will doubt that the
extreme varieties of any of these, say greyhound and pug, if wild,
would be called distinct species, or even distinct genera. We do not
call them so, for two reasons: first, because we see them made; and,
second, because we find all intermediate links between them; and the
usual definition of species is that they can not be made, and they have
no intermediate links. Thus, then, the question is narrowed down to
_wild species_. They say: “We take our stand on these” (surely a very
narrow ground for so broad a philosophy). “We defy you to show gradual
formation with intermediate links.”

Now, in fact, by diligent search such intermediate links between
well-recognized species have been found in some cases, especially in
birds, on account of their great power of dispersal. Certain forms
have long been known from widely-separated regions, and universally
regarded as distinct species, as distinct as any. Then, by minute
examinations of intermediate regions, a complete series of intermediate
forms has been picked up. This has occurred not only in one case but in
many cases, and not in birds only but in many other classes--examples
increase with our increasing knowledge.[11] The only answer to such
evidence is that _these are not true species_. Now, see the fallacy
lurking here! They define species as ultimate elements of taxonomy, as
distinct and without intermediate links, and then require us to find
such intermediate links; and, finally, when with infinite pains some
such links are found, they say: “Oh! I see; we were mistaken; they are
only varieties!!” It is true that naturalists, when intermediate links
are found, usually put all together as one species, but this they do
purely for the sake of clearness of definition and description. It is
freely admitted by the evolutionist that species are _now_ usually
distinct and without intermediate links, these having been destroyed in
the struggle for life. This will be fully explained in another chapter.
It is also freely admitted that although intermediate links must have
existed at one time, their remains are rarely found. The reason of
this will also be explained hereafter. Nevertheless, in some cases, as
already seen, we do find them still existing. Now, we add that in some
cases, where they no longer exist, we find them in the form of fossil
remains. The most remarkable example of this is found in the gradual
changes in the forms of Planorbis in the fresh-water deposits of
Steinheim, as shown by the admirable researches of Hyatt.[12] We shall
discuss these also more fully in another place. Now, if there be any
such links at all, however rare, then every objection to the derivative
origin of species is removed.

Perhaps it may be well to make bare mention of another kind of
evidence, viz., the actual change of species under the eyes, by
the action of change of environment. The different species of the
genus _Artemia_ (a low form of crustacean) live in brine-pools. By
concentrating the brine of such a pool, one species (_A. salina_)
has been observed to change in successive generations into another
(_A. Muhlhausenii_), and the latter back again to the former by slow
freshening.[13] Again: The siredon and the amblystoma have always,
until recently, been regarded as not only distinct species, but
distinct genera of amphibians. Siredon was supposed to be a permanent
gill-breather, while amblystoma becomes by metamorphosis a pure
air-breather. Now, however, it is known that the former may change into
the latter. But the most curious part of the life-history of these
animals, is that if water be abundant the siredon reproduces freely,
and remains indefinitely a gill-breather; but if the water dries up
it changes into the lung-breathing amblystoma. We do not give this
as examples of change of species, for the change is in the individual
life, and therefore in the nature of metamorphosis, but as evidence
of the power of physical conditions in modifying the development of
organic forms and therefore of the manner in which gill-breathers were
probably transformed into air-breathers.

To sum up: 1. All _inorganic_ forms, without exception, have become
what we find them by a natural process--i. e., by evolution. 2. All
_organic_ or living forms within the _limits of observation_, i. e.,
every living thing, has become what we now see, by a gradual, natural
process--i. e., by evolution. 3. All taxonomic groups, except species,
have undoubtedly become what we now see them by a gradual process,
following the laws of evolution, and therefore presumably by a natural
process of evolution. 4. By artificial means, breeds, races, etc., very
similar, at least in many respects, to species, are seen to arise by
a gradual natural process--i. e., by evolution. 5. In some instances,
at least, natural species are observed to pass into one another by
intermediate links in such wise that we are forced to conclude that
they have been formed by a natural process.

May we not, then, safely generalize, and make the law universal? Is
not this a sufficient ground for confident induction? Even though
some facts are still inexplicable, is that a sufficient reason for
withholding assent to a theory which explains so much? In all induction
we first establish a law provisionally from the observation of a
comparatively few facts, and then extend it over a multitude of facts
not included in the original induction. If it explains these also,
the law is verified. The law of gravitation was first based on the
observation of a few facts, and then verified by its explanation of
nearly all the facts of celestial motion. There are some outstanding
facts of celestial motion still unexplained, but we do not, therefore,
doubt the law of gravitation. The same principle applied in biology
ought to establish the law of evolution, for it also explains all
the facts of biology as no other law can. But inductive evidence
differs from other kinds of evidence in one respect, which, in fact,
constitutes its strength to the scientific, but its weakness to the
popular mind. It is a kind of circumstantial evidence, but its force
does not consist in a few strong circumstances easily appreciated,
such as strike the popular mind, and force conviction, but rather in a
multitude of small circumstances, each by itself insignificant, but all
together pointing to one conclusion and demanding one explanation. Such
evidence is, indeed, overwhelming, but only to the mind that masters
it. The evidence for the law of gravitation is literally the whole
science of astronomy. So also the evidence for the law of evolution
is the whole science of biology. Neither of these laws can be proved
in a debating society, but only by a course of study. In the one case
the law has been universally accepted--not, however, on evidence, for
there are few indeed who appreciate the evidence, but on the authority
of scientific unanimity. In the other case there has not yet been time
enough for the already established unanimity to have its full effect.

Thus much, we believe, will be generally admitted as a very moderate
claim. Evolution is certainly a legitimate induction from the facts
of biology. But we are prepared to go much further. We are confident
that evolution is _absolutely certain_. Not, indeed, evolution as a
special theory--Lamarckian, Darwinian, Spencerian--for these are all
more or less successful modes of explaining evolution; nor evolution
as a school of thought, with its following of disciples--for in this
sense it is still in the field of discussion--but evolution as a law
of derivation of forms from previous forms; evolution as a law of
continuity, as a universal law of becoming. In this sense it is not
only certain, it is axiomatic. It is only necessary to conceive it
clearly, to see that it is a necessary truth. This may seem paradoxical
to some. I stop to justify it.

Physical phenomena we all admit follow one another in unbroken
succession, each derived from a preceding, and giving origin to a
succeeding. We call this the law of causation, and say that it is
axiomatic. We might call it a law of derivation. So also organic
_forms_ follow one another in continuous chain, each derived from a
preceding and giving origin to a succeeding. We call this a law of
derivation. We might call it a _law of causation_, and say that it too
is axiomatic. The origins of new phenomena are often obscure, even
inexplicable, but we never think to doubt that they have a natural
cause; for so to doubt is to doubt the validity of reason, and the
rational constitution of Nature. So also the origins of new organic
_forms_ may be obscure or even inexplicable, but we ought not on that
account to doubt that they had a natural cause, and came by a natural
process; for so to doubt is also to doubt the validity of reason, and
the rational constitution of organic Nature. The law of evolution
is naught else than the scientific or, indeed, the rational mode of
thinking about the origin of things in every department of Nature. In
a word, it is naught else than the law of necessary causation applied
to _forms_ instead of phenomena. Evolution, therefore, is no longer
a school of thought. The words _evolutionism_ and _evolutionist_
ought not any longer to be used, any more than _gravitationism_ and
_gravitationist_; for the law of evolution is as certain as the law of
gravitation. Nay, it is far more certain. The nexus between _successive
events in time_ (causation) is far more certain than the nexus between
_coexistent objects in space_ (gravitation). The former _is a necessary
truth_, the latter is usually classed as a contingent truth. I have
used and may continue to use the term evolutionist, but if so it is
only in deference to the views of many intelligent persons, who do not
yet see the certainty of the law.




