CHAPTER VII.

SOME LOGICAL CONSEQUENCES OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE DIVINE IMMANENCY.


The doctrine of the Divine immanency carries with it the solution of
many vexed questions. In fact, in its light these questions simply pass
out of view as no longer having any significance. Several of these
questions have been alluded to in an indirect way in the previous
chapter and in Chapter III. We take them up distinctly here, and show
their relation to evolution.

Religious thought, like all else, is subject to a law of evolution,
and therefore passes through regular stages. Of these stages, three
are very distinct and even strongly contrasted. They correspond in
a general way to the three stages of Comte, which he has misnamed
the _theological_, the _metaphysical_, and the _positive_. We will
illustrate by many examples.


I. _Conception of God._

This, the most fundamental conception of all religion, has passed from
a gross anthropomorphism to a true spiritual theism, and the change
is largely due to science and especially to the theory of evolution.
There are three main stages in the history of this change: (1.) The
first is a _low_ anthropomorphism. God is altogether such a one as
ourselves, but larger and stronger. His action on Nature, like our
own, is _direct_; his will is wholly man-like, capricious and without
law. (2.) The second is still anthropomorphism, but of a nobler sort.
God is not _altogether_ like ourselves. He is man-like; yes, but
also _king-like_. He is _not_ present in Nature, but sits enthroned
above Nature in solitary majesty. He acts on Nature, not directly but
indirectly, through physical forces and natural laws. He is an absentee
landlord governing his estate by means of appointed agents, which are
the natural forces and laws established in the beginning. He interferes
personally and by direct action only occasionally, to initiate
something new or to rectify something going wrong. This idea culminated
and found the clearest expression in the eighteenth century, and was
the necessary result of the scientific ideas then prevalent, viz.,
ideas of pre-established _stability_ of cosmic order and _fixedness_ of
organic types. God was the great _artificer_, the great _architect_,
working, as it were, on foreign material and conditioned by its nature.
He established all things as they are in the beginning, and they have
continued so ever since.

This conception still lingers in the religious mind, and is in fact the
prevailing one now. It is a great advance on the preceding, but, alas!
it removes God beyond the reach of our love. He is the architect of
worlds, the artificer of the eye, the sovereign ruler of the universe,
but not our Father. We are his creatures, his subjects, but not his
children.

(3.) The third and last stage in this development is true spiritual
theism. God is immanent, resident in Nature. Nature is the house
of many mansions in which he ever dwells. The forces of Nature are
different forms of his energy acting directly at all times and in
all places. The laws of Nature are the modes of operation of the
omnipresent Divine energy, invariable because he is perfect. The
objects of Nature are objectified, externalized--materialized states
of Divine consciousness, or Divine thoughts objectified by the Divine
will. In this view we return again to _direct_ action, but in a nobler,
a spiritual, Godlike form. He is again brought very near to every one
of us and restored to our love, for in him we live and move and have
our being. In him all things consist, by him all things exist. This
view has been held by noble men in all times, especially by the early
Greek fathers, but is now verified and well-nigh demonstrated by the
theory of evolution. No other view is any longer tenable.

The idea of God is of course the most fundamental of all religious
ideas, and a change in this carries with it many other changes. Some of
these necessary outcomes, especially the nature, the origin, and the
destiny of the human spirit, and its relation to the Divine spirit, I
have already treated in previous chapters. But there are others which
flow so directly and obviously that they may be presented in brief
space.


II. _Question of First and Second Causes._

Among the most obvious of these is the question of first and second
causes. This distinction, I suppose, did not exist in early thought.
As a popular view, it was mainly due to the physical science of the
eighteenth century. It was a necessary corollary of the idea of God
as the great architect sitting outside of Nature and acting on Nature
as on foreign material. According to this view, God is the original
and primary cause of all things; but he _delegates_ his power to
_secondary_ forces, such as gravity, heat, electricity, etc., which
are therefore the immediate causes of phenomena. I believe that most
persons hold this view still. But it is now being displaced by the
idea of God immanent or resident in Nature as already explained. This
view is a complete _identification_ of first and second causes. All
causes are mere modes of the first cause. They seem to us secondary,
necessary, and unconscious only because they act according to
invariable law. But law itself is only the mode of operation of a
perfect will. Thus we have the same three stages of evolution here
also: (1.) First, all is first cause, direct, man-like, capricious,
lawless. (2.) Then the first cause acts king-like, indirectly by many
appointed agents subject to pre-enacted laws. These agents or secondary
causes directly determine all natural phenomena. (3.) Lastly, come the
complete combination and reconciliation of these two. All is by first
cause and direct action, like the first. All is by invariable law like
the second, the law being only the mode of operation of a perfect will.


III. _Question of General and Special Providence._

So also providence, general and special, is only another phase of the
same question and solved in the same way. At first all is _special_
providence--the result of caprice or favoritism and without law. Then
all or nearly all is general providence operating by invariable law;
but from time to time the general law is broken through for special
purposes when necessary. Is not this the prevailing view now? Lastly,
these two must be combined and reconciled in a third. All is alike
general and special: general--i. e., according to law; special--i. e.,
by direct action. There is no real distinction between the two. The
distinction vanishes in the light of a higher view.


IV. _The Natural and the Supernatural._

In precisely the same category falls the question of the natural and
the supernatural. The same three stages are evident here also, and the
same solution: 1. First all is supernatural and lawless, and Nature is
viewed with stupid wonder and abject fear. 2. Then Nature is reduced to
mechanical laws and made subject to man. Wonder and fear give place to
indifference and even perhaps to contempt. We practically live without
God in the world. It requires, now, _miracles_ or a violent breaking
through of law in order to startle us out of our stupidity and awaken
in us a sense of the Divine presence. 3. But we must come lastly to a
higher philosophy. We must recognize that all is natural and all is
supernatural according as we view it, but none more than another. All
is natural--i. e., according to law; but all is supernatural--i. e.,
above Nature, as we usually regard Nature, for all is permeated with
the immediate Divine presence. Wonder in the contemplation of Nature
returns, or rather exalted reverence and rational worship are given
in place of open-mouthed wonder and superstitious fear. Once clearly
conceive the idea of God permeating Nature and determining directly all
its phenomena according to law, and the distinction between the natural
and the supernatural disappears from view, and with it disappears also
the necessity of miracles as _we usually understand miracles_. In fact,
the word as we usually understand it has no longer any meaning.

I must stop a moment to explain, lest I be misunderstood; and to
enforce, lest it be thought I speak lightly.

Miracle, in the sense of violation of law, is simply impossible,
because law is the expression of the essential nature and perfection
of God. It is as impossible for God to perform a miracle in this sense
as it is for him to lie, and for the same reason, viz., that it is
contrary to his essential nature. In what sense, then, is a miracle
possible? I answer, only as an occurrence or a phenomenon _according to
a law higher than any we yet know_. If we define Nature as phenomena
governed by physical and chemical laws and forces, then life becomes
supernatural and miraculous--because higher than Nature as we define
it. If we reduce the phenomena of life to law and include these
also in our definition of Nature but limit it there, then the free,
self-determined phenomena of reason become supernatural because above
our definition of Nature. There may well be still other and higher
modes of Divine activity, the law of which we do not and may never
understand. These are above our present definition of Nature, and
therefore to us supernatural or miraculous. But, even if miracles in
the ordinary sense were possible, is it not evident that the ordinary
processes of Nature are far more wonderful, more truly Godlike, than
any such miracle?


V. _Question of Design in Nature._

So, again, the question of design or purpose or mind in Nature is
similarly solved. It has been said, it is continually now being
said, that evolution has destroyed forever the teleological view
of Nature--i. e., the idea of design in Nature. Yes, if we mean
the man-like, cabinet-making, watch-making design of Paley and
older writers--a separate petty design for each separate object. It
has indeed destroyed this, but only to replace it by a far nobler
conception--a truly Godlike design, a design embracing all space and
running through all time, including and absorbing all possible separate
designs and predetermining them by a universal law of evolution.

Or the same question may be put in another way as “Mind _vs._
Mechanics in Nature.” In the evolution of thought on this subject at
first all was _mind_, but lawless, capricious, like our own. Then
one department after another of Nature was reduced to mechanical,
physical, necessary law, until all have been or will be or conceivably
may be thus reduced, and mind seems driven out of Nature entirely.
The friends of religion in despair cry out for at least some small
corner left for mind. Thus I find in recent numbers of an English
scientific periodical, “Nature,” a discussion concerning mind as _one_
of the factors of evolution.[48] Is it not amusing, if it were not
so sad?--God the Divine mind as _one of the factors_ of evolution!
The true solution is very simple. All is mind or none; so also all
is mechanics or none. It _is all mind through mechanics_. It is all
mechanics from the outside; it is all mind from the inside. To science
all is mechanics; to theology all is mind. It is the duty of philosophy
to reconcile these two opposites by the higher view that mechanics is
but the mode of operation of the Divine mind. There is only one form of
evolution, viz., human progress, in which mind--but the _human_, not
the Divine mind--is _one_ of the factors of evolution. But to think and
speak thus of God in relation to Nature is to place him on the human
plane. It is gross anthropomorphism.[49]


VI. _Question of the Mode of Creation._

I might multiply examples almost without limit, of questions the
solution of which depends on this one of the relation of God to Nature.
I give one more--Creation.

The creation of the universe _at once_--in the beginning--out of
nothing--and then _rest ever since_. This old anthropomorphic idea is
now replaced by that of continuous creation--unhasting, unresting,
by an eternal process of evolution. For if the universal law of
gravitation is the Divine mode of sustentation of the universe, the no
less universal law of evolution is the Divine process of creation.




