
Transcriber's note: Italics text is denoted with _underscores_, boldface
text with =equals signs=. Other notes are at the end of this eBook.




  EVOLUTION

  ITS NATURE, ITS EVIDENCES, AND ITS
  RELATION TO RELIGIOUS THOUGHT


  BY
  JOSEPH LE CONTE

  AUTHOR OF “RELIGION AND SCIENCE,” ETC.
  AND PROFESSOR OF GEOLOGY AND NATURAL HISTORY IN THE
  UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA

  _SECOND EDITION, REVISED_

  NEW YORK:
  D. APPLETON AND COMPANY,
  72 FIFTH AVENUE.
  1897.




  COPYRIGHT, 1888, 1891,
  BY D. APPLETON AND COMPANY.




PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.


The three years which have elapsed since the publication of the first
edition of this work have been years of great activity of thought on
many of the subjects treated therein. Some changes and additions seemed
therefore imperatively called for.

For example: There has sprung up recently among the foremost writers on
evolution a warm discussion on the _factors_ of evolution, their number
and relative importance. I have therefore added a chapter (Chap. III,
Part II) on this subject--not, indeed, to discuss it fully (for this
would be impossible in the limits of a chapter), but to put the mind of
the reader in position to understand it and to judge for himself.

Again: Every reader of the first edition must have remarked that there
are many fundamental religious questions which I have not touched at
all in Part III. I had avoided these because my own mind was not yet
fully clear. I regarded what I then wrote as only a little leaven
in a very large lump. I was willing to wait and let it work. In the
mean time it has worked in my own mind, and I hope in the minds of
others. I have therefore added two chapters to this part. In one I
simply carry out to their logical consequences the doctrine of the
Divine Immanency. This brings up the questions of _First and Second
Causes_; of _General and Special Providence_; of the _Natural and the
Supernatural_; of _Mind vs. Mechanics in Nature_, etc., and shows the
necessary changes of view which are enforced by the theory of evolution.

In the other I take up very briefly “_The Relation of Evolution to the
Doctrine of the Christ_.” In the discussion of this I restrain myself
strictly within the limits of the subject as stated above.

The only other important changes are in Chapter IV, Part III, “_On the
Relation of Man to Nature_.” As I regard this as the most important
chapter in the whole book, I have endeavored still further to enforce
my view of the origin of man’s spirit, and especially to make it
clearer by means of several additional illustrations.

          JOSEPH LE CONTE.

  BERKELEY, CAL., _July 1, 1891_.




PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.


The subject of the following work may be expressed in three questions:
What is evolution? Is it true? What then? Surely, there are no
questions of the day more burning than these. Much has been written
on each of them, addressed to different classes of minds: some to
the scientific, some to the popular, and some to the religious and
theological; but nothing has yet appeared which covers the whole ground
and connects the different parts together. Much, very much has been
written, especially on the nature and the evidences of evolution, but
the literature is so voluminous, much of it so fragmentary, and most
of it so technical, that even very intelligent persons have still very
vague ideas on the subject. I have attempted to give (1) a very concise
account of what we mean by evolution, (2) an outline of the evidences
of its truth drawn from many different sources, and (3) its relation to
fundamental religious beliefs. I have determined, above all, to make
a book so small that it may be read through without much expense of
time and patience. But the subject is so large that in order to do so
it was necessary to sacrifice all but what was most essential, and to
forego all redundancy (the bane of so-called popular science) even at
the risk of baldness and obscurity. Nevertheless, I hope that the first
and second parts will be found not only interesting to the intelligent
general reader, but even profitable to the special biologist. I have
tried to make these parts as untechnical as possible, but I hope not
on that account the less scientific. For I am among these who think
that it is not necessary to be superficial in order to be popular--that
science may be adapted to the intelligent popular mind without ceasing
to be science.

The third part seems to me still more important just now. There is
a deep and widespread belief in the popular mind, and even to some
extent in the scientific mind, that there is something exceptional in
the doctrine of evolution as regards its relation to religious thought
and moral conduct. Other scientific theories have required only some
modifications of religious conceptions, but this utterly destroys
the possibility of all religious belief by demonstrating a pure
materialism. Now this, I believe, is a complete misconception. Thinking
men are fast coming to see this; some, indeed, have mistaken the
change for a reaction against evolution. It is a reaction not against
evolution, but only against its materialistic implication. Evolution is
more and more firmly established every year. The tide of conviction is
one which knows no ebb. Some clear statement, in brief space, of its
true relation to religious thought seems, therefore, very important at
this time.

BERKELEY, CAL., _May, 1887_.




CONTENTS.


  PART I.

  _WHAT IS EVOLUTION?_


  CHAPTER I.

  ITS SCOPE AND DEFINITION.

  PAGE

  _A type of evolution_--Development of an egg                         3

  _Universality of evolution_--Pervades all nature and concerns
      all departments of thought--One half of all science--
      Illustrated (1) by human body, (2) by solar system, (3) by
      society, (4) by earth, (5) by organic kingdom--The term
      evolution usually, but not rightly, confined to this last        3

  _Definition of evolution_--_I. Progressive change_--Shown in
      the animal body, or the _Ontogenic_ series--In the animal
      scale, or the _Taxonomic_ series--In the geological, or
      _Phylogenic_ series--The three series similar, though not
      identical                                                        8

  _II. Change according to certain laws_--Three laws of succession
      of organic forms                                                11

  (_a_) _Law of differentiation_--Early forms are generalized;
      afterwards separated into specialized forms--Illustrated
      by fishes, by birds--Whole process of differentiation
      illustrated by growth and branching of a tree                   11

  (_b_) _Law of progress of the whole_--Mistake of confounding
      evolution with upward progress--How far true, and how far
      false--Illustrated by branching tree--Examples of this
      mistake in the popular mind--In the scientific mind             13

  (_c_) _Law of cyclical movement_--Shown in geological history--
      Age of mollusks, fishes, reptiles, mammals, man--Illustrated
      again by a branching tree--Increasing complexity as well as
      height--Illustrated by diagram                                  16

  _The above three laws are laws of evolution_--_Differentiation_
      --Shown in the development of an egg, the type of evolution     19

  _Progress of the whole_--Not progress of all parts--Shown in
      the development of an egg                                       22

  _Cyclical movement_--Less fundamental than other two--Shown in
      Ontogeny of body, of mind--Increasing complexity--Necessity
      of continued advance--Otherwise deterioration--All these
      laws shown in progress of society---Differentiation shown--
      Progress of the whole but not of all parts shown--Cyclical
      movement shown--In social evolution, however, there is
      another element, viz., conscious voluntary progress---This
      kind of evolution contrasted with the other                     22

  _III. Change by means of resident forces_--This is the point of
      dispute--Sense in which we use term resident forces--Does
      not touch question of origin of natural forces                  27

  _The two views of the origin of organic forms briefly contrasted_
      --As to whether natural or supernatural--As to variability,
      definite or indefinite--As to change from one species to
      another by transmutation or substitution--As to universality
      of law of continuity                                            29


  CHAPTER II.

  THE RELATION OF LOUIS AGASSIZ TO THE THEORY OF EVOLUTION.

  General misunderstanding on this subject--Necessary to give
      sketch of history of the idea--Greeks, Lucretius, Swedenborg,
      and Kant--First scientific presentation by Lamarck--General
      character of Lamarck’s views--Failed, and rightly so--Next,
      Chambers’s “Vestiges of Creation”--Its general character--
      Failed, and rightly so--Some think this unfortunate--Why
      not so--An obstacle must be removed and a basis laid            32

  _The obstacle removed_--Old views in regard to forces--
      Correlation of forces established--But vital force considered
      exception--Therefore living forms also supposed exception
      to mode of origin of other forms--Then vital forces also
      correlated--Therefore, _a priori_ probable that living forms
      also correlated with other forms as to mode of origin--Thus
      obstacle removed                                                35

  _The basis laid_--Agassiz laid inductive _basis_ of evolution,
      although he refused to build--He established the laws of
      evolution and perfected the method of comparison--Importance
      of method discussed--The method of _notation_--The method
      of experiment--The difficulty of applying these to life
      phenomena--Method of comparison shown--(1) In Taxonomic
      series--(2) In Ontogenic series--(3) In Phylogenic series
      --Cuvier the great worker by comparison in the Taxonomic
      series--Agassiz in the Ontogenic and Phylogenic--Agassiz
      also established the three laws of evolution given in previous
      chapter--Thus he laid foundation--Why he did not build--
      Supposed identity of evolution and materialism--The obstacle
      being removed and the basis laid, when evolution again brought
      forward it was universally accepted, because the world was
      prepared--Place of Agassiz and Darwin compared--Formal
      science _vs._ physical science--Illustrated by relation of
      Kepler to Newton--Relation of Agassiz to time cosmos similar
      to that of Kepler to space cosmos--So Darwin to Newton--
      Some reflections on the above--Gravitation is the law of
      space cosmos--Evolution of time cosmos--Of the divine
      spheral music gravitation is the chordal harmony and evolution
      the melody                                                      37


  PART II.

  _EVIDENCES OF THE TRUTH OF EVOLUTION._


  CHAPTER I.

  GENERAL EVIDENCES OF EVOLUTION AS A UNIVERSAL LAW.

  _Evolution is continuity, causal relation, gradual becoming_
      --Increasing acceptance of this idea--First accepted
      for inorganic forms, mountains, continents and seas, rocks
      and soils, earth as a whole, heavenly bodies--Therefore
      acknowledged for all inorganics--Influence of geology in
      bringing about this change--Organic forms: acknowledged
      for individuals, true for classes, orders, families, genera
      --Races and varieties also formed gradually--Artificial
      species formed gradually--Examples of gradual changes in wild
      species--Hyatt’s researches--Other examples--Summing up
      of general evidence--Sufficient ground for induction--
      But evolution is not only inductively probable but certain,
      axiomatic--It is the law of causation applied to forms, and
      therefore a necessary truth                                     53


  CHAPTER II.

  SPECIAL PROOFS OF EVOLUTION.

  _Introductory._

  _Special proofs necessary_--Evolution, though certain, is not
      yet accepted by the popular mind--Different departments from
      which proofs are drawn                                          67

  _Origin of new organic forms; the old view briefly stated_--
      Necessary to give a brief statement of theories--Old view--
      Permanency of specific types--Supernatural origin of species
      --Centers of creation--Explanation of facts of geographical
      distribution--Of geological distribution--Modification of
      extreme view--Variability, but within limits--Illustrated       68

  _The new view briefly stated_--Indefinite variability of organic
      forms--Effect of environment on rigid forms--On plastic
      forms--Taxonomic groups represent degrees of kinship            72

  _Factors of evolution_--(1) Physical environment--(2) Use
      and disuse of organs--(3) Natural selection--(4) Sexual
      selection--(5) Physiological selection--Its necessity shown
      --Its operation explained--Compared with natural selection
      --Cause of variation unknown--Explanation of this is the
      next great step in the theory of evolution                      73


  CHAPTER III.

  THE GRADES OF THE FACTORS OF EVOLUTION AND THE ORDER OF THEIR
      APPEARANCE.

  _Factors of evolution restated; their grades and the order of
      their introduction shown_--Lamarckian factors, first
      in order because they precede sexual reproduction--(1)
      Environment--(2) Use and disuse--With sexual reproduction
      selective factors introduced--(3) Natural selection--(4)
      Physiological selection--(5) Sexual selection--With man
      was introduced (6) the rational factor--In this process
      two striking stages--viz., the introduction of sex and the
      introduction of reason--Effect of each to hasten the steps of
      evolution--The last by far the greater change                   81

  _Contrast between organic and human evolution_--(1) The
      meaning of term _fittest_ in each--(2) Destiny of the
      weak and helpless in each--(3) The nature of evolutionary
      transformation in each--(4) The law of strait and narrow way
      applied in each--(5) Human evolution is a different kind and
      on a higher plane                                               88

  _Application to some questions of the day._

  I. Neo-Darwinists, their position explained--Reasons for
      dissenting--(_a_) Lamarckian factors preceded all others--
      (_b_) Though now subordinate, they still underlie and condition
      all other factors--(_c_) Shown by comparison of phylogeny
      with ontogeny                                                   92

  II. Human progress not identical with organic evolution--Mistake
      of the materialists--But neither is it wholly different, as
      some suppose                                                    96

  III. Neo-Darwinism is fatal to hopes of human progress--Reason
      may use freely Lamarckian factors, but can not use natural
      selection in the same way as Nature does                        97


  CHAPTER IV.

  SPECIAL PROOFS FROM THE GENERAL LAWS OF ANIMAL STRUCTURE, OR
      COMPARISON IN THE TAXONOMIC SERIES.

  _General Principles._

  _Analogy and homology_--Defined and illustrated by examples--
      Wings and limbs--Lungs, gradual formation of, traced in the
      Taxonomic series--Traced in the Ontogenic series--Examples
      of homology in plants: tuber, cactus-leaf, acacia-leaf--
      Definitions repeated and further explained--Common origin is
      the only explanation of homology                                99

  _Primary divisions of the animal kingdom_--True ground of such
      divisions is ability to trace homology--We take examples
      only from vertebrata and articulata--Compare to styles of
      architecture--To machines--To branching stem                   107


  CHAPTER V.

  PROOFS FROM HOMOLOGIES OF THE VERTEBRATE SKELETON.

  _Common general plan_--In several respects--Strongly suggestive of
      common origin--Details of structure demonstrative of the same  111

  _Special homology of vertebrate limbs_                             113

  _Fore-limbs_--Comparison of fore-limbs of mammals, birds,
      reptiles, and fishes, part for part--Gradual changes in
      collar-bone and coracoid--In position of elbow--In bones
      of forearm--In position of wrist--In the tread--The term
      manus--Number of toes--Modifications for flight in various
      animals--For swimming in whales and fishes                     113

  _Hind-limbs_--Comparison of hind-limbs of several mammals--
      Position of knee--Of heel--Plantigrade and digitigrade
      --Degrees of the latter--Number of toes--General law in
      regard to number of similar parts--Order of toe-dropping in
      artiodactyles--In perissodactyles                              121

  _Genesis of the horse_--Changes in foot-structure--Same true
      of other parts of skeleton--Only natural explanation is
      derivation--Nature compared with man in mode of working--
      Angels--Griffins--Centaurs--Muscular and nervous systems
      --Visceral organs                                              126


  CHAPTER VI.

  HOMOLOGIES OF THE ARTICULATE SKELETON.

  _Illustrations from this type_--Plan of structure entirely
      different--General plan of structure explained and
      modifications shown--Shrimp--Modification of segments and
      of appendages for various purposes: swimming, walking, eating,
      sense--Illustrated by other crustaceans--By myriapods--
      By marine worms--Crabs--Embryonic development of crabs--
      insects--Modification of segments and appendages--Mouth
      parts of insects                                               132

  _Illustration of the law of differentiation_--Cells--Segments
      --Individuals--Homologies in other departments of animals,
      but these are less familiar--Between primary groups, homology
      untraceable in adult forms--But these also probably connected
      by common origin--Different views as to origin of vertebrates  144


  CHAPTER VII.

  PROOFS FROM EMBRYOLOGY, OR COMPARISON IN THE ONTOGENIC SERIES.

  _Resemblance of the three series_--Frog, in Ontogeny passes
      through main stages of Taxonomy and Phylogeny--Resemblance
      only general--Many steps dropped out in Ontogeny               148

  (1) _Ontogeny of tailless amphibians_--The frog: fish stage,
      perennibranch stage, caducibranch stage, aneural stage--Same
      stages in Phylogeny                                            150

  (2) _Aortic arches_--Those of lizard described--Origin from
      gill-arches of fish--Change from one to the other in Ontogeny
      of a frog--Same changes in Phylogeny of lizard--Embryonic
      condition of mammalian heart and vessels--Gradual change and
      final condition in birds--In mammals--Gradual decrease in
      number of aortic arches as we go up the vertebrate scale--
      Cogency of the argument from aortic arches                     151

  (3) _Vertebrate brain_--Fish brain--Brain of reptiles, birds,
      mammals, man compared--Human brain passes through similar
      stages--Changes in complexity of structure in Taxonomy--
      Same changes in Ontogeny of mammals--Same in Phylogeny of
      reptiles, birds, mammals                                       162

  _Cephalization_--Explanation of, in body, in mind                  171

  (4) _Fish-tails_--Homocercal and heterocercal--Vertebrated
      and non-vertebrated--Order of change in Ontogeny--Same
      in Phylogeny--Similar changes in birds’ tails in Ontogeny
      and Phylogeny--In other tailless animals--Examples from
      articulates, insects, crustaceans, etc.                        172

  _Illustration of the differentiation of the whole animal kingdom_
      --Development of eggs of all kinds of animals--This a type
      of changes in Phylogeny--Why Ontogeny repeats Phylogeny--
      Law of acceleration                                            176

  _Proofs from rudimentary and useless organs_--Examples from
      whale: Teeth--Limbs--Hair--Olfactive organs--Examples
      from man: muscles, cæcal appendage--Significance of useless
      organs                                                         179


  CHAPTER VIII.

  PROOFS FROM GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION OF ORGANISMS.

  _Geographical faunas and floras_--Conditions which limit           183

  _Temperature-regions_--Illustrated by plants--In latitude and
      in elevation--Same in animal species                           184

  _More perfect definition of regions_--Range of different
      Taxonomic groups--Gradual shadings on borders of range--
      Shadings out of individuals in number and vigor, but not in
      specific character--As if centers of origin--Effect of east
      and west barriers--Temperature regions repeated south of the
      equator, but not species--As if centers of origin              186

  _Continental faunas and floras_--Temperature zones continuous,
      but not species--Reason: ocean barriers--As if centers
      of origin--Polar regions: one. Why--Temperate zone--
      Different species in different continents--Species of United
      States and of Europe almost wholly different--As if origin
      local--Exceptions--(1) Introduced species--(2) Hardy or
      else wide-migrating species--(3) Alpine species--Tropical
      zone of two continents still more different--Same true of
      south temperate zone                                           188

  _Subdivisions of continental faunas and floras_--Illustrated by
      fauna and flora of United States                               191

  _Special Cases_--Australia--Madagascar--Galapagos--River
      mussels                                                        192

  _Marine species_--Same principles applicable--Therefore organic
      forms grouped in regions, sub-regions, provinces, etc.--
      Primary regions according to Wallace--According to Allen       192

  _Theory of the origin of geographical diversity_--Specific
      centers of creation--Objections to. The element of time left
      out--Progressive change in unlimited time, or evolution the
      only rational explanation--This connects with geographical
      changes in geological times, especially the Glacial epoch--
      Geographical diversity in other times                          193

  _Most probable view of the general process_--Last great period
      of change was the Glacial epoch--This, therefore, is the key
      to geographical distribution--Condition of things during the
      Glacial epoch---In America--Changes in temperature--In
      physical geography and in species--In Europe--Application
      of principles                                                  196

  (1) _Australia_--Characteristics of its fauna--Explanation
      of--Isolation very early--Position of marsupials and
      monotremes in the Taxonomic scale--Australia isolated before
      the Tertiary--Effect of competition on evolution               200

  (2) _Africa_--African region defined--Two groups of its
      mammals, indigenes, and invaders--Effect of the invasion       204

  (3) _Madagascar_--Characteristics of its fauna--Relation
      to African indigenes--Separated before the invasion--
      Significance of its lemurs                                     205

  (4) _Island life_--Two kinds of islands--Defined and
      illustrated by examples--(_a_) _Continental islands_--
      General character of fauna--Illustrated by Madagascar,
      New Zealand, British Islands, coast-islands of California
      --Characteristics of the faunas of these explained--(b)
      _Oceanic Islands_--Defined--Characteristics of faunas and
      their origin                                                   207

  (5) _Alpine species_--Characteristics of and their origin
      explained--Migrations of Arctic species during Glacial times,
      and their isolation on mountains                               215

  _Objection_--Mode of change of species on borders of ranges--
      Examples--Sweet-gum--Sequoia                                   217

  _Answer_--Distribution of these forms in time, and their
      migrations--They are remnants--Intermediate forms are extinct  219


  CHAPTER IX.

  PROOFS FROM VARIATION OF ORGANIC FORMS, ARTIFICIAL AND NATURAL.

  _Limitation of the use of experiment in morphology_--Unconscious
      experiments in breeding, and their results--Principles
      involved--Inheritance, immediate and ancestral--Effect of
      true breeding long continued--Method of selection illustrated
      by diagram--Formation of a race--Process the same in nature
      --Show selective effect of physical environment--Of organic
      environment--Of migrations--Of unlimited time--Other
      factors of change, and their effects shown in nature and in
      domestication--Differences between artificial and natural
      species                                                        222

  _First difference, reversion_--The tendency to reversion
      described--The reason explained--Illustrated by the case of
      the pointer                                                    229

  _Second difference, intermediate forms_--Reason is, these are
      eliminated in nature                                           232

  _Third difference, cross-fertility_--Natural species are usually
      cross-sterile--Degrees of cross-sterility--Two bases of
      species, morphological and physiological--Two kinds of
      isolation, sexual repugnance and cross-sterility--Latter most
      essential--Illustrated by plants and hermaphrodite animals--
      Former only higher animals--Natural laws interfered with by
      domestication--Illustrated by plants and animals               232

  _Law of cross-breeding_--Effect of close breeding--Of crossing
      varieties to a limit--The law investigated--Reproduction in
      lowest organisms--Fission--Gemmation--Internal gemmation
      --Sex introduced--Effect of, is funding of differences in
      offspring and tendency to variation--Sexual and non-sexual
      reproduction compared--Separation of sex elements--
      Of sex-individuals--Introduction of sex-attraction--
      Funding of greater differences in offspring--Crossing of
      varieties--Diagram illustrating effect in vigor--Effect
      also in plasticity--Application of these principles--
      Necessity of sexual isolation to produce species--Origin of
      cross-sterility and thus of species by Dr. Romanes’s idea--
      Why artificial varieties are cross-fertile--Geographical
      species sometimes cross-fertile--Application of principles--
      Absence of intermediate links in natural species explained--
      Under what conditions such are found--Further explanation of
      this point--Illustrated by a growing tree                      236

  _Objection answered_--Intermediate links ought to be found fossil
      --Answer (1) Imperfection of record. (2) The term species
      indefinite. (3) Transitions between all other taxonomic groups
      abundant. (4) Between species, also, both living and fossil
      --Of fossil, Planorbis of Steinheim--Other examples--(5)
      Why transition-forms are rare--Answer--Changes in every
      department of nature are paroxysmal--Illustrated--So the
      steps of evolution paroxysmal--Critical periods in evolution
      --Causes of rapid advance--Apparent discontinuity between
      species--(1) changes paroxysmal--(2) Brooks’s idea--Male
      sex is the progressive element--Illustrated by society--
      Effect of prosperous times--Mrs. Treat’s experiments--Hard
      times produce excess of males, and therefore tend to diversity
      --Summary                                                      248

  _Objection_--Egyptian drawings and mummy plants, show no change
      --Answer (1) Time too short. (2) We are now in time of slow
      change. (3) All species don’t change, most become extinct. (4)
      Evolution is probably slower now than formerly--Reasons for
      so thinking--Organic evolution approaching completion--
      Other supposed objections                                      265

  _Origin of beauty_--Explanation of, in higher animals--In
      flowering plants--But in many cases we can’t explain           269

  _Incipient organs_--Difficulty of explaining--But these are
      not objections to the _fact_ of evolution, but only to the
      sufficiency of the present _theories_ of evolution. Therefore,
      all discussion concerns special theories. The fact of evolution
      is certain                                                     270


  PART III.

  _THE RELATION OF EVOLUTION TO RELIGIOUS THOUGHT._


  CHAPTER I.

  INTRODUCTORY.

  _Evolution if true affects every department of thought_--What
      will be its effect on religious beliefs?--Objection that
      truth-seeker has nothing to do with effects--Answered          275

  _Relation of the true and the good_                                277

  _Relation of philosophy to life_--The three necessary elements
      of a rational philosophy--Application to the case in hand--
      And the subject of Part III justified--Exaggerated fears--
      Different forms of the conflict of science and religion--(1)
      Heliocentric theory--First effect and final result--(2) Law
      of gravitation--Effect and result--(3) Antiquity of the
      earth and cosmos--Effect and result--(4) Antiquity of man
      --(5) Evolution                                                277


  CHAPTER II.

  THE RELATION OF EVOLUTION TO MATERIALISM.

  _Supposed identity_--Tendency of the age--Evolution does not
      differ in this regard from other laws of Nature--Absurdity
      of identification illustrated in many ways--(1) Effect of
      discovery of process of making--(2) Effect of new form of old
      truth--(3) Manner in which vexed questions are settled and
      rational philosophy found--Illustrated--A true philosophy
      is a reconciliation of partial views--Three possible views
      of origin of individuals and of species; two one-sided and
      partial, and the third combining, reconciling, and therefore
      rational--The only bar to speedy reconciliation is dogmatism
      --Theological and scientific--The appropriate rebuke for
      each--Therefore evolution does not differ from other laws in
      regard to its relation to materialism--Nevertheless, great
      changes in our traditional beliefs impending--Main changes
      are notions concerning God, Nature, and man, in their relations
      to one another                                                 284


  CHAPTER III.

  THE RELATION OF GOD TO NATURE.

  The issue in regard to this relation stated--The growth of the
      issue described--The old view of direct relation--The
      effect of science and the resulting view--The compromise--
      Destroyed by evolution--The issue forced--The alternative
      view--Immanence of Deity--This view explained--Objection
      of idealism--Answered--It is not subjective idealism--
      Objection of pantheism--Answer deferred--Objection that the
      view is incompatible with practical life--Answered             297


  CHAPTER IV.

  THE RELATION OF MAN TO NATURE.

  _The two extreme views in this regard_--They are views from
      different points, psychical and material--The latter very
      productive in modern times--But many fear the final effect--
      Reconciliation is possible--Scientific materialism has two
      branches--_Physiological branch_ explained--Conclusion--
      Answer--Relation of psychic to brain changes is inscrutable
      --The mystery illustrated--Outside and inside view--
      Different from other phenomena in this regard                  304

  _Evolution branch_--Close relation of man to animals--Therefore
      must extend immortal spirit to animals--to plants--to all
      existence, and thus identify immortality with conservation
      of force--Embryonic series--Where did spirit enter?--
      Evolution series--Where did spirit enter?--Answer--
      Derived from Nature--The true view of origin stated--Show
      that it is not in discord with other phenomena of evolution
      --The five planes of matter and of force--The change from
      one to another not gradual now nor in the evolution of natural
      forces--Consecutive births into higher forms--Every step
      of these changes taking place now--Relation of these facts
      to immortality--The process briefly stated--Omnipresent
      divine energy individuated to separate entity in man--Anima
      of animals is spirit in embryo--Came to birth in man--
      Illustrated in other ways--(1) By more or less completed
      water-drop--(2) By submergence and emergence--(3) By
      planet birth--(4) By physical birth--(5) By grades of
      organic individuality--(6) By the body as an instrument of
      communication between two worlds--Self-consciousness the sign
      of spirit-individuality--Any animal conscious of self would
      be immortal--Similar changes in passing from animals to man
      in all other departments of psychic activity--Objection that
      other changes of energy not permanent; answered--Our view
      of origin compared with alternative views--Plato’s view--
      Orthodox view                                                  311

  _Some general conclusions_--(1) Two series of changes,
      brain-changes and mind-changes--The initiative in animals
      --In man--(2) Justification of term “_vital principle_”
      --Becomes entity in man--(3) This view is a complete
      reconciliation of realism and nominalism--(4) No meaning in
      Nature without spirit--And no meaning in geological history
      without derivative origin of spirit--Material evolution finds
      its goal in man, psychic evolution in the divine man           327


  CHAPTER V.

  THE RELATION OF GOD TO MAN.

  _Question of revelation_--Difficulty of the subject--Operation
      of divine spirit on spirit of man more direct than on Nature
      --This is revelation--This is no violation of law, but
      operation by higher law--Term supernatural is relative--
      Illustrated--There is but one kind of revelation, and this to
      all men in different degrees--Always imperfect, and therefore
      must be tried by reason                                        331


  CHAPTER VI.

  THE OBJECTION, THAT THE ABOVE VIEW IMPLIES PANTHEISM, ANSWERED.

  _The objection stated and the general answer_--In deepest
      questions single lines of thought lead to extreme views--Must
      follow other lines--These lead to personality                  335

  (1) Exact character of relation of God and of necessary law to
      man’s freedom is inscrutable                                   338

  (2) On the inside of brain-changes we find personality--So on
      the inside of natural phenomena must also be person--In
      either case science studies the outside only--In Nature
      all is mechanics on the outside, but all is mind on the
      inside--Thought behind brain-changes compels belief in same
      behind natural phenomena--Law of infinite expansion--
      Illustrated by ideas of Space and Time--So also with idea
      of self--Infinite person inconceivable, but contrary is more
      inconceivable--Illustrated by ideas of Space and Time          338

  (3) Idea of _Causation_ and of _Force_--Derived from _within_
      --Steps of the evolution of this idea--Final result is one
      infinite personal will--Expansion of idea of causal nexus
      between phenomena to the idea of one infinite cause            342

  (4) Idea of _design_ also originates _within_--Ineradicable, but
      changes form--Expands to infinity--Same change produced by
      science in all our notions concerning God--Same in our sense
      of _mystery_--Same in our notions concerning _creation_--
      Same in our conceptions of _design_--Thus, self-consciousness
      behind brain-changes compels belief in God behind Nature--The
      closeness of connection in the one case necessitates closeness
      of connection in the other--Every material change in Nature
      caused by a mental change behind Nature                        345


  CHAPTER VII.

  SOME LOGICAL CONSEQUENCES OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE DIVINE IMMANENCY.

  Religious thought subject to the law of evolution; three main
      stages                                                         351

  I. _Conception of God_--The three stages shown--(1)
      Anthropomorphism--(2) Absentee landlordism--(3) Immanence      351

  II. _Question of First and Second Causes_--The three stages shown
      here--(1) All is First Cause but man-like--(2) Distinction
      of first and second causes introduced--(3) Identification of
      these                                                          354

  III. _General and Special Providence_--The same three stages
      shown and the same outcome--viz., identification               355

  IV. _Natural and the supernatural_--The same stages and the same
      final identification--Question of miracles                     355

  V. _Question of design or mind in Nature_--The same three stages
      and the same solution shown here--Confusion in the minds of
      modern writers                                                 357

  VI. _Question of mode of creation_--Old and new views contrasted   358


  CHAPTER VIII.

  RELATION OF EVOLUTION TO THE IDEA OF THE CHRIST.

  Comparison of organic with human evolution--The idea of the first
      is _man_, of the second is the _Christ_--Definition of the
      Christ as _ideal man_--The Christ ought to differ from us
      in a superhuman way--Shown by several illustrations--The
      Christ, as ideal man, a true object of rational worship--The
      ideal of organic evolution comes _at the end_--Ideal of human
      evolution must come _in the course_--Objection that there are
      many partial ideals answered--Relative vs. absolute moral
      ideal.                                                         360


  CHAPTER IX.

  THE RELATION OF EVOLUTION TO THE PROBLEM OF EVIL.

  The difficulty of the problem--The light on it by evolution--
      Evil must be based on the constitution of Nature and therefore
      universal--Some of its forms                                   365

  (1) _Physical evil in animal kingdom_--Condition of organic
      evolution is struggle with an apparently inimical environment
      --In its course it seems evil--Looking back from the end it
      is good.                                                       365

  (2) _Physical evil in relation to man_--Necessary condition
      of social evolution is also struggle with a seeming evil
      environment--But looking back from the end this evil is also
      seen to be good--Without it man would never have emerged from
      animality.                                                     366

  (3) _Organic evil--Disease_--This also is the necessary
      condition of acquisition of knowledge of organic Nature--In
      the course of evolution it seems evil, but from the end it is
      seen to be good--In the physical world, laws of Nature are
      beneficent in their general operation, and only evil in their
      specific operation through our ignorance.                      367

  (4) _Moral evil--Moral disease_--Difference between this
      and other forms of evil--Can this also be transmuted into
      good?--This is only the highest form of evil, and therefore
      subject to the same laws of evolution--Here also elevation
      comes only through knowledge and power, and these only through
      struggle with apparent evil--In course it seems evil,
      looking back from end it is seen to be good to the race--
      In all, therefore, the individual is sacrificed to the race,
      but impossible here--A way of escape found in the nature of
      a moral being--In this case not only final victory for the
      race, but also within the power of the individual--In this
      case success is in proportion to honest effort in right spirit
      --Roots, of evil in the necessary law of evolution--It is
      the necessary condition of all progress--Without it a moral
      being is impossible--From philosophic point of view things
      are not good and evil, but only higher and lower--All things
      good in their places--Evil is discord--Good is due relation
      --Action and reaction of higher and lower is the necessary
      condition of true virtue                                       369




PART I.

_WHAT IS EVOLUTION?_




CHAPTER I.

ITS SCOPE AND DEFINITION.


=A Type of Evolution.=--Every one is familiar with the main facts
connected with the development of an egg. We all know that it begins as
a microscopic germ-cell, then grows into an egg, then organizes into
a chick, and finally grows into a cock; and that the whole process
follows some general, well-recognized law. Now, this process is
evolution. It is more--it is _the_ type of all evolution. It is that
from which we get our idea of evolution, and without which there would
be no such word. Whenever and wherever we find a process of change
more or less resembling this, and following laws similar to those
determining the development of an egg, we call it evolution.

_Universality of Evolution._--Evolution as a _process_ is not
confined to one thing, the egg, nor as a doctrine is it confined
to one department of science--biology. The process pervades the
whole universe, and the doctrine concerns alike every department of
science--yea, every department of human thought. It is literally one
half of all science. Therefore, its truth or falseness, its acceptance
or rejection, is no trifling matter, affecting only one small corner
of the thought-realm. On the contrary, it affects profoundly the
foundations of philosophy, and therefore the whole domain of thought.
It determines the whole attitude of the mind toward Nature and God.

I have said evolution constitutes one half of all science. This may
seem to some a startling proposition. I stop to make it good.

Every system of correlated parts may be studied from two points of
view, which give rise to two departments of science, one of which--and
the greater and more complex--is evolution. The one concerns changes
within the system by action and reaction between the parts, producing
equilibrium and stability; the other concerns the progressive movement
of the system, as a whole, to higher and higher conditions--the
movement of the point of equilibrium itself, by constant slight
disturbance and readjustment of parts on a higher plane, with more
complex inter-relations. The one concerns the laws of sustentation of
the system, the other the laws of evolution. The one concerns things as
they are, the other the process by which they become so. Now, Nature
as a whole is such a system of correlated parts. Every department and
sub-department of Nature, whether it be the solar system or the earth,
or the organic kingdom, or human society, or the human body, is such a
system of correlated parts, and is therefore subject to evolution. We
can best make this thought clear by examples:

1. Take, then, the _human body_. This complex and beautiful system
of correlated and nicely-adjusted parts may be studied in a state of
maturity and equilibrium, in which all the organs and functions by
action and reaction co-operate to produce perfect stability, health,
and physical happiness. This study is physiology. Or else the same may
be studied in a state of progressive change. Now, we perceive that the
stability is never perfect--the point of equilibrium is ever moving. By
the ever-changing number and relative power of the co-operating parts
the equilibrium is ever being disturbed, only to be readjusted on a
higher plane, with still more beautiful and complex inter-relations.
This is growth, development, evolution. Its study is called embryology.
2. Take another example--_the solar system_. We may study sun, planets,
and satellites in their mutual actions and reactions, co-operating to
produce perfect equilibrium, stability, beautiful order, and musical
harmony. This is the ideal of physical astronomy as embodied in
Laplace’s “Mécanique Céleste.” Or we may study the same in its origin
and progressive change. Now, we perceive that equilibrium and stability
are never absolutely perfect, but, on the contrary, there is continual
disturbance with readjustment on a higher plane--continual introduction
of infinitesimal discord, only to enhance the grandeur and complexity
of the harmonic relations. This is the nebular hypothesis--the theory
of the development of the solar system. It is cosmogony; it is
evolution. 3. Again: _society_ may be studied in the mutual play of
all its social functions so adjusted as to produce social equilibrium,
happiness, prosperity, and good government. This is social statics.
But equilibrium and stability are never perfect. Permanent social
equilibrium would be social stagnation and decay. Therefore, we must
study society also in its onward movement--the equilibrium ever
disturbed, only to be readjusted on a higher plane with more and more
complexly inter-related parts. This is dynamics--social progress. It
is evolution. 4. Again: the _earth_, as a whole, may be studied in
its present forms, and the mutual action of all its parts--lands and
seas, mountains and valleys, rivers, gulfs, and bays, currents of air
and ocean--and the manner in which all these, by action and reaction,
co-operate to produce climates and physical conditions such as we now
find them. This is physical geography. Or, we may study the earth
in its gradual progress toward its present condition--the changes
which have taken place in all these parts, and consequent changes in
climate; in a word, the gradual process of becoming what it now is.
This is physical geology--it is evolution. 5. Lastly, we may study
the whole _organic kingdom_ in its entirety as we now find it--the
mutual relation of different classes, orders, genera, and species to
each other and to external conditions, and the action and reaction
of these in the struggle for life--the geographical distribution of
species and their relation to climate and other physical conditions,
the whole constituting a complexly adjusted and permanent equilibrium.
This is a science of great importance, but one not yet distinctly
conceived, much less named.[1] Or, we may study the same in its gradual
progressive approach, throughout all geological times, toward the
present condition of things, by continual changes in the parts, and
therefore disturbance of equilibrium and readjustment on a higher plane
with more complex inter-relations. This is development of the organic
kingdom. In the popular mind it is, _par excellence_, evolution.

We might multiply examples without limit. There are the same two
points of view on all subjects. As already said, in the one we are
concerned with things as they are; in the other, with the process
by which they became so. This “law of becoming” in all things--this
universal law of progressive inter-connected change--may be called the
law of continuity. We all recognize the universal relation of things,
gravitative or other, in space. This asserts the universal causal
relation of things in _time_. This is the universal law of evolution.

But it has so happened that in the popular mind the term evolution
is mostly confined to the development of the organic kingdom, or
the law of continuity as applied to this department of Nature. The
reason of this is that this department was the last to acknowledge
the supremacy of this law; this is the domain in which the advocates
of supernaturalism in the realm of Nature had made their last stand.
But it is wholly unphilosophical thus to limit the term. If there be
any evolution, _par excellence_, it is evolution of the individual or
embryonic development. This is the clearest, the most familiar, and
most easily understood, and therefore the type of evolution. We first
take our idea of evolution from this form, and then extend it to other
forms of continuous change following a similar law. But, since the
popular mind limits the term to development of the organic kingdom, and
since, moreover, this is now the battleground between the advocates
of continuity and discontinuity--of naturalism and supernaturalism in
the _realm of Nature_--what we shall say will have reference chiefly
to this department, though we shall illustrate freely by reference to
other forms of evolution.


DEFINITION OF EVOLUTION.

Evolution is (1) continuous _progressive change_, (2) _according to
certain laws_, (3) and by means of _resident forces_. It may doubtless
be defined in other and perhaps better terms, but this suits our
purposes best. Embryonic development is the type of evolution. It
will be admitted that this definition is completely realized in this
process. The change here is certainly continuously progressive; it is
according to certain well-ascertained laws; it is by forces (vital
forces) resident in the egg itself. Is, then, the process of change
in the organic kingdom throughout geologic times like this? Does it
correspond to the definition given above? Does IT also deserve the
name of evolution? We shall see.

I. =Progressive Change.=--Every individual animal body--say man’s--has
become what it now is by a gradual process. Commencing as a microscopic
spherule of living but apparently unorganized protoplasm, it gradually
added cell to cell, tissue to tissue, organ to organ, and function to
function; thus becoming more and more complex in the mutual action of
its correlated parts, as it passed successively through the stages of
germ, egg, embryo, and infant, to maturity. This ascending series of
genetically connected stages is called the embryonic or _Ontogenic_
series.[2]

There is another series the terms of which are coexistent, and which,
therefore, is not in any sense a genetic or development series, but
which it is important to mention, because to some degree similar to
and illustrative of the last. Commencing with the lowest unicelled
microscopic organisms, and passing up to the animal scale, _as it now
exists_, we find a series of forms similar, though not identical, with
the last. Here, again, we find cell added to cell, tissue to tissue,
organ to organ, and function to function, the animal body becoming more
and more complex in structure, in the mutual action of its correlated
parts, and the mutual action with the environment, until we reach the
highest complexity of structure and of internal and external relations
only in the highest animals. This ascending series may be called
the natural history series; or, the classification or _Taxonomic
series_.[3] The terms of this series are, of course, not genetically
connected; at least, not directly so connected. In what way they are
connected, and how the series comes to be similar to the last, we shall
see by-and-by.

Finally, there is still a third series, the grandest and most
fundamental of all, but only recently recognized, and therefore
still imperfectly known. Commencing with the earliest organisms,
the very dawn of life, in the very lowest rocks, and passing onward
and upward through Eozoic, Palæozoic, Mesozoic, Cenozoic, to the
Psychozoic or present time, we again find first the lowest forms,
and then successively forms more and more complex in structure, in
the interaction of correlated parts and in interaction with the
environment, until we reach the most complex internal and external
relations, and therefore the highest structure only in the present
time.[4] This series we will call the geological or _phylogenic_
series.[5] According to the evolution theory, the terms of _this_
series also are genetically connected. It is, therefore, an evolution
series. Furthermore, it is the most fundamental of the three series,
because it is the _cause_ of the other two. The Ontogenic series is
like it because it is a brief recapitulation, through heredity, as it
were from memory, of its main points. The Taxonomic series is like
it because the _rate_ of advance along different lines was different
in every degree, and therefore every stage of the advance is still
represented in a general way among existing forms. Some of these points
will be explained more fully in future chapters, in connection with the
evidences of the truth of evolution.

It will be admitted, then, that we find _progressive change_ in organic
forms throughout geological times. This is the first point in the
definition of evolution.

II. =Change according to Certain Laws.=--We have shown continuously
progressive change in organic forms during the whole geologic history
of the earth, similar in a general way to that observed in embryonic
development. We wish now to show that the _laws of change_ are similar
in the two cases. What, then, are the laws of succession of organic
forms in geologic times? I have been accustomed to formulate them thus:
_a._ The law of differentiation; _b._ The law of progress of the whole;
_c._ The law of cyclical movement.[6] We will take up these and explain
them successively, and then, afterward, show that they are also the
laws of embryonic development, and therefore the laws of evolution.

_a._ =Law of Differentiation.=--It is a most significant fact, to
which attention was first strongly directed by Louis Agassiz, that
the earliest representatives of any group, whether class, order, or
family, were not what we would now call typical representatives of
that group; but, on the contrary, they were, in a wonderful degree,
connecting links; that is, that along with their distinctive classic,
ordinal, or family characters they possessed also other characters
which connected them closely with other classes, orders, or families,
now widely distinct, without connecting links or intermediate forms.
For example: The earliest vertebrates were fishes, but not typical
fishes. On the contrary, they were fishes so closely connected by many
characters with amphibian reptiles, that we hardly know whether to
call some of them reptilian fishes, or fish-like reptiles. From these,
as from a common vertebrate stem, were afterward separated, by slow
changes from generation to generation, in two directions, the typical
fishes and the true reptiles. So, also, to take another example, the
first birds were far different from typical birds as we now know them.
They were, on contrary, birds so reptilian in character, that there
is still some doubt whether bird-characters or reptilian characters
predominate in the mixture, and therefore whether they ought to be
called reptilian birds or bird-like reptiles. From this common stem,
the more specialized modern reptiles branched off in one direction and
typical birds in another, and intermediate forms became extinct; until
_now_, the two classes stand widely apart, without apparent genetic
connection. This subject will be more fully treated hereafter, and
other examples given. These two will be sufficient now to make the idea
clear.

Such early forms combining the characters of two or more groups,
now widely separated, were called by Agassiz _connecting_ types,
_combining_ types, _synthetic_ types, and sometimes _prophetic_ types;
by Dana, _comprehensive_ types; and by Huxley, _generalized_ types.
They are most usually known now as _generalized_ types, and their
widely-separated outcomes _specialized_ types. Thus, in general, we may
say that the widely-separated groups of the present day, when traced
back in geological times, approach one another more and more until they
finally unite to form common stems, and these in their turn unite to
form a common trunk. From such a common trunk, by successive branching
and rebranching, each branch taking a different direction, and all
growing wider and wider apart (differentiation), have been gradually
generated all the diversified forms which we see at the present day.
The last leafy ramifications--flower-bearing and fruit-bearing--of this
tree of life, are the fauna and flora of the present epoch. The law
might be called a law of ramification, of specialization of the parts,
and diversification of the whole.

_b._ =Law of Progress of the Whole.=--Many imagine that progress is
the one law of evolution; in fact, that evolution and progress are
coextensive and convertible terms. They imagine that in evolution the
movement must be upward and onward in all parts; that degeneration
is the opposite of evolution. This is far from the truth. There
is, doubtless, in evolution, progress to higher and higher planes;
but not along every line, nor in every part; for this would be
contrary to the law of differentiation. It is only progress of the
whole organic kingdom in its entirety. We can best make this clear
by an illustration. A growing tree branches and again branches _in
all directions_, some branches going upward some sidewise, and some
downward--anywhere, everywhere, for light and air; but the whole tree
grows ever taller in its higher branches, larger in the circumference
of its outstretching arms, and more diversified in structure. Even
so the tree of life, by the law of differentiation, branches and
rebranches continually in all directions--some branches going upward
to higher planes (progress), some pushing horizontally; neither rising
nor sinking, but only going farther from the generalized origin
(specialization); some going downward (degeneration), anywhere,
everywhere, for an unoccupied place in the economy of Nature, but the
whole tree grows ever higher in its highest parts, grander in its
proportions, and more complexly diversified in its structure.

It may be well to pause here a moment to show how this mistaken
identification of evolution with progress alone, without modification
by the more fundamental laws of differentiation, has given rise to
misconceptions in the popular and even in the scientific mind. The
biologist is continually met with the question, “Do you mean to say
that any one of the invertebrates, such, for instance, as a spider,
may eventually, in the course of successive generations, become a
vertebrate, or that a dog or a monkey is on the highway to become a
man?” By no means. There is but one straight and narrow way to the
highest in evolution as in all else, and few there be that have found
it--in fact, probably two or three only at every step. The animals
mentioned above have diverged from that way. In their ancestral
history, they have missed the golden opportunity, if they ever had it.
It is easy to go on in the way they have chosen, but impossible to get
back on the ascending trunk-line. To compare again with the growing
tree, only one straight trunk-line leads upward to the terminal bud. A
branch once separated must grow its own way, if it grow at all.

Of the same nature is the mistake of some extreme evolutionists,
such as Dr. Bastian and Professor Haeckel, and of nearly all
anti-evolutionists, viz., that of imagining that the truth of
evolution and that of spontaneous generation must stand or fall
together. On the contrary, _if_ life did _once_ arise spontaneously
from any lower forces, physical or chemical, by natural process,
_the conditions necessary for so extraordinary a change could hardly
be expected to occur but once in the history of the earth_. They
are, therefore, _now_, not only unreproducible, but unimaginable.
Such golden opportunities do not recur. Evolution goes only onward.
Therefore, the impossibility of the derivation of life from non-life
_now_, is no more an argument against such a derivation _once_, than
is the hopelessness of a worm ever becoming a vertebrate _now_, an
argument against the derivative origin of vertebrates. Doubtless if
life were now extinguished from the face of the earth, it could not
again be rekindled by any natural process known to us; but the same is
probably true of every step of evolution. If any class--for example,
mammals--were now destroyed, it could not be re-formed from any other
class now living. It would be necessary to go back to the time and
conditions of the separation of this class from the reptilian stem.
Therefore, the falseness of the doctrine of abiogenesis,[7] so far from
being any argument against evolution, is exactly what a true conception
of evolution and knowledge of its laws would lead us to expect.

_c._ =Law of Cyclical Movement.=--The movement of evolution has ever
been onward and upward, it is true, but not at uniform rate in the
whole, and especially in the parts. On the contrary, it has plainly
moved in successive cycles. The tide of evolution rose ever higher and
higher, without ebb, but it nevertheless came in successive waves,
each higher than the preceding and overborne by the succeeding. These
successive cycles are the dynasties or reigns of Agassiz, and ages
of Dana; the reign of mollusks, the reign of fishes, of reptiles,
of mammals, and finally of _man_. During the early Palæozoic times
(Cambrian and Silurian) there were no vertebrates.[8] But never in
the history of the earth were mollusks of greater size, number, and
variety of form than then. They were truly the rulers of these early
seas. In the absence of competition of still higher animals, they had
things all their own way, and therefore grew into a great monopoly of
power. In the later Palæozoic (Devonian) fishes were introduced. They
increased rapidly in size, number, and variety; and being of higher
organization they quickly usurped the empire of the seas, while the
mollusca dwindled in size and importance, and sought safety in a less
conspicuous position. In the Mesozoic times, reptiles, introduced a
little earlier,[9] finding congenial conditions and an unoccupied
place above, rapidly increased in number, variety, and size, until
sea and land seem to have swarmed with them. Never before or since
have reptiles existed in such numbers, in such variety of form, or
assumed such huge proportions; nor have they ever since been so
highly organized as then. They quickly became rulers in every realm
of Nature--rulers of the sea, swimming reptiles; rulers of the land,
walking reptiles; and rulers of the air, flying reptiles. In the
unequal contest, fishes therefore sought safety in subordination.
Meanwhile mammals were introduced in the Mesozoic, but small in size,
low in type (marsupials), and by no means able to contest the empire
with the great reptiles. But in the Cenozoic (Tertiary) the conditions
apparently becoming favorable for their development, they rapidly
increased in number, size, variety, and grade of organization, and
quickly overpowered the great reptiles, which almost immediately sank
into the subordinate position in which we now find them, and thus
found comparative safety. Finally, in the Quaternary, appeared man,
contending doubtfully for a while, with the great mammals, but soon (in
Psychozoic) acquiring mastery through superior intelligence. The huge
and dangerous mammals were destroyed and are still being destroyed; the
useful animals and plants were preserved and made subservient to his
wants; and all things on the face of the earth are being readjusted to
the requirements of his rule. In all cases it will be observed that
the rulers were such because, by reason of strength, organization, and
intelligence, they were fittest to rule. There is always room at the
top. To illustrate again by a growing tree: This successive culmination
of higher and higher classes may be compared to the flowering and
fruiting of successively higher and higher branches. Each uppermost
branch, under the genial heat and light of direct sunshine, received in
abundance by reason of position, grew rapidly, flowered, and fruited;
but quickly dwindled when overshadowed by still higher branches, which,
in their turn, monopolized for a time the precious sunshine.

But observe, furthermore: when each ruling class declined in
importance, it did not perish, but continued in a subordinate position.
Thus, the whole organic kingdom became not only higher and higher in
its highest forms, but also more and more complex in its structure and
in the interaction of its correlated parts. The whole process and its
result is roughly represented in the accompanying diagram, Fig. 1, in
which A B represents the course of geological time and the curve, the
rise, culmination, and decline of successive dominant classes.

[Illustration:

  MOLLUSCS--Silurian.
  FISHES--Devon. and Carb.
  REEPTILES--Mesozoic.
  MAMMALS--Tert’y and Quat.
  MAN--Present.

FIG. 1.]


THE ABOVE THREE LAWS ARE LAWS OF EVOLUTION.

These three laws we have shown are distinctly recognizable in the
succession of organic forms in the geological history of the earth.
They are, therefore, undoubtedly the _general laws of succession_. Are
they also laws of evolution? Are they also discoverable in embryonic
development, the type of evolution? They are, as we now proceed to show:

=Differentiation.=--In reproduction the new individual appears: 1.
As a _germ_-cell--a single microscopic living cell. 2. Then, by
growth and multiplication of cells, it becomes an _egg_. This may be
characterized as an aggregate of _similar_ cells, and therefore is
not yet differentiated into tissues and organs. In other words, it
is not yet visibly organized; for organization may be defined as the
possession of different parts, performing different functions, and
all co-operating for one given end, viz., the life and well-being of
the organism. 3. Then commences the really characteristic process of
development, viz., _differentiation_ or diversification. The cells
are at first all alike in form and function, for all are globular in
form, and each performs all the functions necessary for life. From
this common point now commences development in _different directions_,
which may be compared to a branching and rebranching, with more and
more complex results, according as the animal is higher in the scale
of organization and advances toward a state of maturity. First, the
cell-aggregate (egg) separates into three distinct layers of cells,
called ecto-blast, endo-blast, and meso-blast. These by further
differentiation form the three fundamental groups of organs and
functions, viz., the _nervous system_, the _nutritive system_, and the
_blood system_: the first presiding over the exchange of _force_ or
influence, by action and reaction with the environment, and between the
different parts of the organism; the second presiding over the exchange
of _matter_ with the environment, by absorption and elimination; the
third presiding over exchanges of matter between different parts of
the organism. The first system of functions and organs may be compared
to a system of telegraphy, foreign and domestic; the second to foreign
commerce; the third to an internal carrying-trade. Following out any
one of these groups in higher animals, say the nervous system, it
quickly differentiates again into two sub-systems, viz., cerebro-spinal
and ganglionic, each having its own distinctive functions, which we
can not stop to explain. Then the cerebro-spinal again differentiates
into voluntary and reflex systems. All of these have meanwhile
separated into sensory and motor centers and fibers. Then, taking
only the sensory fibers, these again are differentiated into five
special senses, each having a wholly different function. Then, finally,
taking any one of these, say the _sense of touch_ or feeling, this
again is differentiated into many kinds of fibers, each responding to
a different impression, some to heat, others to cold, still others
to pressure, etc. We have taken the nervous system; but the same
differentiation and redifferentiation takes place in all other systems,
and is carried to higher and higher points according to the position in
the scale of the animal which is to be formed.

Or, to vary the mode of presentation a little, the cells of the
original aggregate, commencing all alike, immediately begin to take on
different forms, in order to perform different functions. Some cells
take on a certain form and aggregate themselves to form a peculiar
tissue which we call muscle, and which does nothing else, can do
nothing else, than contract under stimulus. Another group of cells
take on another peculiar form and aggregate themselves to form another
and very different tissue, viz., nervous tissue, which does nothing
and can do nothing but carry influence back and forth between the
great external world and the little world of consciousness within.
Still another group of cells take still another form and aggregate
to form still another tissue, viz., the _epithelial_, whose only
function is to absorb nutritive and eliminate waste matters. Thus, by
differentiation of form and limitation of function, or division of
labor, the different parts of the organism are bound more and more
closely together by mutual dependence, and the whole becomes more and
more distinctly individuated, and separation of parts becomes more and
more a mutilation, and finally becomes impossible without death. This
process, as already said, reaches its highest point only in the later
stages of development of the highest animals.

=Progress.=--The _law of progress_ is, of course, admitted to be a
law of ontogeny; but observe here, also, it is true only of the whole
and not necessarily of all the parts, _except from the point of view
of the whole_. Thus, for example, starting all from a common form or
generalized type, some cells _advance_ to the dignity of brain-cells,
whose function is somehow connected with the generation or at least
the manifestation of thought, will, and emotion; other cells _descend_
to the position of kidney-cells, whose sole function is the excretion
of urine. But here, also, the highest cells are successively higher,
and the whole aggregate is successively nobler and more complex. It
is again a branching and rebranching, in every direction, some going
upward, some downward, some horizontally, anywhere, everywhere, to
increase the complexity of relations internal and external, and
therefore to elevate the plane of the whole.

=Cyclical Movement.=--Lastly, the law of cyclical movement is also a
law of ontogeny and therefore of evolution. This law, however, is less
fundamental than the other two, and is, therefore, less conspicuous in
the ontogenic than in the phylogenic series. It is conspicuous only in
the later stages of ontogeny, and in other higher kinds of evolution,
such as social evolution. For example, in the ontogenic development of
the body and mind from childhood to manhood we have plainly successive
culminations and declines of higher and higher functions. In bodily
development we have culminating first the _nutritive_ functions, then
the _reproductive_ and _muscular_, and last the _cerebral_. In mental
development we have culmination first of the receptive and retentive
faculties in childhood, then of imaginative and æsthetic faculties
in youth and young manhood; then of the reflective and elaborative
faculties--the faculties of productive work in mature manhood; and,
finally, the moral and religious sentiments in old age. The first
gathers and stores materials; the second vivifies and makes them
plastic building materials; the third uses them in actual constructive
work--in building the temple of science and philosophy; and the fourth
dedicates that temple only to noblest purposes.

Observe here, also, that when each group of faculties culminates and
declines, it does not perish, but only becomes subordinate to the next
higher dominant group, and the whole psychical organism becomes not
only higher and higher in its highest parts, but also more and more
complex in its structure and in the interaction of its correlated parts.

Observe, again, the necessity laid upon us by this law--the necessity
of continued evolution to the end. Childhood, beautiful childhood,
can not remain--it must quickly pass. If, with the decline of its
characteristic faculties, the next higher group characteristic of youth
do not increase and become dominant, then the glory of life is already
past and deterioration begins. Have we not all seen sad examples of
this? Youth, glorious youth, must also pass. If the next higher group
of reflective and elaborative faculties do not arise and dominate, then
progressive deterioration of character commences here--thenceforward
the whole nature becomes coarse, as we so often see in young men,
or else shrivels and withers, as we so often see in young women.
Finally, manhood, strong and self-relying manhood, must also pass. If
the moral and religious sentiments have not been slowly growing and
gathering strength all along, and do not now assert their dominance
over the whole man, then commences the final and saddest decline of
all, and old age becomes the pitiable thing we so often see it. But,
if the evolution have been normal throughout; if the highest moral and
religious nature have been gathering strength through all, and now
dominates all, then the psychic evolution rises to the end--then the
course of life is like a wave rising and cresting only at the moment
of its dissolution, or, like the course of the sun, if not brightest
at least most glorious in its setting. And thus--may we not hope?--the
glories of the close of a well-spent life become the pledge and
harbinger of an eternal to-morrow?

We have thus far illustrated the three laws of succession of organic
forms by ontogeny, because this is the type of evolution; but they
may be illustrated also by other forms of evolution. Next to the
development of the individual, undoubtedly the _progress of society_
furnishes the best illustration of these laws.

Commencing with a condition in which each individual performs all
necessary social functions, but very imperfectly; in which each
individual is his own shoemaker and tailor, and house-builder and
farmer, and therefore all persons are socially alike; as society
advances, the constituent members begin to diverge, some taking on
one social function and some another, until in the highest stages of
social organization this diversification or division and subdivision
of labor reaches its highest point, and each member of the aggregate
can do perfectly but one thing. Thus, the social organism becomes
more and more strongly bound together by mutual dependence, and
separation becomes mutilation. I do not mean to say that this extreme
is desirable, but only that an approach to this is _a_ natural law of
social development. _Is not this the law of differentiation?_

So also _progress_ is here, as in other forms of evolution--a _progress
of the whole_, but not necessarily of every part. Some members of
the social aggregate advance _upward_ to the dignity of statesmen,
philosophers, and poets; some advance _downward_ to the position
of scavengers and sewer-cleansers.[10] But the highest members are
progressively higher, and the whole aggregate is progressively grander
and more complex in structure and functions.

So, again, the _law of cyclical movement_ is equally conspicuous here.
Society everywhere advances, not uniformly, but by successive waves,
each higher than the last; each urged by a new and higher social
force, and embodying a new and higher phase of civilization. Again:
as each phase declines, its characteristic social force is not lost,
but becomes incorporated into the next higher phase as a subordinate
principle, and thus the social organism as a whole becomes not only
higher and higher, but also more and more complex in the mutual
relations of its interacting social forces.

Let us not be misunderstood, however. There is undoubtedly in social
evolution something more and higher than we have described, but which
does not concern us here, except to guard against misconstruction.
There is in society a _voluntary progress_ wholly different from the
evolution we have been describing. In _true_ or material evolution
natural law works for the betterment of the whole utterly regardless
of the elevation of the individual, and the individual contributes to
the advance of the whole quite unconsciously while striving only for
his own betterment. This unconscious evolution by natural law inherited
from the animal kingdom is conspicuous enough in society, especially in
its early stages, but we would make a great mistake if we imagined, as
some do, that this is all. Besides the unconscious evolution by natural
laws, _inherited from below_, there is a higher evolution, _inherited
from above_, indissolubly connected with man’s spiritual nature--a
conscious, voluntary striving of the best members of the social
aggregate for the betterment of the whole--a conscious, voluntary
striving both of the individual and of society toward a recognized
_ideal_. In the one kind of evolution the fittest are those most in
harmony with the environment, and which therefore always survive; in
the other, the fittest are those most in harmony with the ideal, and
which often do not survive. The laws of this free voluntary progress
are little understood. They are of supreme importance, but do not
specially concern us here. We will speak of it again in another chapter.

The three laws above mentioned might be illustrated equally well by all
other forms of evolution. We have selected only those which are most
familiar. They may, therefore, be truly called the laws of evolution.
We have shown that they are the laws of succession of organic forms.

=III. Change by Means of Resident Forces.=--Thus far in our argument
I suppose that most well-informed men will raise no objection. It
will be admitted, I think, even by those most bitterly opposed to
the theory of evolution, that there has been throughout the whole
geological history of the earth an onward movement of the organic
kingdom to higher and higher levels. It will be admitted, also, that
there is a grand and most significant resemblance between the course
of development of the organic kingdom and the course of embryonic
development--between the laws of succession of organic forms and the
laws of ontogenic evolution. But there is another essential element in
ontogenic evolution. It is that the _forces_ or causes of evolution
are _natural_; that they reside in the thing developing and in the
reacting environment. This we know is true of embryonic development; is
it true also of the geologic succession of organic forms? It is true of
ontogeny; is it true also of phylogeny? If not, then only by a metaphor
can we call the process of change in the organic kingdom throughout
geological history an evolution. This is the point of discussion, and
not only of discussion, but, alas! of heated and even angry dispute.
The field of discussion is thus narrowed to this third point only.

Before stating the two opposite views of the cause of evolution, it
is necessary to remind the reader that when the evolutionist speaks
of the forces that determine progressive changes in organic forms
as _resident_ or _inherent_, all that he means, or ought to mean,
is that they are resident in the same sense as all natural forces
are resident; in the same sense that the vital forces of the embryo
are resident in the embryo, or that the forces of the development of
the solar system according to the nebular or any other cosmogonic
hypotheses are resident in that system. In other words, they mean only
that they are _natural_, not supernatural. This does not, of course,
touch that deeper, that deepest of all questions, viz., the essential
_nature and origin of natural forces_; how far they are independent
and self-existent, and how far they are only modes of divine energy.
This is a question of philosophy, not of science. This question is
briefly discussed in another place (Part III, Chap. III); it does not
immediately concern us here.

=The Two Views briefly Contrasted.=--As already stated, all will admit
a grand resemblance between the stages of embryonic development and
those of the development of the organic kingdom. This was first brought
out clearly by Louis Agassiz, and is, in fact, the greatest result
of his life-work. All admit, also, that the embryonic development is
a natural process. Is the development of the organic kingdom also a
natural process? All biologists of the present day contend that it
is; all the old-school naturalists, with Agassiz at their head, and
all anti-evolutionists of every school, contend that it is not. We
take Agassiz as the type of this school, because he has most fully
elaborated and most distinctly formulated this view. As formulated by
him, it has stood in the minds of many as an alternative and substitute
for evolution.

According to the evolutionists, all organic forms, whether species,
genera, families, orders, classes, etc., are variable, and, if external
conditions favor, these variations accumulate in one direction and
gradually produce new forms, the intermediate links being usually
destroyed or dying out. According to Agassiz, the higher groups,
such as genera, families, orders, etc., are indeed variable by the
introduction of new species, but species are the ultimate elements of
classification, and, like the ultimate elements of chemistry, are
unchangeable; and, therefore, the speculations of the evolutionist
concerning the transmutation of species are as vain as were the
speculations of the alchemists concerning the transmutation of
metals--that the origin of man, for example, from any lower species
is as impossible as the origin of gold from any baser metal. Both
sides admit frequent change of species during geological history, but
one regards the change as a change by gradual _transmutation_ of one
species _into_ another through successive generations and by _natural_
process, the other as change by _substitution_ of one species _for_
another by direct supernatural _creative act_. Both admit the gradual
development of the organic kingdom as a whole through stages similar
to those of embryonic development; but the one regards the whole
process as natural, and therefore strictly comparable to embryonic
development, the other as requiring frequent special interference of
creative energy, and therefore comparable rather to the development
of a building under the hand and according to the preconceived plan
of an architect--a plan, in this case, conceived in eternity and
carried out consistently through infinite time. It is seen that the
essential point of difference is this: The one asserts the variability
of species (if conditions favor, and time enough is given) without
limit; the other asserts the permanency of specific forms, or their
variability only within narrow limits. The one asserts the origin
of species by “_descent with modifications_”; the other, the origin
of species by “_special act of creation_.” The one asserts the law
of continuity (i. e., that each stage is the natural outcome of the
immediately preceding stage) in this, as in every other department of
Nature; the other asserts that the law of continuity (i. e., of cause
and effect) does not hold in this department; that the links of the
chain of changes are discontinuous, the connection between them being
intellectual, not physical.

So much for sharp contrasting characterization of the two views,
necessary for clear understanding of much that follows. We will have
to give them more fully hereafter when we take up the evidences of
evolution in Part II.




