CHAPTER II.

THE RELATION OF EVOLUTION TO MATERIALISM.


It is seen in the sketch given in the previous chapter that, after
every struggle between theology and science, there has been a
readjustment of some beliefs, a giving up of some notions which really
had nothing to do with religion in a proper sense, but which had
become so _associated_ with religious belief as be to confounded with
the latter--a giving up of some line of defense which ought never to
have been held because not within the rightful domain of theology at
all. Until the present the whole difficulty has been the result of
misconception, and Christianity has emerged from every struggle only
strengthened and purified, by casting off an obstructing shell which
hindered its growth. But the present struggle seems to many an entirely
different and far more serious matter. To many it seems no longer
a struggle of theology, but of essential religion itself--a deadly
life-and-death struggle between religion and materialism. To many,
both skeptics and Christians, evolution seems to be synonymous with
blank materialism, and therefore cuts up by the roots every form of
religion by denying the existence of God and the fact of immortality.
That the enemies of religion, if there be any such, should assume and
insist on this identity, and thus carry over the whole accumulated
evidence of evolution as a demonstration of materialism, although
wholly unwarranted, is not so surprising; but what shall we say of the
incredible folly of her friends in admitting the same identity!

A little reflection will explain this. There can be no doubt that there
is at present a strong and to many an overwhelming tendency toward
materialism. The amazing achievements of modern science; the absorption
of intellectual energy in the investigation of external nature and
the laws of matter have created a current in that direction so strong
that of those who feel its influence--of those who do not stay at
home, shut up in their creeds, but walk abroad in the light of modern
thought--it sweeps away and bears on its bosom all but the strongest
and most reflective minds. Materialism has thus become a fashion of
thought; and, like all fashions, must be guarded against. This tendency
has been created and is now guided by science. Just at this time it is
strongest in the department of biology, and especially is evolution its
stronghold. This theory is supposed by many to be simply demonstrative
of materialism. Once it was the theory of gravitation which seemed
demonstrative of materialism. The sustentation of the universe by law
seemed to imply that Nature operates itself and needs no God. That time
is passed. Now it is evolution and creation by law. This will also
pass. The theory seems to many the most materialistic of all scientific
doctrine only because it is the _last_ which is claimed by materialism,
and the absurdity of the claim is not yet made clear to many.

The truth is, there is no such necessary connection between evolution
and materialism as is imagined by some. There is no difference in this
respect between evolution and any other law of Nature. In evolution,
it is true, the last barrier is broken down, and the whole domain of
nature is now subject to law; but it is only _the last_; the march
of science has been in the same direction all the time. In a word,
evolution is not only not identical with materialism, but, to the deep
thinker, it has not added a feather’s weight to its probability or
reasonableness. Evolution is one thing and materialism quite another.
The one is an established law of nature, the other an unwarranted and
hasty inference from that law. Let no one imagine, as he is conducted
by the materialistic scientist in the paths of evolution from the
inorganic to the organic, from the organic to the animate, from the
animate to the rational and moral, until he lands, as it seems to him,
logically and inevitably, in universal materialism--let no such one
imagine that he has walked all the way in the domain of science. He
has stepped across the boundary into the domain of philosophy. But,
on account of the strong tendency to materialism and the skillful
guidance of his leaders, there seems to be no such boundary; he does
not distinguish between the inductions of science and the inferences
of a shallow philosophy; the whole is accredited to science, and the
final conclusion seems to carry with it all the certainty which belongs
to scientific results. The fact that these materialistic conclusions
are reached by some of the foremost scientists of the present day adds
nothing to their probability. In a question of science, viz., the law
of evolution, their authority is deservedly high, but in a question
of philosophy, viz., materialism, it is far otherwise. If the pure
scientists smile when theological philosophers, unacquainted with the
methods of science, undertake to dogmatize on the subject of evolution,
they must pardon the philosophers if they also smile when the pure
scientists imagine that they can at once solve questions in philosophy
which have agitated the human mind from the earliest times. I am
anxious to show the absurdity of this materialistic conclusion, but I
shall try to do so, not by any labored argument, but by a few simple
illustrations.

1. It is curious to observe how, when the question is concerning a
work of Nature, we no sooner find out how a thing is made than we
immediately exclaim: “It is not made at all, it became so of itself!”
So long as we knew not how worlds were made, we of course concluded
they must have been created, but so soon as science showed _how_ it
was probably done, immediately we say we were mistaken--they were not
made at all. So also, so long as we could not imagine how new organic
forms originated, we were willing to believe they were created, but,
so soon as we find that they originated by evolution, many at once say,
“We were mistaken; no creator is necessary at all.” Is this so when the
question is concerning a work of man? Yes, of one kind--viz., the work
of the magician. Here, indeed, we believe in him, and are delighted
with his work, until we know how it is done, and then all our faith
and wonder cease. But in any honest work it is not so; but, on the
contrary, when we understand how it is done, stupid wonder is changed
into intellectual delight. Does it not seem, then, that to most people
God is a mere wonder-worker, a chief magician. But the mission of
science is to show us how things are done. Is it any wonder, then, that
to such persons science is constantly destroying their superstitious
illusions? But if God is an honest worker, according to reason--i. e.,
according to law--ought not science rather to change gaping wonder into
intelligent delight--superstition into rational worship?

2. Again, it is curious to observe how an _old truth_, if it come only
in a _new form_, often strikes us as something unheard of, and even
as paradoxical and almost impossible. A little over thirty years ago
a little philosophical toy, the gyroscope, was introduced and became
very common. At first sight, it seems to violate all mechanical laws,
and set at naught the law of gravitation itself. A heavy-brass wheel,
four to five inches in diameter, at the end of a horizontal axle, six
or eight inches long, is set rotating rapidly, and then the free end
of the axis is supported by a string or otherwise. The wheel remains
suspended in the air while slowly gyrating. What mysterious force
sustains the wheel when its only point of support is at the end of
the axle, six or eight inches away? Scientific and popular literature
were flooded with explanations of this seeming paradox. And yet it was
nothing new. The boy’s top, that spins and leans and will not fall,
although solicited by gravity, so long as it spins, which we have seen
all our lives without special wonder, is precisely the same thing.

Now, evolution is no new thing, but an old familiar truth; but,
coming now in a new and questionable shape, lo, how it startles
us out of our propriety! Origin of forms by evolution is going on
everywhere about us, both in the inorganic and the organic world. In
its more familiar forms, it had never occurred to most of us that it
was a scientific refutation of the existence of God, that it was a
demonstration of materialism. But now it is pushed one step farther
in the direction it has always been going--it is made to include also
the origin of species--only a little change in its form, and lo, how
we start! To the deep thinker, now and always, there is and has been
the alternative--materialism or theism. God operates Nature or Nature
operates itself; but evolution puts no new phase on this old question.
For example, the origin of the individual by evolution. Everybody knows
that every one of us individually became what we now are by a slow
process of evolution from a microscopic spherule of protoplasm, and yet
this did not interfere with the idea of God as our individual maker.
Why, then, should the discovery that the species (or first individuals
of each kind) originated by evolution destroy our belief in God as the
creator of species?

3. It is curious and very interesting to observe the manner in which
vexed questions are always finally settled, if settled at all. All
vexed questions--i. e., questions which have tasked the powers of
the greatest minds age after age--are such only because there is
a real truth on both sides. Pure, unmixed error does not live to
plague us long. Error, when it continues to live, does so by virtue
of a germ of truth contained. Great questions, therefore, continue
to be argued _pro_ and _con_ from age to age, because each side
is in a sense--i. e., from its own point of view--true, but wrong
in excluding the other point of view; and a true solution, a true
rational philosophy, will always be found in a view which combines and
reconciles the two partial, mutually excluding views, showing in what
they are true and in what they are false--explaining their differences
by transcending them. This is so universal and far-reaching a principle
that I am sure I will be pardoned for illustrating it in the homeliest
and tritest fashion. I will do so by means of the shield with the
diverse sides, giving the story and construing it, however, in my own
way. There is, apparently, no limit to the amount of rich marrow of
truth that may be extracted from these dry bones of popular proverbs
and fables by patient turning and gnawing.

We all remember, then, the famous dispute concerning the shield,
with its sides of different colors, which we shall here call white
and black. We all remember how, after vain attempts to discover the
truth by dispute, it was agreed to try the scientific method of
investigation. We all remember the surprising result. Both parties to
the dispute were right and both were wrong. Each was right from his
point of view, but wrong in excluding the other point of view. Each
was right in what he asserted, and each wrong in what he denied. And
the complete truth was the combination of the partial truths and the
elimination of the partial errors. But we must not make the mistake of
supposing that truth consists in _compromise_. There is an old adage
that truth lies in the middle between antagonistic extremes. But it
seems to us that this is the place of _safety_, not of truth. This is
the favorite adage, therefore, of the timid man, the time-server, the
fence-man, not the truth-seeker. Suppose there had been on the occasion
mentioned above one of these fence-philosophers. He would have said:
“These disputants are equally intelligent and equally valiant. One side
says the shield is white, the other that it is black, now truth lies
in the middle; therefore, I conclude the shield is gray or neutral
tint, or a sort of pepper-and-salt.” Do we not see that he is the only
man who has no truth in him? No; truth is no heterogeneous mixture of
opposite extremes, but a stereoscopic combination of two surface views
into one solid reality.

Now, the same is true of all vexed questions, and I have given this
trite fable again only to apply it to the case in hand.

There are three possible views concerning the origin of organic forms
whether individual or specific. Two of these are opposite and mutually
excluding; the third combining and reconciling. For example, take the
individual. There are three theories concerning the origin of the
individual. The first is that of the pious child who thinks that he was
made very much as he himself makes his dirt-pies; the second is that
of the street-gamin, or of Topsy, who says: “I was not made at all,
I growed”; the third is that of most intelligent Christians--i. e.,
that we were made by a process of evolution. Observe that this latter
combines and reconciles the other two, and is thus the more rational
and philosophical. Now, there are also three exactly corresponding
theories concerning the origin of species. The first is that of many
pious persons and many intelligent clergymen, who say that species were
made at once by the Divine hand _without natural process_. The second
is that of the materialists, who say that species were not made at all,
they were derived, “they growed.” The third is that of the theistic
evolutionists, who think that they were _created_ by a process of
evolution--who believe that making is not inconsistent with growing.
The one asserts the divine agency, but denies natural process; the
second asserts the natural process, but denies divine agency; the third
asserts _divine agency by natural process_. Of the first two, observe,
both are right and both wrong; each view is right in what it asserts,
and wrong in what it denies--each is right from its own point of view,
but wrong in excluding the other point of view. The third is the only
true rational solution, for it includes, combines, and reconciles the
other two; showing wherein each is right and wherein wrong. It is the
combination of the two partial truths, and the elimination of the
partial errors. But let us not fail to do perfect justice. The first
two views of origin, whether of the individual or of the species, are
indeed both partly wrong as well as partly right; but the view of the
pious child and of the Christian contains by far the more essential
truth. Of the two sides of the shield, theirs is at least the whiter
and more beautiful.

But, alas! the great bar to a speedy settlement of this question and
the adoption of a rational philosophy is not in the head but in the
heart--is not in the reason but in pride of opinion, self-conceit,
dogmatism. The rarest of all gifts is a truly tolerant, rational
spirit. In all our gettings let us strive to get this, for _it_
alone is true wisdom. But we must not imagine that all the dogmatism
is on one side, and that the theological. Many seem to think that
theology has a “_pre-emptive right_” to dogmatism. If so, then modern
materialistic science has “_jumped the claim_.” Dogmatism has its roots
deep-bedded in the human heart. It showed itself first in the domain
of theology, because there was the seat of power. In modern times it
has gone over to the side of science, because here now is the place of
power and fashion. There are _two dogmatisms_, both equally opposed
to the true rational spirit, viz., the old theological and the new
scientific. The old clings fondly to old things, only because they
are old; the new grasps eagerly after new things, only because they
are new. True wisdom and true philosophy, on the contrary, tries all
things both old and new, and holds fast only to that which is good and
true. The new dogmatism taunts the old for credulity and superstition;
the old reproaches the new for levity and skepticism. But true wisdom
perceives that they are both equally credulous and equally skeptical.
The old is credulous of old ideas and skeptical of new; the new is
skeptical of old ideas and credulous of new. Both deserve the unsparing
rebuke of all right-minded men. The appropriate rebuke for the old
dogmatism has been already put in the mouth of Job in the form of a
bitter sneer: “No doubt ye are the people, and wisdom shall _die_ with
you.” The appropriate rebuke for the new dogmatism, though not put into
the mouth of any ancient prophet, ought to be uttered--I will undertake
to utter it here. I would say to these modern materialists, “No doubt
ye are the men, and wisdom and true philosophy were _born_ with you.”

Let it be observed that we are not here touching the general question
of the personal agency of God in operating Nature. This we shall take
up hereafter. All that we wish to insist on now is that the process and
the law of evolution does not differ in its relation to materialism
from all other processes and laws of Nature. If the sustentation of
the universe by the law of gravitation does not disturb our belief in
God as the sustainer of the universe, there is no reason why the origin
of the universe by the law of evolution should disturb our faith in God
as the creator of the universe. If the law of gravitation be regarded
as the Divine mode of sustentation, there is no reason why we should
not regard the law of evolution as the Divine process of creation. It
is evident that if evolution be materialism, then is gravitation also
materialism; then is every law of Nature and all science materialism.
If there be any difference at all, it consists only in this: that, as
already said, here is the _last_ line of defense of the supporters of
supernaturalism in the realm of Nature. But being the last line of
defense--the last ditch--it is evident that a yielding here implies
not a mere shifting of line, but a change of base; not a readjustment
of details only, but a _reconstruction of Christian theology_. This, I
believe, is indeed necessary. There can be little doubt in the mind of
the thoughtful observer that we are even now on the eve of the greatest
change in traditional views that has taken place since the birth of
Christianity. But let no one be greatly disturbed thereby. For as then,
so now, change comes not to destroy but to fulfill all our dearest
hopes and aspirations; as then, so now, the germ of living truth has,
in the course of ages, become so encrusted with meaningless traditions
which stifle its growth, that it is necessary to break the shell to set
it free; as then, so now, it has become necessary to purge religious
belief of dross in the form of trivialities and superstitions. This
has ever been and ever will be the function of science. The essentials
of religious faith it does not, it can not, touch, but it purifies and
ennobles our conceptions of Deity, and thus elevates the whole plane of
religious thought.

It will not, of course, be expected of me to give, even in briefest
outline, a system of reconstructed Christian thought. Such an attempt
would be wholly unbecoming. Time, very much time, and the co-operation
of many minds, bringing contributions from many departments of thought,
is necessary for this. In a word, it can only itself come by a gradual
process of evolution. But from the point of view of science some very
fundamental changes in traditional views are already plain. Of these
the most fundamental and important are our ideas concerning God,
Nature, and man in their relations to one another. These will form the
subject of the next three chapters.




