CHAPTER V.


_THE CONCEPTION _RANDOMNESS_ AND ITS SCIENTIFIC TREATMENT._

1. There is a term of frequent occurrence in treatises
on Probability, and which we have already had repeated occasion
to employ, viz. the designation _random_ applied to an
event, as in the expression 'a random distribution'. The
scientific conception involved in the correct use of this term
is, I apprehend, nothing more than that of aggregate order
and individual irregularity (or apparent irregularity), which
has been already described in the preceding chapters. A
brief discussion of the requisites in this scientific conception,
and in particular of the nature and some of the reasons for
the departure from the popular conception, may serve to
clear up some of the principal remaining difficulties which
attend this part of our subject.

The original,[1] and still popular, signification of the term
is of course widely different from the scientific. What it
looks to is the origin, not the results, of the random performance,
and it has reference rather to the single action
than to a group or series of actions. Thus, when a man
draws a bow 'at a venture', or 'at random', we mean only
to point out the aimless character of the performance;
we are contrasting it with the definite intention to hit a
certain mark. But it is none the less true, as already
pointed out, that we can only apply processes of inference to
such performances as these when we regard them as being
capable of frequent, or rather of indefinitely extended repetition.

Begin with an illustration. Perhaps the best typical
example that we can give of the scientific meaning of
random distribution is afforded by the arrangement of the
drops of rain in a shower. No one can give a guess whereabouts
at any instant a drop will fall, but we know that if
we put out a sheet of paper it will gradually become uniformly
spotted over; and that if we were to mark out any
two equal areas on the paper these would gradually tend
to be struck equally often.

2. I. Any attempt to draw inferences from the assumption
of random arrangement must postulate the occurrence
of this particular state of things at some stage or
other. But there is often considerable difficulty, leading occasionally
to some arbitrariness, in deciding the particular
stage at which it ought to be introduced.

(1) Thus, in many of the problems discussed by mathematicians,
we look as entirely to the results obtained, and
think as little of the actual process by which they are obtained,
as when we are regarding the arrangement of the drops of
rain. A simple example of this kind would be the following.
A pawn, diameter of base one inch, is placed at random on
a chess-board, the diameter of the squares of which is one inch
and a quarter: find the chance that its base shall lie across
one of the intersecting lines. Here we may imagine the
pawns to be so to say rained down vertically upon the board,
and the question is to find the ultimate proportion of those
which meet a boundary line to the total of those which fall.
The problem therefore becomes a merely geometrical one,
viz. to determine the ratio of a certain area on the board to
the whole area. The determination of this ratio is all that
the mathematician ever takes into account.

Now take the following. A straight brittle rod is broken
at random in two places: find the chance that the pieces can
make a triangle.[2] Since the only condition for making a
triangle with three straight lines is that each two shall be
greater than the third, the problem seems to involve the
same general conception as in the former case. We must
conceive such rods breaking at one pair of spots after
another,--no one can tell precisely where,--but showing the
same ultimate tendency to distribute these spots throughout
the whole length uniformly. As in the last case, the mathematician
thinks of nothing but this final result, and pays no
heed to the process by which it may be brought about. Accordingly
the problem is again reduced to one of mensuration,
though of a somewhat more complicated character.

3. (2) In another class of cases we have to contemplate
an intermediate process rather than a final result; but the
same conception has to be introduced here, though it is now
applied to the former stage, and in consequence will not in
general apply to the latter.

For instance: a shot is fired at random from a gun whose
maximum range (i.e. at 45° elevation) is 3000 yards: what is
the chance that the actual range shall exceed 2000 yards?
The ultimately uniform (or random) distribution here is
commonly assumed to apply to the various directions in
which the gun can be pointed; all possible directions above
the horizontal being equally represented in the long run.
We have therefore to contemplate a surface of uniform distribution,
but it will be the surface, not of the ground, but
of a hemisphere whose centre is occupied by the man who
fires. The ultimate distribution of the bullets on the spots
where they strike the ground will not be uniform. The
problem is in fact to discover the law of variation of the
density of distribution.

The above is, I presume, the treatment generally adopted
in solving such a problem. But there seems no absolute
necessity for any such particular choice. It is surely open to
any one to maintain[3] that his conception of the randomness of
the firing is assigned by saying that it is likely that a man
should begin by facing towards any point of the compass indifferently,
and then proceed to raise his gun to any angle
indifferently. The stage of ultimately uniform distribution
here has receded a step further back. It is not assigned
directly to the surface of an imaginary hemisphere, but to
the lines of altitude and azimuth drawn on that surface.
Accordingly, the distribution over the hemisphere itself will
not now be uniform,--there will be a comparative crowding
up towards the pole,--and the ultimate distribution over the
ground will not be the same as before.

4. Difficulties of this kind, arising out of the uncertainty
as to what stage should be selected for that of uniform
distribution, will occasionally present themselves. For
instance: let a book be taken at random out of a bookcase;
what is the chance of hitting upon some assigned volume?
I hardly know how this question would commonly be treated.
If we were to set our man opposite the middle of the shelf
and inquire what would generally happen in practice, supposing
him blindfolded, there cannot be much doubt that
the volumes would not be selected equally often. On the
contrary, it is likely that there would be a tendency to increased
frequency about a centre indicated by the height
of his shoulder, and (unless he be left-handed) a trifle to the
right of the point exactly opposite his starting point.

If the question were one which it were really worth
while to work out on these lines we should be led a long
way back. Just as we imagined our rifleman's position (on
the second supposition) to be determined by two independent
coordinates of assumed continuous and equal facility,
so we might conceive our making the attempt to analyse the
man's movements into a certain number of independent
constituents. We might suppose all the various directions
from his starting point, along the ground, to be equally
likely; and that when he reaches the shelves the random
motion of his hand is to be regulated after the fashion of a
shot discharged at random.

The above would be one way of setting about the statement
of the problem. But the reader will understand that
all which I am here proposing to maintain is that in these,
as in every similar case, we always encounter, under this
conception of 'randomness', at some stage or other, this
postulate of ultimate uniformity of distribution over some
assigned magnitude: either time; or space, linear, superficial,
or solid. But the selection of the stage at which this is to
be applied may give rise to considerable difficulty, and even
arbitrariness of choice.

5. Some years ago there was a very interesting discussion
upon this subject carried on in the mathematical part of
the _Educational Times_ (see, especially, Vol. VII.). As not
unfrequently happens in mathematics there was an almost
entire accord amongst the various writers as to the assumptions
practically to be made in any particular case, and therefore
as to the conclusion to be drawn, combined with a very
considerable amount of difference as to the axioms and definitions
to be employed. Thus Mr M. W. Crofton, with the
substantial agreement of Mr Woolhouse, laid it down unhesitatingly
that "at random" has "a very clear and definite
meaning; one which cannot be better conveyed than by Mr
Wilson's definition, '_according to no law_'; and in this sense
alone I mean to use it." According to any scientific interpretation
of 'law' I should have said that where there was
no law there could be no inference. But ultimate tendency
towards equality of distribution is as much taken for granted
by Mr Crofton as by any one else: in fact he makes this a
deduction from his definition:--"As this infinite system of
parallels are drawn according to no law, they are as thickly
disposed along any part of the [common] perpendicular as
along any other" (VII. p. 85). Mr Crofton holds that any
kind of _unequal_ distribution would imply law,--"If the points
[on a plane] tended to become denser in any part of the plane
than in another, there must be some law attracting them
there" (ib. p. 84). The same view is enforced in his paper
on _Local Probability_ (in the _Phil. Trans._, Vol. 158). Surely
if they tend to become _equally_ dense this is just as much
a case of regularity or law.

It may be remarked that wherever any serious practical
consequences turn upon duly securing the desired randomness,
it is always so contrived that no design or awkwardness
or unconscious one-sidedness shall disturb the result. The
principal case in point here is of course afforded by games of
chance. What we want, when we toss a die, is to secure that
all numbers from 1 to 6 shall be equally often represented in
the long run, but that no person shall be able to predict the
individual occurrence. We might, in our statement of a
problem, as easily postulate 'a number _thought of_ at random'
as 'a shot fired at random', but no one would risk his chances
of gain and loss on the supposition that this would be done
with continued fairness. Accordingly, we construct a die
whose sides are accurately alike, and it is found that we may
do almost what we like with this, at any previous stage to
that of its issue from the dice box on to the table, without
interfering with the random nature of the result.

6. II. Another characteristic in which the scientific
conception seems to me to depart from the popular or original
signification is the following. The area of distribution which
we take into account must be a finite or limited one. The
necessity for this restriction may not be obvious at first sight,
but the consideration of one or two examples will serve to
indicate the point at which it makes itself felt. Suppose
that one were asked to choose a number at random, not
from a finite range, but from the inexhaustible possibilities
of enumeration. In the popular sense of the term,--i.e. of
uttering a number without pausing to choose,--there is no
difficulty. But a moment's consideration will show that no
arrangement even tending towards ultimately uniform distribution
can be secured in this way. No _average_ could be
struck with ever increasing steadiness. So with spatial
infinity. We can rationally speak of choosing a point at
random in a given straight line, area, or volume. But if we
suppose the line to have no end, or the selection to be made
in infinite space, the basis of ultimate tendency towards
what may be called the equally thick deposit of our random
points fails us utterly.

Similarly in any other example in which one of the
magnitudes is unlimited. Suppose I fling a stick at random
in a horizontal plane against a row of iron railings and
inquire for the chance of its passing through without touching
them. The problem bears some analogy to that of the
chessmen, and so far as the motion of translation of the
stick is concerned (if we begin with this) it presents no
difficulty. But as regards the rotation it is otherwise. For
any assigned linear velocity there is a certain angular velocity
_below_ which the stick may pass through without contact,
but _above_ which it cannot. And inasmuch as the former
range is limited and the latter is unlimited, we encounter
the same impossibility as before in endeavouring to conceive
a uniform distribution. Of course we might evade this
particular difficulty by beginning with an estimate of the
angular velocity, when we should have to repeat what has
just been said, mutatis mutandis, in reference to the linear
velocity.

7. I am of course aware that there are a variety of
problems current which seem to conflict with what has just
been said, but they will all submit to explanation. For instance;
What is the chance that three straight lines, taken
or drawn at random, shall be of such lengths as will admit of
their forming a triangle? There are two ways in which we
may regard the problem. We may, for one thing, start with
the assumption of three lines not greater than a certain
length n, and then determine towards what limit the chance
tends as n increases unceasingly. Or, we may maintain that
the question is merely one of _relative proportion_ of the three
lines. We may then start with any magnitude we please to
represent one of the lines (for simplicity, say, the longest of
them), and consider that all possible shapes of a triangle
will be represented by varying the lengths of the other two.
In either case we get a definite result without need to make
an attempt to conceive any random selection from the infinity
of possible length.

So in what is called the "three-point problem":--Three
points in space are selected at random; find the chance of
their forming an acute-angled triangle. What is done is to
start with a closed volume,--say a sphere, from its superior
simplicity,--find the chance (on the assumption of uniform
distribution within this volume); and then conceive the continual
enlargement without limit of this sphere. So regarded
the problem is perfectly consistent and intelligible, though I
fail to see why it should be termed a random selection _in
space_ rather than in a sphere. Of course if we started with
a different volume, say a cube, we should get a different
result; and it is therefore contended (e.g. by Mr Crofton in
the _Educational Times_, as already referred to) that infinite
space is more naturally and appropriately regarded as tended
towards by the enlargement of a sphere than by that of a
cube or any other figure.

Again: A group of integers is taken at random; show
that the number thus taken is more likely to be odd than
even. What we do in answering this is to start with any
finite number n, and show that of all the possible combinations
which can be made within this range there are
more odd than even. Since this is true irrespective of the
magnitude of n, we are apt to speak as if we could conceive
the selection being made at random from the true infinity
contemplated in numeration.

8. Where these conditions cannot be secured then it
seems to me that the attempt to assign any finite value to
the probability fails. For instance, in the following problem,
proposed by Mr J. M. Wilson, "Three straight lines are
drawn at random on an infinite plane, and a fourth line is
drawn at random to intersect them: find the probability of
its passing through the triangle formed by the other three"
(_Ed. Times_, Reprint, Vol. V. p. 82), he offers the following
solution: "Of the four lines, two must and two must not pass
within the triangle formed by the remaining three. Since
all are drawn at random, the chance that the last drawn
should pass through the triangle formed by the other three
is consequently 1/2."

I quote this solution because it seems to me to illustrate
the difficulty to which I want to call attention. As the
problem is worded, a triangle is supposed to be assigned by
three straight lines. However large it may be, its size bears
no finite ratio whatever to the indefinitely larger area outside
it; and, so far as I can put any intelligible construction
on the supposition, the chance of drawing a fourth random
line which should happen to intersect this finite area must
be reckoned as zero. The problem Mr Wilson has solved
seems to me to be a quite different one, viz. "Given four
intersecting straight lines, find the chance that we should,
at random, select one that passes through the triangle formed
by the other three."

The same difficulty seems to me to turn up in most other
attempts to apply this conception of randomness to real
infinity. The following seems an exact analogue of the
above problem:--A number is selected at random, find the
chance that another number selected at random shall be
greater than the former;--the answer surely must be that
the chance is unity, viz. certainty, because the range above
any assigned number is infinitely greater than that below it.
Or, expressed in the only language in which I can understand
the term 'infinity', what I mean is this. If the first
number be m and I am restricted to selecting up to n
(n > m) then the chance of exceeding m is n - m : n; if I
am restricted to 2n then it is 2n - m : 2n and so on. That
is, however large n and m may be the expression is always
intelligible; but, _m being chosen first_, n may be made as
much larger than m as we please: i.e. the chance may be
made to approach as near to unity as we please.

I cannot but think that there is a similar fallacy in De Morgan's
admirably suggestive paper on _Infinity_ (_Camb.
Phil. Trans._ Vol. 11.) when he is discussing the "three-point
problem":--i.e. given three points taken at random find the
chance that they shall form an acute-angled triangle. All
that he shows is, that if we start with _one side as given_ and
consider the subsequent possible positions of the opposite
vertex, there are infinitely as many such positions which
would form an acute-angled triangle as an obtuse: but, as
before, this is solving a different problem.

9. The nearest approach I can make towards true indefinite
randomness, or random selection from true indefiniteness,
is as follows. Suppose a circle with a tangent line extended
indefinitely in each direction. Now from the centre draw
radii at random; in other words, let the semicircumference
which lies towards the tangent be ultimately uniformly intersected
by the radii. Let these radii be then produced so as
to intersect the tangent line, and consider the distribution
of these points of intersection. We shall obtain in the result
_one_ characteristic of our random distribution; i.e. no portion
of this tangent, however small or however remote, but will
find itself in the position ultimately of any small portion of
the pavement in our supposed continual rainfall. That is,
any such elementary patch will become more and more closely
dotted over with the points of intersection. But the other
essential characteristic, viz. that of ultimately _uniform_ distribution,
will be missing. There will be a special form of
distribution,--what in fact will have to be discussed in a
future chapter under the designation of a 'law of error',--by
virtue of which the concentration will tend to be greatest at
a certain point (that of contact with the circle), and will thin
out from here in each direction according to an easily
calculated formula. The existence of such a state of things
as this is quite opposed to the conception of true randomness.

10. III. Apart from definitions and what comes of
them, perhaps the most important question connected with
the conception of Randomness is this: How in any given
case are we to determine whether an observed arrangement
is to be considered a random one or not? This question will
have to be more fully discussed in a future chapter, but we
are already in a position to see our way through some of the
difficulties involved in it.

(1) If the events or objects under consideration are supposed
to be continued indefinitely, or if we know enough
about the mode in which they are brought about to detect
their ultimate tendency,--or even, short of this, if they are
numerous enough to be beyond practical counting,--there is
no great difficulty. We are simply confronted with a question
of fact, to be settled like other questions of fact. In the
case of the rain-drops, watch two equal squares of pavement
or other surfaces, and note whether they come to be more
and more densely uniformly and evenly spotted over: if they
do, then the arrangement is what we call a random one. If
I want to know whether a tobacco-pipe really breaks at random,
and would therefore serve as an illustration of the
problem proposed some pages back, I have only to drop
enough of them and see whether pieces of all possible lengths
are equally represented in the long run. Or, I may argue
deductively, from what I know about the strength of materials
and the molecular constitution of such bodies, as to
whether fractures of small and large pieces are all equally
likely to occur.

11. The reader's attention must be carefully directed
to a source of confusion here, arising out of a certain cross-division.
What we are now discussing is a question of fact,
viz. the nature of a certain ultimate arrangement; we are
not discussing the particular way in which it is brought
about. In other words, the antithesis is between what is and
what is not random: it is not between what is random and
what is designed. As we shall see in a few moments it is
quite possible that an arrangement which is the result,--if
ever anything were so,--of 'design', may nevertheless present
the unmistakeable stamp of randomness of arrangement.

Consider a case which has been a good deal discussed,
and to which we shall revert again: the arrangement of the
stars. The question here is rather complicated by the fact
that we know nothing about the actual mutual positions of
the stars, all that we can take cognizance of being their apparent
or visible places as projected upon the surface of a
supposed sphere. Appealing to what alone we can thus
observe, it is obvious that the arrangement, as a whole, is
not of the random sort. The Milky Way and the other resolvable
nebulæ, as they present themselves to us, are as obvious
an infraction of such an arrangement as would be the
occurrence here and there of patches of ground in a rainfall
which received a vast number more drops than the spaces
surrounding them. If we leave these exceptional areas out
of the question and consider only the stars which are visible
by the naked eye or by slight telescopic power, it seems
equally certain that the arrangement _is_, for the most part, a
fairly representative random one. By this we mean nothing
more than the fact that when we mark off any number of
equal areas on the visible sphere these are found to contain
approximately the same number of stars.

The actual arrangement of the stars in space _may_ also
be of the same character: that is, the apparently denser
aggregation may be apparent only, arising from the fact that
we are looking through regions which are not more thickly
occupied but are merely more extensive. The alternative
before us, in fact, is this. If the whole volume, so to say, of
the starry heavens is tolerably regular in shape, then the
arrangement of the stars is not of the random order; if that
volume is very irregular in shape, it is possible that the arrangement
within it may be throughout of that order.

12. (2) When the arrangement in question includes
but a comparatively small number of events or objects, it
becomes much more difficult to determine whether or not it
is to be designated a random one. In fact we have to shift
our ground, and to decide not by what has been actually
observed but by what we have reason to conclude would be
observed if we could continue our observation much longer.
This introduces what is called 'Inverse Probability', viz. the
determination of the nature of a cause from the nature of the
observed effect; a question which will be fully discussed in
a future chapter. But some introductory remarks may be
conveniently made here.

Every problem of Probability, as the subject is here understood,
introduces the conception of an ultimate limit, and
therefore presupposes an indefinite possibility of repetition.
When we have only a finite number of occurrences before us,
_direct_ evidence of the character of their arrangement fails us,
and we have to fall back upon the nature of the agency
which produces them. And as the number becomes smaller
the confidence with which we can estimate the nature of the
agency becomes gradually less.

Begin with an intermediate case. There is a small lawn,
sprinkled over with daisies: is this a random arrangement?
We feel some confidence that it is so, on mere inspection;
meaning by this that (negatively) no trace of any regular
pattern can be discerned and (affirmatively) that if we take
any moderately small area, say a square yard, we shall find
much about the same number of the plants included in it.
But we can help ourselves by an appeal to the known agency
of distribution here. We know that the daisy spreads by
seed, and considering the effect of the wind and the continued
sweeping and mowing of the lawn we can detect causes at
work which are analogous to those by which the dealing of
cards and the tossing of dice are regulated.

In the above case the appeal to the process of production
was subsidiary, but when we come to consider the nature of
a very small succession or group this appeal becomes much
more important. Let us be told of a certain succession of
'heads' and 'tails' to the number of ten. The range here is
far too small for decision, and unless we are told whether the
agent who obtained them was tossing or designing we are
quite unable to say whether or not the designation of 'random'
ought to be applied to the result obtained. The truth
must never be forgotten that though 'design' is sure to
break down in the long run if it make the attempt to produce
directly the semblance of randomness,[4] yet for a short
spell it can simulate it perfectly. Any short succession, say
of heads and tails, may have been equally well brought
about by tossing or by deliberate choice.

13. The reader will observe that this question of
randomness is being here treated as simply one of ultimate
statistical fact. I have fully admitted that this is not the
primitive conception, nor is it the popular interpretation,
but to adopt it seems the only course open to us if we are to
draw inferences such as those contemplated in Probability.
When we look to the producing agency of the ultimate
arrangement we may find this very various. It may prove
itself to be (a few stages back) one of conscious deliberate
purpose, as in drawing a card or tossing a die: it may be
the outcome of an extremely complicated interaction of many
natural causes, as in the arrangement of the flowers scattered
over a lawn or meadow: it may be of a kind of which we
know literally nothing whatever, as in the case of the actual
arrangement of the stars relatively to each other.

This was the state of things had in view when it was
said a few pages back that randomness and design would
result in something of a cross-division. Plenty of arrangements
in which design had a hand, a stage or two back, can
be mentioned, which would be quite indistinguishable in
their results from those in which no design whatever could
be traced. Perhaps the most striking case in point here is
to be found in the arrangement of the digits in one of the
natural arithmetical constants, such as π or e, or in a table
of logarithms. If we look to the process of production of
these digits, no extremer instance can be found of what we
mean by the antithesis of randomness: every figure has its
necessarily pre-ordained position, and a moment's flagging of
intention would defeat the whole purpose of the calculator.
And yet, if we look to results only, no better instance can
be found than one of these rows of digits if it were intended
to illustrate what we practically understand by a chance
arrangement of a number of objects. Each digit occurs
approximately equally often, and this tendency develops as
we advance further: the mutual juxtaposition of the digits
also shows the same tendency, that is, any digit (say 5) is
just as often followed by 6 or 7 as by any of the others. In
fact, if we were to take the whole row of hitherto calculated
figures, cut off the first five as familiar to us all, and contemplate
the rest, no one would have the slightest reason
to suppose that these had not come out as the results of a
die with ten equal faces.

14. If it be asked _why_ this is so, a rather puzzling
question is raised. Wherever physical causation is involved
we are generally understood to have satisfied the demand
implied in this question if we assign antecedents which will
be followed regularly by the event before us; but in geometry
and arithmetic there is no opening for antecedents. What
we then commonly look for is a demonstration, i.e. the resolution
of the observed fact into axioms if possible, or at
any rate into admitted truths of wider generality. I do not
know that a demonstration can be given as to the existence
of this characteristic of statistical randomness in such successions
of digits as those under consideration. But the
following remarks may serve to shift the onus of unlikelihood
by suggesting that the preponderance of analogy is
rather in favour of the existence.

Take the well-known constant π for consideration. This
stands for a quantity which presents itself in a vast number
of arithmetical and geometrical relations; let us take for
examination the best known of these, by regarding it as
standing for the ratio of the circumference to the diameter
of a circle. So regarded, it is nothing more than a simple
case of the measurement of a magnitude by an arbitrarily
selected unit. Conceive then that we had before us a rod
or line and that we wished to measure it with absolute
accuracy. We must suppose--if we are to have a suitable
analogue to the determination of π to several hundred
figures,--that by the application of continued higher magnifying
power we can detect ever finer subdivisions in the
graduation. We lay our rod against the scale and find it,
say, fall between 31 and 32 inches; we then look at the
next division of the scale, viz. that into tenths of an inch.
Can we see the slightest reason why the number of these
tenths should be other than independent of the number of
whole inches? The "piece over" which we are measuring
may in fact be regarded as an entirely new piece, which had
fallen into our hands after that of 31 inches had been
measured and done with; and similarly with every successive
piece over, as we proceed to the ever finer and finer divisions.

Similar remarks may be made about most other incommensurable
quantities, such as irreducible roots. Conceive
two straight lines at right angles, and that we lay off a
certain number of inches along each of these from the point
of intersection; say two and five inches, and join the extremities
of these so as to form the diagonal of a right-angled
triangle. If we proceed to measure this diagonal in terms
of either of the other lines we are to all intents and purposes
extracting a square root. We should expect, rather than
otherwise, to find here, as in the case of π, that incommensurability
and resultant randomness of order in the digits
was the rule, and commensurability was the exception. Now
and then, as when the two sides were three and four, we
should find the diagonal commensurable with them; but
these would be the occasional exceptions, or rather they
would be the comparatively finite exceptions amidst the
indefinitely numerous cases which furnished the rule.

15. The best way perhaps of illustrating the truly
random character of such a row of figures is by appealing to
graphical aid. It is not easy here, any more than in ordinary
statistics, to grasp the import of mere figures; whereas the
arrangement of groups of points or lines is much more
readily seized. The eye is very quick in detecting any
symptoms of regularity in the arrangement, or any tendency
to denser aggregation in one direction than in another.
How then are we to dispose our figures so as to force them
to display their true character? I should suggest that we
set about _drawing a line at random_; and, since we cannot
trust our own unaided efforts to do this, that we rely upon
the help of such a table of figures to do it for us, and then
examine with what sort of efficiency they can perform the
task. The problem of drawing _straight_ lines at random,
under various limitations of direction or intersection, is
familiar enough, but I do not know that any one has suggested
the drawing of a line whose shape as well as position
shall be of a purely random character. For simplicity we
suppose the line to be confined to a plane.

The definition of such a line does not seem to involve
any particular difficulty. Phrased in accordance with the
ordinary language we should describe it as the path (i.e. any
path) traced out by a point which at every moment is as
likely to move in any one direction as in any other. That
we could not ourselves draw such a line, and that we could
not get it traced by any physical agency, is certain. The
mere inertia of any moving body will always give it a
tendency, however slight, to go on in a straight line at each
moment, instead of being instantly responsive to instantaneously
varying dictates as to its direction of motion. Nor can
we conceive or picture such a line in its ultimate or ideal condition.
But it is easy to give a graphical approximation to it,
and it is easy also to show how this approximation may be
carried on as far as we please towards the ideal in question.

We may proceed as follows. Take a sheet of the ordinary
ruled paper prepared for the graphical exposition of curves.
Select as our starting point the intersection of two of these
lines, and consider the eight 'points of the compass' indicated
by these lines and the bisections of the contained
right angles.[5] For suggesting the random selection amongst
these directions let them be numbered from 0 to 7, and
let us say that a line measured due 'north' shall be designated
by the figure 0, 'north-east' by 1, and so on. The
selection amongst these numbers, and therefore directions, at
every corner, might be handed over to a die with eight faces;
but for the purpose of the illustration in view we select the
digits 0 to 7 as they present themselves in the calculated
value of π. The sort of path along which we should
travel by a series of such steps thus taken at random
may be readily conceived; it is given at the end of this
chapter.

For the purpose with which this illustration was proposed,
viz. the graphical display of the succession of digits
in any one of the incommensurable constants of arithmetic
or geometry, the above may suffice. After actually testing
some of them in this way they seem to me, so far as the eye,
or the theoretical principles to be presently mentioned, are
any guide, to answer quite fairly to the description of randomness.

16. As we are on the subject, however, it seems worth
going farther by enquiring how near we could get to the
ideal of randomness of direction. To carry this out completely
two improvements must be made. For one thing,
instead of confining ourselves to eight directions we must
admit an infinite number. This would offer no great difficulty;
for instead of employing a small number of digits we
should merely have to use some kind of circular teetotum
which would rest indifferently in any direction. But in the
next place instead of short finite steps we must suppose them
indefinitely short. It is here that the actual unattainability
makes itself felt. We are familiar enough with the device,
employed by Newton, of passing from the discontinuous
polygon to the continuous curve. But we can resort to this
device because the ideal, viz. the curve, is as easily drawn
(and, I should say, as easily conceived or pictured) as any of
the steps which lead us towards it. But in the case before
us it is otherwise. The line in question will remain discontinuous,
or rather angular, to the last: for its angles do
not tend even to lose their sharpness, though the fragments
which compose them increase in number and diminish in
magnitude without any limit. And such an ideal is not conceivable
as an ideal. It is as if we had a rough body under
the microscope, and found that as we subjected it to higher
and higher powers there was no tendency for the angles to
round themselves off. Our 'random line' must remain as
'spiky' as ever, though the size of its spikes of course
diminishes without any limit.

The case therefore seems to be this. It is easy, in words,
to indicate the conception by speaking of a line which at
every instant is as likely to take one direction as another.
It is easy moreover to draw such a line with any degree
of minuteness which we choose to demand. But it is not
possible to conceive or picture the line in its ultimate form.[6]
There is in fact no 'limit' here, intelligible to the understanding
or picturable by the imagination (corresponding to
the asymptote of a curve, or the continuous curve to the
incessantly developing polygon), towards which we find ourselves
continually approaching, and which therefore we are
apt to conceive ourselves as ultimately attaining. The usual
assumption therefore which underlies the Newtonian infinitesimal
geometry and the Differential Calculus, ceases to
apply here.

17. If we like to consider such a line in one of its
approximate stages, as above indicated, it seems to me that
some of the usual theorems of Probability, where large
numbers are concerned, may safely be applied. If it be
asked, for instance, whether such a line will ultimately tend
to stray indefinitely far from its starting point, Bernoulli's
'Law of Large Numbers' may be appealed to, in virtue of
which we should say that it was excessively unlikely that its
divergence should be relatively great. Recur to our graphical
illustration, and consider first the resultant deviation
of the point (after a great many steps) right or left of the
vertical line through the starting point. Of the eight admissible
motions at each stage two will not affect this relative
position, whilst the other six are equally likely to move us a
step to the right or to the left. Our resultant 'drift' therefore
to the right or left will be analogous to the resultant
difference between the number of heads and tails after a
great many tosses of a penny. Now the well-known outcome
of such a number of tosses is that ultimately the
_proportional_ approximation to the _à priori_ probability, i.e. to
equality of heads and tails, is more and more nearly carried
out, but that the _absolute_ deflection is more and more widely
displayed.

Applying this to the case in point, and remembering
that the results apply equally to the horizontal and vertical
directions, we should say that after any very great number
of such 'steps' as those contemplated, the ratio of our distance
from the starting point to the whole distance travelled
will pretty certainly be small, whereas the actual distance
from it would be large. We should also say that the longer
we continued to produce such a line the more pronounced
would these tendencies become. So far as concerns this test,
and that afforded by the general appearance of the lines
drawn,--this last, as above remarked, being tolerably trustworthy,--I
feel no doubt as to the generally 'random'
character of the rows of figures displayed by the incommensurable
or irrational ratios in question.

As it may interest the reader to see an actual specimen
of such a path I append one representing the arrangement
of the eight digits from 0 to 7 in the value of π. The data
are taken from Mr Shanks' astonishing performance in the
calculation of this constant to 707 places of figures (_Proc. of
R. S._, XXI. p. 319). Of these, after omitting 8 and 9, there
remain 568; the diagram represents the course traced out
by following the direction of these as the clue to our path.
Many of the steps have of course been taken in opposite
directions twice or oftener. The result seems to me to
furnish a very fair graphical indication of randomness. I
have compared it with corresponding paths furnished by
rows of figures taken from logarithmic tables, and in other
ways, and find the results to be much the same.

[Figure: Digits of π as a path.]

1. According to Prof. Skeat (_Etymological Dictionary_) the earliest
  known meaning is that of _furious_ action, as in a charge of
  cavalry. The etymology, he considers, is connected with the
  Teutonic word _rand_ (brim), and implies the furious and irregular
  action of a river full to the brim.

2. See the problem paper of Jan. 18, 1854, in the Cambridge
  Mathematical Tripos.

3. As, according to Mr H. Godfray, the majority of the candidates
  _did_ assume when the problem was once proposed in an
  examination. See the _Educational Times_ (Reprint, Vol. VII.
  p. 99.)

4. Vide p. 68.

5. It would of course be more complete to take _ten_ alternatives of
  direction, and thus to omit none of the digits; but this is much
  more troublesome in practice than to confine ourselves to eight.

6. Any more than we picture the shape of an equiangular spiral _at the
  centre_.




