CHAPTER VI.[1]


_THE SUBJECTIVE SIDE OF PROBABILITY. MEASUREMENT OF BELIEF._

1. Originally written in somewhat of a spirit of protest against what
  seemed to me the prevalent disposition to follow De Morgan in taking
  too subjective a view of the science. In reading it through now I
  cannot find any single sentence to which I could take distinct
  objection, though I must admit that if I were writing it entirely
  afresh I should endeavour to express myself with less emphasis, and
  I have made alterations in that direction. The reader who wishes to
  see a view not substantially very different from mine, but expressed
  with a somewhat opposite emphasis, can refer to Mr F. Y. Edgeworth's
  article on "The Philosophy of Chance" (_Mind_, Vol. IX.)


1. Having now obtained a clear conception of a
certain kind of series, the next enquiry is, What is to be
done with this series? How is it to be employed as a means
of making inferences? The general step that we are now
about to take might be described as one from the objective
to the subjective, from the things themselves to the state of
our minds in contemplating them.

The reader should observe that a substitution has, in a
great number of cases, already been made as a first stage
towards bringing the things into a shape fit for calculation.
This substitution, as described in former chapters, is, in a
measure, a process of _idealization_. The series we actually
meet with are apt to show a changeable type, and the individuals
of them will sometimes transgress their licensed irregularity.
Hence they have to be pruned a little into shape, as
natural objects almost always have before they are capable of
being accurately reasoned about. The form in which the
series emerges is that of a series with a fixed type. This
imaginary or ideal series is the basis of our calculation.

2. It must not be supposed that this is at all at variance
with the assertion previously made, that Probability is a
science of inference about real things; it is only by a substitution
of the above kind that we are enabled to reason about
the things. In nature nearly all phenomena present themselves
in a form which departs from that rigorously accurate
one which scientific purposes mostly demand, so we have to
introduce an imaginary series, which shall be free from any
such defects. The only condition to be fulfilled is, that the
substitution is to be as little arbitrary, that is, to vary from
the truth as slightly, as possible. This kind of substitution
generally passes without notice when natural objects of any
kind are made subjects of exact science. I direct distinct
attention to it here simply from the apprehension that want
of familiarity with the subject-matter might lead some readers
to suppose that it involves, in this case, an exceptional deflection
from accuracy in the formal process of inference.

It may be remarked also that the adoption of this imaginary
series offers no countenance whatever to the doctrine
criticised in the last chapter, in accordance with which it was
supposed that our series possessed a fixed unchangeable type
which was merely the "development of the probabilities" of
things, to use Laplace's expression. It differs from anything
contemplated on that hypothesis by the fact that it is to be
recognized as a necessary substitution of our own for the
actual series, and to be kept in as close conformity with facts as
possible. It is a mere fiction or artifice necessarily resorted
to for the purpose of calculation, and for this purpose only.

This caution is the more necessary, because in the example
that I shall select, and which belongs to the most favourite
class of examples in this subject, the substitution becomes
accidentally unnecessary. The things, as has been repeatedly
pointed out, may sometimes need no trimming, because in
the form in which they actually present themselves they _are_
almost idealized. In most cases a good deal of alteration is
necessary to bring the series into shape, but in some--prominently
in the case of games of chance--we find the alterations,
for all practical purposes, needless.

3. We start then, from such a series as this, upon the
enquiry, What kind of inference can be made about it? It
may assist the logical reader to inform him that our first step
will be analogous to one class of what are commonly known
as _immediate_ inferences,--inferences, that is, of the type,--'All
men are mortal, therefore any particular man or men
are mortal.' This case, simple and obvious as it is in Logic,
requires very careful consideration in Probability.

It is obvious that we must be prepared to form an opinion
upon the propriety of taking the step involved in making
such an inference. Hitherto we have had as little to do as
possible with the irregular individuals; we have regarded
them simply as fragments of a regular series. But we cannot
long continue to neglect all consideration of them. Even if
these events in the gross be tolerably certain, it is not only
in the gross that we have to deal with them; they constantly
come before us a few at a time, or even as individuals,
and we have to form some opinion about them in this
state. An insurance office, for instance, deals with numbers
large enough to obviate most of the uncertainty, but
each of their transactions has another party interested in
it--What has the man who insures to say to their proceedings?
for to him this question becomes an individual one.
And even the office itself receives its cases singly, and would
therefore like to have as clear views as possible about these
single cases. Now, the remarks made in the preceding chapters
about the subjects which Probability discusses might seem to
preclude all enquiries of this kind, for was not ignorance of
the individual presupposed to such an extent that even (as
will be seen hereafter) causation might be denied, within
considerable limits, without affecting our conclusions? The
answer to this enquiry will require us to turn now to the
consideration of a totally distinct side of the question, and
one which has not yet come before us. Our best introduction
to it will be by the discussion of a special example.

4. Let a penny be tossed up a very great many
times; we may then be supposed to know for certain this
fact (amongst many others) that in the long run head and
tail will occur about equally often. But suppose we consider
only a moderate number of throws, or fewer still, and so
continue limiting the number until we come down to three
or two, or even one? We have, as the extreme cases, certainty
or something undistinguishably near it, and utter
uncertainty. Have we not, between these extremes, all
gradations of belief? There is a large body of writers, including
some of the most eminent authorities upon this
subject, who state or imply that we are distinctly conscious of
such a variation of the amount of our belief, and that this
state of our minds can be measured and determined with
almost the same accuracy as the external events to which
they refer. The principal mathematical supporter of this
view is De Morgan, who has insisted strongly upon it in all
his works on the subject. The clearest exposition of his
opinions will be found in his _Formal Logic_, in which work he
has made the view which we are now discussing the basis of
his system. He holds that we have a certain amount of belief
of every proposition which may be set before us, an amount
which in its nature admits of determination, though we may
practically find it difficult in any particular case to determine
it. He considers, in fact, that Probability is a sort of sister
science to Formal Logic,[1] speaking of it in the following
words: "I cannot understand why the study of the effect,
which partial belief of the premises produces with respect to
the conclusion, should be separated from that of the consequences
of supposing the former to be absolutely true."[2]
In other words, there is a science--Formal Logic--which investigates
the rules according to which one proposition can be
necessarily inferred from another; in close correspondence
with this there is a science which investigates the rules according
to which the amount of our belief of one proposition
varies with the amount of our belief of other propositions
with which it is connected.

The same view is also supported by another high authority,
the late Prof. Donkin, who says (_Phil. Mag._ May, 1851), "It
will, I suppose, be generally admitted, and has often been
more or less explicitly stated, that the subject-matter of
calculation in the mathematical theory of Probabilities is
_quantity of belief_."

5. Before proceeding to criticise this opinion, one remark
may be made upon it which has been too frequently
overlooked. It should be borne in mind that, even were this
view of the subject not actually incorrect, it might be objected
to as insufficient for the purpose of a definition, on the ground
that variation of belief is not confined to Probability. It is
a property with which that science is concerned, no doubt,
but it is a property which meets us in other directions as
well. In every case in which we extend our inferences by
Induction or Analogy, or depend upon the witness of others,
or trust to our own memory of the past, or come to a conclusion
through conflicting arguments, or even make a long and
complicated deduction by mathematics or logic, we have a
result of which we can scarcely feel as certain as of the premises
from which it was obtained. In all these cases then
we are conscious of varying quantities of belief, but are the
laws according to which the belief is produced and varied the
same? If they cannot be reduced to one harmonious scheme,
if in fact they can at best be brought to nothing but a number
of different schemes, each with its own body of laws and rules,
then it is vain to endeavour to force them into one science.

This opinion is strengthened by observing that most of
the writers who adopt the definition in question do practically
dismiss from consideration most of the above-mentioned
examples of diminution of belief, and confine their attention
to classes of events which have the property discussed in
Chap I., viz. 'ignorance of the few, knowledge of the many.'
It is quite true that considerable violence has to be done to
some of these examples, by introducing exceedingly arbitrary
suppositions into them, before they can be forced to assume
a suitable form. But still there is little doubt that, if we
carefully examine the language employed, we shall find that
in almost every case assumptions are made which virtually
imply that our knowledge of the individual is derived from
propositions given in the typical form described in Chap I.
This will be more fully proved when we come to consider
some common misapplications of the science.

6. Even then, if the above-mentioned view of the
subject were correct, it would yet, I consider, be insufficient
for the purpose of a definition; but it is at least very doubtful
whether it is correct. Before we could properly assign to
the belief side of the question the prominence given to it by
De Morgan and others, certainly before the science could be
defined from that side, it would be necessary, it appears, to
establish the two following positions, against both of which
strong objections can be brought.

(1) That our belief of every proposition is a thing which
we can, strictly speaking, be said to measure; that
there must be a certain amount of it in every case,
which we can realize somehow in consciousness and
refer to some standard so as to pronounce upon its
value.

(2) That the value thus apprehended is the correct one
according to the theory, viz. that it is the exact
fraction of full conviction that it should be. This
statement will perhaps seem somewhat obscure at
first; it will be explained presently.

7. (I.) Now, in the first place, as regards the difficulty
of obtaining any measure of the amount of our belief. One
source of this difficulty is too obvious to have escaped notice;
this is the disturbing influence produced on the quantity of
belief by any strong emotion or passion. A deep interest in
the matter at stake, whether it excite hope or fear, plays great
havoc with the belief-meter, so that we must assume the
mind to be quite unimpassioned in weighing the evidence.
This is noticed and acknowledged by Laplace and others;
but these writers seem to me to assume it to be the only
source of error, and also to be of comparative unimportance.
Even if it were the only source of error I cannot see that it
would be unimportant. We experience hope or fear in so
very many instances, that to omit such influences from consideration
would be almost equivalent to saying that whilst
we profess to consider the whole quantity of our belief we
will in reality consider only a portion of it. Very strong
feelings are, of course, exceptional, but we should nevertheless
find that the emotional element, in some form or other,
makes itself felt on almost every occasion. It is very seldom
that we cannot speak of our surprise or expectation in reference
to any particular event. Both of these expressions, but
especially the former, seem to point to something more than
mere belief. It is true that the word 'expectation' is generally
defined in treatises on Probability as equivalent to
belief; but it seems doubtful whether any one who attends
to the popular use of the terms would admit that they were
exactly synonymous. Be this however as it may, the emotional
element is present upon almost every occasion, and its
disturbing influence therefore is constantly at work.

8. Another cause, which co-operates with the former,
is to be found in the extreme complexity and variety of the
evidence on which our belief of any proposition depends.
Hence it results that our actual belief at any given moment
is one of the most fugitive and variable things possible, so
that we can scarcely ever get sufficiently clear hold of it to
measure it. This is not confined to the times when our
minds are in a turmoil of excitement through hope or fear.
In our calmest moments we shall find it no easy thing to
give a precise answer to the question, How firmly do I hold
this or that belief? There may be one or two prominent
arguments in its favour, and one or two corresponding objections
against it, but this is far from comprising all the
causes by which our state of belief is produced. Because
such reasons as these are all that can be practically introduced
into oral or written controversies, we must not conclude
that it is by these only that our conviction is influenced.
On the contrary, our conviction generally rests upon a sort
of chaotic basis composed of an infinite number of inferences
and analogies of every description, and these moreover distorted
by our state of feeling at the time, dimmed by the
degree of our recollection of them afterwards, and probably
received from time to time with varying force according to
the way in which they happen to combine in our consciousness
at the moment. To borrow a striking illustration from
Abraham Tucker, the substructure of our convictions is not
so much to be compared to the solid foundations of an ordinary
building, as to the piles of the houses of Rotterdam
which rest somehow in a deep bed of soft mud. They bear
their weight securely enough, but it would not be easy to
point out accurately the dependence of the different parts
upon one another. Directly we begin to think of the amount
of our belief, we have to think of the arguments by which it
is produced--in fact, these arguments will intrude themselves
without our choice. As each in turn flashes through the
mind, it modifies the strength of our conviction; we are like
a person listening to the confused hubbub of a crowd, where
there is always something arbitrary in the particular sound
we choose to listen to. There may be reasons enough to
suffice abundantly for our ultimate choice, but on examination
we shall find that they are by no means apprehended
with the same force at different times. The belief produced
by some strong argument may be very decisive at the moment,
but it will often begin to diminish when the argument
is not actually before the mind. It is like being dazzled by
a strong light; the impression still remains, but begins almost
immediately to fade away. I think that this is the
case, however we try to limit the sources of our conviction.

9. (II.) But supposing that it were possible to strike
a sort of average of this fluctuating state, should we find this
average to be of the amount assigned by theory? In other
words, is our natural belief in the happening of two different
events in direct proportion to the frequency with which those
events happen in the long run? There is a lottery with 100
tickets and ten prizes; is a man's belief that he will get a
prize fairly represented by one-tenth of certainty? The mere
reference to a lottery should be sufficient to disprove this.
Lotteries have flourished at all times, and have never failed
to be abundantly supported, in spite of the most perfect conviction,
on the part of many, if not of most, of those who put
into them, that in the long run all will lose. Deductions
should undoubtedly be made for those who act from superstitious
motives, from belief in omens, dreams, and so on.
But apart from these, and supposing any one to come fortified
by all that mathematics can do for him, it is difficult to
believe that his natural impressions about single events would
be always what they should be according to theory. Are
there many who can honestly declare that they would have
no desire to buy a single ticket? They would probably say
to themselves that the sum they paid away was nothing
worth mentioning to lose, and that there was a chance of
gaining a great deal; in other words, they are not apportioning
their belief in the way that theory assigns.

What bears out this view is, that the same persons who
would act in this way in single instances would often not
think of doing so in any but single instances. In other
words, the natural tendency here is to attribute too great an
amount of belief where it is or should be small; i.e. to depreciate
the risk in proportion to the contingent advantage.
They would very likely, when argued with, attach disparaging
epithets to this state of feeling, by calling it an unaccountable
fascination, or something of that kind, but of
its existence there can be little doubt. We are speaking
now of what is the natural tendency of our minds, not of
that into which they may at length be disciplined by education
and thought. If, however, educated persons have succeeded
for the most part in controlling this tendency in
games of chance, the spirit of reckless speculation has
scarcely yet been banished from commerce. On examination,
this tendency will be found so prevalent in all ages, ranks,
and dispositions, that it would be inadmissible to neglect it in
order to bring our supposed instincts more closely into accordance
with the commonly received theories of Probability.

10. There is another aspect of this question which has
been often overlooked, but which seems to deserve some
attention. Granted that we have an instinct of credence,
why should it be assumed that this must be just of that intensity
which subsequent experience will justify? Our
instincts are implanted in us for good purposes, and are intended
to act immediately and unconsciously. They are,
however, subject to control, and have to be brought into
accordance with what we believe to be true and right. In
other departments of psychology we do not assume that
every spontaneous prompting of nature is to be left just as
we find it, or even that on the average, omitting individual
variations, it is set at that pitch that will be found in the
end to be the best when we come to think about it and assign
its rules. Take, for example, the case of resentment. Here
we have an instinctive tendency, and one that on the whole
is good in its results. But moralists are agreed that almost
all our efforts at self-control are to be directed towards subduing
it and keeping it in its right direction. It is assumed
to be given as a sort of rough protection, and to be set, if
one might so express oneself, at too high a pitch to be
deliberately and consciously acted on in society. May not
something of this kind be the case also with our belief?
I only make a passing reference to this point here, as on
the theory of Probability adopted in this work it does not
appear to be at all material to the science. But it seems
a strong argument against the expediency of commencing
the study of the science from the subjective side, or even of
assigning any great degree of prominence to this side.

That men _do_ not believe in exact accordance with this
theory must have struck almost every one, but this has
probably been considered as mere exception and irregularity;
the assumption being made that on the average, and in far
the majority of cases, they do so believe. As stated above,
it is very doubtful whether the tendency which has just
been discussed is not so widely prevalent that it might with
far more propriety be called the rule than the exception.
And it may be better that this should be so: many good
results may follow from that cheerful disposition which induces
a man sometimes to go on trying after some great
good, the chance of which he overvalues. He will keep on
through trouble and disappointment, without serious harm
perhaps, when the cool and calculating bystander sees plainly
that his 'measure of belief' is much higher than it should
be. So, too, the tendency also so common, of underrating
the chance of a great evil may also work for good. By many
men death might be looked upon as an almost infinite evil,
at least they would so regard it themselves; suppose they
kept this contingency constantly before them at its right
value, how would it be possible to get through the practical
work of life? Men would be stopping indoors because if
they went out they might be murdered or bitten by a mad
dog. To say this is not to advocate a return to our instincts;
indeed when we have once reached the critical and conscious
state, it is hardly possible to do so; but it should be noticed
that the advantage gained by correcting them is at best but
a balanced one.[3] What is most to our present purpose, it
suggests the inexpediency of attempting to found an exact
theory on what may afterwards prove to be a mere instinct,
unauthorized in its full extent by experience.

11. It may be replied, that though people, as a matter
of fact, do not apportion belief in this exact way, yet they
_ought_ to do so. The purport of this remark will be examined
presently; it need only be said here that it grants all that
is now contended for. For it admits that the degree of our
belief is capable of modification, and may need it. But in
accordance with what is the belief to be modified? obviously
in accordance with experience; it cannot be trusted to by
itself, but the fraction at which it is to be rated must be
determined by the comparative frequency of the events to
which it refers. Experience then furnishing the standard, it
is surely most reasonable to start from this experience, and to
found the theory of our processes upon it.

If we do not do this, it should be observed that we are
detaching Probability altogether from the study of things
external to us, and making it nothing else in effect than a
portion of Psychology. If we refuse to be controlled by
experience, but confine our attention to the laws according
to which belief is naturally or instinctively compounded and
distributed in our minds, we have no right then to appeal to
experience afterwards even for illustrations, unless under the
express understanding that we do not guarantee its accuracy.
Our belief in some single events, for example, might be correct,
and yet that in a compound of several (if derived merely
from our instinctive laws of belief) very possibly might not
be correct, but might lead us into practical mistakes if we
determined to act upon it. Even if the two were in accordance,
this accordance would have to be proved, which would
lead us round, by what I cannot but think a circuitous
process, to the point which has been already chosen for
commencing with.

12. De Morgan seems to imply that the doctrine
criticised above finds a justification from the analogy of
Formal Logic. If the laws of necessary inference can be
studied apart from all reference to external facts (except
by way of illustration), why not those of probable inference?
There does not, however, seem to be much force in any such
analogy. Formal Logic, at any rate under its modern or
Kantian mode of treatment, is based upon the assumption
that there are laws of thought as distinguished from laws of
things, and that these laws of thought can be ascertained and
studied without taking into account their reference to any
particular object. Now so long as we are confined to necessary
or irreversible laws, as is of course the case in ordinary
Formal Logic, this assumption leads to no special difficulties.
We mean by this, that no conflict arises between these subjective
and objective necessities. The two exist in perfect
harmony side by side, the one being the accurate counterpart
of the other. So precise is the correspondence between
them, that few persons would notice, until study of metaphysics
had called their attention to such points, that there
were these two sides to the question. They would make
their appeal to either with equal confidence, saying indifferently,
'the thing must be so,' or, 'we cannot conceive its being
otherwise.' In fact it is only since the time of Kant that
this mental analysis has been to any extent appreciated and
accepted. And even now the dominant experience school of
philosophy would not admit that there are here two really
distinct sides to the phenomenon; they maintain either that
the subjective necessity is nothing more than the consequence
by inveterate association of the objective uniformity,
or else that this so-called necessity (say in the Law of Contradiction)
is after all merely verbal, merely a different way of
saying the same thing over again in other words. Whatever
the explanation adopted, the general result is that fallacies,
as real acts of thought, are impossible within the domain of
pure logic; error within that province is only possibly by a
momentary lapse of attention, that is of consciousness.

13. But though this perfect harmony between subjective
and objective uniformities or laws may exist within
the domain of pure logic, it is far from existing within that
of probability. The moment we make the _quantity_ of our
belief an integral part of the subject to be studied, any such
invariable correspondence ceases to exist. In the former
case, we could not consciously think erroneously even though
we might try to do so; in the latter, we not only can believe
erroneously but constantly do so. Far from the quantity of
our belief being so exactly adjusted in conformity with the
facts to which it refers that we cannot even in imagination
go astray, we find that it frequently exists in excess or defect
of that which subsequent judgment will approve. Our instincts
of credence are unquestionably in frequent hostility
with experience; and what do we do then? We simply
modify the instincts into accordance with the things. We
are constantly performing this practice, and no cultivated
mind would find it possible to do anything else. No man
would think of divorcing his belief from the things on which
it was exercised, or would suppose that the former had anything
else to do than to follow the lead of the latter. Hence
it results that that separation of the subjective necessity from
the objective, and that determination to treat the former
as a science apart by itself, for which a plausible defence
could be made in the case of pure logic, is entirely inadmissible
in the case of probability. However we might
contrive to '_think_' aright without appeal to facts, we cannot
_believe_ aright without incessantly checking our proceedings
by such appeals. Whatever then may be the
claims of Formal Logic to rank as a separate science, it
does not appear that it can furnish any support to the
theory of Probability at present under examination.

14. The point in question is sometimes urged as
follows. Suppose a man with two, and only two, alternatives
before him, one of which he knows must involve
success and the other failure. He knows nothing more
about them than this, and he is forced to act. Would he
not regard them with absolutely similar and equal feelings
of confidence, without the necessity of referring them to any
real or imaginary series? If so, is not this equivalent to
saying that his belief of either, since one of them must
come to pass, is equal to that of the other, and therefore that
his belief of each is one-half of full confidence? Similarly
if there are more than two alternatives: let it be supposed
that there are any number of them, amongst which no
distinctions whatever can be discerned except in such particulars
as we know for certain will not affect the result;
should we not feel equally confident in respect of each of
them? and so here again should we riot have a fractional
estimate of our absolute amount of belief? It is thus
attempted to lay the basis of a pure science of Probability,
determining the distribution and combination of our belief
hypothetically; viz. _if_ the contingencies are exactly alike,
then our belief is so apportioned, the question whether the
contingencies are equal being of course decided as the objective
data of Logic or Mathematics are decided.

To discuss this question fully would require a statement
at some length of the reasons in favour of the objective or
material view of Logic, as opposed to the Formal or Conceptualist.
I shall have to speak on this subject in another
chapter, and will not therefore enter upon it here. But one
conclusive objection which is applicable more peculiarly to
Probability may be offered at once. To pursue the line of
enquiry just indicated, is, as already remarked, to desert
the strictly logical ground, and to take up that appropriate
to psychology; the proper question, in all these cases, being
not what _do_ men believe, but what ought they to believe?
Admitting, as was done above, that in the case of Formal
Logic these two enquiries, or rather those corresponding to
them, practically run into one, owing to the fact that men
cannot consciously 'think' wrongly; it cannot be too strongly
insisted on that in Probability the two are perfectly separable
and distinct. It is of no use saying what men do or
will believe, we want to know what they will be right in
believing; and this can never be settled without an appeal
to the phenomena themselves.

15. But apart from the above considerations, this way
of putting the case does not seem to me at all conclusive.
Take the following example. A man[4] finds himself on the
sands of the Wash or Morecambe Bay, in a dense mist, when
the spring-tide is coming in; and knows therefore that to
be once caught by the tide would be fatal. He hears a
church-bell at a distance, but has no means of knowing
whether it is on the same side of the water with himself or
on the opposite side. He cannot tell therefore whether by
following its sound he will be led out into the mid-stream
and be lost, or led back to dry land and safety. Here there
can be no repetition of the event, and the cases are indistinguishably
alike, to him, in the only circumstances which
can affect the issue: is not then his prospect of death, it
will be said, necessarily equal to one-half? A proper analysis
of his state of mind would be a psychological rather than
a logical enquiry, and in any case, as above remarked, the
decision of this question does not touch our logical position.
But according to the best introspection I can give I should
say that what really passes through the mind in such a case
is something of this kind: In most doubtful positions and
circumstances we are accustomed to decide our conduct by
a consideration of the relative advantages and disadvantages
of each side, that is by the observed or inferred frequency
with which one or the other alternative has succeeded. In
proportion as these become more nearly balanced, we are
more frequently mistaken in the individual cases; that is, it
becomes more and more nearly what would be called 'a
mere toss up' whether we are right or wrong. The case
in question seems merely the limiting case, in which it has
been contrived that there shall be no appreciable difference
between the alternatives, by which to decide in favour of
one or other, and we accordingly feel no confidence in the
particular result. Having to decide, however, we decide according
to the precedent of similar cases which have occurred
before. To stand still and wait for better information is
certain death, and we therefore appeal to and employ the
only rule we know of; or rather we feel, or endeavour to
feel, as we have felt before when acting in the presence of
alternatives as nearly balanced as possible. But I can
neither perceive in my own case, nor feel convinced in that
of others, that this appeal, in a case which cannot be repeated,[5]
to a rule acted on and justified in cases which can be
and are repeated, at all forces us to admit that our state of
mind is the same in each case.

16. This example serves to bring out very clearly a point
which has been already mentioned, and which will have to be
insisted upon again, viz. that all which Probability discusses
is the statistical frequency of events, or, if we prefer so to
put it, the quantity of belief with which any one of these
events should be individually regarded, but leaves all the
subsequent conduct dependent upon that frequency, or that
belief, to the choice of the agents. Suppose there are two
travellers in the predicament in question: shall they keep
together, or separate in opposite directions? In either case
alike the chance of safety to each is the same, viz. one-half,
but clearly their circumstances must decide which course it
is preferable to adopt. If they are husband and wife, they will
probably prefer to remain together; if they are sole depositaries
of an important state secret, they may decide to part.
In other words, we have to select here between the two alternatives
of the certainty of a single loss, and the even chance
of a double loss; alternatives which the common mathematical
statement of their chances has a decided tendency
to make us regard as indistinguishable from one another.
But clearly the decision must be grounded on the desires,
feelings, and conscience of the agents. Probability cannot
say a word upon this question. As I have pointed out elsewhere,
there has been much confusion on this matter in
applications of the science to betting, and in the discussion
of the Petersburg problem.

We have thus examined the doctrine in question with
a minuteness which may seem tedious, but in consequence of
the eminence of its supporters it would have been presumptuous
to have rejected it without the strongest grounds. The
objections which have been urged might be summarised as
follows:--the amount of our belief of any given proposition,
supposing it to be in its nature capable of accurate determination
(which does not seem to be the case), depends upon a
great variety of causes, of which statistical frequency--the
subject of Probability--is but one. That even if we confine
our attention to this one cause, the natural amount of our
belief is not necessarily what theory would assign, but has to
be checked by appeal to experience. The subjective side of
Probability therefore, though very interesting and well deserving
of examination, seems a mere appendage of the objective,
and affords in itself no safe ground for a science of
inference.

17. The conception then of the science of Probability
as a science of the laws of belief seems to break down at
every point. We must not however rest content with such
merely negative criticism. The degree of belief we entertain
of a proposition may be hard to get at accurately, and
when obtained may be often wrong, and may need therefore
to be checked by an appeal to the objects of belief. Still in
popular estimation we do seem to be able with more or less
accuracy to form a graduated scale of intensity of belief.
What we have to examine now is whether this be possible,
and, if so, what is the explanation of the fact?

That it is generally believed that we can form such a
scale scarcely admits of doubt. There is a whole vocabulary
of common expressions such as, 'I feel almost sure,' 'I do not
feel quite certain,' 'I am less confident of this than of that,'
and so on. When we make use of any one of these phrases
we seldom doubt that we have a distinct meaning to convey
by means of it. Nor do we feel much at a loss, under any
given circumstances, as to which of these expressions we
should employ in preference to the others. If we were asked
to arrange in order, according to the intensity of the belief
with which we respectively hold them, things broadly marked
off from one another, we could do it from our consciousness
of belief alone, without a fresh appeal to the evidence upon
which the belief depended. Passing over the looser propositions
which are used in common conversation, let us take but
one simple example from amongst those which furnish numerical
data. Do I not feel more certain that some one will die
this week in the whole town, than in the particular street in
which I live? and if the town is known to contain a population
one hundred times greater than that in the street, would
not almost any one be prepared to assert on reflection that
he felt a hundred times more sure of the first proposition
than of the second? Or to take a non-numerical example, are
we not often able to say unhesitatingly which of two propositions
we believe the most, and to some rough degree how
much more we believe one than the other, at a time when all
the evidence upon which each rests has faded from the
mind, so that each has to be judged, as we may say, solely on
its own merits?

Here then a problem proposes itself. If popular opinion,
as illustrated in common language, be correct,--and very
considerable weight must of course be attributed to it,--there
does exist something which we call partial belief in reference
to any proposition of the numerical kind described
above. Now what we want to do is to find some test or
justification of this belief, to obtain in fact some intelligible
answer to the question, Is it correct? We shall find incidentally
that the answer to this question will throw a good deal
of light upon another question nearly as important and far
more intricate, viz. What is the meaning of this partial belief?

18. We shall find it advisable to commence by ascertaining
how such enquiries as the above would be answered
in the case of ordinary full belief. Such a step would not
offer the slightest difficulty. Suppose, to take a simple
example, that we have obtained the following proposition,--whether
by induction, or by the rules of ordinary deductive
logic, does not matter for our present purpose,--that a certain
mixture of oxygen and hydrogen is explosive. Here we have
an inference, and consequent belief of a proposition. Now
suppose there were any enquiry as to whether our belief
were correct, what should we do? The simplest way of
settling the matter would be to find out by a distinct appeal
to experience whether the proposition was true. Since we
are reasoning about things, the justification of the belief, that
is, the test of its correctness, would be most readily found in
the truth of the proposition. If by any process of inference
I have come to believe that a certain mixture will explode, I
consider my belief to be justified, that is to be correct, if
under proper circumstances the explosion always does occur;
if it does not occur the belief was wrong.

Such an answer, no doubt, goes but a little way, or rather
no way at all, towards explaining what is the nature of belief
in itself; but it is sufficient for our present purpose, which is
merely that of determining what is meant by the correctness
of our belief, and by the test of its correctness. In all inferences
about things, in which the _amount_ of our belief is not
taken into account, such an explanation as the above is quite
sufficient; it would be the ordinary one in any question of
science. It is moreover perfectly intelligible, whether the
conclusion is particular or universal. Whether we believe
that 'some men die', or that 'all men die', our belief may with
equal ease be tested by the appropriate train of experience.

19. But when we attempt to apply the same test to
_partial_ belief, we shall find ourselves reduced to an awkward
perplexity. A difficulty now emerges which has been singularly
overlooked by those who have treated of the subject.
As a simple example will serve our purpose, we will take the
case of a penny. I am about to toss one up, and I therefore
half believe, to adopt the current language, that it will give
head. Now it seems to be overlooked that if we appeal to
the event, as we did in the case last examined, our belief
must inevitably be wrong, and therefore the test above mentioned
will fail. For the thing must either happen or not
happen: i.e. in this case the penny must either give head, or
not give it; there is no third alternative. But whichever
way it occurs, our half-belief, so far as such a state of mind
admits of interpretation, must be wrong. If head does come,
I am wrong in not having expected it enough; for I only half
believed in its occurrence. If it does not happen, I am
equally wrong in having expected it too much; for I half
believed in its occurrence, when in fact it did not occur at all.

The same difficulty will occur in every case in which we
attempt to justify our state of partial belief in a single contingent
event. Let us take another example, slightly differing
from the last. A man is to receive £1 if a die gives six,
to pay 1_s_. if it gives any other number. It will generally be
admitted that he ought to give 2_s_. 6_d_. for the chance, and
that if he does so he will be paying a fair sum. This example
only differs from the last in the fact that instead of
simple belief in a proposition, we have taken what mathematicians
call 'the _value_ of the expectation'. In other words,
we have brought into a greater prominence, not merely the belief,
but the conduct which is founded upon the belief. But
precisely the same difficulty recurs here. For appealing to the
event,--the single event, that is,--we see that one or other
party must lose his money without compensation. In what
sense then can such an expectation be said to be a fair one?

20. A possible answer to this, and so far as appears the
only possible answer, will be, that what we really mean by
saying that we half believe in the occurrence of head is to
express our conviction that head will certainly happen on
the average every other time. And similarly, in the second
example, by calling the sum a fair one it is meant that in
the long run neither party will gain or lose. As we shall
recur presently to the point raised in this form of answer, the
only notice that need be taken of it at this point is to call
attention to the fact that it entirely abandons the whole
question in dispute, for it admits that this partial belief does
not in any strict sense apply to the individual event, since it
clearly cannot be justified there. At such a result indeed we
cannot be surprised; at least we cannot on the theory adopted
throughout this Essay. For bearing in mind that the employment
of Probability postulates ignorance of the single
event, it is not easy to see how we are to justify any other
opinion or statement about the single event than a confession
of such ignorance.

21. So far then we do not seem to have made the
slightest approximation to a solution of the particular
question now under examination. The more closely we have
analysed special examples, the more unmistakeably are we
brought to the conclusion that in the individual instance no
justification of anything like quantitative belief is to be
found; at least none is to be found in the same sense in
which we expect it in ordinary scientific conclusions, whether
Inductive or Deductive. And yet we have to face and
account for the fact that common impressions, as attested by
a whole vocabulary of common phrases, are in favour of the
existence of this quantitative belief. How are we to account
for this? If we appeal to an example again, and analyse it
somewhat more closely, we may yet find our way to some
satisfactory explanation.

In our previous analysis (§18) we found it sufficient to stop
at an early stage, and to give as the justification of our belief
the fact of the proposition being true. Stopping however at
that stage, we have found this explanation fail altogether to
give a justification of partial belief; fail, that is, when applied
to the individual instance. The two states of belief and disbelief
correspond admirably to the two results of the event
happening and not happening respectively, and unless for
psychological purposes we saw no reason to analyse further;
but to partial belief there is nothing corresponding in the result,
for the event cannot partially happen in such cases as we
are concerned with. Suppose then we advance a step further
in the analysis, and ask again what is meant by the proposition
being true? This introduces us, of course, to a very long
and intricate path; but in the short distance along it which
we shall advance, we shall not, it is to be hoped, find any
very serious difficulty. As before, we will illustrate the
analysis by first applying it to the case of ordinary full belief.

22. Whatever opinion then may be held about the
essential nature of belief, it will probably be admitted that a
readiness to act upon the proposition believed is an inseparable
accompaniment of that state of mind. There can be no
alteration in our belief (at any rate in the case of sane persons)
without a possible alteration in our conduct, nor anything in
our conduct which is not connected with something in our
belief. We will first take an example in connection with the
penny, in which there is full belief; we will analyse it a step
further than we did before, and then attempt to apply the
same analysis to an example of a similar kind, but one in
which the belief is partial instead of full.

Suppose that I am about to throw a penny up, and contemplate
the prospect of its falling upon one of its sides and
not upon its edge. We feel perfectly confident that it will
do so. Now whatever else may be implied in our belief, we
certainly mean this; that we are ready to stake our conduct
upon its falling thus. All our betting, and everything else
that we do, is carried on upon this supposition. Any risk
whatever that might ensue upon its falling otherwise will be
incurred without fear. This, it must be observed, is equally
the case whether we are speaking of a single throw or of a
long succession of throws.

But now let us take the case of a penny falling, not upon
one side or the other, but upon a given side, _head_. To a
certain extent this example resembles the last. We are perfectly
ready to stake our conduct upon what comes to pass in
the long run. When we are considering the result of a large
number of throws, we are ready to act upon the supposition
that head comes every other time. If e.g. we are betting
upon it, we shall not object to paying £1 every time that
head comes, on condition of receiving £1 every time that
head does not come. This is nothing else than the _translation_,
as we may call it, into practice, of our belief that head
and tail occur equally often.

Now it will be obvious, on a moment's consideration, that
our conduct is capable of being slightly varied: of being
varied, that is, in form, whilst it remains identical in respect
of its results. It is clear that to pay £1 every time we lose,
and to get £1 every time we gain, comes to precisely the same
thing, in the case under consideration, as to pay ten shillings
every time without exception, and to receive £1 every time
that head occurs. It is so, because heads occur, on the
average, every other time. In the long run the two results
coincide; but there is a marked difference between the two
cases, considered individually. The difference is two-fold.
In the first place we depart from the notion of a payment
every other time, and come to that of one made every time.
In the second place, what we pay every time is half of what
we get in the cases in which we do get anything. The difference
may seem slight; but mark the effect when our conduct
is translated back again into the subjective condition
upon which it depends, viz. into our belief. It is in consequence
of such a translation, as it appears to me, that the
notion has been acquired that we have an accurately determinable
amount of belief as to every such proposition. To
have losses and gains of equal amount, and to incur them
equally often, was the experience connected with our belief
that the two events, head and tail, would occur equally often.
This was quite intelligible, for it referred to the long run.
To find that this could be commuted for a payment made
every time without exception, a payment, observe, of half the
amount of what we occasionally receive, has very naturally
been interpreted to mean that there must be a state of half-belief
which refers to each individual throw.

23. One such example, of course, does not go far towards
establishing a theory. But the reader will bear in
mind that almost all our conduct tends towards the same
result; that it is not in betting only, but in every course of
action in which we have to count the events, that such a
numerical apportionment of our conduct is possible. Hence,
by the ordinary principles of association, it would appear
exceedingly likely that, not exactly a numerical condition of
mind, but rather numerical associations, become inseparably
connected with each particular event which we know to occur
in a certain proportion of times. Once in six times a die
gives ace; a knowledge of this fact, taken in combination
with all the practical results to which it leads, produces, one
cannot doubt, an inseparable notion of one-sixth connected
with each _single_ throw. But it surely cannot be called belief
to the amount of one-sixth; at least it admits neither of
justification nor explanation in these single cases, to which
alone the fractional belief, if such existed, ought to apply.

It is in consequence, I apprehend, of such association that
we act in such an unhesitating manner in reference to any
single contingent event, even when we have no expectation
of its being repeated. A die is going to be thrown up once,
and once only. I bet 5 to 1 against ace, not, as is commonly
asserted, because I feel one-sixth part of certainty in the
occurrence of ace; but because I know that such conduct
would be justified in the long run of such cases, and I apply
to the solitary individual the same rule that I should apply
to it if I knew it were one of a long series. This accounts
for my conduct being the same in the two cases; by association,
moreover, we probably experience very similar feelings
in regard to them both.

24. And here, on the view of the subject adopted in
this Essay, we might stop. We are bound to explain the
'measure of our belief' in the occurrence of a single event
when we judge solely from the statistical frequency with
which such events occur, for such a series of events was our
starting-point; but we are not bound to inquire whether in
every case in which persons have, or claim to have, a certain
measure of belief there must be such a series to which to
refer it, and by which to justify it. Those who start from
the subjective side, and regard Probability as the science of
quantitative belief, are obliged to do this, but we are free
from the obligation.

Still the question is one which is so naturally raised in
connection with this subject, that it cannot be altogether
passed by. I think that to a considerable extent such a
justification as that mentioned above will be found applicable
in other cases. The fact is that we are very seldom called
upon to decide and act upon a single contingency which cannot
be viewed as being one of a series. Experience introduces
us, it must be remembered, not merely to a succession
of events neatly arranged in a single series (as we have
hitherto assumed them to be for the purpose of illustration),
but to an infinite number belonging to a vast variety of
different series. A man is obliged to be acting, and therefore
exercising his belief about one thing or another, almost
the whole of every day of his life. Any one person will have
to decide in his time about a multitude of events, each one
of which may never recur again within his own experience.
But by the very fact of there being a multitude, though they
are all of different kinds, we shall still find that order is
maintained, and so a course of conduct can be justified. In
a plantation of trees we should find that there is order of a
certain kind if we measure them in any one direction, the
trees being on an average about the same distance from each
other. But a somewhat similar order would be found if we
were to examine them in any other direction whatsoever. So
in nature generally; there is regularity in a succession of
events of the same kind. But there may also be regularity
if we form a series by taking successively a number out of
totally distinct kinds.

It is in this circumstance that we find an extension of the
practical justification of the measure of our belief. A man,
say, buys a life annuity, insures his life on a railway journey,
puts into a lottery, and so on. Now we may make a series
out of these acts of his, though each is in itself a single event
which he may never intend to repeat. His conduct, and therefore
his belief, measured by the result in each individual
instance, will not be justified, but the reverse, as shown in §19.
Could he indeed repeat each kind of action often
enough it would be justified; but from this, by the conditions
of life, he is debarred. Now it is perfectly conceivable that
in the new series, formed by his successive acts of different
kinds, there should be no regularity. As a matter of fact,
however, it is found that there is regularity. In this way the
equalization of his gains and losses, for which he cannot hope
in annuities, insurances, and lotteries taken separately, may
yet be secured to him out of these events taken collectively.
If in each case he values his chance at its right proportion
(and acts accordingly) he will in the course of his life neither
gain nor lose. And in the same way if, whenever he has the
alternative of different courses of conduct, he acts in accordance
with the estimate of his belief described above, i.e.
chooses the event whose chance is the best, he will in the end
gain more in this way than by any other course. By the existence,
therefore, of these _cross-series_, as we may term them,
there is an immense addition to the number of actions which
may be fairly considered to belong to those courses of conduct
which offer many successive opportunities of equalizing
gains and losses. All these cases then may be regarded as
admitting of justification in the way now under discussion.

25. In the above remarks it will be observed that we
have been giving what is to be regarded as a justification of
his belief from the point of view of the individual agent himself.
If we suppose the existence of an enlarged fellow-feeling,
the applicability of such a justification becomes still more
extensive. We can assign a very intelligible sense to the
assertion that it is 999 to 1 that I shall not get a prize in a
lottery, even if this be stated in the form that my belief in
my so doing is represented by the fraction 1/1000th of certainty.
Properly it means that in a very large number of throws I
should gain once in 1000 times. If we include other contingencies
of the same kind, as described in the last section,
each individual may be supposed to reach to something like
this experience within the limits of his own life. He could
not do it in this particular line of conduct alone, but he could
do it in this line combined with others. Now introduce the
possibility of each man feeling that the gain of others offers
some analogy to his own gains, which we may conceive his
doing except in the case of the gains of those against whom
he is directly competing, and the above justification becomes
still more extensively applicable.

The following would be a fair illustration to test this
view. I know that I must die on some day of the week, and
there are but seven days. My belief, therefore, that I shall
die on a Sunday is one-seventh. Here the contingent event
is clearly one that does not admit of repetition; and yet
would not the belief of every man have the value assigned it
by the formula? It would appear that the same principle
will be found to be at work here as in the former examples.
It is quite true that I have only the opportunity of dying
once myself, but I am a member of a class in which deaths
occur with frequency, and I form my opinion upon evidence
drawn from that class. If, for example, I had insured my
life for £1000, I should feel a certain propriety in demanding
£7000 in case the office declared that it would only pay in
the event of my dying on a Sunday. _I_, indeed, for my own
private part, might not find the arrangement an equitable
one; but mankind at large, in case they acted on such a
principle, might fairly commute their aggregate gains in such
a way, whilst to the Insurance Office it would not make any
difference at all.

26. The results of the last few sections might be summarised
as follows:--the different amounts of belief which
we entertain upon different events, and which are recognized
by various phrases in common use, have undoubtedly some
meaning. But the greater part of their meaning, and certainly
their only justification, are to be sought in the _series_
of corresponding events to which they belong; in regard to
which it may be shown that far more events are capable of
being referred to a series than might be supposed at first
sight. The test and justification of belief are to be found in
conduct; in this test applied to the series as a whole, there
is nothing peculiar, it differs in no way from the similar test
when we are acting on our belief about any single event.
But so applied, from the nature of the case it is applied
successively to each of the individuals of the series; here our
_conduct_ generally admits of being separately considered in
reference to each particular event; and this has been understood
to denote a certain amount of belief which should be a
fraction of certainty. Probably on the principles of association,
a peculiar condition of mind is produced in reference to
each single event. And these associations are not unnaturally
retained even when we contemplate any one of these single
events isolated from any series to which it belongs. When
it is found alone we treat it, and feel towards it, as we do
when it is in company with the rest of the series.

27. We may now see, more clearly than we could
before, why it is that we are free from any necessity of assuming
the existence of causation, in the sense of necessary
invariable sequence, in the case of the events which compose
our series. Against such a view it might very plausibly be
urged, that we constantly talk of the probability of a single
event; but how can this be done, it may reasonably be said,
if we once admit the possibility of that event occurring fortuitously?
Take an instance from human life; the average
duration of the lives of a batch of men aged thirty will be
about thirty-four years. We say therefore to any individual
of them, Your expectation of life is thirty-four years. But
how can this be said if we admit that the train of events
composing his life is liable to be destitute of all regular
sequence of cause and effect? To this it may be replied
that the denial of causation enables us to say neither more
nor less than its assertion, in reference to the length of the
individual life, for of this we are ignorant in each case alike.
By assigning, as above, an expectation in reference to the
individual, we _mean_ nothing more than to make a statement
about the average of his class. Whether there be causation
or not in these individual cases does not affect our knowledge
of the average, for this by supposition rests on independent
experience. The legitimate inferences are the same on either
hypothesis, and of equal value. The only difference is that
on the hypothesis of non-causation we have forced upon our
attention the impropriety of talking of the 'proper' expectation
of the individual, owing to the fact that all knowledge of
its amount is formally impossible; on the other hypothesis
the impropriety is overlooked from the fact of such knowledge
being only practically unattainable. As a matter of
fact the amount of our knowledge is the same in each case;
it is a knowledge of the average, and of that only.[6]

28. We may conclude, then, that the limits within
which we are thus able to justify the amount of our belief
are far more extensive than might appear at first sight.
Whether every case in which persons feel an amount of
belief short of perfect confidence could be forced into the
province of Probability is a wider question. Even, however,
if the belief could be supposed capable of justification on its
principles, its rules could never in such cases be made use of.
Suppose, for example, that a father were in doubt whether
to give a certain medicine to his sick child. On the one
hand, the doctor declared that the child would die unless the
medicine were given; on the other, through a mistake, the
father cannot feel quite sure that the medicine he has is the
right one. It is conceivable that some mathematicians, in
their conviction that everything has its definite numerical
probability, would declare that the man's belief had some
'value' (if they could only find out what it is), say nine-tenths;
by which they would mean that in nine cases out of
ten in which he entertained a belief of that particular value
he proved to be right. So with his belief and doubt on
the other side of the question. Putting the two together,
there is but one course which, as a prudent man and a good
father, he can possibly follow. It may be so, but when (as
here) the identification of an event in a series depends on
purely subjective conditions, as in this case upon the degree
of vividness of his conviction, of which no one else can judge,
no test is possible, and therefore no proof can be found.

29. So much then for the attempts, so frequently
made, to found the science on a subjective basis; they can
lead, as it has here been endeavoured to show, to no satisfactory
result. Still our belief is so inseparably connected with
our action, that something of a defence can be made for the
attempts described above; but when it is attempted, as is
often the case, to import other sentiments besides pure belief,
and to find a justification for them also in the results of our
science, the confusion becomes far worse. The following
extract from Archbishop Thomson's _Laws of Thought_ (§122,
Ed. II.) will show what kind of applications of the science are
contemplated here: "In applying the doctrine of chances to
that subject in connexion with which it was invented--games
of chance,--the principles of what has been happily termed
'moral arithmetic' must not be forgotten. Not only would
it be difficult for a gamester to find an antagonist on terms,
as to fortune and needs, precisely equal, but also it is impossible
that with such an equality the advantage of a
considerable gain should balance the harm of a serious loss.
'If two men,' says Buffon, 'were to determine to play for
their whole property, what would be the effect of this agreement?
The one would only double his fortune, and the
other reduce his to naught. What proportion is there between
the loss and the gain? The same that there is between
all and nothing. The gain of the one is but a moderate
sum,--the loss of the other is numerically infinite, and
morally so great that the labour of his whole life may not
perhaps suffice to restore his property.'"

As moral advice this is all very true and good. But if it
be regarded as a contribution to the science of the subject it
is quite inappropriate, and seems calculated to cause confusion.
The doctrine of chances pronounces upon certain
kinds of events in respect of number and magnitude; it has
absolutely nothing to do with any particular person's feelings
about these relations. We might as well append a corollary
to the rules of arithmetic, to point out that although it is
very true that twice two are four it does not follow that four,
horses will give twice as much pleasure to the owner as two
will. If two men play on equal terms their chances are
equal; in other words, if they were often to play in this
manner each would lose as frequently as he would gain. That
is all that Probability can say; what under the circumstances
may be the determination and opinions of the men in question,
it is for them and them alone to decide. There are
many persons who cannot bear mediocrity of any kind, and
to whom the prospect of doubling their fortune would outweigh
a greater chance of losing it altogether. They alone
are the judges.

If we will introduce such a balance of pleasure and pain
the individual must make the calculation for himself. The
supposition is that total ruin is very painful, partial loss
painful in a less proportion than that assigned by the ratio
of the losses themselves; the inference is therefore drawn
that on the average more pain is caused by occasional great
losses than by frequent small ones, though the money value
of the losses in the long run may be the same in each case.
But if we suppose a country where the desire of spending
largely is very strong, and where owing to abundant production
loss is easily replaced, the calculation might incline the
other way. Under such circumstances it is quite possible
that more happiness might result from playing for high than
for low stakes. The fact is that all emotional considerations
of this kind are irrelevant; they are, at most, mere applications
of the theory, and such as each individual is alone
competent to make for himself. Some more remarks will be
made upon this subject in the chapter upon Insurance and
Gambling.

30. It is by the introduction of such considerations as
these that the Petersburg Problem has been so perplexed.
Having already given some description of this problem we
will refer to it very briefly here. It presents us with a
sequence of sets of throws for each of which sets I am to
receive something, say a shilling, as the minimum receipt.
My receipts increase in proportion to the rarity of each
particular kind of set, and each kind is observed or inferred
to grow more rare in a certain definite but unlimited order.
By the wording of the problem, properly interpreted, I am
supposed never to stop. Clearly therefore, however large a
fee I pay for each of these sets, I shall be sure to make it up
in time. The mathematical expression of this is, that I
ought always to pay an infinite sum. To this the objection
is opposed, that no sensible man would think of advancing
even a large finite sum, say £50. Certainly he would not;
but why? Because neither he nor those who are to pay
him would be likely to live long enough for him to obtain
throws good enough to remunerate him for one-tenth of his
outlay; to say nothing of his trouble and loss of time. We
must not suppose that the problem, as stated in the ideal
form, will coincide with the practical form in which it
presents itself in life. A carpenter might as well object to
Euclid's second postulate, because his plane came to a stop
in six feet on the plank on which he was at work. Many
persons have failed to perceive this, and have assumed that,
besides enabling us to draw numerical inferences about the
members of a series, the theory ought also to be called upon
to justify all the opinions which average respectable men
might be inclined to form about them, as well as the conduct
they might choose to pursue in consequence. It is obvious
that to enter upon such considerations as these is to diverge
from our proper ground. We are concerned, in these cases,
with the actions of men only, as given in statistics; with the
emotions they experience in the performance of these actions
we have no direct concern whatever. The error is the same
as if any one were to confound, in political economy, value in
use with value in exchange, and object to measuring the
value of a loaf by its cost of production, because bread is
worth more to a man when he is hungry than it is just after
his dinner.

31. One class of emotions indeed ought to be excepted,
which, from the apparent uniformity and consistency
with which they show themselves in different persons
and at different times, do really present some better claim to
consideration. In connection with a science of inference
they can never indeed be regarded as more than an accident
of what is essential to the subject, but compared with other
emotions they seem to be inseparable accidents.

The reader will remember that attention was drawn in
the earlier part of this chapter to the compound nature of
the state of mind which we term belief. It is partly intellectual,
partly also emotional; it professes to rest upon
experience, but in reality the experience acts through the
distorting media of hopes and fears and other disturbing
agencies. So long as we confine our attention to the _state
of mind_ of the person who believes, it appears to me that
these two parts of belief are quite inseparable. Indeed, to
speak of them as two parts may convey a wrong impression;
for though they spring from different sources, they so entirely
merge in one result as to produce what might be
called an indistinguishable compound. Every kind of inference,
whether in probability or not, is liable to be disturbed
in this way. A timid man may honestly believe that he will
be wounded in a coming battle, when others, with the same
experience but calmer judgments, see that the chance is
too small to deserve consideration. But such a man's belief,
if we look only to that, will not differ in its nature from
sound belief. His conduct also in consequence of his belief
will by itself afford no ground of discrimination; he will
make his will as sincerely as a man who is unmistakeably on
his death-bed. The only resource is to check and correct
his belief by appealing to past and current experience.[7] This
was advanced as an objection to the theory on which probability
is regarded as concerned primarily with laws of belief.
But on the view taken in this Essay in which we are supposed
to be concerned with laws of inference about things,
error and difficulty from this source vanish. Let us bear clearly
in mind that we are concerned with inferences about things,
and whatever there may be in belief which does not depend
on experience will disappear from notice.

32. These emotions then can claim no notice as an
integral portion of any science of inference, and should in
strictness be rigidly excluded from it. But if any of them
are uniform and regular in their production and magnitude,
they may be fairly admitted as accidental and extraneous
accompaniments. This is really the case to some extent
with our surprise. This emotion does show a considerable
degree of uniformity. The rarer any event is the more am I,
in common with most other men, surprised at it when it does
happen. This surprise may range through all degrees, from
the most languid form of interest up to the condition which
we term 'being startled'. And since the surprise seems
to be pretty much the same, under similar circumstances,
at different times, and in the case of different persons, it is
free from that extreme irregularity which is found in most
of the other mental conditions which accompany the contemplation
of unexpected events. Hence our surprise, though,
as stated above, having no proper claim to admission into
the science of Probability, is such a constant and regular
accompaniment of that which Probability is concerned with,
that notice must often be taken of it. References will occasionally
be found to this aspect of the question in the
following chapters.

It may be remarked in passing, for the sake of further
illustration of the subject, that this emotional accompaniment
of surprise, to which we are thus able to assign something
like a fractional value, differs in two important respects
from the commonly accepted fraction of belief. In the first
place, it has what may be termed an independent existence;
it is intelligible by itself. The belief, as we endeavoured to
show, needs explanation and finds it in our consequent conduct.
Not so with the emotion; this stands upon its own
footing, and may be examined in and by itself. Hence, in
the second place, it is as applicable, and as capable of any kind
of justification, in relation to the _single event_, as to a series of
events. In this respect, as will be remembered, it offers a
complete contrast to our state of belief about any one contingent
event. May not these considerations help to account
for the general acceptance of the doctrine, that we have a
certain definite and measurable amount of belief about these
events? I cannot help thinking that what is so obviously
true of the emotional portion of the belief, has been unconsciously
transferred to the other or intellectual portion of the
compound condition, to which it is not applicable, and where
it cannot find a justification.

33. A further illustration may now be given of the
subjective view of Probability at present under discussion.

An appeal to common language is always of service, as
the employment of any distinct word is generally a proof
that mankind have observed some distinct properties in the
things, which have caused them to be singled out and have
that name appropriated to them. There is such a class of
words assigned by popular usage to the kind of events of
which Probability takes account. If we examine them we
shall find, I think, that they direct us unmistakeably to the
two-fold aspect of the question,--the objective and the subjective,
the quality in the events and the state of our minds
in considering them,--that have occupied our attention
during the former chapters.

The word 'extraordinary', for instance, seems to point to
the observed fact, that events are arranged in a sort of _ordo_
or rank. No one of them might be so exactly placed that
we could have inferred its position, but when we take a great
many into account together, running our eye, as it were,
along the line, we begin to see that they really do for the
most part stand in order. Those which stand away from the
line have this divergence observed, and are called extraordinary,
the rest ordinary, or in the line. So too 'irregular'
and 'abnormal' are doubtless used from the appearance
of things, when examined in large numbers, being that
of an arrangement by rule or measure. This only holds
when there are a good many; we could not speak of the
single events being so arranged. Again the word 'law', in
its philosophical sense, has now become quite popularised.
How the term became introduced is not certain, but
there can be little doubt that it was somewhat in this
way:--The effect of a law, in its usual application to
human conduct, is to produce regularity where it did not
previously exist; when then a regularity began to be perceived
in nature, the same word was used, whether the cause
was supposed to be the same or not. In each case there
was the same generality of agreement, subject to occasional
deflection.[8]

On the other hand, observe the words 'wonderful', 'unexpected',
'incredible'. Their connotation describes states
of mind simply; they are of course not confined to Probability,
in the sense of statistical frequency, but imply simply
that the events they denote are such as from some cause we
did not expect would happen, and at which therefore, when
they do happen, we are surprised.

Now when we bear in mind that these two classes of
words are in their origin perfectly distinct;--the one denoting
simply events of a certain character; the other,
though also denoting events, _connoting_ simply states of
mind;--and yet that they are universally applied to the
same events, so as to be used as perfectly synonymous, we
have in this a striking illustration of the two sides under
which Probability may be viewed, and of the universal recognition
of a close connection between them. The words are
popularly used as synonymous, and we must not press their
meaning too far; but if it were to be observed, as I am
rather inclined to think it could, that the application of the
words which denote mental states is wider than that of the
others, we should have an illustration of what has been
already observed, viz. that the province of Probability is not
so extensive as that over which variation of belief might be
observed. Probability only considers the case in which this
variation is brought about in a certain definite statistical
way.

34. It will be found in the end both interesting and
important to have devoted some attention to this subjective
side of the question. In the first place, as a mere speculative
inquiry the quantity of our belief of any proposition
deserves notice. To study it at all deeply would be to trespass
into the province of Psychology, but it is so intimately
connected with our own subject that we cannot avoid all
reference to it. We therefore discuss the laws under which
our expectation and surprise at isolated events increases or
diminishes, so as to account for these states of mind in any
individual instance, and, if necessary, to correct them when
they vary from their proper amount.

But there is another more important reason than this.
It is quite true that when the subjects of our discussion in
any particular instance lie entirely within the province
of Probability, they may be treated without any reference
to our belief. We may or we may not employ this side of
the question according to our pleasure. If, for example, I
am asked whether it is more likely that A. B. will die this
year, than that it will rain to-morrow, I may calculate the
chance (which really is at bottom the same thing as my
belief) of each, find them respectively, one-sixth and one-seventh,
say, and therefore decide that my 'expectation' of
the former is the greater, viz. that this is the more likely
event. In this case the process is precisely the same whether
we suppose our belief to be introduced or not; our mental
state is, in fact, quite immaterial to the question. But, in
other cases, it may be different. Suppose that we are comparing
two things, of which one is wholly alien to Probability,
in the sense that it is hopeless to attempt to assign
any degree of numerical frequency to it, the only ground
they have in common may be the amount of belief to which
they are respectively entitled. We cannot compare the
frequency of their occurrence, for one may occur too seldom
to judge by, perhaps it may be unique. It has been already
said, that our belief of many events rests upon a very complicated
and extensive basis. My belief may be the product
of many conflicting arguments, and many analogies more or
less remote; these proofs themselves may have mostly faded
from my mind, but they will leave their effect behind them
in a weak or strong conviction. At the time, therefore, I
may still be able to say, with some degree of accuracy,
though a very slight degree, what amount of belief I entertain
upon the subject. Now we cannot compare things that
are heterogeneous: if, therefore, we are to decide between
this and an event determined naturally and properly by
Probability, it is impossible to appeal to chances or frequency
of occurrence. The measure of belief is the only common
ground, and we must therefore compare this quantity in each
case. The test afforded will be an exceedingly rough one,
for the reasons mentioned above, but it will be better than
none; in some cases it will be found to furnish all we want.

Suppose, for example, that one letter in a million is lost
in the Post Office, and that in any given instance I wish to
know which is more likely, that a letter has been so lost, or
that my servant has stolen it? If the latter alternative
could, like the former, be stated in a numerical form, the
comparison would be simple. But it cannot be reduced to
this form, at least not consciously and directly. Still, if we
could feel that our belief in the man's dishonesty was greater
than one-millionth, we should then have homogeneous things
before us, and therefore comparison would be possible.

35. We are now in a position to give a tolerably accurate
definition of a phrase which we have frequently been
obliged to employ, or incidentally to suggest, and of which
the reader may have looked for a definition already, viz. the
probability of an event, or what is equivalent to this, the
chance of any given event happening. I consider that these
terms presuppose a series; within the indefinitely numerous
class which composes this series a smaller class is distinguished
by the presence or absence of some attribute or
attributes, as was fully illustrated and explained in a previous
chapter. These larger and smaller classes respectively
are commonly spoken of as instances of the 'event,' and of
'its happening in a given particular way.' Adopting this
phraseology, which with proper explanations is suitable
enough, we may define the probability or chance (the terms
are here regarded as synonymous) of the event happening
in that particular way as the numerical fraction which represents
the proportion between the two different classes in the
long run. Thus, for example, let the probability be that
of a given infant living to be eighty years of age. The
larger series will comprise all infants, the smaller all who live
to eighty. Let the proportion of the former to the latter be
9 to 1; in other words, suppose that one infant in ten lives
to eighty. Then the chance or probability that any given
infant will live to eighty is the numerical fraction 1/10. This
assumes that the series are of indefinite extent, and of the
kind which we have described as possessing a fixed type.
If this be not the case, but the series be supposed terminable,
or regularly or irregularly fluctuating, as might be the
case, for instance, in a society where owing to sanitary or
other causes the average longevity was steadily undergoing
a change, then in so far as this is the case the series ceases
to be a subject of science. What we have to do under these
circumstances, is to substitute a series of the right kind for
the inappropriate one presented by nature, choosing it, of
course, with as little deflection as possible from the observed
facts. This is nothing more than has to be done, and invariably
is done, whenever natural objects are made subjects
of strict science.

36. A word or two of explanation may be added about
the expression employed above, 'the proportion in the long
run.' The run must be supposed to be very long indeed, in
fact never to stop. As we keep on taking more terms of the
series we shall find the proportion still fluctuating a little,
but its fluctuations will grow less. The proportion, in fact,
will gradually approach towards some fixed numerical value,
what mathematicians term its _limit_. This fractional value
is the one spoken of above. In the cases in which deductive
reasoning is possible, this fraction may be obtained without
direct appeal to statistics, from reasoning about the conditions
under which the events occur, as was explained in
the fourth chapter.

Here becomes apparent the full importance of the distinction
so frequently insisted on, between the actual irregular
series before us and the substituted one of calculation, and
the meaning of the assertion (Ch. I. §13), that it was in the
case of the latter only that strict scientific inferences could
be made. For how can we have a 'limit' in the case of
those series which ultimately exhibit irregular fluctuations?
When we say, for instance, that it is an even chance that
a given person recovers from the cholera, the meaning of
this assertion is that in the long run one half of the persons
attacked by that disease do recover. But if we examined
a sufficiently extensive range of statistics, we might find
that the manners and customs of society had produced such
a change in the type of the disease or its treatment, that we
were no nearer approaching towards a fixed limit than we
were at first. The conception of an ultimate limit in the
ratio between the numbers of the two classes in the series
necessarily involves an absolute fixity of the type. When
therefore nature does not present us with this absolute fixity,
as she seldom or never does except in games of chance (and
not demonstrably there), our only resource is to introduce
such a series, in other words, as has so often been said, to
substitute a series of the right kind.

37. The above, which may be considered tolerably
complete as a definition, might equally well have been
given in the last chapter. It has been deferred however
to the present place, in order to connect with it at once a
proposition involving the conceptions introduced in this
chapter; viz. the state of our own minds, in reference to the
amount of belief we entertain in contemplating any one
of the events whose probability has just been described.
Reasons were given against the opinion that our belief admitted
of any exact apportionment like the numerical one
just mentioned. Still, it was shown that a reasonable explanation
could be given of such an expression as, 'my belief is
1/10th of certainty', though it was an explanation which pointed
unmistakeably to a series of events, and ceased to be intelligible,
or at any rate justifiable, when it was not viewed in
such a relation to a series. In so far, then, as this explanation
is adopted, we may say that our belief is in proportion
to the above fraction. This referred to the purely
intellectual part of belief which cannot be conceived to be
separable, even in thought, from the things upon which it
is exercised. With this intellectual part there are commonly
associated various emotions. These we can to a
certain extent separate, and, when separated, can measure
with that degree of accuracy which is possible in the case of
other emotions. They are moreover intelligible in reference
to the individual events. They will be found to increase
and diminish in accordance, to some extent, with the fraction
which represents the scarcity of the event. The emotion of
surprise does so with some degree of accuracy.

The above investigation describes, though in a very brief
form, the amount of truth which appears to me to be contained
in the assertion frequently made, that the fraction
expressive of the probability represents also the fractional
part of full certainty to which our belief of the individual
event amounts. Any further analysis of the matter would
seem to belong to Psychology rather than to Probability.


1. In the ordinary signification of this term. As De Morgan uses it he
  makes Formal Logic _include_ Probability, as one of its branches, as
  indicated in his title "Formal Logic, or the Calculus of Inference,
  necessary and probable."

2. _Formal Logic_. Preface, page v.

3. An illustration of the points here insisted on has recently [1876]
  been given in a quarter where few would have expected it; I allude,
  as many readers will readily infer, to J. S. Mill's exceedingly
  interesting Essays on Theism. It is not within our province here to
  criticise any of their conclusions, but they have expressed in a
  very significant way the conviction entertained by him that beliefs
  which are not justified by evidence, and possibly may not be capable
  of justification (those for instance of immortality and the
  existence of the Deity), may nevertheless not only continue to exist
  in cultivated minds, but may also be profitably encouraged there, at
  any rate in the shape of hopes, for certain supposed advantages
  attendant on their retention, irrespective even of their truth.

4. It is necessary to take an example in which the man is forced to
  act, or we should not be able to shew that he has any belief on the
  subject at all. He may declare that he neither knows nor cares
  anything about the matter, and that therefore there is nothing of
  the nature of belief to be extracted out of his mental condition. He
  very likely would take this ground if we asked him, as De Morgan
  does, with a slightly different reference (_Formal Logic_, p. 183),
  whether he considers that there are volcanoes on the unseen side of
  the moon larger than those on the side turned towards us; or, with
  Jevons (_Principles of Science_, Ed. II. p. 212) whether he
  considers that a Platythliptic Coefficient is positive. These do not
  therefore seem good instances to illustrate the position that we
  always entertain a certain degree of belief on every question which
  can be stated, and that utter inability to give a reason in favour
  of either alternative corresponds to half belief.

5. Except indeed on the principles indicated further on in §§24, 25.

6. For a fuller discussion of this, see the Chapter on Causation.

7. The best example I can recall of the distinction between judging
  from the subjective and the objective side, in such cases as these,
  occurred once in a railway train. I met a timid old lady who was in
  much fear of accidents. I endeavoured to soothe her on the usual
  statistical ground of the extreme rarity of such events. She
  listened patiently, and then replied, "Yes, Sir, that is all very
  well; but I don't see how the real danger will be a bit the less
  because I don't believe in it."

8. This would still hold of _empirical_ laws which may be capable of
  being broken: we now have very much shifted the word, to denote an
  _ultimate_ law which it is supposed cannot be broken.




