The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Logic of Chance, 3rd edition, by John Venn

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Logic of Chance, 3rd edition
       An Essay on the Foundations and Provice of the Theory of Probability

Author: John Venn

Release Date: June 19, 2018 [EBook #57359]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LOGIC OF CHANCE, 3RD EDITION ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Andrew D. Hwang, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.





Transcriber's Note

Minor typographical errors and irregularities have been corrected.

Footnotes have been numbered sequentially within chapters and moved
to the end of each chapter.




THE
LOGIC OF CHANCE

AN ESSAY

ON THE FOUNDATIONS AND PROVINCE OF
THE THEORY OF PROBABILITY,

WITH ESPECIAL REFERENCE TO ITS LOGICAL BEARINGS
AND ITS APPLICATION TO

MORAL AND SOCIAL SCIENCE AND TO STATISTICS,


BY

JOHN VENN, Sc.D., F.R.S.,

FELLOW AND LECTURER IN THE MORAL SCIENCES, GONVILLE AND CAIUS COLLEGE,
CAMBRIDGE.

LATE EXAMINER IN LOGIC AND MORAL PHILOSOPHY IN THE
UNIVERSITY OF LONDON.


"So careful of the type she seems
So careless of the single life."


_THIRD EDITION, RE-WRITTEN AND ENLARGED._


London:
MACMILLAN AND CO.
AND NEW YORK
1888

[_All Rights reserved._]




_First Edition printed_ 1866.
_Second Edition_ 1876.
_Third Edition_ 1888.




PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION

Any work on Probability by a Cambridge man will be so
likely to have its scope and its general treatment of the
subject prejudged, that it may be well to state at the outset
that the following Essay is in no sense mathematical. Not
only, to quote a common but often delusive assurance, will
'no knowledge of mathematics beyond the simple rules of
Arithmetic' be required to understand these pages, but it is
not intended that any such knowledge should be acquired by
the process of reading them. Of the two or three occasions
on which algebraical formulæ occur they will not be found to
form any essential part of the text.

The science of Probability occupies at present a somewhat
anomalous position. It is impossible, I think, not to
observe in it some of the marks and consequent disadvantages
of a _sectional_ study. By a small body of ardent students it
has been cultivated with great assiduity, and the results they
have obtained will always be reckoned among the most extraordinary
products of mathematical genius. But by the
general body of thinking men its principles seem to be
regarded with indifference or suspicion. Such persons may
admire the ingenuity displayed, and be struck with the profundity
of many of the calculations, but there seems to
them, if I may so express it, an _unreality_ about the whole
treatment of the subject. To many persons the mention of
Probability suggests little else than the notion of a set of
rules, very ingenious and profound rules no doubt, with which
mathematicians amuse themselves by setting and solving
puzzles.

It must be admitted that some ground has been given
for such an opinion. The examples commonly selected by
writers on the subject, though very well adapted to illustrate
its rules, are for the most part of a special and peculiar
character, such as those relating to dice and cards. When
they have searched for illustrations drawn from the practical
business of life, they have very generally, but unfortunately,
hit upon just the sort of instances which, as I shall endeavour
to show hereafter, are among the very worst that could
be chosen for the purpose. It is scarcely possible for any
unprejudiced person to read what has been written about the
credibility of witnesses by eminent writers, without his experiencing
an invincible distrust of the principles which they
adopt. To say that the rules of evidence sometimes given
by such writers are broken in practice, would scarcely be
correct; for the rules are of such a kind as generally to defy
any attempt to appeal to them in practice.

This supposed want of harmony between Probability and
other branches of Philosophy is perfectly erroneous. It
arises from the belief that Probability is a branch of mathematics
trying to intrude itself on to ground which does not
altogether belong to it. I shall endeavour to show that this
belief is unfounded. To answer correctly the sort of questions
to which the science introduces us does generally demand
some knowledge of mathematics, often a great knowledge,
but the discussion of the fundamental principles on which
the rules are based does not necessarily require any such
qualification. Questions might arise in other sciences, in
Geology, for example, which could only be answered by the
aid of arithmetical calculations. In such a case any one
would admit that the arithmetic was extraneous and accidental.
However many questions of this kind there might
be here, those persons who do not care to work out special
results for themselves might still have an accurate knowledge
of the principles of the science, and even considerable
acquaintance with the details of it. The same holds true in
Probability; its connection with mathematics, though certainly
far closer than that of most other sciences, is still of
much the same kind. It is principally when we wish to
work out results for ourselves that mathematical knowledge
is required; without such knowledge the student may still
have a firm grasp of the principles and even see his way to
many of the derivative results.

The opinion that Probability, instead of being a branch of
the general science of evidence which happens to make much
use of mathematics, _is_ a portion of mathematics, erroneous as
it is, has yet been very disadvantageous to the science in
several ways. Students of Philosophy in general have thence
conceived a prejudice against Probability, which has for the
most part deterred them from examining it. As soon as a
subject comes to be considered 'mathematical' its claims
seem generally, by the mass of readers, to be either on the
one hand scouted or at least courteously rejected, or on the
other to be blindly accepted with all their assumed consequences.
Of impartial and liberal criticism it obtains little
or nothing.

The consequences of this state of things have been, I
think, disastrous to the students themselves of Probability.
No science can safely be abandoned entirely to its own devotees.
Its details of course can only be studied by those who
make it their special occupation, but its general principles
are sure to be cramped if it is not exposed occasionally to
the free criticism of those whose main culture has been of
a more general character. Probability has been very much
abandoned to mathematicians, who as mathematicians have
generally been unwilling to treat it thoroughly. They have
worked out its results, it is true, with wonderful acuteness,
and the greatest ingenuity has been shown in solving various
problems that arose, and deducing subordinate rules. And
this was all that they could in fairness be expected to do.
Any subject which has been discussed by such men as
Laplace and Poisson, and on which they have exhausted all
their powers of analysis, could not fail to be profoundly
treated, so far as it fell within their province. But from this
province the real principles of the science have generally
been excluded, or so meagrely discussed that they had better
have been omitted altogether. Treating the subject as mathematicians
such writers have naturally taken it up at the
point where their mathematics would best come into play,
and that of course has not been at the foundations. In the
works of most writers upon the subject we should search in
vain for anything like a critical discussion of the fundamental
principles upon which its rules rest, the class of
enquiries to which it is most properly applicable, or the
relation it bears to Logic and the general rules of inductive
evidence.

This want of precision as to ultimate principles is perfectly
compatible here, as it is in the departments of Morals
and Politics, with a general agreement on processes and
results. But it is, to say the least, unphilosophical, and
denotes a state of things in which positive error is always
liable to arise whenever the process of controversy forces us
to appeal to the foundations of the science.

With regard to the remarks in the last few paragraphs,
prominent exceptions must be made in the case of two recent
works at least.[1] The first of these is Professor de Morgan's
_Formal Logic_. He has there given an investigation into the
foundations of Probability as conceived by him, and nothing
can be more complete and precise than his statement of
principles, and his deductions from them. If I could at all
agree with these principles there would have been no necessity
for the following essay, as I could not hope to add
anything to their foundation, and should be far indeed from
rivalling his lucid statement of them. But in his scheme
Probability is regarded very much from the Conceptualist
point of view; as stated in the preface, he considers that
Probability is concerned with formal inferences in which the
premises are entertained with a conviction short of absolute
certainty. With this view I cannot agree. As I have entered
into criticism of some points of his scheme in one of the
following chapters, and shall have occasion frequently to refer
to his work, I need say no more about it here. The other
work to which I refer is the profound _Laws of Thought_ of
the late Professor Boole, to which somewhat similar remarks
may in part be applied. Owing however to his peculiar
treatment of the subject, I have scarcely anywhere come
into contact with any of his expressed opinions.

The view of the province of Probability adopted in this
Essay differs so radically from that of most other writers on
the subject, and especially from that of those just referred to,
that I have thought it better, as regards details, to avoid all
criticism of the opinions of others, except where conflict was
unavoidable. With regard to that radical difference itself
Bacon's remark applies, behind which I must shelter myself
from any change of presumption.--"Quod ad universalem
istam reprehensionem attinet, certissimum vere est rem reputanti,
eam et magis probabilem esse et magis modestam,
quam si facta fuisset ex parte."

Almost the only writer who seems to me to have expressed
a just view of the nature and foundation of the rules
of Probability is Mr Mill, in his _System of Logic_.[2] His
treatment of the subject is however very brief, and a considerable
portion of the space which he has devoted to it is
occupied by the discussion of one or two special examples.
There are moreover some errors, as it seems to me, in what
he has written, which will be referred to in some of the
following chapters.

The reference to the work just mentioned will serve to
convey a general idea of the view of Probability adopted in
this Essay. With what may be called the Material view of
Logic as opposed to the Formal or Conceptualist,--with that
which regards it as taking cognisance of laws of things and
not of the laws of our own minds in thinking about things,--I
am in entire accordance. Of the province of Logic, regarded
from this point of view, and under its widest aspect, Probability
may, in my opinion, be considered to be a portion. The
principal objects of this Essay are to ascertain how great a
portion it comprises, where we are to draw the boundary between
it and the contiguous branches of the general science
of evidence, what are the ultimate foundations upon which its
rules rest, what the nature of the evidence they are capable
of affording, and to what class of subjects they may most fitly
be applied. That the science of Probability, on this view of
it, contains something more important than the results of a
system of mathematical assumptions, is obvious. I am convinced
moreover that it can and ought to be rendered both
interesting and intelligible to ordinary readers who have any
taste for philosophy. In other words, if the large and growing
body of readers who can find pleasure in the study of
books like Mill's _Logic_ and Whewell's _Inductive Sciences_,
turn with aversion from a work on Probability, the cause in
the latter case must lie either in the view of the subject or
in the manner and style of the book.

I take this opportunity of thanking several friends,
amongst whom I must especially mention Mr Todhunter, of
St John's College, and Mr H. Sidgwick, of Trinity College,
for the trouble they have kindly taken in looking over the
proof-sheets, whilst this work was passing through the Press.
To the former in particular my thanks are due for thus
adding to the obligations which I, as an old pupil, already
owed him, by taking an amount of trouble, in making suggestions
and corrections for the benefit of another, which few
would care to take for anything but a work of their own.
His extensive knowledge of the subject, and his extremely
accurate judgment, render the service he has thus afforded
me of the greatest possible value.

GONVILLE AND CAIUS COLLEGE
_September_ 1866.


1. I am here speaking, of course, of
  those only who have expressly treated
  of the foundations of the science. Mr
  Todhunter's admirable work on the
  _History of the Theory of Probability_
  being, as the name denotes, mainly
  historical, such enquiries have not
  directly fallen within his province.

2. This remark, and that at the
  commencement of the last paragraph,
  having been misunderstood, I ought
  to say that the only sense in which
  originality is claimed for this Essay
  is in the thorough working out of the
  Material view of Logic as applied to
  Probability. I have given a pretty
  full discussion of the general principles
  of this view in the tenth
  chapter, and have there pointed out
  some of the peculiarities to which it
  leads.




PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION

The principal reason for designating this volume a second
edition consists in the fact that the greater portion of what
may be termed the first edition is incorporated into it. Besides
various omissions (principally where the former treatment
has since seemed to me needlessly prolix), I have added
new matter, not much inferior in amount to the whole of
the original work. In addition, moreover, to these alterations
in the matter, the general arrangement of the subject
as regards the successive chapters has been completely
changed; the former arrangement having been (as it now
seems to me) justly objected to as deficient and awkward in
method.

After saying this, it ought to be explained whether any
change of general view or results will be found in the present
treatment.

The general view of Probability adopted is quite unchanged,
further reading and reflection having only confirmed
me in the conviction that this is the soundest and most
fruitful way of regarding the subject. It is the more necessary
to say this, as to a cursory reader it might seem
otherwise; owing to my having endeavoured to avoid the
needlessly polemical tone which, as is often the case with
those who are making their first essay in writing upon any
subject, was doubtless too prominent in the former edition.
I have not thought it necessary, of course, except in one or
two cases, to indicate points of detail which it has seemed
necessary to correct.

A number of new discussions have been introduced upon
topics which were but little or not at all treated before. The
principal of these refer to the nature and physical origin of
Laws of Error (Ch. II.); the general view of Logic, and consequently
of Probability, termed the Material view, adopted
here (Ch. X.); a brief history and criticism of the various
opinions held on the subject of Modality (Ch. XII.); the
logical principles underlying the method of Least Squares
(Ch. XIII.); and the practices of Insurance and Gambling,
so far as the principles involved in them are concerned
(Ch. XV.). The Chapter on the Credibility of Extraordinary
Stories is also mainly new; this was the portion of the former
work which has since seemed to me the least satisfactory,
but owing to the extreme intricacy of the subject I am far
from feeling thoroughly satisfied with it even now.

I have again to thank several friends for the assistance
they have so kindly afforded. Amongst these I must prominently
mention Mr C. J. Monro, late fellow of Trinity. It is
only the truth to say that I have derived more assistance from
his suggestions and criticisms than has been consciously obtained
from all other external sources together. Much of this
criticism has been given privately in letters, and notes on
the proof-sheets; but one of the most elaborate of his discussions
of the subject was communicated to the Cambridge
Philosophical Society some years ago; as it was not published,
however, I am unfortunately unable to refer the reader to it.
I ought to add that he is not in any way committed to any
of my opinions upon the subject, from some of which in fact
he more or less dissents. I am also much indebted to
Mr J. W. L. Glaisher, also of Trinity College, for many hints
and references to various publications upon the subject of
Least Squares, and for careful criticism (given in the midst
of much other labour) of the chapter in which that subject is
treated.

I need not add that, like every one else who has had to
discuss the subject of Probability during the last ten years,
I have made constant use of Mr Todhunter's History.

I may take this opportunity of adding that a considerable
portion of the tenth chapter has recently appeared in the
January number of _Mind_, and that the substance of several
chapters, especially in the more logical parts, has formed part
of my ordinary lectures in Cambridge; the foundation and
logical treatment of Probability being now expressly included
in the Schedule of Subjects for the Moral Sciences Tripos.

_March_ 1876.




PREFACE TO THIRD EDITION

The present edition has been revised throughout, and in fact
rewritten. Three chapters are new, viz. the fifth (On the
conception of Randomness) and the eighteenth and nineteenth
(On the nature, and on the employment, of Averages).
The eighth, tenth, eleventh, and fifteenth chapters have been
recast, and much new matter added, and numerous alterations
made in the remaining portions.[1] On the other hand
three chapters of the last edition have been nearly or
entirely omitted.

These alterations do not imply any appreciable change of
view on my part as to the foundations and province of
Probability. Some of them are of course due to the necessary
changes involved in the attempt to write up to date upon a
subject which has not been stationary during the last eleven
years. For instance the greatly increased interest now
taken in what may be called the Theory of Statistics has
rendered it desirable to go much more fully into the Nature
and treatment of Laws of Error. The omissions are mainly
due to a wish to avoid increasing the bulk of this volume
more than is actually necessary, and to a feeling that the
portions treating specially of Inductive Logic (which occupied
some space in the last edition) would be more
suitable to a regular work on that subject. I am at present
engaged on such a work.

The publications which I have had occasion to notice
have mostly appeared in various scientific journals. The
principal authors of these have been Mr F. Galton and
Mr F. Y. Edgeworth: to the latter of whom I am also
personally much obliged for many discussions, oral and
written, and for his kindness in looking through the proof-sheets.
His published articles are too numerous for separate
mention here, but I may say generally, in addition to the
obligations specially noticed, that I have been considerably
indebted to them in writing the last two chapters. Two
authors of works of a somewhat more substantial character,
viz. Prof. Lexis and Von Kries, only came under my notice
unfortunately after this work was already in the printer's
hands. With the latter of these authors I find myself in
closer agreement than with most others, in respect of his
general conception and treatment of Probability.

_December_ 1887.


1. I have indicated the new chapters and sections by printing them in
  italics in the Table of Contents.




TABLE OF CONTENTS.[1]

1. Chapters and sections which are nearly or entirely new are printed
in _italics_.


PART I.

PHYSICAL FOUNDATIONS OF THE SCIENCE OF PROBABILITY. Chh. I-V.


CHAPTER I.

THE SERIES OF PROBABILITY.

§§ 1, 2. Distinction between the proportional propositions of Probability,
       and the propositions of Logic.
   3, 4. The former are best regarded as presenting a series of individuals,
   5. Which may occur in any order of time,
   6, 7. And which present themselves in groups.
   8. Comparison of the above with the ordinary phraseology.
   9, 10. These series ultimately fluctuate,
   11. Especially in the case of moral and social phenomena,
   12. Though in the case of games of chance the fluctuation is practically
       inappreciable.
   13, 14. In this latter case only can rigorous inferences be drawn.
   15, 16. The Petersburg Problem.


