CHAPTER XVIII.

ON THE NATURE AND USE OF AN AVERAGE, AND ON THE DIFFERENT KINDS OF AVERAGE.

§  1. _Preliminary rude notion of an average,_
   2. _More precise quantitative notion, yielding_
      (1) _the Arithmetical Average,_
   3. (2) _the Geometrical._
   4. _In asymmetrical curves of error the arithmetic average must be
       distinguished from,_
   5. (3) _the Maximum Ordinate average,_
   6. (4) _and the Median._
   7. _Diagram in illustration._
   8-10. _Average departure from the average, considered under the above
       heads, and under that of_
   11. (5) _The (average of) Mean Square of Error,_
   12-14. _The objects of taking averages._
   15. _Mr Galton's practical method of determining the average._
   16, 17. _No distinction between the average and the mean._
   18-20. _Distinction between what is necessary and what is experimental
       here._
   21, 22. _Theoretical defects in the determination of the 'errors'._
   23. _Practical escape from these._

(_Note about the units in the exponential equation and integral._)


CHAPTER XIX.

THE THEORY OF THE AVERAGE AS A MEANS OF APPROXIMATION TO THE TRUTH.

§§ 1-4. _General indication of the problem: i.e. an inverse one
    requiring the previous consideration of a direct one._

    [I. _The direct problem:--given the central value and law of
    dispersion of the single errors, to determine those of the
    averages._ §§ 6-20.]

   6. (i) _The law of dispersion may be determinable _à priori_,_
   7. (ii) _or experimentally, by statistics._
   8, 9. _Thence to determine the modulus of the error curve._
   10-14. _Numerical example to illustrate the nature and amount of
       the contraction of the modulus of the average-error curve._
   15. _This curve is of the same general kind as that of the single errors;_
   16. _Equally symmetrical,_
   17, 18. _And more heaped up towards the centre._
   19, 20. _Algebraic generalization of the foregoing results._

    [II. _The inverse problem:--given but a few of the errors to
    determine their centre and law, and thence to draw the above
    deductions._ §§ 21-25.]

   22, 23. _The actual calculations are the same as before,_
   24. _With the extra demand that we must determine how probable are the
       results._
   25. _Summary._

    [III. _Consideration of the same questions as applied to certain
    peculiar laws of error._ §§ 26-37.]

   26. (i) _All errors equally probable._
   27, 28. (ii) _Certain peculiar laws of error._
   29, 30. _Further analysis of the reasons for taking averages._
   31-35. _Illustrative examples._
   36, 37. _Curves with double centre and absence of symmetry._
   38, 39. _Conclusion._




THE LOGIC OF CHANCE.




CHAPTER I.


_ON CERTAIN KINDS OF GROUPS OR SERIES AS THE FOUNDATION OF PROBABILITY._

1. It is sometimes not easy to give a clear definition of a
science at the outset, so as to set its scope and province before
the reader in a few words. In the case of those sciences
which are more immediately and directly concerned with
what are termed objects, rather than with what are termed
processes, this difficulty is not indeed so serious. If the
reader is already familiar with the objects, a simple reference
to them will give him a tolerably accurate idea of the
direction and nature of his studies. Even if he be not
familiar with them, they will still be often to some extent
connected and associated in his mind by a name, and
the mere utterance of the name may thus convey a fair
amount of preliminary information. This is more or less
the case with many of the natural sciences; we can often
tell the reader beforehand exactly what he is going to study.
But when a science is concerned, not so much with objects
directly, as with processes and laws, or when it takes for the
subject of its enquiry some comparatively obscure feature
drawn from phenomena which have little or nothing else in
common, the difficulty of giving preliminary information
becomes greater. Recognized classes of objects have then
to be disregarded and even broken up, and an entirely novel
arrangement of the objects to be made. In such cases it is
the study of the science that first gives the science its unity,
for till it is studied the objects with which it is concerned
were probably never thought of together. Here a definition
cannot be given at the outset, and the process of obtaining it
may become by comparison somewhat laborious.

The science of Probability, at least on the view taken of
it in the following pages, is of this latter description. The
reader who is at present unacquainted with the science
cannot be at once informed of its scope by a reference to
objects with which he is already familiar. He will have
to be taken in hand, as it were, and some little time
and trouble will have to be expended in directing his
attention to our subject-matter before he can be expected to
know it. To do this will be our first task.

2. In studying Nature, in any form, we are continually
coming into possession of information which we sum up in
general propositions. Now in very many cases these general
propositions are neither more nor less certain and accurate
than the details which they embrace and of which they are
composed. We are assuming at present that the truth of
these generalizations is not disputed; as a matter of fact
they may rest on weak evidence, or they may be uncertain
from their being widely extended by induction; what is
meant is, that when we resolve them into their component
parts we have precisely the same assurance of the truth of
the details as we have of that of the whole. When I know,
for instance, that all cows ruminate, I feel just as certain
that any particular cow or cows ruminate as that the whole
class does. I may be right or wrong in my original statement,
and I may have obtained it by any conceivable mode
in which truths can be obtained; but whatever the value of
the general proposition may be, that of the particulars is
neither greater nor less. The process of inferring the particular
from the general is not accompanied by the slightest
diminution of certainty. If one of these 'immediate inferences'
is justified at all, it will be equally right in every
case.

But it is by no means necessary that this characteristic
should exist in all cases. There is a class of immediate inferences,
almost unrecognized indeed in logic, but constantly
drawn in practice, of which the characteristic is, that as they
increase in particularity they diminish in certainty. Let me
assume that I am told that _some_ cows ruminate; I cannot
infer logically from this that any particular cow does so,
though I should feel some way removed from absolute disbelief,
or even indifference to assent, upon the subject; but
if I saw a herd of cows I should feel more sure that some of
them were ruminant than I did of the single cow, and my
assurance would increase with the numbers of the herd about
which I had to form an opinion. Here then we have a class
of things as to the individuals of which we feel quite in
uncertainty, whilst as we embrace larger numbers in our
assertions we attach greater weight to our inferences. It is
with such classes of things and such inferences that the
science of Probability is concerned.

3. In the foregoing remarks, which are intended to
be purely preliminary, we have not been able altogether to
avoid some reference to a subjective element, viz. the degree
of our certainty or belief about the things which we are
supposed to contemplate. The reader may be aware that
by some writers this element is regarded as the subject-matter
of the science. Hence it will have to be discussed
in a future chapter. As however I do not agree with the
opinion of the writers just mentioned, at least as regards
treating this element as one of primary importance, no
further allusion will be made to it here, but we will pass on
at once to a more minute investigation of that distinctive
characteristic of certain classes of things which was introduced
to notice in the last section.

In these classes of things, which are those with which
Probability is concerned, the fundamental conception which
the reader has to fix in his mind as clearly as possible, is, I
take it, that of a series. But it is a series of a peculiar kind,
one of which no better compendious description can be given
than that which is contained in the statement that it combines
individual irregularity with aggregate regularity. This
is a statement which will probably need some explanation.
Let us recur to an example of the kind already alluded to,
selecting one which shall be in accordance with experience.
Some children will not live to thirty. Now if this proposition
is to be regarded as a purely indefinite or, as it would
be termed in logic, 'particular' proposition, no doubt the
notion of a series does not obviously present itself in connection
with it. It contains a statement about a certain
unknown proportion of the whole, and that is all. But it is
not with these purely indefinite propositions that we shall
be concerned. Let us suppose the statement, on the contrary,
to be of a numerical character, and to refer to a given
proportion of the whole, and we shall then find it difficult to
exclude the notion of a series. We shall find it, I think,
impossible to do so as soon as we set before us the aim of
obtaining accurate, or even moderately correct inferences.
What, for instance, is the meaning of the statement that
two new-born children in three fail to attain the age of
sixty-three? It certainly does not declare that in any given
batch of, say, thirty, we shall find just twenty that fail:
whatever might be the strict meaning of the words, this
is not the import of the statement. It rather contemplates
our examination of a large number, of a long succession
of instances, and states that in such a succession we shall
find a numerical proportion, not indeed fixed and accurate at
first, but which tends in the long run to become so. In
every kind of example with which we shall be concerned we
shall find this reference to a large number or succession
of objects, or, as we shall term it, _series_ of them.

A few additional examples may serve to make this plain.

Let us suppose that we toss up a penny a great many
times; the results of the successive throws may be conceived
to form a series. The separate throws of this series seem to
occur in utter disorder; it is this disorder which causes our
uncertainty about them. Sometimes head comes, sometimes
tail comes; sometimes there is a repetition of the same face,
sometimes not. So long as we confine our observation to a
few throws at a time, the series seems to be simply chaotic.
But when we consider the result of a long succession we find
a marked distinction; a kind of order begins gradually to
emerge, and at last assumes a distinct and striking aspect.
We find in this case that the heads and tails occur in about
equal numbers, that similar repetitions of different faces do
so also, and so on. In a word, notwithstanding the individual
disorder, an aggregate order begins to prevail. So again if
we are examining the length of human life, the different lives
which fall under our notice compose a series presenting the
same features. The length of a single life is familiarly uncertain,
but the average duration of a batch of lives is becoming
in an almost equal degree familiarly certain. The
larger the number we take out of any mixed crowd, the
clearer become the symptoms of order, the more nearly will
the average length of each selected class be the same.
These few cases will serve as simple examples of a property
of things which can be traced almost everywhere, to a
greater or less extent, throughout the whole field of our experience.
Fires, shipwrecks, yields of harvest, births, marriages,
suicides; it scarcely seems to matter what feature we
single out for observation.[1] The irregularity of the single
instances diminishes when we take a large number, and at
last seems for all practical purposes to disappear.

In speaking of the effect of the average in thus diminishing
the irregularities which present themselves in the details,
the attention of the student must be prominently directed to
the point, that it is not the _absolute_ but the _relative_ irregularities
which thus tend to diminish without limit. This
idea will be familiar enough to the mathematician, but to
others it may require some reflection in order to grasp it
clearly. The absolute divergences and irregularities, so far
from diminishing, show a disposition to increase, and this (it
may be) without limit, though their relative importance shows
a corresponding disposition to diminish without limit. Thus
in the case of tossing a penny, if we take a few throws, say
ten, it is decidedly unlikely that there should be a difference
of six between the numbers of heads and tails; that is, that
there should be as many as eight heads and therefore as few
as two tails, or _vice versâ_. But take a thousand throws, and
it becomes in turn exceedingly likely that there should be
as much as, or more than, a difference of six between the
respective numbers. On the other hand the _proportion_ of
heads to tails in the case of the thousand throws will be very
much nearer to unity, in most cases, than when we only took
ten. In other words, the longer a game of chance continues
the larger are the spells and runs of luck in themselves, but
the less their relative proportions to the whole amounts
involved.

4. In speaking as above of events or things as to the
details of which we know little or nothing, it is not of course
implied that our ignorance about them is complete and universal,
or, what comes to the same thing, that irregularity
may be observed in all their qualities. All that is meant is
that there are _some_ qualities or marks in them, the existence
of which we are not able to predicate with certainty in the
individuals. With regard to all their other qualities there
may be the utmost uniformity, and consequently the most
complete certainty. The irregularity in the length of human
life is notorious, but no one doubts the existence of such
organs as a heart and brains in any person whom he happens
to meet. And even in the qualities in which the irregularity
is observed, there are often, indeed generally, positive limits
within which it will be found to be confined. No person,
for instance, can calculate what may be the length of any
particular life, but we feel perfectly certain that it will not
stretch out to 150 years. The irregularity of the individual
instances is only shown in certain respects, as e.g. the length
of the life, and even in these respects it has its limits. The
same remark will apply to most of the other examples with
which we shall be concerned. The disorder in fact is not
universal and unlimited, it only prevails in certain directions
and up to certain points.

5. In speaking as above of a series, it will hardly be
necessary to point out that we do not imply that the objects
themselves which compose the series must occur successively
in time; the series may be formed simply by their coming
in succession under our notice, which as a matter of fact
they may do in any order whatever. A register of mortality,
for instance, may be made up of deaths which took place
simultaneously or successively; or, we might if we pleased
arrange the deaths in an order quite distinct from either of
these. This is entirely a matter of indifference; in all these
cases the series, for any purposes which we need take into
account, may be regarded as being of precisely the same description.
The objects, be it remembered, are given to us in
nature; the order under which we view them is our own private
arrangement. This is mentioned here simply by way of
caution, the meaning of this assertion will become more plain
in the sequel.

I am aware that the word 'series' in the application with
which it is used here is liable to some misconstruction, but I
cannot find any better word, or indeed any as suitable in all
respects. As remarked above, the events need not necessarily
have occurred in a regular sequence of time, though
they often will have done so. In many cases (for instance,
the throws of a penny or a die) they really do occur in succession;
in other cases (for instance, the heights of men, or
the duration of their lives), whatever may have been the
order of their actual occurrence, they are commonly brought
under our notice in succession by being arranged in statistical
tables. In all cases alike our processes of inference involve
the necessity of examining one after another of the members
which compose the group, or at least of being prepared to do
this, if we are to be in a position to justify our inferences.
The force of these considerations will come out in the course
of the investigation in Chapter VI.

The late Leslie Ellis[2] has expressed what seems to me
a substantially similar view in terms of genus and species,
instead of speaking of a series. He says, "When individual
cases are considered, we have no conviction that the ratios of
frequency of occurrence depend on the circumstances common
to all the trials. On the contrary, we recognize in the determining
circumstances of their occurrence an extraneous
element, an element, that is, extraneous to the idea of the
genus and species. Contingency and limitation come in (so
to speak) together; and both alike disappear when we consider
the genus in its entirety, or (which is the same thing)
in what may be called an ideal and practically impossible
realization of all which it potentially contains. If this be
granted, it seems to follow that the fundamental principle
of the Theory of Probabilities may be regarded as included
in the following statement,--The conception of a genus
implies that of numerical relations among the species subordinated
to it." As remarked above, this appears a substantially
similar doctrine to that explained in this chapter,
but I do not think that the terms genus and species are by
any means so well fitted to bring out the conception of a
tendency or limit as when we speak of a series, and I therefore
much prefer the latter expression.

6. The reader will now have in his mind the conception
of a series or group of things or events, about the individuals
of which we know but little, at least in certain respects,
whilst we find a continually increasing uniformity as we
take larger numbers under our notice. This is definite
enough to point out tolerably clearly the kind of things
with which we have to deal, but it is not sufficiently definite
for purposes of accurate thought. We must therefore attempt
a somewhat closer analysis.

There are certain phrases so commonly adopted as to
have become part of the technical vocabulary of the subject,
such as an 'event' and the 'way in which it can
happen.' Thus the act of throwing a penny would be called
an event, and the fact of its giving head or tail would be
called the way in which the event happened. If we were
discussing tables of mortality, the former term would denote
the mere fact of death, the latter the age at which
it occurred, or the way in which it was brought about,
or whatever else in it might be the particular circumstance
under discussion. This phraseology is very convenient, and
will often be made use of in this work, but without explanation
it may lead to confusion. For in many cases the
way in which the event happens is of such great relative
importance, that according as it happens in one way or
another the event would have a different name; in other
words, it would not in the two cases be nominally the same
event. The phrase therefore will have to be considerably
stretched before it will conveniently cover all the cases to
which we may have to apply it. If for instance we were
contemplating a series of human beings, male and female,
it would sound odd to call their humanity an event, and
their sex the way in which the event happened.

If we recur however to any of the classes of objects
already referred to, we may see our path towards obtaining
a more accurate conception of what we want. It will easily
be seen that in every one of them there is a mixture of
similarity and dissimilarity; there is a series of events
which have a certain number of features or attributes in
common,--without this they would not be classed together.
But there is also a distinction existing amongst them; a
certain number of other attributes are to be found in some
and are not to be found in others. In other words, the
individuals which form the series are compound, each being
made up of a collection of things or attributes; some of
these things exist in all the members of the series, others
are found in some only. So far there is nothing peculiar
to the science of Probability; that in which the distinctive
characteristic consists is this;--that the occasional attributes,
as distinguished from the permanent, are found on
an extended examination to tend to exist _in a certain definite
proportion of the whole number of cases_. We cannot tell in
any given instance whether they will be found or not, but
as we go on examining more cases we find a growing uniformity.
We find that the proportion of instances in which
they are found to instances in which they are wanting, is
gradually subject to less and less comparative variation, and
approaches continually towards some apparently fixed value.

The above is the most comprehensive form of description;
as a matter of fact the groups will in many cases take a
far simpler form; they may appear, e.g. simply as a succession
of things of the same kind, say human beings, with
or without an occasional attribute, say that of being left-handed.
We are using the word attribute, of course, in its
widest sense, intending it to include every distinctive feature
that can be observed in a thing, from essential qualities
down to the merest accidents of time and place.

7. On examining our series, therefore, we shall find
that it may best be conceived, not necessarily as a succession
of events happening in different ways, but as a succession
of groups of things. These groups, on being analysed, are
found in every case to be resolvable into collections of substances
and attributes. That which gives its unity to the
succession of groups is the fact of some of these substances or
attributes being common to the whole succession; that which
gives their distinction to the groups in the succession is the
fact of some of them containing only a portion of these substances
and attributes, the other portion or portions being
occasionally absent. So understood, our phraseology may
be made to embrace every class of things of which Probability
can take account.

8. It will be easily seen that the ordinary expression
(viz. the 'event,' and the 'way in which it happens') may be
included in the above. When the occasional attributes are
unimportant the permanent ones are sufficient to fix and
appropriate the name, the presence or absence of the others
being simply denoted by some modification of the name or
the addition of some predicate. We may therefore in all such
cases speak of the collection of attributes as 'the event,'--the
same event essentially, that is--only saying that _it_ (so as
to preserve its nominal identity) happens in different ways
in the different cases. When the occasional attributes however
are important, or compose the majority, this way of
speaking becomes less appropriate; language is somewhat
strained by our implying that two extremely different assemblages
are in reality the same event, with a difference only
in its mode of happening. The phrase is however a very
convenient one, and with this caution against its being misunderstood,
it will frequently be made use of here.

9. A series of the above-mentioned kind is, I apprehend,
the ultimate basis upon which all the rules of
Probability must be based. It is essential to a clear comprehension
of the subject to have carried our analysis up
to this point, but any attempt at further analysis into the
intimate nature of the events composing the series, is not
required. It is altogether unnecessary, for instance, to form
any opinion upon the questions discussed in metaphysics as
to the independent existence of substances. We have discovered,
on examination, a series composed of groups of
substances and attributes, or of attributes alone. At such
a series we stop, and thence investigate our rules of inference;
into what these substances or attributes would themselves
be ultimately analysed, if taken in hand by the
psychologist or metaphysician, it is no business of ours to
enquire here.

10. The stage then which we have now reached is
that of having discovered a quantity of things (they prove
on analysis to be groups of things) which are capable of
being classified together, and are best regarded as constituting
a series. The distinctive peculiarity of this series is
our finding in it an order, gradually emerging out of disorder,
and showing in time a marked and unmistakeable uniformity.

The impression which may possibly be derived from the
description of such a series, and which the reader will probably
already entertain if he have studied Probability before,
is that the gradual evolution of this order is indefinite, and
its approach therefore to perfection unlimited. And many of
the examples commonly selected certainly tend to confirm
such an impression. But in reference to the theory of the
subject it is, I am convinced, an error, and one liable to lead
to much confusion.

The lines which have been prefixed as a motto to this
work, "So careful of the type she seems, so careless of the
single life," are soon after corrected by the assertion that
the type itself, if we regard it for a long time, changes,
and then vanishes and is succeeded by others. So in Probability;
that uniformity which is found in the long run,
and which presents so great a contrast to the individual
disorder, though durable is not everlasting. Keep on watching
it long enough, and it will be found almost invariably to
fluctuate, and in time may prove as utterly irreducible to
rule, and therefore as incapable of prediction, as the individual
cases themselves. The full bearing of this fact upon
the theory of the subject, and upon certain common modes
of calculation connected with it, will appear more fully in
some of the following chapters; at present we will confine
ourselves to very briefly establishing and illustrating it.

Let us take, for example, the average duration of life.
This, provided our data are sufficiently extensive, is known to
be tolerably regular and uniform. This fact has been already
indicated in the preceding sections, and is a truth indeed
of which the popular mind has a tolerably clear grasp at the
present day. But a very little consideration will show that
there may be a superior as well as an inferior limit to
the extent within which this uniformity can be observed;
in other words whilst we may fall into error by taking too
few instances we may also fail in our aim, though in a very
different way and from quite different reasons, by taking too
many. At the present time the average duration of life in
England may be, say, forty years; but a century ago it was
decidedly less; several centuries ago it was presumably very
much less; whilst if we possessed statistics referring to a still
earlier population of the country we should probably find that
there has been since that time a still more marked improvement.
What may be the future tendency no man can say for
certain. It may be, and we hope that it will be the case,
that owing to sanitary and other improvements, the duration
of life will go on increasing steadily; it is at least conceivable,
though doubtless incredible, that it should do so without
limit. On the other hand, and with much more likelihood,
this duration might gradually tend towards some fixed
length. Or, again, it is perfectly possible that future generations
might prefer a short and a merry life, and therefore
reduce their average longevity. The duration of life cannot
but depend to some extent upon the general tastes, habits
and employments of the people, that is upon the ideal which
they consciously or unconsciously set before them, and he would
be a rash man who should undertake to predict what this ideal
will be some centuries hence. All that it is here necessary
however to indicate is, that this particular uniformity (as we
have hitherto called it, in order to mark its relative character)
has varied, and, under the influence of future eddies
in opinion and practice, may vary still; and this to any
extent, and with any degree of irregularity. To borrow a
term from Astronomy, we find our uniformity subject to what
might be called an irregular _secular_ variation.

11. The above is a fair typical instance. If we had
taken a less simple feature than the length of life, or one
less closely connected with what may be called by comparison
the great permanent uniformities of nature, we should
have found the peculiarity under notice exhibited in a far
more striking degree. The deaths from small-pox, for example,
or the instances of duelling or accusations of witchcraft,
if examined during a few successive decades, might
have shown a very tolerable degree of uniformity. But these
uniformities have risen possibly from zero; after various and
very great fluctuations seem tending towards zero again, at
least in this century; and may, for anything we know, undergo
still more rapid fluctuations in future. Now these
examples must be regarded as being only extreme ones, and
not such very extreme ones, of what is the almost universal
rule in nature. I shall endeavour to show that even the few
apparent exceptions, such as the proportions between male
and female births, &c., may not be, and probably in reality
are not, strictly speaking, exceptions. A type, that is, which
shall be in the fullest sense of the words, persistent and
invariable is scarcely to be found in nature. The full import
of this conclusion will be seen in future chapters. Attention
is only directed here to the important inference that, although
statistics are notoriously of no value unless they are in sufficient
numbers, yet it does not follow but that in certain cases
we may have too many of them. If they are made too extensive,
they may again fall short, at least for any particular
time or place, of their greatest attainable accuracy.

12. These natural uniformities then are found at
length to be subject to fluctuation. Now contrast with them
any of the uniformities afforded by games of chance; these
latter seem to show no trace of secular fluctuation, however
long we may continue our examination of them. Criticisms
will be offered, in the course of the following chapters, upon
some of the common attempts to prove _à priori_ that there
must be this fixity in the uniformity in question, but of its
existence there can scarcely be much doubt. Pence give
heads and tails about equally often now, as they did when
they were first tossed, and as we believe they will continue
to do, so long as the present order of things continues. The
fixity of these uniformities may not be as absolute as is
commonly supposed, but no amount of experience which we
need take into account is likely in any appreciable degree to
interfere with them. Hence the obvious contrast, that,
whereas natural uniformities at length fluctuate, those afforded
by games of chance seem fixed for ever.

13. Here then are series apparently of two different
kinds. They are alike in their initial irregularity, alike in
their subsequent regularity; it is in what we may term
their ultimate form that they begin to diverge from each
other. The one tends without any irregular variation
towards a fixed numerical proportion in its uniformity; in
the other the uniformity is found at last to fluctuate, and to
fluctuate, it may be, in a manner utterly irreducible to rule.

As this chapter is intended to be little more than explanatory
and illustrative of the foundations of the science,
the remark may be made here (for which subsequent justification
will be offered) that it is in the case of series of the
former kind only that we are able to make anything which
can be interpreted into strict scientific inferences. We shall
be able however in a general way to see the kind and extent
of error that would be committed if, in any example, we were
to substitute an imaginary series of the former kind for any
actual series of the latter kind which experience may present
to us. The two series are of course to be as alike as possible
in all respects, except that the variable uniformity has been
replaced by a fixed one. The difference then between them
would not appear in the initial stage, for in that stage the
distinctive characteristics of the series of Probability are not
apparent; all is there irregularity, and it would be as impossible
to show that they were alike as that they were
different; we can only say generally that each shows the
same kind of irregularity. Nor would it appear in the next
subsequent stage, for the real variability of the uniformity
has not for some time scope to make itself perceived. It
would only be in what we have called the ultimate stage,
when we suppose the series to extend for a very long time,
that the difference would begin to make itself felt.[3] The
proportion of persons, for example, who die each year at the
age of six months is, when the numbers examined are on a
small scale, utterly irregular; it becomes however regular
when the numbers examined are on a larger scale; but if we
continued our observation for a very great length of time, or
over a very great extent of country, we should find this
regularity itself changing in an irregular way. The substitution
just mentioned is really equivalent to saying, Let
us assume that the regularity is fixed and permanent. It is
making a hypothesis which may not be altogether consistent
with fact, but which is forced upon us for the purpose of
securing precision of statement and definition.

14. The full meaning and bearing of such a substitution
will only become apparent in some of the subsequent
chapters, but it may be pointed out at once that it is in this
way only that we can with perfect strictness introduce the
notion of a 'limit' into our account of the matter, at any
rate in reference to many of the applications of the subject
to purely statistical enquiries. We say that a certain proportion
begins to prevail among the events in the long run;
but then on looking closer at the facts we find that we have
to express ourselves hypothetically, and to say that if present
circumstances remain as they are, the long run will show its
characteristics without disturbance. When, as is often the
case, we know nothing accurately of the circumstances by
which the succession of events is brought about, but have
strong reasons to suspect that these circumstances are likely
to undergo some change, there is really nothing else to be
done. We can only introduce the conception of a limit, towards
which the numbers are tending, by assuming that
these circumstances do not change; in other words, by substituting
a series with a fixed uniformity for the actual one
with the varying uniformity.[4]

15. If the reader will study the following example,
one well known to mathematicians under the name of the
Petersburg[5] problem, he will find that it serves to illustrate
several of the considerations mentioned in this chapter. It
serves especially to bring out the facts that the series with
which we are concerned must be regarded as indefinitely
extensive in point of number or duration; and that when so
regarded certain series, but certain series only (the one in
question being a case in point), take advantage of the indefinite
range to keep on producing individuals in it whose
deviation from the previous average has no finite limit
whatever. When rightly viewed it is a very simple problem,
but it has given rise, at one time or another, to a good
deal of confusion and perplexity.

The problem may be stated thus:--a penny is tossed up;
if it gives head I receive one pound; if heads twice running
two pounds; if heads three times running four pounds, and
so on; the amount to be received doubling every time that
a fresh head succeeds. That is, I am to go on as long as it
continues to give a succession of heads, to regard this succession
as a 'turn' or set, and then take another turn, and so
on; and for each such turn I am to receive a payment; the
occurrence of tail being understood to yield nothing, in fact
being omitted from our consideration. However many times
head may be given in succession, the number of pounds I
may claim is found by raising two to a power one less
than that number of times. Here then is a series formed by
a succession of throws. We will assume,--what many persons
will consider to admit of demonstration, and what
certainly experience confirms within considerable limits,--that
the rarity of these 'runs' of the same face is in direct
proportion to the amount I receive for them when they do
occur. In other words, if we regard only the occasions on
which I receive payments, we shall find that every other
time I get one pound, once in four times I get two pounds,
once in eight times four pounds, and so on without any end.
The question is then asked, what ought I to pay for this
privilege? At the risk of a slight anticipation of the results
of a subsequent chapter, we may assume that this is equivalent
to asking, what amount paid each time would on the
average leave me neither winner nor loser? In other words,
what is the average amount I should receive on the above
terms? Theory pronounces that I ought to give an _infinite_
sum: that is, no finite sum, however great, would be an
adequate equivalent. And this is really quite intelligible.
There is a series of indefinite length before me, and the
longer I continue to work it the richer are my returns, and
this without any limit whatever. It is true that the very
rich hauls are extremely rare, but still they do come, and
when they come they make it up by their greater richness.
On every occasion on which people have devoted themselves
to the pursuit in question, they made acquaintance, of course,
with but a limited portion of this series; but the series on
which we base our calculation is unlimited; and the inferences
usually drawn as to the sum which ought in the long
run to be paid for the privilege in question are in perfect
accordance with this supposition.

The common form of objection is given in the reply, that
so far from paying an infinite sum, no sensible man would
give anything approaching to £50 for such a chance. Probably
not, because no man would see enough of the series to
make it worth his while. What most persons form their
practical opinion upon, is such small portions of the series
as they have actually seen or can reasonably expect. Now
in any such portion, say one which embraces 100 turns, the
longest succession of heads would not amount on the average
to more than seven or eight. This is observed, but it is forgotten
that the formula which produced these, would, if it
had greater scope, keep on producing better and better ones
without any limit. Hence it arises that some persons are
perplexed, because the conduct they would adopt, in reference
to the curtailed portion of the series which they are practically
likely to meet with, does not find its justification in inferences
which are necessarily based upon the series in the completeness
of its infinitude.

16. This will be more clearly seen by considering the
various possibilities, and the scope required in order to exhaust
them, when we confine ourselves to a _limited_ number of
throws. Begin with three. This yields eight equally likely
possibilities. In four of these cases the thrower starts with
tail and therefore loses: in two he gains a single point
(i.e. £1); in one he gains two points, and in one he gains four
points. Hence his total gain being eight pounds achieved in
four different contingencies, his average gain would be two
pounds.

Now suppose he be allowed to go as far as n throws, so
that we have to contemplate 2^{n} possibilities. All of these
have to be taken into account if we wish to consider what
happens on the average. It will readily be seen that, when
all the possible cases have been reckoned once, his total gain
will be (reckoned in pounds),

2^{n-2} + 2^{n-3}·2 + 2^{n-4}·2^{2} + ... + 2·2^{n-3} + 2^{n-2} + 2^{n-1},

viz.

(n + 1) 2^{n-2}.

This being spread over 2^{n-1} different occasions of gain his
average gain will be 1/2 (n + 1).

Now when we are referring to averages it must be remembered
that the minimum number of different occurrences
necessary in order to justify the average is that which enables
each of them to present itself once. A man proposes to stop
short at a succession of ten heads. Well and good. We tell
him that his average gain will be £5. 10_s_. 0_d_.: but we also
impress upon him that in order to justify this statement he
must commence to toss at least 1024 times, for in no less
number can all the contingencies of gain and loss be exhibited
and balanced. If he proposes to reach an average gain of £20,
he will require to be prepared to go up to 39 throws,
To _justify_ this payment he must commence to throw 2^{39} times,
i.e. about a million million times. Not before he has
accomplished this will he be in a position to prove to any
sceptic that this is the true average value of a 'turn' extending
to 39 successive tosses.

Of course if he elects to toss to all eternity we must
adopt the line of explanation which alone is possible where
questions of infinity in respect of number and magnitude are
involved. We cannot tell him to pay down 'an infinite sum,'
for this has no strict meaning. But we tell him that, however
much he may consent to pay each time runs of heads occur,
he will attain at last a stage in which he will have won
back his total payments by his total receipts. However
large n may be, if he perseveres in trying 2^{n} times he _may_
have a true average receipt of 1/2 (n + 1) pounds, and if he
continues long enough onwards he _will_ have it.

The problem will recur for consideration in a future
chapter.


1. The following statistics will give a fair idea of the wide range of
  experience over which such regularity is found to exist: "As
  illustrations of equal amounts of fluctuation from totally
  dissimilar causes, take the deaths in the West district of London in
  seven years (fluctuation 13.66), and offences against the person
  (fluctuation 13.61); or deaths from apoplexy (fluctuation 5.54), and
  offences against property, without violence (fluctuation 5.48); or
  students registered at the College of Surgeons (fluctuation 1.85),
  and the number of pounds of manufactured tobacco taken for home
  consumption (fluctuation 1.89); or out-door paupers (fluctuation
  3.45) and tonnage of British vessels entered in ballast (fluctuation
  3.43), &c."  [Extracted from a paper in the Journal of the
  Statistical Society, by Mr Guy, March, 1858; the 'fluctuation' here
  given is a measure of the amount of irregularity, that is of
  departure from the average, estimated in a way which will be
  described hereafter.]

2. Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, Vol. IX. p. 605.
  Reprinted in the collected edition of his writings, p. 50.

3. We might express it thus:--a few instances are not sufficient to
  display a law at all; a considerable number will suffice to display
  it; but it takes a very great number to establish that a _change_ is
  taking place in the law.

4. The mathematician may illustrate the nature of this substitution by
  the analogies of the 'circle of curvature' in geometry, and the
  'instantaneous ellipse' in astronomy. In the cases in which these
  conceptions are made use of we have a phenomenon which is
  continuously varying and also changing its rate of variation. We
  take it at some given moment, suppose its rate at that moment to be
  fixed, and then complete its career on that supposition.

5. So called from its first mathematical treatment appearing in the
  _Commentarii_ of the Petersburg Academy; a variety of notices upon
  it will be found in Mr Todhunter's History of the Theory of
  Probability.




