CHAPTER III.


_ON THE CAUSAL PROCESS BY WHICH THE GROUPS OR SERIES OF PROBABILITY ARE
BROUGHT ABOUT._

1. In discussing the question whether all the various
groups and series with which Probability is concerned are of
precisely one and the same type, we made some examination
of the process by which they are naturally produced, but we
must now enter a little more into the details of this process.
All events are the results of numerous and complicated
antecedents, far too numerous and complicated
in fact for it to be possible for us to determine or take
them all into account. Now, though it is strictly true that
we can never determine them all, there is a broad distinction
between the case of Induction, in which we can
make out enough of them, and with sufficient accuracy, to
satisfy a reasonable certainty, and Probability, in which we
cannot do so. To Induction we shall return in a future
chapter, and therefore no more need be said about it here.

We shall find it convenient to begin with a division
which, though not pretending to any philosophical accuracy,
will serve as a preliminary guide. It is the simple division
into objects, and the agencies which affect them. All the
phenomena with which Probability is concerned (as indeed
most of those with which science of any kind is concerned)
are the product of certain objects natural and artificial,
acting under the influence of certain agencies natural and
artificial. In the tossing of a penny, for instance, the objects
would be the penny or pence which were successively
thrown; the agencies would be the act of throwing, and
everything which combined directly or indirectly with this
to make any particular face come uppermost. This is a
simple and intelligible division, and can easily be so extended
in meaning as to embrace every class of objects with
which we are concerned.

Now if, in any two or more cases, we had the same
object, or objects indistinguishably alike, and if they were
exposed to the influence of agencies in all respects precisely
alike, we should expect the results to be precisely similar.
By one of the applications of the familiar principle of the
uniformity of nature we should be confident that exact
likeness in the antecedents would be followed by exact
likeness in the consequents. If the same penny, or similar
pence, were thrown in exactly the same way, we should
invariably find that the same face falls uppermost.

2. What we actually find is, of course, very far removed
from this. In the case of the objects, when they
are artificial constructions, e.g. dice, pence, cards, it is true
that they are purposely made as nearly as possible indistinguishably
alike. We either use the same thing over and
over again or different ones made according to precisely
the same model. But in natural objects nothing of the
sort prevails. In fact when we come to examine them, we
find reproduced in them precisely the same characteristics
as those which present themselves in the final result which
we were asked to explain, so that unless we examine them
a stage further back, as we shall have to do to some extent
at any rate, we seem to be merely postulating again the
very peculiarity of the phenomena which we were undertaking
to explain. They will be found, for instance, to
consist of large classes of objects, throughout all the individual
members of which a general resemblance extends.
Suppose that we were considering the length of life. The
objects here are the human beings, or that selected class
of them, whose lives we are considering. The resemblance
existing among them is to be found in the strength and
soundness of their principal vital organs, together with all
the circumstances which collectively make up what we call
the goodness of their constitutions. It is true that most of
these circumstances do not admit of any approach to actual
measurement; but, as was pointed out in the last chapter,
very many of the circumstances which do admit of such
measurement have been measured, and found to display
the characteristics in question. Hence, from the known
analogy and correlation between our various organs, there
can be no reasonable doubt that if we could arrange human
constitutions in general, or the various elements which compose
them in particular, in the order of their strength, we
should find just such an aggregate regularity and just such
groupings about the mean, as the final result (viz. in this
case the length of their lives) presents to our notice.

3. It will be observed therefore that for this purpose
the existence of natural kinds or groups is necessary.
In our games of chance of course the same die may be
thrown, or a card be drawn from the same pack, as often
as we please; but many of the events which occur to
human beings either cannot be repeated at all, or not often
enough to secure in the case of the single individual any
sufficient statistical uniformity. Such regularity as we trace
in nature is owing, much more than is often suspected,
to the arrangement of things in natural kinds, each of
them containing a large number of individuals. Were each
kind of animals or vegetables limited to a single pair, or
even to but a few pairs, there would not be much scope
left for the collection of statistical tables amongst them.
Or to take a less violent supposition, if the numbers
in each natural class of objects were much smaller than
they are at present, or the differences between their varieties
and sub-species much more marked, the consequent
difficulty of extracting from them any sufficient length of
statistical tables, though not fatal, might be very serious.
A large number of objects in the class, together with that
general similarity which entitles the objects to be fairly
comprised in one class, seem to be important conditions
for the applicability of the theory of Probability to any
phenomenon. Something analogous to this excessive paucity
of objects in a class would be found in the attempt to
apply special Insurance offices to the case of those trades
where the numbers are very limited, and the employment
so dangerous as to put them in a class by themselves. If
an insurance society were started for the workmen in
gunpowder mills alone, a premium would have to be charged
to avoid possible ruin, so high as to illustrate the extreme
paucity of appropriate statistics.

4. So much (at present) for the objects. If we turn
to what we have termed the agencies, we find much the
same thing again here. By the adjustment of their relative
intensity, and the respective frequency of their occurrence,
the total effects which they produce are found to be also
tolerably uniform. It is of course conceivable that this
should have been otherwise. It might have been found
that the second group of conditions so exactly corrected the
former as to convert the merely general uniformity into
an absolute one; or it might have been found, on the
other hand, that the second group should aggravate or
disturb the influence of the former to such an extent
as to destroy all the uniformity of its effects. Practically
neither is the case. The second condition simply varies the
details, leaving the uniformity on the whole of precisely
the same general description as it was before. Or if the
objects were supposed to be absolutely alike, as in the case
of successive throws of a penny, it may serve to bring about
a uniformity. Analysis will show these agencies to be
thus made up of an almost infinite number of different
components, but it will detect the same peculiarity that
we have so often had occasion to refer to, pervading almost
all these components. The proportions in which they are
combined will be found to be nearly, though not quite, the
same; the intensity with which they act will be nearly
though not quite equal. And they will all unite and blend
into a more and more perfect regularity as we proceed to
take the average of a larger number of instances.

Take, for instance, the length of life. As we have seen,
the constitutions of a very large number of persons selected
at random will be found to present much the same feature;
general uniformity accompanied by individual irregularity.
Now when these persons go out into the world, they are
exposed to a variety of agencies, the collective influence
of which will assign to each the length of life allotted to
him. These agencies are of course innumerable, and their
mutual interaction complicated beyond all power of analysis
to extricate. Each effect becomes in its turn a cause, is
interwoven inextricably with an indefinite number of other
causes, and reacts upon the final result. Climate, food,
clothing, are some of these agencies, or rather comprise
aggregate groups of them. The nature of a man's work
is also important. One man overworks himself, another
follows an unhealthy trade, a third exposes himself to infection,
and so on.

The result of all this interaction between what we have
thus called objects and agencies is that the final outcome
presents the same general characteristics of uniformity as may
be detected separately in the two constituent elements. Or
rather, as we shall proceed presently to show, it does so
in the great majority of cases.

5. It may be objected that such an explanation as
the above does not really amount to anything deserving
of the name, for that instead of explaining how a particular
state of things is caused it merely points out that the
same state exists elsewhere. There is a uniformity discovered
in the objects at the stage when they are commonly
submitted to calculation; we then grope about
amongst the causes of them, and after all only discover
a precisely similar uniformity existing amongst these causes.
This is to some extent true, for though part of the objection
can be removed, it must always remain the case that the
foundations of an objective science will rest in the last resort
upon the mere fact that things are found to be of such and
such a character.

6. This division, into objects and the agencies which
affect them, is merely intended for a rough practical arrangement,
sufficient to point out to the reader the immediate
nature of the causes which bring about our familiar
uniformities. If we go back a step further, it might fairly
be maintained that they may be reduced to one, namely,
to the agencies. The objects, as we have termed them,
are not an original creation in the state in which we now
find them. No one supposes that whole groups or classes
were brought into existence simultaneously, with all their
general resemblances and particular differences fully developed.
Even if it were the case that the first parents
of each natural kind had been specially created, instead
of being developed out of pre-existing forms, it would still
be true that amongst the numbers of each that now present
themselves the characteristic differences and resemblances
are the result of what we have termed agencies. Take, for
instance, a single characteristic only, say the height; what
determines this as we find it in any given group of men?
Partly, no doubt, the nature of their own food, clothing,
employment, and so on, especially in the earliest years of
their life; partly also, very likely, similar conditions and
circumstances on the part of their parents at one time or
another. No one, I presume, in the present state of knowledge,
would attempt to enumerate the remaining causes,
or even to give any indication of their exact nature; but
at the same time few would entertain any doubt that
agencies of this general description have been the determining
causes at work.

If it be asked again, Into what may these agencies
themselves be ultimately analysed? the answer to this
question, in so far as it involves any detailed examination
of them, would be foreign to the plan of this essay. In so
far as any general remarks, applicable to nearly all classes
alike of such agencies, are called for, we are led back to
the point from which we started in the previous chapter,
when we were discussing whether there is necessarily one
fixed law according to which all our series are formed. We
there saw that every event might be regarded as being
brought about by a comparatively few important causes, of
the kind which comprises all of which ordinary observation
takes any notice, and an indefinitely numerous group of
small causes, too numerous, minute, and uncertain in their
action for us to be able to estimate them or indeed to take
them individually into account at all. The important ones,
it is true, may also in turn be themselves conceived to be
made up of aggregates of small components, but they are
still best regarded as being by comparison simple and distinct,
for their component parts act mostly in groups collectively,
appearing and disappearing together, so that they
possess the essential characteristics of unity.

7. Now, broadly speaking, it appears to me that the
most suitable conditions for Probability are these: that the
important causes should be by comparison fixed and permanent,
and that the remaining ones should on the average
continue to act as often in one direction as in the other.
This they may do in two ways. In the first place we
may be able to predicate nothing more of them than the
mere fact that they act[1] as often in one direction as the
other; what we should then obtain would be merely the
simple statistical uniformity that is described in the first
chapter. But it may be the case, and in practice generally
is so more or less approximately, that these minor causes
act also in independence of one another. What we then
get is a group of uniformities such as was explained and
illustrated in the second chapter. Every possible combination
of these causes then occurring with a regular degree
of frequency, we find one peculiar kind of uniformity
exhibited, not merely in the mere fact of excess and defect
(of whatever may be the variable quality in question), but
also in every particular amount of excess and defect.
Hence, in this case, we get what some writers term a
'mean' or 'type,' instead of a simple average. For instance,
suppose a man throwing a quoit at a mark. Here
our fixed causes are his strength, the weight of the quoit,
and the intention of aiming at a given point. These we
must of course suppose to remain unchanged, if we are
to obtain any such uniformity as we are seeking. The
minor and variable causes are all those innumerable little
disturbing influences referred to in the last chapter. It
might conceivably be the case that we were only able to
ascertain that these acted as often in one direction as in
the other; what we should then find was that the quoit
tended to fall short of the mark as often as beyond it.
But owing to these little causes being mostly independent
of one another, and more or less equal in their influence,
we find also that every _amount_ of excess and defect presents
the same general characteristics, and that in a large number
of throws the quantity of divergences from the mark, of any
given amount, is a tolerably determinate function, according
to a regular law, of that amount of divergence.[2]

8. The necessity of the conditions just hinted at
will best be seen by a reference to cases in which any of
them happen to be missing. Thus we know that the length
of life is on the whole tolerably regular, and so are the
numbers of those who die in successive years or centuries
of most of the commoner diseases. But it does not seem
to be the case with all diseases. What, for instance, of
the Sweating Sickness, the Black Death, the Asiatic
Cholera? The two former either do not recur, or, if they
do, recur in such a mild form as not to deserve the same
name. What in fact of any of the diseases which are
epidemic rather than endemic? All these have their causes
doubtless, and would be produced again by the recurrence
of the conditions which caused them before. But some of
them apparently do not recur at all. They seem to have
depended upon such rare conditions that their occurrence
was almost unique. And of those which do recur the course
is frequently so eccentric and irregular, often so much dependent
upon human will or want of will, as to entirely
deprive their results (that is, the annual number of deaths
which they cause) of the statistical uniformity of which we
are speaking.

The explanation probably is that one of the principal
causes in such cases is what we commonly call contagion.
If so, we have at once a cause which so far from being fixed is
subject to the utmost variability. Stringent caution may
destroy it, carelessness may aggravate it to any extent. The
will of man, as finding its expression either on the part of
government, of doctors, or of the public, may make of it
pretty nearly what is wished, though against the possibility
of its entrance into any community no precautions can absolutely
insure us.

9. If it be replied that this want of statistical regularity
only arises from the fact of our having confined ourselves
to too limited a time, and that we should find
irregularity disappear here, as elsewhere, if we kept our
tables open long enough, we shall find that the answer will
suggest another case in which the requisite conditions for
Probability are wanting. Such a reply would only be conclusive
upon the supposition that the ways and thoughts of
men are in the long run invariable, or if variable, subject to
periodic changes only. On the assumption of a steady progress
in society, either for the better or the worse, the argument
falls to the ground at once. From what we know of
the course of the world, these fearful pests of the past may
be considered as solitary events in our history, or at least
events which will not be repeated. No continued uniformity
would therefore be found in the deaths which they occasion,
though the registrar's books were kept open for a thousand
years. The reason here is probably to be sought in the
gradual alteration of those indefinitely numerous conditions
which we term collectively progress or civilization. Every
little circumstance of this kind has some bearing upon the
liability of any one to catch a disease. But when a kind of
slow and steady tide sets in, in consequence of which these
influences no longer remain at about the same average
strength, warring on about equal terms with hostile influences,
but on the contrary show a steady tendency to increase
their power, the statistics will, with consequent steadiness
and permanence, take the impress of such a change.

10. Briefly then, if we were asked where the distinctive
characteristics of Probability are most prominently
to be found, and where they are most prominently absent,
we might say that (1) they prevail principally in the properties
of natural kinds, both in the ultimate and in the derivative
or accidental properties. In all the characteristics of
natural species, in all they do and in all which happens to
them, so far as it depends upon their properties, we seldom
fail to detect this regularity. Thus in men; their height,
strength, weight, the age to which they live, the diseases of
which they die; all present a well-known uniformity. Life
insurance tables offer the most familiar instance of the importance
of these applications of Probability.

(2) The same peculiarity prevails again in the force
and frequency of most natural agencies. Wind and weather
are seen to lose their proverbial irregularity when examined
on a large scale. Man's work therefore, when operated on
by such agencies as these, even though it had been made in
different cases absolutely alike to begin with, afterwards
shows only a general regularity. I may sow exactly the
same amount of seed in my field every year. The yield may
one year be moderate, the next year be abundant through
favourable weather, and then again in turn be destroyed by
hail. But in the long run these irregularities will be equalized
in the result of my crops, because they are equalized in the
power and frequency of the productive agencies. The
business of underwriters, and offices which insure the crops
against hail, would fall under this class; though, as already
remarked, there is no very profound distinction between them
and the former class.

The reader must be reminded again that this fixity is
only temporary, that is, that even here the series belong to
the class of those which possess a fluctuating type. Those
indeed who believe in the fixity of natural species will have
the best chance of finding a series of the really permanent
type amongst them, though even they will admit that some
change in the characteristic is attainable in length of time.
In the case of the principal natural agencies, it is of course
incontestable that the present average is referable to the
present geological period only. Our average temperature
and average rainfall have in former times been widely
different from what they now are, and doubtless will be so again.

Any fuller investigation of the process by which, on the
Theory of Evolution, out of a primeval simplicity and uniformity
the present variety was educed, hardly belongs to
the scope of the present work: at most, a few hints must suffice.

11. The above, then, are instances of natural objects
and natural agencies. There seems reason to believe that it
is in such things only, as distinguished from things artificial,
that the property in question is to be found. This is an assertion
that will need some discussion and explanation. Two
instances, in apparent opposition, will at once occur to the
mind of some readers; one of which, from its great intrinsic
importance, and the other, from the frequency of the problems
which it furnishes, will demand a few minutes' separate
examination.

(1) The first of these is the already mentioned case of
instrumental observations. In the use of astronomical and
other instruments the utmost possible degree of accuracy is
often desired, a degree which cannot be reasonably hoped for
in any one single observation. What we do therefore in
these cases is to make a large number of successive observations
which are naturally found to differ somewhat from each
other in their results; by means of these the true value
(as explained in a future chapter, on the Method of Least
Squares) is to be determined as accurately as possible. The
subjects then of calculation here are a certain number of
elements, slightly incorrect elements, given by successive
observations. Are not these observations artificial, or the
direct product of voluntary agency? Certainly not: or rather,
the answer depends on what we understand by voluntary.
What is really intended and aimed at by the observer, is of
course, perfect accuracy, that is, the true observation, or the
voluntary steps and preliminaries on which this observation
depends. Whether voluntary or not, this result only can be
called intentional. But this result is not obtained. What
we actually get in its place is a series of deviations from it,
containing results more or less wide of the truth. Now by
what are these deviations caused? By just such agencies as
we have been considering in some of the earlier sections in
this chapter. Heat and its irregular warping influence,
draughts of air producing their corresponding effects, dust
and consequent friction in one part or another, the slight
distortion of the instrument by strains or the slow uneven
contraction which continues long after the metal was cast;
these and such as these are some of the causes which divert
us from the truth. Besides this group, there are others
which certainly do depend upon human agency, but which
are not, strictly speaking, voluntary. They are such as the
irregular action of the muscles, inability to make our various
organs and members execute precisely the purposes we have
in mind, perhaps different rates in the rapidity of the nervous
currents, or in the response to stimuli, in the same or
different observers. The effect produced by some of these,
and the allowance that has in consequence to be made, are
becoming familiar even to the outside world under the name
of the 'personal equation' in astronomical, psychophysical,
and other observations.

12. (2) The other example, alluded to above, is the stock
one of cards and dice. Here, as in the last case, the result
is remotely voluntary, in the sense that deliberate volition
presents itself at one stage. But subsequently to this stage,
the result is produced or affected by so many involuntary
agencies that it owes its characteristic properties to these.
The turning up, for example, of a particular face of a die is
the result of voluntary agency, but it is not an immediate
result. That particular face was not chosen, though the fact
of its being chosen was the remote consequence of an act of
choice. There has been an intermediate chaos of conflicting
agencies, which no one can calculate before or distinguish
afterwards. These agencies seem to show a uniformity in
the long run, and thence to produce a similar uniformity in
the result. The drawing of a card from a pack is indeed
more directly volitional, as in cutting for partners in a game
of whist. But no one continues to do this long without
having the pack well shuffled in the interval, whereby a host
of involuntary influences are let in.

13. The once startling but now familiar uniformities
exhibited in the cases of suicides and misdirected letters, do
not belong to the same class. The final resolution, or want
of it, which leads to these results, is in each case indeed an
important ingredient in the individual's action or omission;
but, in so far as volition has anything to do with the results
_as a whole_, it instantly disturbs them. If the voice of the
Legislature speaks out, or any great preacher or moralist
succeeds in deterring, or any impressive example in influencing,
our moral statistics are instantly tampered with.
Some further discussion will be devoted to this subject in a
future chapter; it need only be remarked here that (always
excluding such common or general influence as those just
mentioned) the average volition, potent as it is in each
separate case, is on the whole swayed by non-voluntary conditions,
such as those of health, the casualties of employment, &c.,
in fact the various circumstances which influence
the length of a man's life.

14. Such distinctions as those just insisted on may
seem to some persons to be needless, but serious errors have
occasionally arisen from the neglect of them. The immediate
products of man's mind, so far indeed as we can make
an attempt to obtain them, do not seem to possess this
essential characteristic of Probability. Their characteristic
seems rather to be, either perfect mathematical accuracy or
utter want of it, either law unfailing or mere caprice. If,
e.g., we find the trees in a forest growing in straight lines,
we unhesitatingly conclude that they were planted by man
as they stand. It is true on the other hand, that if we find
them not regularly planted, we cannot conclude that they
were not planted by man; partly because the planter may
have worked without a plan, partly because the subsequent
irregularities brought on by nature may have obscured the
plan. Practically the mind has to work by the aid of imperfect
instruments, and is subjected to many hindrances
through various and conflicting agencies, and by these means
the work loses its original properties. Suppose, for instance,
that a man, instead of producing numerical results by imperfect
observations or by the cast of dice, were to select
them at first hand for himself by simply thinking of them
at once; what sort of series would he obtain? It would be
about as difficult to obtain in this way any such series as
those appropriate to Probability as it would be to keep his
heart or pulse working regularly by direct acts of volition,
supposing that he had the requisite control over these organs.
But the mere suggestion is absurd. A man must have an
object in thinking, he must think according to a rule or formula;
but unless he takes some natural series as a copy, he
will never be able to construct one mentally which shall permanently
imitate the originals. Or take another product of
human efforts, in which the intention can be executed with
tolerable success. When any one builds a house, there are
many slight disturbing influences at work, such as shrinking
of bricks and mortar, settling of foundations, &c. But the
effect which these disturbances are able to produce is so inappreciably
small, that we may fairly consider that the result
obtained is the direct product of the mind, the accurate
realization of its intention. What is the consequence?
Every house in the row, if designed by one man and at one
time, is of exactly the same height, width, &c. as its
neighbours; or if there are variations they are few, definite,
and regular. The result offers no resemblance whatever to
the heights, weights, &c. of a number of men selected at
random. The builder probably had some regular design in
contemplation, and he has succeeded in executing it.

15. It may be replied that if we extend our observations,
say to the houses of a large city, we shall then detect
the property under discussion. The different heights of a
great number, when grouped together, might be found to
resemble those of a great number of human beings under
similar treatment. Something of this kind might not improbably
be found to be the case, though the resemblance
would be far from being a close one. But to raise this
question is to get on to different ground, for we were
speaking (as remarked above) not of the work of different
minds with their different aims, but of that of one mind.
In a multiplicity of designs, there may be that variable uniformity,
for which we may look in vain in a single design.
The heights which the _different_ builders contemplated
might be found to group themselves into something of the
same kind of uniformity as that which prevails in most
other things which they should undertake to do independently.
We might then trace the action of the same two
conditions,--a uniformity in the multitude of their different
designs, a uniformity also in the infinite variety of the
influences which have modified those designs. But this is a
very different thing from saying that the work of one man
will show such a result as this. The difference is much like
that between the tread of a thousand men who are stepping
without thinking of each other, and their tread when they
are drilled into a regiment. In the former case there is
the working, in one way or another, of a thousand minds;
in the latter, of one only.

The investigations of this and the former chapter
constitute a sufficiently close examination into the detailed
causes by which the peculiar form of statistical results with
which we are concerned is actually produced, to serve the
purpose of a work which is occupied mainly with the _methods_
of the Science of Probability. The great importance, however,
of certain statistical or sociological enquiries will demand
a recurrence in a future chapter to one particular
application of these statistics, viz. to those concerned with
some classes of human actions.

16. The only important addition to, or modification of,
the foregoing remarks which I have found occasion to make
is due to Mr Galton. He has recently pointed out,--and was
I believe the first to do so,--that in certain cases some
analysis of the causal processes can be effected, and is in fact
absolutely necessary in order to account for the facts observed.
Take, for instance, the _heights_ of the population of
any country. If the distribution or dispersion of these about
their mean value were left to the unimpeded action of those
myriad productive agencies alluded to above, we should certainly
obtain such an arrangement in the posterity of any
one generation as had already been exhibited in the parents.
That is, we should find repeated in the previous stage the
same kind of order as we were trying to account for in the
following stage.

But then, as Mr Galton insists, if such agencies acted
freely and independently, though we should get the same
_kind_ of arrangement or distribution, we should not get the
same _degree_ of it: there would, on the contrary, be a tendency
towards further dispersion. The 'curve of facility' (v. the
diagram on p. 29) would belong to the same class, but would
have a different modulus. We shall see this at once if we
take for comparison a case in which similar agencies work
their way without any counteraction whatever. Suppose, for
instance, that a large number of persons, whose fortunes
were equal to begin with, were to commence gambling or
betting continually for some small sum. If we examine
their circumstances after successive intervals of time, we
should expect to find their fortunes distributed according to
the same general law,--i.e. the now familiar law in question,--but
we should also expect to find that the poorest
ones were slightly poorer, and the richest ones slightly
richer, on each successive occasion. We shall see more
about this in a future chapter (on _Gambling_), but it may
be taken for granted here that there is nothing in the laws
of chance to resist this tendency towards intensifying the extremes.

Now it is found, on the contrary, in the case of vital
phenomena,--for instance in that of height, and presumably
of most of the other qualities which are in any way characteristic
of natural kinds,--that there is, through a number of
successive generations, a remarkable degree of fixity. The
tall men are not taller, and the short men are not shorter,
per cent. of the population in successive generations: always
supposing of course that some general change of circumstances,
such as climate, diet, &c. has not set in. There
must therefore here be some cause at work which tends, so
to say, to draw in the extremes and thus to check the otherwise
continually increasing dispersion.

17. The facts were first tested by careful experiment.
At the date of Mr Galton's original paper on the subject,[3]
there were no available statistics of heights of human beings;
so a physical element admitting of careful experiment (viz.
the size or weight of certain seeds) was accurately estimated.
From these data the actual amount of reversion from the
extremes, that is, of the slight pressure continually put upon
the extreme members with the result of crowding them back
towards the mean, was determined, and this was compared
with what theory would require in order to keep the characteristics
of the species permanently fixed. Since then,
statistics have been obtained to a large extent which deal
directly with the heights of human beings.

The general conclusion at which we arrive is that there
are several causes at work which are neither slight nor independent.
There is, for instance, the observed fact that the
extremes are as a rule not equally fertile with the means,
nor equally capable of resisting death and disease. Hence
as regards their mere numbers, there is a tendency for them
somewhat to thin out. Then again there is a distinct
positive cause in respect of 'reversion.' Not only are the
offspring of the extremes less numerous, but these offspring
also tend to cluster about a mean which is, so to say, shifted
a little towards the true centre of the whole group; i.e. towards
the mean offspring of the mean parents.

18. For a full discussion of these characteristics, and
for a variety of most ingenious illustrations of their mode of
agency and of their comparative efficacy, the reader may be
referred to Mr Galton's original articles. For our present
purpose it will suffice to say that these characteristics tend
towards maintaining the fixity of species; and that though
they do not affect what may be called the general nature of
the 'probability curve' or 'law of facility', they do determine
its precise value in the cases in question. If, indeed, it be
asked why there is no need for any such corrective influence
in the case of, say, firing at a mark: the answer is that there
is no opening for it except where a _cumulative_ influence is introduced.
The reason why the fortunes of our betting party
showed an ever increasing divergency, and why some special
correction was needed in order to avert such a tendency in
the case of vital phenomena, was that the new starting-point
at every step was slightly determined by the results of the
previous step. The man who has lost a shilling one time
starts, next time, worse off by just a shilling; and, but for
the corrections we have been indicating, the man who was
born tall would, so to say, throw off his descendants from a
vantage ground of superior height. The true parallel in the
case of the marksmen would be to suppose that their new
points of aim were always shifted a little in the direction of
the last divergence. The spreading out of the shot-marks
would then continue without limit, just as would the divergence
of fortunes of the supposed gamblers.


1. As stated above, this is really little more than a re-statement, a
  stage further back, of the existence of the same kind of uniformity
  as that which we are called upon to explain in the concrete details
  presented to us in experience.

2. "It would seem in fact that in coarse and rude observations the
  errors proceed from a _very few_ principal causes, and in
  consequence our hypothesis [as to the Exponential Law of Error] will
  probably represent the facts only imperfectly, and the frequency of
  the errors will only approximate roughly and vaguely to the law
  which follows from it. But when astronomers, not content with the
  degree of accuracy they had reached, prosecuted their researches
  into the remaining sources of error, they found that not three or
  four, but a _great number_ of minor sources of error of nearly
  co-ordinate importance began to reveal themselves, having been till
  then masked and overshadowed by the graver errors which had been now
  approximately removed.... There were errors of graduation, and many
  others in the contraction of instruments; other errors of their
  adjustments; errors (technically so called) of _observation_; errors
  from the changes of temperature, of weather, from slight irregular
  motions and vibrations; in short, the thousand minute disturbing
  influences with which modern astronomers are familiar." (Extracted
  from a paper by Mr Crofton in the Vol. of the _Philosophical
  Transactions_ for 1870, p. 177.)

3. _Typical Laws of Heredity_; read before the Royal Institution,
  Feb. 9, 1877. See also _Journal of the Anthrop. Inst._ Nov. 1885.




