CHAPTER IV.


_ON THE MODES OF ESTABLISHING AND DETERMINING THE EXISTENCE AND
NUMERICAL PROPORTIONS OF THE CHARACTERISTIC PROPERTIES OF OUR SERIES
OR GROUPS._

1. At the point which we have now reached, we are
supposed to be in possession of series or groups of a certain
kind, lying at the bottom, as one may say, and forming the
foundation on which the Science of Probability is to be
erected. We have described with sufficient particularity the
characteristics of such a series, and have indicated the process
by which it is, as a rule, actually brought about in
nature. The next enquiries which have to be successively
made are, how in any particular case we are to establish
their existence and determine their special character and
properties? and secondly,[1] when we have obtained them, in
what mode are they to be employed for logical purposes?

The answer to the former enquiry does not seem difficult.
Experience is our sole guide. If we want to discover what is
in reality a series of _things_, not a series of our own conceptions,
we must appeal to the things themselves to obtain it,
for we cannot find much help elsewhere. We cannot tell
how many persons will be born or die in a year, or how
many houses will be burnt or ships wrecked, without actually
counting them. When we thus speak of 'experience' we
mean to employ the term in its widest signification; we
mean experience supplemented by all the aids which inductive
or deductive logic can afford. When, for instance,
we have found the series which comprises the numbers of
persons of any assigned class who die in successive years, we
have no hesitation in extending it some way into the future
as well as into the past. The justification of such a procedure
must be sought in the ordinary canons of Induction.
As a special discussion will be given upon the connection
between Probability and Induction, no more need be said
upon this subject here; but nothing will be found there at
variance with the assertion just made, that the series we
employ are ultimately obtained by experience only.

2. In many cases it is undoubtedly true that we do not
resort to direct experience at all. If I want to know what is
my chance of holding ten trumps in a game of whist, I do
not enquire how often such a thing has occurred before. If
all the inhabitants of the globe were to divide themselves up
into whist parties they would have to keep on at it for a
great many years, if they wanted to settle the question
satisfactorily in that way. What we do of course is to calculate
algebraically the proportion of possible combinations
in which ten trumps can occur, and take this as the answer
to our problem. So again, if I wanted to know the chance
of throwing six with a die whose faces were unequal, it
would be a question if my best way would not be to calculate
geometrically the solid angle subtended at the centre of
gravity by the opposite face, and the ratio of this to the
whole surface of a sphere would represent sufficiently closely
the chance required.

It is quite true that in such examples as the above, especially
the former one, nobody would ever think of appealing
to statistics. This would be a tedious process to adopt when,
as here, the mechanical and other conditions upon which the
production of the events depend are comparatively few, determinate,
and admit of isolated consideration, whilst the
enormous number of combinations which can be constructed
out of them causes an enormous consequent multiplicity of
ways in which the events can possibly happen. Hence, in
practice, _à priori_ determination is often easy, whilst _à posteriori_
appeal to experience would be not merely tedious but
utterly impracticable. This, combined with the frequent
simplicity and attractiveness of such examples when deductively
treated, has made them very popular, and produced the
impression in many quarters that they are the proper typical
instances to illustrate the theory of chance. Whereas, had
the science been concerned with those kinds of events only
which in practice are commonly made subjects of insurance,
probably no other view would ever have been taken than
that it was based upon direct appeal to experience.

3. When, however, we look a little closer, we find that
there is no occasion for such a sharp distinction as that apparently
implied between the two classes of examples just
indicated. In such cases as those of dice and cards, even, in
which we appear to reason directly from the determining
conditions, or possible variety of the events, rather than from
actual observation of their occurrence, we shall find that this
procedure is only valid by the help of a tacit assumption
which can never be determined otherwise than by direct
experience. It is, no doubt, an exceedingly natural and
obvious assumption, and one which is continually deriving
fresh weight from every-day observation, but it is one which
ought not to be admitted without consideration. As this is a
very important matter, not so much in itself as in connection
with the light which it throws upon the theory of the subject,
we will enter into a somewhat detailed examination of it.

Let us take a very simple example, that of tossing up a
penny. Suppose that I am contemplating a succession of
two throws; I can see that the only possible events are[2]
HH, HT, TH, TT. So much is certain. We are moreover
tolerably well convinced from experience that these
events occur, in the long run, about equally often. This is
of course admitted on all hands. But on the view commonly
maintained, it is contended that we might have known the
fact beforehand on grounds which are applicable to an indefinite
number of other and more complex cases. The form in
which this view would generally be advanced is, that we are
enabled to state beforehand that the four throws above mentioned
are _equally likely_. If in return we ask what is meant
by the expression 'equally likely', it appears that there are
two and only two possible forms of reply. One of these seeks
the explanation in the state of mind of the observer, the
other seeks it in some characteristic of the things observed.

(1) It might, for instance, be said on the one hand, that
what is meant is that the four events contemplated are
equally easy to imagine, or, more accurately, that our expectation
or belief in their occurrence is equal. We could
hardly be content with this reply, for the further enquiry
would immediately be urged, On what ground is this to be
believed? What are the characteristics of events of which
our expectation is equal? If we consented to give an answer
to this further enquiry, we should be led to the second form
of reply, to be noticed directly; if we did not consent we
should, it seems, be admitting that Probability was only a
portion of Psychology, confined therefore to considering states
of mind in themselves, rather than in their reference to facts,
viz. as being true or false. We should, that is, be ceasing
to make it a science of inference about things. This point
will have to be gone into more thoroughly in another chapter;
but it is impossible to direct attention too prominently
to the fact that Logic (and therefore Probability as a branch
of Logic) is not concerned with what men _do_ believe, but
with what they ought to believe, if they are to believe
correctly.

(2) In the other form of reply the explanation of the
phrase in question would be sought, not in a state of mind,
but in a quality of the things contemplated. We might assign
the following as the meaning, viz. that the events really
would occur with equal frequency in the long run. The
ground of this assertion would probably be found in past experience,
and it would doubtless be impossible so to frame
the answer as to exclude the notion of our belief altogether.
But still there is a broad distinction between seeking an
equality in the amount of our belief, as before, and in the
frequency of occurrence of the events themselves, as here.

4. When we have got as far as this it can readily be
shown that an appeal to experience cannot be long evaded.
For _can_ the assertion in question (viz. that the throws of the
penny will occur equally often) be safely made _à priori_?
Those who consider that it can seem hardly to have fully
faced the difficulties which meet them. For when we begin
to enquire seriously whether the penny will really do what
is expected of it, we find that restrictions have to be introduced.
In the first place it must be an ideal coin, with
its sides equal and fair. This restriction is perfectly intelligible;
the study of solid geometry enables us to idealize a
penny into a circular or cylindrical lamina. But this condition
by itself is not sufficient, others are wanted as well. The
penny was supposed to be tossed up, as we say 'at random.'
What is meant by this, and how is this process to be idealized?
To ask this is to introduce no idle subtlety; for it
would scarcely be maintained that the heads and tails would
get their fair chances if, immediately before the throwing,
we were so to place the coin in our hands as to start it
always with the same side upwards. The difference that
would result in consequence, slight as its cause is, would
tend in time to show itself in the results. Or, if we persisted
in starting with each of the two sides alternately
upwards, would the longer repetitions of the same side get
their fair chance?

Perhaps it will be replied that if we think nothing whatever
about these matters all will come right of its own accord.
It may, and doubtless will be so, but this is falling back upon
experience. It is here, then, that we find ourselves resting on
the experimental assumption above mentioned, and which
indeed cannot be avoided. For suppose, lastly, that the
circumstances of nature, or my bodily or mental constitution,
were such that the same side always _is_ started upwards, or
indeed that they are started in any arbitrary order of our
own? Well, it will be replied, it would not then be a fair
trial. If we press in this way for an answer to such enquiries,
we shall find that these tacit restrictions are really nothing
else than a mode of securing an experimental result. They
are only another way of saying, Let a series of actions be
performed in such a way as to secure a sequence of a particular
kind, viz., of the kind described in the previous chapters.

5. An intermediate way of evading the direct appeal
to experience is sometimes found by defining the probability
of an event as being measured by the ratio which the
number of cases favourable to the event bears to the total
number of cases which are possible. This seems a somewhat
loose and ambiguous way of speaking. It is clearly not
enough to _count_ the number of cases merely, they must also
be _valued_, since it is not certain that each is equally potent
in producing the effect. This, of course, would never be
denied, but sufficient importance does not seem to be attached
to the fact that we have really no other way of
valuing them except by estimating the effects which they
actually do, or would produce. Instead of thus appealing to
the proportion of cases favourable to the event, it is far better
(at least as regards the foundation of the science, for we are
not at this moment discussing the practical method of facilitating
our calculations) to appeal at once to the proportion
of cases in which the event actually occurs.

6. The remarks above made will apply, of course, to
most of the other common examples of chance; the throwing
of dice, drawing of cards, of balls from bags, &c. In the
last case, for instance, one would naturally be inclined to
suppose that a ball which had just been put back would
thereby have a better chance of coming out again next time,
since it will be more in the way for that purpose. How is
this to be prevented? If we designedly thrust it to the
middle or bottom of the others, we may overdo the precaution;
and are in any case introducing human design, that
element so essentially hostile to all that we understand by
chance. If we were to trust to a good shake setting matters
right, we may easily be deceived; for shaking the bag can
hardly do more than diminish the disposition of those balls
which were already in each other's neighbourhood, to remain
so. In the consequent interaction of each upon all, the
arrangement in which they start cannot but leave its impress
to some extent upon their final positions. In all such cases,
therefore, if we scrutinize our language, we shall find that
any supposed _à priori_ mode of stating a problem is little else
than a compendious way of saying, Let means be taken for
obtaining a given result. Since it is upon this result that
our inferences ultimately rest, it seems simpler and more
philosophical to appeal to it at once as the groundwork of
our science.

7. Let us again take the instance of the tossing of a
penny, and examine it somewhat more minutely, to see what
can be actually proved about the results we shall obtain.
We are willing to give the pence fair treatment by assuming
that they are perfect, that is, that in the long run they show
no preference for either head or tail; the question then
remains, Will the repetitions of the same face obtain the
proportional shares to which they are entitled by the
usual interpretations of the theory? Putting then, as before,
for the sake of brevity, H for head, and HH for heads twice
running, we are brought to this issue;--Given that the
chance of H is 1/2, does it follow necessarily that the chance of HH
(with two pence) is 1/4? To say nothing of 'H ten times'
occurring once in 1024 times (with ten pence), need it occur
at all? The mathematicians, for the most part, seem to think
that this conclusion follows necessarily from first principles;
to me it seems to rest upon no more certain evidence than a
reasonable extension by Induction.

Taking then the possible results which can be obtained
from a pair of pence, what do we find? Four different
results may follow, namely, (1) HT, (2) HH, (3) TH, (4) TT.
If it can be proved that these four are equally probable, that
is, occur equally often, the commonly accepted conclusions
will follow, for a precisely similar argument would apply to
all the larger numbers.

8. The proof usually advanced makes use of what is
called the Principle of Sufficient Reason. It takes this
form;--Here are four kinds of throws which may happen;
once admit that the separate elements of them, namely, H
and T, happen equally often, and it will follow that the above
combinations will also happen equally often, for no reason can
be given in favour of one of them that would not equally hold
in favour of the others.

To a certain extent we must admit the validity of the
principle for the purpose. In the case of the throws given
above, it would be valid to prove the equal frequency of (1)
and (3) and also of (2) and (4); for there is no difference
existing between these pairs except what is introduced by our
own notation.[3] TH is the same as HT, except in the order
of the occurrence of the symbols H and T, which we do not
take into account. But either of the pair (1) and (3) _is_
different from either of the pair (2) and (4). Transpose the
notation, and there would still remain here a distinction which
the mind can recognize. A succession of the same thing
twice running is distinguished from the conjunction of two
different things, by a distinction which does not depend
upon our arbitrary notation only, and would remain entirely
unaltered by a change in this notation. The principle therefore
of Sufficient Reason, if admitted, would only prove that
doublets of the two kinds, for example (2) and (4), occur
equally often, but it would not prove that they must each
occur once in four times. It cannot be proved indeed in this
way that they need ever occur at all.

9. The formula, then, not being demonstrable _à priori_,
(as might have been concluded,) can it be obtained by experience?
To a certain extent it can; the present experience
of mankind in pence and dice seems to show that the smaller
successions of throws do really occur in about the proportions
assigned by the theory. But how nearly they do so no one
can say, for the amount of time and trouble to be expended
before we could feel that we have verified the fact, even for
small numbers, is very great, whilst for large numbers it
would be simply intolerable. The experiment of throwing
often enough to obtain 'heads ten times' has been actually
performed by two or three persons, and the results are given
by De Morgan, and Jevons.[4] This, however, being only
sufficient on the average to give 'heads ten times' a single
chance, the evidence is very slight; it would take a considerable
number of such experiments to set the matter
nearly at rest.

Any such rule, then, as that which we have just been
discussing, which professes to describe what will take place
in a long succession of throws, is only conclusively proved by
experience within very narrow limits, that is, for small repetitions
of the same face; within limits less narrow, indeed,
we feel assured that the rule cannot be flagrantly in error,
otherwise the variation would be almost sure to be detected.
From this we feel strongly inclined to infer that the same
law will hold throughout. In other words, we are inclined
to extend the rule by Induction and Analogy. Still there
are so many instances in nature of proposed laws which hold
within narrow limits but get egregiously astray when we
attempt to push them to great lengths, that we must give at
best but a qualified assent to the truth of the formula.

10. The object of the above reasoning is simply to
show that we cannot be certain that the rule is true. Let
us now turn for a minute to consider the causes by which
the succession of heads and tails is produced, and we may
perhaps see reasons to make us still more doubtful.

It has been already pointed out that in calculating probabilities
_à priori_, as it is called, we are only able to do so by
introducing restrictions and suppositions which are in reality
equivalent to assuming the expected results. We use words
which in strictness mean, Let a given process be performed;
but an analysis of our language, and an examination of
various tacit suppositions which make themselves felt the
moment they are not complied with, soon show that our real
meaning is, Let a series of a given kind be obtained; it is to
this series only, and not to the conditions of its production,
that all our subsequent calculations properly apply. The
physical process being performed, we want to know whether
anything resembling the contemplated series really will be
obtained.

Now if the penny were invariably set the same side uppermost,
and thrown with the same velocity of rotation and
to the same height, &c.--in a word, subjected to the same
conditions,--it would always come down with the same side
uppermost. Practically, we know that nothing of this kind
occurs, for the individual variations in the results of the
throws are endless. Still there will be an _average_ of these
conditions, about which the throws will be found, as it were,
to cluster much more thickly than elsewhere. We should be
inclined therefore to infer that if the same side were always
set uppermost there would really be a departure from the
sort of series which we ordinarily expect. In a very large
number of throws we should probably begin to find, under
such circumstances, that either head or tail was having a
preference shown to it. If so, would not similar effects be
found to be connected with the way in which we started
each successive _pair_ of throws? According as we chose to
make a practice of putting HH or TT uppermost, might
there not be a disturbance in the proportion of successions of
two heads or two tails? Following out this train of reasoning,
it would seem to point with some likelihood to the conclusion
that in order to obtain a series of the kind we
expect, we should have to dispose the antecedents in a
similar series at the start. The changes and chances produced
by the act of throwing might introduce infinite individual
variations, and yet there might be found, in the very
long run, to be a close similarity between these two series.

11. This is, to a certain extent, only shifting the difficulty,
I admit; for the claim formerly advanced about the
possibility of proving the proportions of the throws in the
former series, will probably now be repeated in favour of
those in the latter. Still the question is very much narrowed,
for we have reduced it to a series of _voluntary_ acts.
A man may put whatever side he pleases uppermost. He
may act consciously, as I have said, or he may think nothing
whatever about the matter, that is, throw at random; if so,
it will probably be asserted by many that he will involuntarily
produce a series of the kind in question. It may be
so, or it may not; it does not seem that there are any
easily accessible data by which to decide. All that I am
concerned with here is to show the likelihood that the commonly
received result does in reality depend upon the fulfilment
of a certain condition at the outset, a condition which
it is certainly optional with any one to fulfil or not as he
pleases. The short successions doubtless will take care of
themselves, owing to the infinite complications produced by
the casual variations in throwing; but the long ones may
suffer, unless their interest be consciously or unconsciously
regarded at the outset.

12. The advice, 'Only try long enough, and you will
sooner or later get any result that is possible,' is plausible,
but it rests only on Induction and Analogy; mathematics do
not prove it. As has been repeatedly stated, there are two
distinct views of the subject. Either we may, on the one
hand, take a series of symbols, call them heads and tails;
H, T, &c.; and make the assumption that each of these, and
each pair of them, and so on, will occur in the long run with
a regulated degree of frequency. We may then calculate
their various combinations, and the consequences that may
be drawn from the data assumed. This is a purely algebraical
process; it is infallible; and there is no limit whatever to the
extent to which it may be carried. This way of looking at
the matter may be, and undoubtedly should be, nothing
more than the counterpart of what I have called the substituted
or idealized series which generally has to be introduced
as the basis of our calculation. The danger to be guarded
against is that of regarding it too purely as an algebraical
conception, and thence of sinking into the very natural
errors both of too readily evolving it out of our own consciousness,
and too freely pushing it to unwarranted lengths.

Or on the other hand, we may consider that we are treating
of the behaviour of _things_;--balls, dice, births, deaths, &c.;
and drawing inferences about them. But, then, what
were in the former instance allowable assumptions, become
here propositions to be tested by experience. Now the whole
theory of Probability as a practical science, in fact as anything
more than an algebraical truth, depends of course upon
there being a close correspondence between these two views
of the subject, in other words, upon our substituted series
being kept in accordance with the actual series. Experience
abundantly proves that, between considerable limits, in the
example in question, there does exist such a correspondence.
But let no one attempt to enforce our assent to every remote
deduction that mathematicians can draw from their formulæ.
When this is attempted the distinction just traced becomes
prominent and important, and we have to choose our side.
Either we go over to the mathematics, and so lose all right
of discussion about the things; or else we take part with the
things, and so defy the mathematics. We do not question
the formal accuracy of the latter within their own province,
but either we dismiss them as somewhat irrelevant, as applying
to data of whose correctness we cannot be certain, or
we take the liberty of remodelling them so as to bring them
into accordance with facts.

13. A critic of any doctrine can hardly be considered
to have done much more than half his duty when he has
explained and justified his grounds for objecting to it. It
still remains for him to indicate, if only in a few words,
what he considers its legitimate functions and position to be,
for it can seldom happen that he regards it as absolutely
worthless or unmeaning. I should say, then, that when
Probability is thus divorced from direct reference to objects,
as it substantially is by not being founded upon experience,
it simply resolves itself into the common algebraical or arithmetical
doctrine of Permutations and Combinations.[5] The
considerations upon which these depend are purely formal
and necessary, and can be fully reasoned out without any
appeal to experience. We there start from pure considerations
of number or magnitude, and we terminate with them,
having only arithmetical calculations to connect them together.
I wish, for instance, to find the chance of throwing
heads three times running with a penny. All I have to do
is first to ascertain the possible number of throws. Permutations
tell me that with two things thus in question (viz.
head and tail) and three times to perform the process, there
are eight possible forms of the result. Of these eight one
only being favourable, the chance in question is pronounced
to be one-eighth.

Now though it is quite true that the actual calculation of
every chance problem must be of the above character, viz. an
algebraical or arithmetical process, yet there is, it seems to
me, a broad and important distinction between a material
science which employs mathematics, and a formal one which
consists of nothing but mathematics. When we cut ourselves
off from the necessity of any appeal to experience, we
are retaining only the intermediate or calculating part of the
investigation; we may talk of dice, or pence, or cards, but
these are really only names we choose to give to our symbols.
The H's and T's with which we deal have no bearing on objective
occurrences, but are just like the x's and y's with
which the rest of algebra deals. Probability in fact, when so
treated, seems to be absolutely nothing else than a system of
applied Permutations and Combinations.

It will now readily be seen how narrow is the range of
cases to which any purely deductive method of treatment can
apply. It is almost entirely confined to such employments
as games of chance, and, as already pointed out, can only be
regarded as really trustworthy even there, by the help of
various tacit restrictions. This alone would be conclusive
against the theory of the subject being rested upon such a
basis. The experimental method, on the other hand, is, in the
same theoretical sense, of universal application. It would
include the ordinary problems furnished by games of chance,
as well as those where the dice are loaded and the pence are
not perfect, and also the indefinitely numerous applications
of statistics to the various kinds of social phenomena.

14. The particular view of the deductive character of
Probability above discussed, could scarcely have intruded
itself into any other examples than those of the nature of
games of chance, in which the conditions of occurrence are
by comparison few and simple, and are amenable to accurate
numerical determination. But a doctrine, which is in reality
little else than the same theory in a slightly disguised form,
is very prevalent, and has been applied to truths of the most
purely empirical character. This doctrine will be best introduced
by a quotation from Laplace. After speaking of
the irregularity and uncertainty of nature as it appears at
first sight, he goes on to remark that when we look closer we
begin to detect "a striking regularity which seems to suggest
a design, and which some have considered a proof of
Providence. But, on reflection, it is soon perceived that this
regularity is nothing but the development of the respective
probabilities of the simple events, which ought to occur more
frequently according as they are more probable."[6]

If this remark had been made about the succession of
heads and tails in the throwing up of a penny, it would
have been intelligible. It would simply mean this: that the
constitution of the body was such that we could anticipate
with some confidence what the result would be when it was
treated in a certain way, and that experience would justify
our anticipation in the long run. But applied as it is in a
more general form to the facts of nature, it seems really to
have but little meaning in it. Let us test it by an instance.
Amidst the irregularity of individual births, we find that the
male children are to the female, in the long run, in about
the proportion of 106 to 100. Now if we were told that
there is nothing in this but "the development of their respective
probabilities," would there be anything in such a
statement but a somewhat pretentious re-statement of the
fact already asserted? The probability _is_ nothing but that
proportion, and is unquestionably in this case derived from
no other source but the statistics themselves; in the above
remark the attempt seems to be made to invert this process,
and to derive the sequence of events from the mere numerical
statement of the proportions in which they occur.

15. It will very likely be replied that by the probability
above mentioned is meant, not the mere numerical
proportion between, the births, but some fact in our constitution
upon which this proportion depends; that just as
there was a relation of equality between the two sides of the
penny, which produced the ultimate equality in the number
of heads and tails, so there may be something in our constitution
or circumstances in the proportion of 106 to 100,
which produces the observed statistical result. When this
something, whatever it might be, was discovered, the observed
numbers might be supposed capable of being determined
beforehand. Even if this were the case, however, it
must not be forgotten that there could hardly fail to be, in
combination with such causes, other concurrent conditions in
order to produce the ultimate result; just as besides the shape
of the penny, we had also to take into account the nature of
the 'randomness' with which it was tossed. What these
may be, no one at present can undertake to say, for the best
physiologists seem indisposed to hazard even a guess upon
the subject.[7] But without going into particulars, one may
assert with some confidence that these conditions cannot well
be altogether independent of the health, circumstances, manners
and customs, &c. (to express oneself in the vaguest way)
of the parents; and if once these influencing elements are
introduced, even as very minute factors, the results cease to
be dependent only on fixed and permanent conditions. We
are at once letting in other conditions, which, if they also
possess the characteristics that distinguish Probability (an
exceedingly questionable assumption), must have that fact
specially proved about them. That this should be the case
indeed seems not merely questionable, but almost certainly
impossible; for these conditions partaking of the nature of
what we term generally, Progress and Civilization, cannot be
expected to show any permanent disposition to hover about
an average.

16. The reader who is familiar with Probability is of
course acquainted with the celebrated theorem of James
Bernoulli. This theorem, of which the examples just adduced
are merely particular cases, is generally expressed
somewhat as follows:--in the long run all events will tend
to occur with a relative frequency proportional to their
objective probabilities. With the mathematical proof of this
theorem we need not trouble ourselves, as it lies outside the
province of this work; but indeed if there is any value in the
foregoing criticism, the basis on which the mathematics rest
is faulty, owing to there being really nothing which we can
with propriety call an objective probability.

If one might judge by the interpretation and uses to
which this theorem is sometimes exposed, we should regard
it as one of the last remaining relics of Realism, which after
being banished elsewhere still manages to linger in the remote
province of Probability. It would be an illustration of
the inveterate tendency to objectify our conceptions, even in
cases where the conceptions had no right to exist at all. A
uniformity is observed; sometimes, as in games of chance, it
is found to be so connected with the physical constitution of
the bodies employed as to be capable of being inferred beforehand;
though even here the connection is by no means
so necessary as is commonly supposed, owing to the fact that
in addition to these bodies themselves we have also to take
into account their relation to the agencies which influence
them. This constitution is then converted into an 'objective
probability', supposed to develop into the sequence which
exhibits the uniformity. Finally, this very questionable objective
probability is assumed to exist, with the same faculty
of development, in all the cases in which uniformity is observed,
however little resemblance there may be between
these and games of chance.

17. How utterly inappropriate any such conception is
in most of the cases in which we find statistical uniformity,
will be obvious on a moment's consideration. The observed
phenomena are generally the product, in these cases, of very
numerous and complicated antecedents. The number of
crimes, for instance, annually committed in any society, is a
function amongst other things, of the strictness of the law,
the morality of the people, their social condition, and the
vigilance of the police, each of these elements being in itself
almost infinitely complex. Now, as a result of all these
agencies, there is some degree of uniformity; but what has
been called above the change of type, which it sooner or
later tends to display, is unmistakeable. The average annual
numbers do not show a steady gradual approach towards
what might be considered in some sense a limiting value,
but, on the contrary, fluctuate in a way which, however it
may depend upon causes, shows none of the permanent uniformity
which is characteristic of games of chance. This
fact, combined with the obvious arbitrariness of singling out,
from amongst the many and various antecedents which produced
the observed regularity, a few only, which should constitute
the objective probability (if we took all, the events
being absolutely determined, there would be no occasion for
an appeal to probability in the case), would have been sufficient
to prevent any one from assuming the existence of
any such thing, unless the mistaken analogy of other cases
had predisposed him to seek for it.

There is a familiar practical form of the same error, the
tendency to which may not improbably be derived from a
similar theoretical source. It is that of continuing to accumulate
our statistical data to an excessive extent. If the
type were absolutely fixed we could not possibly have too
many statistics; the longer we chose to take the trouble
of collecting them the more accurate our results would be.
But if the type is changing, in other words, if some of the
principal causes which aid in their production have, in regard
to their present degree of intensity, strict limits of time or
space, we shall do harm rather than good if we overstep
these limits. The danger of stopping too soon is easily seen,
but in avoiding it we must not fall into the opposite error of
going on too long, and so getting either gradually or suddenly
under the influence of a changed set of circumstances.

18. This chapter was intended to be devoted to a
consideration, not of the processes by which nature produces
the series with which we are concerned, but of the theoretic
basis of the methods by which we can determine the existence
of such series. But it is not possible to keep the two enquiries
apart, for here, at any rate, the old maxim prevails that to
know a thing we must know its causes. Recur for a minute
to the considerations of the last chapter. We there saw
that there was a large class of events, the conditions of production
of which could be said to consist of (1) a comparatively
few nearly unchangeable elements, and (2) a vast number
of independent and very changeable elements. At least if
there were any other elements besides these, we are assumed
either to make special allowance for them, or to omit them
from our enquiry. Now in certain cases, such as games of
chance, the unchangeable elements may without practical
error be regarded as really unchangeable throughout any
range of time and space. Hence, as a result, the deductive
method of treatment becomes in their case at once the most
simple, natural, and conclusive; but, as a further consequence,
the statistics of the events, if we choose to appeal to them,
may be collected _ad libitum_ with better and better approximation
to truth. On the other hand, in all social
applications of Probability, the unchangeable causes can only
be regarded as really unchangeable under many qualifications.
We know little or nothing of them directly; they are
often in reality numerous, indeterminate, and fluctuating;
and it is only under the guarantee of stringent restrictions of
time and place, that we can with any safety attribute to
them sufficient fixity to justify our theory. Hence, as a
result, the deductive method, under whatever name it may
go, becomes totally inapplicable both in theory and practice;
and, as a further consequence, the appeal to statistics has to
be made with the caution in mind that we shall do mischief
rather than good if we go on collecting too many of them.

19. The results of the last two chapters may be
summed up as follows:--We have extended the conception
of a series obtained in the first chapter; for we have found
that these series are mostly presented to us in groups.
These groups are found upon examination to be formed upon
approximately the same type throughout a very wide and
varied range of experience; the causes of this agreement we
discussed and explained in some detail. When, however, we
extend our examination by supposing the series to run to a
very great length, we find that they may be divided into two
classes separated by important distinctions. In one of these
classes (that containing the results of games of chance) the
conditions of production, and consequently the laws of statistical
occurrence, may be practically regarded as absolutely
fixed; and the extent of the divergences from the mean
seem to know no finite limit. In the other class, on the
contrary (containing the bulk of ordinary statistical enquiries),
the conditions of production vary with more or less rapidity,
and so in consequence do the results. Moreover it is often
impossible that variations from the mean should exceed a
certain amount. The former we may term _ideal_ series. It
is they alone which show the requisite characteristics with
any close approach to accuracy, and to make the theory of
the subject tenable, we have really to substitute one of this
kind for one of the less perfect ones of the other class, when
these latter are under treatment. The former class have,
however, been too exclusively considered by writers on the
subject; and conceptions appropriate only to them, and not
always even to them, have been imported into the other
class. It is in this way that a general tendency to an excessive
deductive or _à priori_ treatment of the science has
been encouraged.


1. This latter enquiry belongs to what may be termed the more purely
  logical part of this volume, and is entered on in the course of
  Chapter VI.

2. For the use of those not acquainted with the common notation
  employed in this subject, it may be remarked that HH is simply an
  abbreviated way of saying that the two successive throws of the
  penny give head; HT that the first of them gives head, and the
  second tail; and so on with the remaining symbols.

3. I am endeavouring to treat this rule of Sufficient Reason in a way
  that shall be legitimate in the opinion of those who accept it, but
  there seem very great doubts whether a contradiction is not involved
  when we attempt to extract results from it. If the sides are
  absolutely alike, how can there he any difference between the terms
  of the series? The succession seems then reduced to a dull
  uniformity, a mere iteration of the same thing many times; the
  series we contemplated has disappeared. If the sides are not
  absolutely alike, what becomes of the applicability of the rule?

4. _Formal Logic_, p. 185. _Principles of Science_, p. 208.

5. The close connection between these subjects is well indicated in
  the title of Mr Whitworth's treatise, _Choice and Chance_.

6. _Essai Philosophique_. Ed. 1825, p. 74.

7. An opinion prevailed rather at one time (quoted and supported by
  Quetelet amongst others) that the relative ages of the parents had
  something to do with the sex of the offspring. If this were so, it
  would quite bear out the above remarks. As a matter of fact, it
  should be observed, that the proportion of 106 to 100 does not seem
  by any means universal in all countries or at all times. For various
  statistical tables on the subject see Quetelet, _Physique Sociale_,
  Vol. I. 166, 173, 238.




