CHAPTER II.


_FURTHER DISCUSSION UPON THE NATURE OF THE SERIES MENTIONED IN THE LAST
CHAPTER._

1. In the course of the last chapter the nature of a particular
kind of series, that namely, which must be considered
to constitute the basis of the science of Probability, has received
a sufficiently general explanation for the preliminary
purpose of introduction. One might indeed say more than
this; for the characteristics which were there pointed out are
really sufficient in themselves to give a fair general idea of
the nature of Probability, and of the sort of problems with
which it deals. But in the concluding paragraphs an indication
was given that the series of this kind, as they actually
occur in nature or as the results of more or less artificial
production, are seldom or never found to occur in such a
simple form as might possibly be expected from what had
previously been said; but that they are almost always seen
to be associated together in groups after a somewhat complicated
fashion. A fuller discussion of this topic must now
be undertaken.

We will take for examination an instance of a kind with
which the investigations of Quetelet will have served to
familiarize some readers. Suppose that we measure the
heights of a great many adult men in any town or country.
These heights will of course lie between certain extremes in
each direction, and if we continue to accumulate our measures
it will be found that they tend to lie continuously
between these extremes; that is to say, that under those
circumstances no intermediate height will be found to be
permanently unrepresented in such a collection of measurements.
Now suppose these heights to be marshalled in the
order of their magnitude. What we always find is something
of the following kind;--about the middle point between
the extremes, a large number of the results will be
found crowded together: a little on each side of this point
there will still be an excess, but not to so great an extent;
and so on, in some diminishing scale of proportion, until as
we get towards the extreme results the numbers thin off and
become relatively exceedingly small.

The point to which attention is here directed is not the
mere fact that the numbers thus tend to diminish from the
middle in each direction, but, as will be more fully explained
directly, the _law_ according to which this progressive diminution
takes place. The word 'law' is here used in its mathematical
sense, to express the formula connecting together the
two elements in question, namely, the height itself, and the
relative number that are found of that height. We shall
have to enquire whether one of these elements is a function
of the other, and, if so, what function.

2. After what was said in the last chapter, it need
hardly be insisted upon that the interest and significance of
such investigations as these are almost entirely dependent
upon the statistics being very extensive. In one or other of
Quetelet's works on Social Physics[1] will be found a selection
of measurements of almost every element which the physical
frame of man can furnish:--his height, his weight, the muscular
power of various limbs, the dimensions of almost every
part and organ, and so on. Some of the most extensive of
these express the heights of 25,000 Federal soldiers from the
Army of the Potomac, and the circumferences of the chests
of 5738 Scotch militia men taken many years ago. Those
who wish to consult a large repertory of such statistics cannot
be referred to any better sources than to these and other
works by the same author.[2]

Interesting and valuable, however, as are Quetelet's statistical
investigations (and much of the importance now
deservedly attached to such enquiries is, perhaps, owing
more to his efforts than to those of any other person), I cannot
but feel convinced that there is much in what he has
written upon the subject which is erroneous and confusing as
regards the foundations of the science of Probability, and the
philosophical questions which it involves. These errors are
not by any means confined to him, but for various reasons
they will be better discussed in the form of a criticism of his
explicit or implicit expression of them, than in any more independent
way.

3. In the first place then, he always, or almost always,
assumes that there can be but one and the same law of arrangement
for the results of our observations, measurements,
and so on, in these statistical enquiries. That is, he assumes
that whenever we get a group of such magnitudes
clustering about a mean, and growing less frequent as
they depart from that mean, we shall find that this diminution
of frequency takes place according to one invariable
law, whatever may be the nature of these magnitudes,
and whatever the process by which they may have
been obtained.

That such a uniformity as this should prevail amongst
many and various classes of phenomena would probably seem
surprising in any case. But the full significance of such a
fact as this (if indeed it were a fact) only becomes apparent
when attention is directed to the profound distinctions in the
nature and origin of the phenomena which are thus supposed
to be harmonized by being brought under one comprehensive
principle. This will be better appreciated if we take a brief
glance at some of the principal classes into which the things
with which Probability is chiefly concerned may be divided.
These are of a three-fold kind.

4. In the first place there are the various combinations,
and runs of luck, afforded by games of chance. Suppose
a handful, consisting of ten coins, were tossed up a
great many times in succession, and the results were tabulated.
What we should obtain would be something of the
following kind. In a certain proportion of cases, and these
the most numerous of all, we should find that we got five
heads and five tails; in a somewhat less proportion of cases
we should have, as equally frequent results, four heads six
tails, and four tails six heads; and so on in a continually
diminishing proportion until at length we came down, in a
very small relative number of cases, to nine heads one tail,
and nine tails one head; whilst the least frequent results
possible would be those which gave all heads or all tails.[3]
Here the statistical elements under consideration are, as
regards their origin at any rate, optional or brought about
by human choice. They would, therefore, be commonly
described as being mainly artificial, but their results ultimately
altogether a matter of chance.

Again, in the second place, we might take the accurate
measurements--i.e. the actual magnitudes themselves,--of
a great many natural objects, belonging to the same genus
or class; such as the cases, already referred to, of the heights,
or other characteristics of the inhabitants of any district.
Here human volition or intervention of any kind seem to
have little or nothing to do with the matter. It is optional
with us to _collect_ the measures, but the things measured are
quite outside our control. They would therefore be commonly
described as being altogether the production of nature,
and it would not be supposed that in strictness chance had
anything whatever to do with the matter.

In the third place, the result at which we are aiming
may be some fixed magnitude, one and the same in each
of our successive attempts, so that if our measurements
were rigidly accurate we should merely obtain the same
result repeated over and over again. But since all our
methods of attaining our aims are practically subject to
innumerable imperfections, the results actually obtained
will depart more or less, in almost every case, from the
real and fixed value which we are trying to secure. They
will be sometimes more wide of the mark, sometimes less
so, the worse attempts being of course the less frequent.
If a man aims at a target he will seldom or never hit it
precisely in the centre, but his good shots will be more[4]
numerous than his bad ones. Here again, then, we have
a series of magnitudes (i.e. the deflections of the shots from
the point aimed at) clustering about a mean, but produced
in a very different way from those of the last two cases.
In this instance the elements would be commonly regarded
as only partially the results of human volition, and chance
therefore as being only a co-agent in the effects produced.
With these must be classed what may be called _estimates_,
as distinguished from measurements. By the latter are
generally understood the results of a certain amount of
mechanism or manipulation; by the former we may understand
those cases in which the magnitude in question is
determined by direct observation or introspection. The
interest and importance of this class, so far as scientific
principles are concerned, dates mainly from the investigations
of Fechner. Its chief field is naturally to be found amongst
psychological data.

Other classes of things, besides those alluded to above,
might readily be given. These however are the classes about
which the most extensive statistics are obtainable, or to
which the most practical importance and interest are attached.
The profound distinctions which separate their
origin and character are obvious. If they all really did
display precisely the same law of variation it would be a
most remarkable fact, pointing doubtless to some deep-seated
identity underlying the various ways, apparently
so widely distinct, in which they had been brought about.
The questions now to be discussed are: Is it the case,
with any considerable degree of rigour, that only one law
of distribution does really prevail? and, in so far as this
is so, how does it come to pass?

5. In support of an affirmative answer to the former
of these two questions, several different kinds of proof are,
or might be, offered.

(I.) For one plan we may make a direct appeal to
experience, by collecting sets of statistics and observing
what is their law of distribution. As remarked above, this
has been done in a great variety of cases, and in some
instances to a very considerable extent, by Quetelet and
others. His researches have made it abundantly convincing
that many classes of things and processes, differing widely
in their nature and origin, do nevertheless appear to conform
with a considerable degree of accuracy to one and the
same[5] law. At least this is made plain for the more
central values, for those that is which are situated most
nearly about the mean. With regard to the extreme values
there is, on the other hand, some difficulty. For instance
in the arrangements of the heights of a number of men,
these extremes are rather a stumbling-block; indeed it has
been proposed to reject them from both ends of the scale
on the plea that they are monstrosities, the fact being that
their relative numbers do not seem to be by any means
those which theory would assign.[6] Such a plan of rejection
is however quite unauthorized, for these dwarfs and giants
are born into the world like their more normally sized
brethren, and have precisely as much right as any others
to be included in the formulæ we draw up.

Besides the instance of the heights of men, other classes
of observations of a somewhat similar character have been
already referred to as collected and arranged by Quetelet.
From the nature of the case, however, there are not many
appropriate ones at hand; for when our object is, not to
illustrate a law which can be otherwise proved, but to
obtain actual direct proof of it, the collection of observations
and measurements ought to be made upon such a large
scale as to deter any but the most persevering computers
from undergoing the requisite labour. Some of the remarks
made in the course of the note on the opposite page will
serve to illustrate the difficulties which would lie in the way
of such a mode of proof.

We are speaking here, it must be understood, only of
_symmetrical_ curves: if there is asymmetry, i.e. if the Law of
Error is different on different sides of the mean,--a comparatively
very small number of observations would suffice
to detect the fact. But, granted symmetry and rapid
decrease of frequency on each side of the mean, we could
generally select some one species of the exponential curve
which should pretty closely represent our statistics in the
neighbourhood of the mean. That is, where the statistics are
numerous we could secure agreement; and where we could
not secure agreement the statistics would be comparatively
so scarce that we should have to continue the observations
for a very long time in order to prove the disagreement.

6. Allowing the various statistics such credit as they
deserve, for their extent, appropriateness, accuracy and so
on, the general conclusion which will on the whole be drawn
by almost every one who takes the trouble to consult them,
is that they do, in large part, conform approximately to one
type or law, at any rate for all except the extreme values.
So much as this must be fully admitted. But that they do
not, indeed we may say that they cannot, always do so in
the case of the extreme values, will become obvious on
a little consideration. In some of the classes of things to
which the law is supposed to apply, for example, the successions
of heads and tails in the throws of a penny, there is
no limit to the magnitude of the fluctuations which may and
will occur. Postulate as long a succession of heads or of tails
as we please, and if we could only live and toss long enough
for it we should succeed in getting it at length. In other
cases, including many of the applications of Probability
to natural phenomena, there can hardly fail to be such
limits. Deviations exceeding a certain range may not be
merely improbable, that is of very rare occurrence, but they
may often from the nature of the case be actually impossible.
And even when they are not actually impossible it
may frequently appear on examination that they are only
rendered possible by the occasional introduction of agencies
which are not supposed to be available in the production
of the more ordinary or intermediate values. When, for
instance, we are making observations with any kind of
instrument, the nature of its construction may put an
absolute limit upon the possible amount of error. And even
if there be not an absolute limit under all kinds of usage
it may nevertheless be the case that there is one under
fair and proper usage; it being the case that only when
the instrument is designedly or carelessly tampered with will
any new causes of divergence be introduced which were not
confined within the old limits.

Suppose, for instance, that a man is firing at a mark.
His worst shots must be supposed to be brought about by
a combination of such causes as were acting, or prepared
to act, in every other case; the extreme instance of what
we may thus term 'fair usage' being when a number of
distinct causes have happened to conspire together so as
to tend in the same direction, instead of, as in the other
cases, more or less neutralizing one another's work. But
the aggregate effect of such causes may well be supposed
to be limited. The man will not discharge his shot nearly
at right angles to the true line of fire unless some entirely
new cause comes in, as by some unusual circumstance
having distracted his attention, or by his having had some
spasmodic seizure. But influences of this kind were not
supposed to have been available before; and even if they
were we are taking a bold step in assuming that these
occasional great disturbances are subject to the same kind
of laws as are the aggregates of innumerable little ones.

We cannot indeed lay much stress upon an example
of this last kind, as compared with those in which we
can see for certain that there is a fixed limit to the range
of error. It is therefore offered rather for illustration than
for proof. The enormous, in fact inconceivable magnitude
of the numbers expressive of the chance of very rare combinations,
such as those in question, has such a bewildering
effect upon the mind that one may be sometimes apt to confound
the impossible with the higher degrees of the merely
mathematically improbable.

7. At the time the first edition of this essay was composed
writers on Statistics were, I think, still for the most
part under the influence of Quetelet, and inclined to overvalue
his authority on this particular subject: of late however
attention has been repeatedly drawn to the necessity of
taking account of other laws of arrangement than the binomial
or exponential.

Mr Galton, for instance,--to whom every branch of the
theory of statistics owes so much,--has insisted[7] that the
"assumption which lies at the basis of the well-known law of
'Frequency of Error'... is incorrect in many groups of vital
and social phenomena.... For example, suppose we endeavour
to match a tint; Fechner's law, in its approximative and
simplest form of sensation = log stimulus, tells us that a
series of tints, in which the quantities of white scattered on a
black ground are as 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, &c., will appear to the
eye to be separated by equal intervals of tint. Therefore, in
matching a grey that contains 8 portions of white, we are
just as likely to err by selecting one that has 16 portions as
one that has 4 portions. In the first case there would be an
error in excess, of 8; in the second there would be an error,
in deficiency, of 4. Therefore, an error of the same magnitude
in excess or in deficiency is not equally probable." The consequences
of this assumption are worked out in a remarkable
paper by Dr D. McAlister, to which allusion will have to be
made again hereafter. All that concerns us here to point out
is that when the results of statistics of this character are
arranged graphically we do _not_ get a curve which is symmetrical
on both sides of a central axis.

8. More recently, Mr F. Y. Edgeworth (in a report of
a Committee of the British Association appointed to enquire
into the variation of the monetary standard) has urged the
same considerations in respect of prices of commodities. He
gives a number of statistics "drawn from the prices of twelve
commodities during the two periods 1782-1820, 1820-1865.
The maximum and minimum entry for each series having
been noted, it is found that the number of entries above the
'middle point,' half-way between the maximum and minimum,[8]
is in every instance less than half the total number of entries
in the series. In the twenty-four trials there is not a single
exception to the rule, and in very few cases even an approach
to an exception. We may presume then that the curves are
of the lop-sided character indicated by the accompanying
diagram." The same facts are also ascertained in respect to
_place_ variations as distinguished from time variations. To
these may be added some statistics of my own, referring to
the heights of the barometer taken at the same hour on more
than 4000 successive days (v. _Nature_, Sept. 2, 1887). So far
as these go they show a marked asymmetry of arrangement.

In fact it appears to me that this want of symmetry
ought to be looked for in all cases in which the phenomena
under measurement are of a 'one-sided' character; in the
sense that they are measured on one side only of a certain
fixed point from which their possibility is supposed to start.
For not only is it impossible for them to fall below this point:
long before they reach it the influence of its proximity is felt
in enhancing the difficulty and importance of the same
amount of absolute difference.

Look at a table of statures, for instance, with a mean
value of 69 inches. A diminution of three feet (were this
possible) is much more influential,--counts for much more,
in every sense of the term,--than an addition of the same
amount; for the former does not double the mean, while the
latter more than halves it. Revert to an illustration. If
a vast number of petty influencing circumstances of the kind
already described were to act upon a swinging _pendulum_ we
should expect the deflections in each direction to display
symmetry; but if they were to act upon a _spring_ we should
not expect such a result. Any phenomena of which the
latter is the more appropriate illustration can hardly be
expected to range themselves with symmetry about a mean.[9]

9. (II.) The last remarks will suggest another kind of
proof which might be offered to establish the invariable nature
of the law of error. It is of a direct deductive kind, not
appealing immediately to statistics, but involving an enquiry
into the actual or assumed nature of the causes by which the
events are brought about. Imagine that the event under
consideration is brought to pass, in the first place, by some
fixed cause, or group of fixed causes. If this comprised all
the influencing circumstances the event would invariably
happen in precisely the same way: there would be no errors
or deflections whatever to be taken account of. But now
suppose that there were also an enormous number of very
small causes which tended to produce deflections; that these
causes acted in entire independence of one another; and that
each of the lot told as often, in the long run, in one direction
as in the opposite. It is easy[10] to see, in a general way, what
would follow from these assumptions. In a very few cases
nearly all the causes would tell in the same direction; in
other words, in a very few cases the deflection would be
extreme. In a greater number of cases, however, it would
only be the most part of them that would tell in one direction,
whilst a few did what they could to counteract the rest;
the result being a comparatively larger number of somewhat
smaller deflections. So on, in increasing numbers, till we
approach the middle point. Here we shall have a very large
number of very small deflections: the cases in which the
opposed influences just succeed in balancing one another,
so that no error whatever is produced, being, though actually
infrequent, relatively the most frequent of all.

Now if all deflections from a mean were brought about in
the way just indicated (an indication which must suffice for
the present) we should always have one and the same law of
arrangement of frequency for these deflections or errors, viz.
the exponential[11] law mentioned in §5.

10. It may be readily admitted from what we know
about the production of events that something resembling
these assumptions, and therefore something resembling the
consequences which follow from them, is really secured in a
very great number of cases. But although this may prevail
approximately, it is in the highest degree improbable that it
could ever be secured, even artificially, with anything approaching
to rigid accuracy. For one thing, the causes of
deflection will seldom or never be really independent of one
another. Some of them will generally be of a kind such that
the supposition that several are swaying in one direction,
may affect the capacity of each to produce that full effect
which it would have been capable of if it had been left to do
its work alone. In the common example, for instance, of
firing at a mark, so long as we consider the case of the tolerably
good shots the effect of the wind (one of the causes of
error) will be approximately the same whatever may be the
precise direction of the bullet. But when a shot is considerably
wide of the mark the wind can no longer be regarded as
acting at right angles to the line of flight, and its effect in
consequence will not be precisely the same as before. In
other words, the causes here are not strictly independent, as
they were assumed to be; and consequently the results to be
attributed to each are not absolutely uninfluenced by those
of the others. Doubtless the effect is trifling here, but I
apprehend that if we were carefully to scrutinize the modes
in which the several elements of the total cause conspire
together, we should find that the assumption of absolute
independence was hazardous, not to say unwarrantable, in a
very great number of cases. These brief remarks upon the
process by which the deflections are brought about must
suffice for the present purpose, as the subject will receive a
fuller investigation in the course of the next chapter.

According, therefore, to the best consideration which
can at the present stage be afforded to this subject, we may
draw a similar conclusion from this deductive line of argument
as from the direct appeal to statistics. The same
general result seems to be established; namely, that approximately,
with sufficient accuracy for all practical purposes, we
may say that an examination of the causes by which the
deflections are generally brought about shows that they are
mostly of such a character as would result in giving us the
commonly accepted 'Law of Error,' as it is termed.[12] The
two lines of enquiry, therefore, within the limits assigned,
afford each other a decided mutual confirmation.

11. (III.) There still remains a third, indirect and
mathematical line of proof, which might be offered to establish
the conclusion that the Law of Error is always one and
the same. It may be maintained that the recognized and
universal employment of one and the same method, that
known to mathematicians and astronomers as the Method of
Least Squares, in all manner of different cases with very
satisfactory results, is compatible only with the supposition
that the errors to which that method is applied must be
grouped according to one invariable law. If all 'laws of
error' were not of one and the same type, that is, if the
relative frequency of large and small divergences (such as we
have been speaking of) were not arranged according to one
pattern, how could one method or rule equally suit them all?

In order to preserve a continuity of treatment, some
notice must be taken of this enquiry here, though, as in the
case of the last argument, any thorough discussion of the
subject is impossible at the present stage. For one thing, it
would involve too much employment of mathematics, or at
any rate of mathematical conceptions, to be suitable for the
general plan of this treatise: I have accordingly devoted a
special chapter to the consideration of it.

The main reason, however, against discussing this argument
here, is, that to do so would involve the anticipation of
a totally different side of the science of Probability from that
hitherto treated of. This must be especially insisted upon, as
the neglect of it involves much confusion and some error.
During these earlier chapters we have been entirely occupied
with laying what may be called the physical foundations of
Probability. We have done nothing else than establish, in one
way or another, the existence of certain groups or arrangements
of things which are found to present themselves in
nature; we have endeavoured to explain how they come to
pass, and we have illustrated their principal characteristics.
But these are merely the foundations of Inference, we have
not yet said a word upon the logical processes which are to
be erected upon these foundations. We have not therefore
entered yet upon the _logic_ of chance.

12. Now the way in which the Method of Least Squares
is sometimes spoken of tends to conceal the magnitude of
this distinction. Writers have regarded it as synonymous
with the Law of Error, whereas the fact is that the two are
not only totally distinct things but that they have scarcely
even any necessary connection with each other. The Law of
Error is the statement of a physical fact; it simply assigns,
with more or less of accuracy, the relative frequency with
which errors or deviations of any kind are found in practice
to present themselves. It belongs therefore to what may be
termed the physical foundations of the science. The Method
of Least Squares, on the other hand, is not a law at all in the
scientific sense of the term. It is simply a rule or direction
informing us how we may best proceed to treat any group of
these errors which may be set before us, so as to extract the
true result at which they have been aiming. Clearly therefore
it belongs to the inferential or logical part of the subject.

It cannot indeed be denied that the methods we employ
must have some connection with the arrangement of the facts
to which they are applied; but the two things are none the
less distinct in their nature, and in this case the connection
does not seem at all a necessary one, but at most one of propriety
and convenience. The Method of Least Squares is
usually applied, no doubt, to the most familiar and common
form of the Law of Error, namely the exponential form with
which we have been recently occupied. But other forms of
laws of error may exist, and, if they did, the method in
question might equally well be applied to them. I am not
asserting that it would necessarily be the best method in
every case, but it would be a possible one; indeed we may
go further and say, as will be shown in a future chapter,
that it would be a good method in almost every case. But
its particular merits or demerits do not interfere with its
possible employment in every case in which we may choose
to resort to it. It will be seen therefore, even from the few
remarks that can be made upon the subject here, that the
fact that one and the same method is very commonly employed
with satisfactory results affords little or no proof that
the errors to which it is applied must be arranged according
to one fixed law.

13. So much then for the attempt to prove the prevalence,
in all cases, of this particular law of divergence. The
next point in Quetelet's treatment of the subject which deserves
attention as erroneous or confusing, is the doctrine maintained
by him and others as to the existence of what he terms a _type_
in the groups of things in question. This is a not unnatural
consequence from some of the data and conclusions of the
last few paragraphs. Refer back to two of the three classes
of things already mentioned in §4. If it really were the case
that in arranging in order a series of incorrect observations
or attempts of our own, and a collection of natural objects
belonging to some one and the same species or class, we found
that the law of their divergence was in each case identical in
the long run, we should be naturally disposed to apply the
same expression 'Law of Error' to both instances alike,
though in strictness it could only be appropriate to the
former. When we perform an operation ourselves with a
clear consciousness of what we are aiming at, we may quite
correctly speak of every deviation from this as being an
error; but when Nature presents us with a group of objects
of any kind, it is using a rather bold metaphor to speak in
this case also of a law of error, as if she had been aiming at
something all the time, and had like the rest of us missed
her mark more or less in almost every instance.[13]

Suppose we make a long succession of attempts to measure
accurately the precise height of a man, we should from one
cause or another seldom or never succeed in doing so with
absolute accuracy. But we have no right to assume that these
imperfect measurements of ours would be found so to deviate
according to one particular law of error as to present the
precise counterpart of a series of actual heights of _different_
men, supposing that these latter were assigned with absolute
precision. What might be the actual law of error in a series
of direct measurements of any given magnitude could hardly
be asserted beforehand, and probably the attempt to determine
it by experience has not been made sufficiently often to
enable us to ascertain it; but upon general grounds it seems
by no means certain that it would follow the so-called exponential
law. Be this however as it may, it is rather a
licence of language to talk as if nature had been at work in
the same way as one of us; aiming (ineffectually for the most
part) at a given result, that is at producing a man endowed
with a certain stature, proportions, and so on, who might
therefore be regarded as the typical man.

14. Stated as above, namely, that there is a fixed
invariable human type to which all individual specimens of
humanity may be regarded as having been meant to attain,
but from which they have deviated in one direction or
another; according to a law of deviation capable of _à priori_
determination, the doctrine is little else than absurd. But
if we look somewhat closer at the facts of the case, and the
probable explanation of these facts, we may see our way to
an important truth. The facts, on the authority of Quetelet's
statistics (the great interest and value of which must be
frankly admitted), are very briefly as follows: if we take any
element of our physical frame which admits of accurate
measurement, say the height, and determine this measure in
a great number of different individuals belonging to any
tolerably homogeneous class of people, we shall find that
these heights do admit of an orderly arrangement about a
mean, after the fashion which has been already repeatedly
mentioned. What is meant by a homogeneous class? is a
pertinent and significant enquiry, but applying this condition
to any simple cases its meaning is readily stated. It implies
that the mean in question will be different according to the
nationality of the persons under measurement. According to
Quetelet,[14] in the case of Englishmen the mean is about
5 ft. 9 in.; for Belgians about 5 ft. 7 in.; for the French about
5 ft. 4 in. It need hardly be added that these measures are
those of adult males.

15. It may fairly be asked here what would have
been the consequence, had we, instead of keeping the English
and the French apart, mixed the results of our measurements
of them all together? The question is an important one, as it
will oblige us to understand more clearly what we mean by
homogeneous classes. The answer that would usually be
given to it, though substantially correct, is somewhat too decisive
and summary. It would be said that we are here
mixing distinctly heterogeneous elements, and that in consequence
the resultant law of error will be by no means of
the simple character previously exhibited. So far as such an
answer is to be admitted its grounds are easy to appreciate.
In accordance with the usual law of error the divergences
from the mean grow continuously less numerous as they
increase in amount. Now, if we mix up the French and
English heights, what will follow? Beginning from the
English mean of 5 feet 9 inches, the heights will at first follow
almost entirely the law determined by these English
conditions, for at this point the English data are very numerous,
and the French by comparison very few. But, as we
begin to approach the French mean, the numbers will cease
to show that continual diminution which they should show,
according to the English scale of arrangement, for here the
French data are in turn very numerous, and the English by
comparison few. The result of such a combination of heterogeneous
elements is illustrated by the figure annexed, of
course in a very exaggerated form.

[Figure: Superposition of two Gaussians.]

16. In the above case the nature of the heterogeneity,
and the reasons why the statistics should be so collected and
arranged as to avoid it, seemed tolerably obvious. It will be
seen still more plainly if we take a parallel case drawn from
artificial proceedings. Suppose that after a man had fired a
few thousand shots at a certain spot, say a wafer fixed somewhere
on a wall, the position of the spot at which he aims
were shifted, and he fired a few thousand more shots at the
wafer in its new position. Now let us collect and arrange all
the shots of both series in the order of their departure from
either of the centres, say the new one. Here we should
really be mingling together two discordant sets of elements,
either of which, if kept apart from the other, would have
been of a simple and homogeneous character. We should
find, in consequence, that the resultant law of error betrayed
its composite or heterogeneous origin by a glaring departure
from the customary form, somewhat after the fashion indicated
in the above diagram.

The instance of the English and French heights resembles
the one just given, but falls far short of it in the stringency
with which the requisite conditions are secured. The
fact is we have not here got the most suitable requirements,
viz. a group consisting of a few fixed causes supplemented by
innumerable little disturbing influences. What we call a
nation is really a highly artificial body, the members of
which are subject to a considerable number of local or occasional
disturbing causes. Amongst Frenchmen were included,
presumably, Bretons, Provençals, Alsatians, and so on,
thus commingling distinctions which, though less than those
between French and English, regarded as wholes, are very
far from being insignificant. And to these differences of
race must be added other disturbances, also highly important,
dependent upon varying climate, food and occupation.
It is plain, therefore, that whatever objections exist against
confusing together French and English statistics, exist also,
though of course in a less degree, against confusing together
those of the various provincial and other components which
make up the French people.

17. Out of the great variety of important causes
which influence the height of men, it is probable that those
which most nearly fulfil the main conditions required by the
'Law of Error' are those about which we know the least.
Upon the effects of food and employment, observation has
something to say, but upon the purely physiological causes
by which the height of the parents influences the height of
the offspring, we have probably nothing which deserves to
be called knowledge. Perhaps the best supposition we can
make is one which, in accordance with the saying that 'like
breeds like', would assume that the purely physiological
causes represent the constant element; that is, given a homogeneous
race of people to begin with, who freely intermarry,
and are subject to like circumstances of climate, food,
and occupation, the standard would remain on the whole
constant.[15]

In such a case the man who possessed the mean height,
mean weight, mean strength, and so on, might then be
called, in a sort of way, a 'type'. The deviations from this
type would then be produced by innumerable small influences,
partly physiological, partly physical and social, acting
for the most part independently of one another, and resulting
in a Law of Error of the usual description. Under such
restrictions and explanations as these, there seems to be no
reasonable objection to speaking of a French or English type
or mean. But it must always be remembered that under
the present circumstances of every political nation, these
somewhat heterogeneous bodies might be subdivided into
various smaller groups, each of which would frequently exhibit
the characteristics of such a type in an even more
marked degree.

18. On this point the reports of the Anthropometrical
Committee, already referred to, are most instructive. They
illustrate the extent to which this subdivision could be
carried out, and prove,--if any proof were necessary,--that
the discovery of Quetelet's _homme moyen_ would lead us a
long chase. So far as their results go the mean 'English'
stature (in inches) is 67.66. But this is composed of Scotch,
Irish, English and Welsh constituents, the separate means of
these being, respectively; 68.71, 67.90, 67.36, and 66.66.
But these again may be subdivided; for careful observation
shows that the mean English stature is distinctly greater in
certain districts (e.g. the North-Eastern counties) than in
others. Then again the mean of the professional classes is
considerably greater than that of the labourers; and that of
the honest and intelligent is very much greater than that of
the criminal and lunatic constituents of the population.
And, so far as the observations are extensive enough for the
purpose, it appears that every characteristic in respect of the
grouping about a mean which can be detected in the more
extensive of these classes can be detected also in the narrower.
Nor is there any reason to suppose that the same
process of subdivision could not be carried out as much
farther as we chose to prolong it.

19. It need hardly be added to the above remarks
that no one who gives the slightest adhesion to the Doctrine
of Evolution could regard the type, in the above qualified
sense of the term, as possessing any real permanence and
fixity. If the constant causes, whatever they may be, remain
unchanged, and if the variable ones continue in the
long run to balance one another, the results will continue to
cluster about the same mean. But if the constant ones
undergo a gradual change, or if the variable ones, instead of
balancing each other suffer one or more of their number to
begin to acquire a preponderating influence, so as to put a
sort of bias upon their aggregate effect, the mean will at
once begin, so to say, to shift its ground. And having once
begun to shift, it may continue to do so, to whatever extent
we recognize that Species are variable and Development is a
fact. It is as if the point on the target at which we aim, instead
of being fixed, were slowly changing its position as we
continue to fire at it; changing almost certainly to some extent
and temporarily, and not improbably to a considerable
extent and permanently.

20. Our examples throughout this chapter have been
almost exclusively drawn from physical characteristics,
whether of man or of inanimate things; but it need not be
supposed that we are necessarily confined to such instances.
Mr Galton, for instance, has proposed to extend the same
principles of calculation to mental phenomena, with a view
to their more accurate determination. The objects to be
gained by so doing belong rather to the inferential part of
our subject, and will be better indicated further on; but
they do not involve any distinct principle. Like other attempts
to apply the methods of science in the region of the
mind, this proposal has met with some opposition; with very
slight reason, as it seems to me. That our mental qualities,
if they could be submitted to accurate measurement, would
be found to follow the usual Law of Error, may be assumed
without much hesitation. The known extent of the correlation
of mental and bodily characteristics gives high probability
to the supposition that what is proved to prevail, at
any rate approximately, amongst most bodily elements which
have been submitted to measurement, will prevail also
amongst the mental elements.

To what extent such measurements could be carried
out practically, is another matter. It does not seem to
me that it could be done with much success; partly because
our mental qualities are so closely connected with,
indeed so run into one another, that it is impossible to
isolate them for purposes of comparison.[16] This is to some
extent indeed a difficulty in bodily measurements, but it is
far more so in those of the mind, where we can hardly get
beyond what can be called a good guess. The doctrine,
therefore, that mental qualities follow the now familiar law
of arrangement can scarcely be grounded upon anything
more than a strong analogy. Still this analogy is quite
strong enough to justify us in accepting the doctrine and
all the conclusions which follow from it, in so far as our
estimates and measurements can be regarded as trustworthy.
There seems therefore nothing unreasonable in the attempt
to establish a system of natural classification of mankind
by arranging them into a certain number of groups above
and below the average, each group being intended to correspond
to certain limits of excellency or deficiency.[17] All
that is necessary for such a purpose is that the rate of
departure from the mean should be tolerably constant under
widely different circumstances: in this case throughout all
the races of man. Of course if the law of divergence is
the same as that which prevails in inanimate nature we
have a still wider and more natural system of classification
at hand, and one which ought to be familiar, more or less, to
every one who has thus to estimate qualities.

21. Perhaps one of the best illustrations of the legitimate
application of such principles is to be found in Mr
Galton's work on _Hereditary Genius_. Indeed the full force
and purport of some of his reasonings there can hardly be
appreciated except by those who are familiar with the conceptions
which we have been discussing in this chapter. We
can only afford space to notice one or two points, but the
student will find in the perusal, of at any rate the more
argumentive parts, of that volume[18] an interesting illustration
of the doctrines now under discussion. For one thing it
may be safely asserted, that no one unfamiliar with the Law
of Error would ever in the least appreciate the excessive
rapidity with which the superior degrees of excellence tend
to become scarce. Every one, of course, can see at once, in
a numerical way at least, what is involved in being 'one of a
million'; but they would not at all understand, how very
little extra superiority is to be looked for in the man who is
'one of two million'. They would confound the mere numerical
distinction, which seems in some way to imply
double excellence, with the intrinsic superiority, which
would mostly be represented by a very small fractional advantage.
To be 'one of ten million' sounds very grand, but
if the qualities under consideration could be estimated in
themselves without the knowledge of the vastly wider area
from which the selection had been made, and in freedom
therefore from any consequent numerical bias, people would
be surprised to find what a very slight comparative superiority
was, as a rule, thus obtained.

22. The point just mentioned is an important one in
arguments from statistics. If, for instance, we find a small
group of persons, connected together by blood-relationship,
and all possessing some mental characteristic in marked
superiority, much depends upon the comparative rarity of
such excellence when we are endeavouring to decide whether
or not the common possession of these qualities was accidental.
Such a decision can never be more than a rough
one, but if it is to be made at all this consideration must
enter as a factor. Again, when we are comparing one nation
with another,[19] say the Athenian with any modern European
people, does the popular mind at all appreciate what sort of
evidence of general superiority is implied by the production,
out of one nation, of such a group as can be composed of
Socrates, Plato, and a few of their contemporaries? In this
latter case we are also, it should be remarked, employing the
'Law of Error' in a second way; for we are assuming that
where the extremes are great so will also the means be, in
other words we are assuming that every amount of departure
from the mean occurs with a (roughly) calculable degree
of relative frequency. However generally this truth may
be accepted in a vague way, its evidence can only be appreciated
by those who know the reasons which can be given
in its favour.

But the same principles will also supply a caution in
the case of the last example. They remind us that, for
the mere purpose of comparison, the _average_ man of any
group or class is a much better object for selection than
the eminent one. There may be greater difficulties in the
way of detecting him, but when we have done so we have
got possession of a securer and more stable basis of comparison.
He is selected, by the nature of the case, from
the most numerous stratum of his society; the eminent
man from a thinly occupied stratum. In accordance therefore
with the now familiar laws of averages and of large
numbers the fluctuations amongst the former will generally
be very few and small in comparison with those amongst the
latter.


1. _Essai de Physique Sociale_, 1869. _Anthropométrie_, 1870.

2. As regards later statistics on the same subject the reader can
  refer to the Reports of the Anthropometrical Committee of the
  British Association (1879, 1880, 1881, 1883;--especially this
  last). These reports seem to me to represent a great advance on the
  results obtained by Quetelet, and fully to justify the claim of the
  Secretary (Mr C. Roberts) that their statistics are "unique in range
  and numbers". They embrace not merely military recruits--like most
  of the previous tables--but almost every class and age, and both
  sexes. Moreover they refer not only to stature but to a number of
  other physical characteristics.

3. As every mathematician knows, the relative numbers of each of these
  possible throws are given by the successive terms of the expansion
  of (1 + 1)^{10}, viz. 1, 10, 45, 120, 210, 252, 210, 120, 45, 10, 1.

4. That is they will be more densely aggregated. If a space _the size
  of the bull's-eye_ be examined in each successive circle, the number
  of shot marks which it contains will be successively less. The
  _actual_ number of shots which strike the bull's-eye will not be the
  greatest, since it covers so much less surface than any of the other
  circles.

5. Commonly called the exponential law; its equation being of the form
  y = Ae^{-hx^{2}}. The curve corresponding to it cuts the axis of y
  at right angles (expressing the fact that near the mean there are a
  large number of values approximately equal); after a time it begins
  to slope away rapidly towards the axis of x (expressing the fact
  that the results soon begin to grow less common as we recede from
  the mean); and the axis of x is an asymptote in both directions
  (expressing the fact that no magnitude, however remote from the
  mean, is strictly impossible; that is, every deviation, however
  excessive, will have to be encountered at length within the range of
  a sufficiently long experience). The curve is obviously symmetrical,
  expressing the fact that equal deviations from the mean, in excess
  and in defect, tend to occur equally often in the long run.

  [Figure: Gaussian normal distribution.]

  A rough graphic representation of the curve is given above. For the
  benefit of those unfamiliar with mathematics one or two brief
  remarks may be here appended concerning some of its properties.
  (1) It must not be supposed that all specimens of the curve are
  similar to one another. The dotted lines are equally specimens of
  it. In fact, by varying the essentially arbitrary units in which x
  and y are respectively estimated, we may make the portion towards
  the vertex of the curve as obtuse or as acute as we please. This
  consideration is of importance; for it reminds us that, by varying
  one of these arbitrary units, we could get an 'exponential curve'
  which should tolerably closely resemble any symmetrical curve of
  error, provided that this latter recognized and was founded upon the
  assumption that extreme divergences were excessively rare. Hence it
  would be difficult, by mere observation, to prove that the law of
  error in any given case was not exponential; unless the statistics
  were very extensive, or the actual results departed considerably
  from the exponential form. (2) It is quite impossible by any graphic
  representation to give an adequate idea of the excessive rapidity
  with which the curve after a time approaches the axis of x. At the
  point R, on our scale, the curve would approach within the
  fifteen-thousandth part of an inch from the axis of x, a distance
  which only a very good microscope could detect. Whereas in the
  hyperbola, e.g. the rate of approach of the curve to its asymptote
  is continually decreasing, it is here just the reverse; this rate is
  continually increasing. Hence the two, viz. the curve and the axis
  of x, appear to the eye, after a very short time, to merge into one
  another.

6. As by Quetelet: noted, amongst others, by Herschel, _Essays_, page
  409.

7. _Proc. R. Soc._ Oct. 21, 1879.

8. We are here considering, remember, the case of a _finite_ amount of
  statistics; so that there are actual limits at each end.

9. It must be admitted that experience has not yet (I believe) shown
  this asymmetry in respect of heights.

10. The above reasoning will probably be accepted as valid at this
  stage of enquiry. But in strictness, assumptions are made here,
  which however justifiable they may be in themselves, involve
  somewhat of an anticipation. They demand, and in a future chapter
  will receive, closer scrutiny and criticism.

11. A definite numerical example of this kind of concentration of
  frequency about the mean was given in the note to §4. It was of a
  binomial form, consisting of the successive terms of the expansion
  of (1 + 1)^{m}. Now it may be shown (Quetelet, _Letters_, p. 263;
  Liagre, _Calcul des Probabilités_, §34) that the expansion of such
  a binomial, as m becomes indefinitely great, approaches as its limit
  the exponential form; that is, if we take a number of equidistant
  ordinates proportional respectively to 1, m, m(m - 1)/(1·2) &c., and
  connect their vertices, the figure we obtain approximately
  represents some form of the curve y = Ae^{-hx^{2}}, and tends to
  become identical with it, as m is increased without limit. In other
  words, if we suppose the errors to be produced by a limited number
  of finite, equal and independent causes, we have an approximation to
  the exponential Law of Error, which merges into identity as the
  causes are increased in number and diminished in magnitude without
  limit. Jevons has given (_Principles of Science_, p. 381) a diagram
  drawn to scale, to show how rapid this approximation is. One point
  must be carefully remembered here, as it is frequently overlooked
  (by Quetelet, for instance). The coefficients of a binomial of two
  equal terms--as (1 + 1)^{m}, in the preceding paragraph--are
  symmetrical in their arrangement from the first, and very speedily
  become indistinguishable in (graphical) outline from the final
  exponential form. But if, on the other hand, we were to consider the
  successive terms of such a binomial as (1 + 4)^{m} (which are
  proportional to the relative chances of 0, 1, 2, 3, ... failures in
  m ventures, of an event which has one chance in its favour to four
  against it) we should have an unsymmetrical succession. If however
  we suppose m to increase without limit, as in the former
  supposition, the unsymmetry gradually disappears and we tend towards
  precisely the same exponential form as if we had begun with two
  equal terms. The only difference is that the position of the vertex
  of the curve is no longer in the centre: in other words, the
  likeliest term or event is not an equal number of successes and
  failures but successes and failures in the ratio of 1 to 4.

12. 'Law of Error' is the usual technical term for what has been
  elsewhere spoken of above as a Law of Divergence from a mean. It is
  in strictness only appropriate in the case of one, namely the third,
  of the three classes of phenomena mentioned in §4, but by a
  convenient generalization it is equally applied to the other two; so
  that we term the amount of the divergence from the mean an 'error'
  in every case, however it may have been brought about.

13. This however seems to be the purport, either by direct assertion
  or by implication, of two elaborate works by Quetelet, viz. his
  _Physique Sociale_ and his _Anthropométrie_.

14. He scarcely, however, professes to give these as an accurate
  measure of the mean height, nor does he always give precisely the
  same measure. Practically, none but soldiers being measured in any
  great numbers, the English stature did not afford accurate data on
  any large scale. The statistics given a few pages further on are
  probably far more trustworthy.

15. This statement will receive some explanation and correction in the
  next chapter.

16. I am not speaking here of the now familiar results of
  Psychophysics, which are mainly occupied with the measurement of
  perceptions and other simple states of consciousness.

17. Perhaps the best brief account of Mr Galton's method is to be
  found in a paper in _Mind_ (July, 1880) on the statistics of Mental
  Imagery. The subject under comparison here--viz. the relative
  power, possessed by different persons, of raising clear visual
  images of objects no longer present to us--is one which it seems
  impossible to 'measure', in the ordinary sense of the term. But by
  arranging all the answers in the order in which the faculty in
  question seems to be possessed we can, with some approach to
  accuracy, select the middlemost person in the row and use him as a
  basis of comparison with the corresponding person in any other
  batch. And similarly with those who occupy other relative positions
  than that of the middlemost.

18. I refer to the introductory and concluding chapters: the bulk of
  the book is, from the nature of the case, mainly occupied with
  statistical and biographical details.

19. See Galton's _Hereditary Genius_, pp. 336-350, "On the comparative
  worth of different races."




