CHAPTER XIII.

A NEW SYSTEM OF MENTAL THERAPEUTICS.

    Telepathy the Normal Means of Communication between
    Subjective Minds.--Perfect Passivity required for Therapeutic
    Suggestions.--Natural Sleep the most Perfect State of
    Passivity.--Hypnotic Sleep and Natural Sleep identical.--Phenomena
    of Dreams.--Subjective Mind controllable by Suggestion during
    Natural Sleep.--Illustrative Incidents.--Passivity a Necessity on
    the Part of the Operator.--The Subjective Mind can be caused to
    convey Telepathic Messages during Sleep.--Illustrative Experiments.


The science of psycho-therapeutics is yet in its infancy. Thus far just
enough has been learned to stimulate research. It has been demonstrated
that there is a psychic power inherent in man which can be employed for
the amelioration of his own physical condition, as well as that of his
fellows. When this is said, nearly all the ground covered by present
knowledge has been embraced. It is true that many wonderful cures have
been effected, many marvellous phenomena developed. Nevertheless, all
are groping in the dark, with only an occasional glimmering of distant
light shed upon the subject; and this light serves principally to show
how little is now known, compared with what there is yet to learn.

In one view of the situation, however, it may be said that much has
already been accomplished. In the conflict of theoretical discussion,
and by means of the various and seemingly conflicting methods of
operation, certain laws have been discovered which may serve as a basis
for new experiments and new discoveries. It is the province of science
to collate those laws and to classify the facts whereever found, and
from them to try to reason up to the general principles involved. When
this is done, fearlessly and conscientiously, a decided step in advance
will have been made. Some new law may then be discovered, or at least
some new method of operation may be developed, which shall add to the
general stock of knowledge of the science, and enlarge its field of
usefulness.

It is the object of the writer to offer a few observations in this
chapter, in a direction believed to be substantially new, and briefly
to present some conclusions at which he has arrived from a careful
examination of premises which seem to have been well established by the
experiments of others. Before doing so it will be necessary first to
state the premises upon which the conclusions are based; and in doing
this, care will be taken not to travel outside of well-authenticated
experiments.

The first proposition is, that there is inherent in mankind the
power to communicate thoughts to others independently of objective
means of communication. The truth of this general proposition has
been so thoroughly demonstrated by the experiments of members of the
London Society for Psychical Research that time and space will not
be wasted in its further elucidation. For a full treatment of the
subject the reader is referred to "Phantasms of the Living," in which
the results of the researches of that Society are ably set forth
by Messrs. Edmund Gurney, F.W. H. Myers, and Frank Podmore. It is
hardly necessary to remind the intelligent reader that the methods
of investigation employed by these able and indefatigable laborers
in the field of psychical research are purely scientific, and their
works are singularly free from manifestations of prejudice or of
unreasoning scepticism on the one hand, and of credulity on the other.
It is confidently assumed, therefore, that the power of telepathic
communication is as thoroughly established as any fact in nature.

Now, telepathy is primarily the communion of subjective minds, or
rather it is the normal means of communication between subjective
minds. The reason of the apparent rarity of its manifestation is
that it requires exceptional conditions to bring its results above
the threshold of consciousness. There is every reason to believe that
the souls, or subjective minds, of men can and do habitually hold
communion with one another when not the remotest perception of the fact
is communicated to the objective intelligence. It may be that such
communion is not general among men; but it is certain that it is held
between those who, from any cause, are _en rapport_. The facts recorded
by the Society for Psychical Research demonstrate that proposition.
Thus, near relatives are oftenest found to be in communion, as is
shown by the comparative frequency of telepathic communications
between relatives, giving warning of sickness or of death. Next in
frequency are communications between intimate friends. Communications
of this character between comparative strangers are apparently rare.
Of course the only means we have of judging of these things is by the
record of those cases in which the communications have been brought to
the objective consciousness of the percipients. From these cases it
seems fair to infer that the subjective minds of those who are deeply
interested in one another are in habitual communion, especially when
the personal interest or welfare of either agent or percipient is at
stake. Be this as it may, it is certain that telepathic communication
can be established at will by the conscious effort of one or both of
the parties, even between strangers. The experiments of the Society
above named have demonstrated this fact. It will be assumed, therefore,
for the purposes of this argument that telepathic communion can be
established between two subjective minds at the will of either. The
fact may not be perceived by the subject, for it may not rise above the
threshold of his objective consciousness. But for therapeutic purposes
it is not necessary that the patient should know, objectively, that
anything is being done for him. Indeed, it is often better that he
should not know it, for reasons set forth in a former chapter.

The second proposition is that a state of perfect passivity on the part
of the percipient is the most favorable condition for the reception
of telepathic impressions or communications. It needs no argument to
establish the truth of this proposition. It is universally known to be
true, by all who have given the slightest attention to psychological
science, that passivity on the part of the subject is the primary
condition necessary for the production of any psychic phenomenon.
Passivity simply means the suspension of the functions of the objective
mind for the time being, for the purpose of allowing the subjective
mind to receive impressions and to act upon them. The more perfectly
the objective intelligence can be held in abeyance, the more perfectly
will the subjective mind perform its functions. This is why a state
of profound hypnotism is the most favorable for the reception of
suggestions, either oral or mental. That this is more especially true
of mental suggestions is shown by all experiments in mesmerism. It may,
therefore, be safely assumed that the most favorable condition in which
a patient can be placed for the reception of telepathic suggestions
for therapeutic purposes is the condition wherein the functions of his
objective intelligence are, for the time being, entirely suspended.

The third proposition is that _there is nothing to differentiate
hypnotic sleep from natural sleep_. Startling as this proposition may
appear to the superficial observer, it is fully concurred in both by M.
Liébault and Professor Bernheim.

    "There is no fundamental difference," says the latter,[30] "between
    spontaneous and induced sleep. M. Liébault has very wisely
    established this fact. The spontaneous sleeper is in relationship
    with himself alone; the idea which occupies his mind just before
    going to sleep, the impressions which the sensitive and sensorial
    nerves of the periphery continue to transmit to the brain, and the
    stimuli coming from the viscera, become the point of departure for
    the incoherent images and impressions which constitute dreams. Have
    those who deny the psychical phenomena of hypnotism, or who only
    admit them in cases of diseased nervous temperament, ever reflected
    upon what occurs in normal sleep, in which the best-balanced mind
    is carried by the current, in which the faculties are dissociated,
    in which the most singular ideas and the most fantastic conceptions
    obtrude? Poor human reason is carried away, the proudest mind
    yields to hallucinations, and during this sleep--that is to say,
    during a quarter of its existence--becomes the plaything of the
    dreams which imagination calls forth.

    "In induced sleep the subject's mind retains the memory of the
    person who has put him to sleep, whence the hypnotizer's power
    of playing upon his imagination, of suggesting dreams, and of
    directing the acts which are no longer controlled by the weakened
    or absent will."

There are, in fact, many analogies between the phenomena of normal
sleep and the phenomena of hypnotism. For instance, it is well known
that the recollection of what occurred during hypnotic sleep is in
exact inverse proportion to the depth of the sleep. If the sleep
is light, the remembrance of the subject is perfect. If the sleep
is profound, he remembers nothing, no matter what the character of
the scenes he may have passed through. The same is true of dreams.
We remember only those dreams which occur during the period when we
are just going to sleep or are just awakening. Profound sleep is
dreamless, so far as the recollection of the sleeper informs him.
Nevertheless, it is certain that we dream continuously during sleep.
The subjective mind is ever awake during the sleep of the body, and
always active. Our dreams are often incoherent and absurd, for the
reason that they are generally invoked by peripheral impressions.
These impressions constitute suggestions which the subjective mind, in
obedience to the universal law, accepts as true; and it always deduces
the legitimate conclusions therefrom. For instance, it is probably
within the experience of every reader that an accidental removal of
the bed-clothing during a cold night will cause the sleeper to dream
of wading through snow, or of sleigh-riding. And the dream will be
pleasant or otherwise just in accordance with the character of the
other attendant peripheral impressions. If the dreamer is in good
health he will dream of pleasant winter scenes and experiences. If his
stomach is out of order, or overloaded, he will have a nightmare, with
a winter setting of ice and snow and all that is disagreeable, dank,
and dismal.

As we have seen in the preceding chapters, the subjective mind reasons
deductively only from premises that are suggested to it, whether the
suggestions are imparted to it by its physical environment, as in
sleep, or by oral suggestion, as in hypnotism, or telepathically, as
in the higher forms of mesmerism. Its deductions are always logical,
whether the premises are true or false. Hence the absurdity of many
of our dreams; they are merely deductions from false premises. The
suggestions or impressions imparted to us during sleep being the result
of accidental surroundings and stimuli, modified by the state of our
health, our mental work during the day, and a thousand other things
of which we can have no knowledge, and which are beyond our control,
are necessarily of a heterogeneous character; and the deductions from
such premises must of necessity be incoherent and fantastic to the last
degree.

It is obvious, therefore, that the subjective mind is amenable to
control by suggestion during natural sleep just the same as it is
during hypnotic, or induced, sleep. It might not be unprofitable in
this connection to enter into a general inquiry as to how far it would
be possible to control our dreams by auto-suggestion, and thus obviate
the discomforts incident to unpleasant nocturnal hallucinations. But
as we are now engaged in a specific inquiry into the question of how
far the subjective mind can be influenced for therapeutic purposes, the
general field of speculation must be left for others. It is sufficient
for present purposes to establish the proposition that the subjective
mind is controllable by the power of suggestion during natural sleep.

Recurring in this connection to the preceding proposition, that "a
state of perfect passivity on the part of the patient is the most
favorable condition for the reception of telepathic impressions or
communications for therapeutic purposes," the conclusion is obvious
that the condition of natural sleep, being the most perfectly passive
condition imaginable, must of necessity be the most favorable
condition for the reception of telepathic suggestions for therapeutic
purposes. It is especially adapted for the conveyance of therapeutic
suggestions, for the reason that for such purposes it is not necessary
that the suggestions or impressions should rise above the threshold of
the patient's consciousness. Indeed, as we have before observed, it is
better that they should not. The object being merely the restoration of
health, it is not necessary that the objective mind should feel, or be
conscious of, the impressions or suggestions made. It is precisely as
it is in hypnotism; the suggestions, whether oral or telepathic, are
made to the subjective intelligence; and, in case of profound hypnotic
sleep, the objective mind retains no recollection of the suggestions.
In either case the subjective mind is the one addressed; and that,
being the central power in control of the functions and conditions of
the body, accepts the suggestions and acts accordingly.

There are not wanting facts which show clearly that the power exists to
convey telepathic messages to sleeping persons, causing them to dream
of the things that the agent desires. As long ago as 1819, Councillor
H.M. Wesermann, of Düsseldorf, recorded, in the "Archiv für den
thierischen Magnetismus,"[31] a few experiments of his own which show
this to be true. The following items are reproduced in "Phantasms of
the Living,"[32] from the original article above mentioned:--

    "_First Experiment, at a Distance of Five Miles._--I endeavored
    to acquaint my friend, the Hofkammerrath G. (whom I had not seen,
    with whom I had not spoken, and to whom I had not written for
    thirteen years), with the fact of my intended visit, by presenting
    my form to him in his sleep, through the force of my will. When I
    unexpectedly went to him on the following evening, he evinced his
    astonishment at having seen me in a dream on the preceding night.

    "_Second Experiment, at a Distance of Three Miles._--Madame W., in
    her sleep, was to hear a conversation between me and two other
    persons, relating to a certain secret; and when I visited her on
    the third day, she told me all that had been said, and showed her
    astonishment at this remarkable dream.

    "_Third Experiment, at a Distance of One Mile._--An aged person in
    G---- was to see in a dream the funeral procession of my deceased
    friend S.; and when I visited her on the next day, her first words
    were that she had in her sleep seen a funeral procession, and on
    inquiry had learned that I was the corpse. Here there was a slight
    error.

    "_Fourth Experiment, at a Distance of One-Eighth of a Mile._--Herr
    Doctor B. desired a trial to convince him, whereupon I represented
    to him a nocturnal street-brawl. He saw it in a dream, to his great
    astonishment. (This means, presumably, that he was astonished when
    he found that the actual subject of his dream was what Wesermann
    had been endeavoring to impress on him.)"

It would thus seem to be reasonably well established that the state
of natural sleep is the best possible condition for the reception of
telepathic suggestions for therapeutic purposes.

The next inquiry in order is, therefore, as to what is the best means
of conveying telepathic suggestion to the sleeping patient. In a
previous chapter it has been shown that a successful mesmerizer must
necessarily be in a partially subjective condition himself in order
to produce the higher phenomena of mesmerism. It may, it is thought,
be safely assumed that the phenomenon of thought-transference cannot
be produced under any other conditions. Indeed, it stands to reason
that, inasmuch as it is the subjective mind of the percipient that is
impressed, the message must proceed from the subjective mind of the
agent. In other words, it is reasonable to suppose that, the subjective
or passive condition being a necessity on the part of the percipient
or subject, an analogous condition is a necessity on the part of the
agent or operator. This fact is shown, not only in mesmerism, but in
the methods of Christian scientists. The mesmerist, as we have seen,
quietly fixes his gaze upon the subject and concentrates his mind
and will upon the work in hand, and thus, unknowingly, it may be,
partially hypnotizes himself. The Christian scientist sits quietly by
the patient and concentrates his mind, in like manner, upon the central
idea of curing the patient. And, in either case, just in proportion
to the ability of the operator to get himself into the subjective
condition will he succeed in accomplishing his object, whether it is
the production of the higher phenomena of mesmerism, or the healing of
the sick by telepathic suggestion.

If, then, the passive, or subjective, condition of the agent is
necessary for the successful transmission of telepathic suggestions or
communications, or if it is the _best_ condition for such a purpose, it
follows that the more perfectly that condition is attained, the more
successful will be the experiment. As before observed, the condition
of natural sleep is manifestly the most perfectly passive condition
attainable. It is necessarily perfect, for all the objective senses are
locked in slumber, and the subjective mind is free to act in accordance
with the laws which govern it. Those laws are, it is true, at present
but little understood; but this much has been demonstrated, namely,
that the subjective mind is controllable by the mysterious power of
suggestion, and is always most active during sleep.

Theoretically, then, we find that the most perfect condition either
for the conveyance or the reception of telepathic impressions or
communications is that of natural sleep. The only question that remains
to be settled is whether it is possible for the agent or operator so to
control his own subjective mind during his bodily sleep as to compel or
induce it to convey the desired message to the sub-consciousness of the
patient. To settle this question, we must again have recourse to the
record of the labors and researches of the London Society for Psychical
Research. It might well be inferred that this power must necessarily
be possessed, when we take into consideration the general law of
suggestion, coupled with the fact that the subjective mind is perfectly
amenable to control by auto-suggestion. If the law of suggestion is
valid and universal, the conclusion is irresistible that this power
is inherent in man, even without one experimental fact to sustain it.
Fortunately, we are not left to conjecture in regard to this important
question. The literature of psychical experiment is full of facts which
are demonstrative. Some of the experiments recorded in "Phantasms of
the Living" show that a vastly greater power exists in this direction
than would be required to convey a simple therapeutic suggestion to a
sleeping patient. The following experiments are recorded in "Phantasms
of the Living."[33] In the first case, the Rev. W. Stainton Moses was
the percipient, and he corroborates the following account, written by
the agent:--

    "One evening I resolved to appear to Z at some miles' distance.
    I did not inform him beforehand of the intended experiment,
    but retired to rest shortly before midnight with thoughts
    intently fixed on Z, with whose room and surroundings I was
    quite unacquainted. I soon fell asleep, and awoke next morning
    unconscious of anything having taken place. On seeing Z, a few
    days afterwards, I inquired, 'Did anything happen at your rooms
    on Saturday night?' 'Yes,' replied he, 'a great deal happened. I
    had been sitting over the fire with M, smoking and chatting. About
    12.30 he rose to leave, and I let him out myself. I returned to
    the fire to finish my pipe, when I saw you sitting in the chair
    just vacated by him. I looked intently at you, and then took up a
    newspaper to assure myself I was not dreaming; but on laying it
    down I saw you still there. While I gazed, without speaking, you
    faded away.'"

The next case was recorded by the agent, Mr. S.H.B., at the time of the
occurrence, and his account of it is duly verified by the percipients.
It is as follows:--

    On a certain Sunday evening in November, 1881, having been reading
    of the great power which the human will is capable of exercising,
    I determined, with the whole force of my being, that I would be
    present in spirit in the front bed-room on the second floor of
    a house situated at 22 Hogarth Road, Kensington, in which room
    slept two ladies of my acquaintance,--namely, Miss L.S.V. and
    Miss E.C.V., aged respectively twenty-five and eleven years. I was
    living at this time at 23 Kildare Gardens, a distance of about
    three miles from Hogarth Road; and I had not mentioned in any way
    my intention of trying this experiment to either of the above
    ladies, for the simple reason that it was only on retiring to rest
    upon this Sunday night that I made up my mind to do so. The time
    at which I determined I would be there was one o'clock in the
    morning; and I also had a strong intention of making my presence
    perceptible. On the following Thursday I went to see the ladies in
    question, and, in the course of conversation (without any allusion
    to the subject on my part), the elder one told me that on the
    previous Sunday night she had been much terrified by perceiving me
    standing by her bedside, and that she screamed when the apparition
    advanced towards her, and awoke her little sister, who saw me also.

    I asked her if she was awake at the time, and she replied most
    decidedly in the affirmative; and upon my inquiring the time of the
    occurrence, she replied, "About one o'clock in the morning."

    This lady, at my request, wrote down a statement of the event, and
    signed it.

    This was the first occasion upon which I tried an experiment of
    this kind, and its complete success startled me very much. Besides
    exercising my power of volition very strongly, I put forth an
    effort which I cannot find words to describe. I was conscious of a
    mysterious influence of some sort permeating in my body, and had
    a distinct impression that I was exercising some force with which
    I had been hitherto unacquainted, but which I can now at certain
    times set in motion at will. S.H.B.

The next case of Mr. S.H.B.'s is different in this respect, that the
percipient was not consciously present to the agent's mind on the night
that he made his attempt:--

    On Friday, Dec. 1, 1882, at 9.30 P.M., I went into a room alone and
    sat by the fireside, and endeavored so strongly to fix my mind upon
    the interior of a house at Kew (namely, Clarence Road), in which
    resided Miss V. and her two sisters, that I seemed to be actually
    in the house.

    During this experiment I must have fallen into a mesmeric sleep,
    for although I was conscious, I could not move my limbs. I did not
    seem to have lost the power of moving them, but I could not make
    the effort to do so; and my hands, which lay loosely on my knees,
    about six inches apart, felt involuntarily drawn together, and
    seemed to meet, although I was conscious that they did not move.

    At 10 P.M. I regained my normal state by an effort of the will,
    and then took a pencil and wrote down on a sheet of note-paper the
    foregoing statements.

    When I went to bed on this same night I determined that I would be
    in the front bed-room of the above-mentioned house at 12 P.M., and
    remain there until I had made my spiritual presence perceptible to
    the inmates of that room.

    On the next day (Saturday) I went to Kew to spend the evening,
    and met there a married sister of Miss V. (namely, Mrs. L.). This
    lady I had only met once before, and then it was at a ball two
    years previous to the above date. We were both in fancy dress at
    the time, and as we did not exchange more than half-a-dozen words,
    this lady would naturally have lost any vivid recollection of my
    appearance, even if she had remarked it.

    In the course of conversation (although I did not think for a
    moment of asking her any questions on such a subject) she told
    me that on the previous night she had seen me distinctly upon
    two occasions. She had spent the night at Clarence Road, and had
    slept in the front bed-room. At about 9.30 she had seen me in the
    passage, going from one room to another; and at 12 P.M., when she
    was wide awake, she had seen me enter the bed-room and walk round
    to where she was sleeping, and take her hair (which is very long)
    into my hand. She also told me that the apparition took hold of
    her hand and gazed intently into it, whereupon she spoke, saying,
    "You need not look at the lines, for I have never had any trouble."
    She then awoke her sister, Miss V., who was sleeping with her, and
    told her about it. After hearing this account, I took the statement
    which I had written down on the previous evening from my pocket and
    showed it to some of the persons present, who were much astonished,
    although incredulous.

    I asked Mrs. L. if she was not dreaming at the time of the latter
    experience; but this she stoutly denied, and stated that she
    had forgotten what I was like, but seeing me so distinctly, she
    recognized me at once.

    Mrs. L. is a lady of highly imaginative temperament, and told me
    that she had been subject since childhood to psychological fancies,
    etc.; but the wonderful coincidence of the time (which was exact)
    convinced me that what she told me was more than a flight of
    the imagination. At my request she wrote a brief account of her
    impressions, and signed it.

  S.H.B.

One of the authors of "Phantasms of the Living" (Mr. Gurney) on
one occasion requested Mr. B. to send him a note on the night that
he intended to make his next experiment of the kind, whereupon the
following correspondence ensued:--

  March 22, 1884.

    DEAR MR. GURNEY,--I am going to try the experiment to-night of
    making my presence perceptible at 44 Morland Square, at 12 P.M. I
    will let you know the result in a few days.

  Yours very sincerely,      S.H.B.

The next letter was received in the course of the following week:--

  April 3, 1884.

    DEAR MR. GURNEY,--I have a strange statement to show you respecting
    my experiment, which was tried at your suggestion, and under
    the test conditions which you imposed. Having quite forgotten
    which night it was on which I attempted the projection, I cannot
    say whether the result is a brilliant success, or only a slight
    one, until I see the letter which I posted you on the evening of
    the experiment. Having sent you that letter, I did not deem it
    necessary to make a note in my diary, and consequently have let the
    exact date slip my memory. If the dates correspond, the success
    is complete in every detail, and I have an account signed and
    witnessed to show you.

    I saw the lady (who was the subject) for the first time last night,
    since the experiment, and she made a voluntary statement to me,
    which I wrote down at her dictation, and to which she has attached
    her signature. The date and time of the apparition are specified in
    this statement, and it will be for you to decide whether they are
    identical with those given in my letter to you. I have completely
    forgotten, but yet I fancy that they are the same. S.H.B.

This is the statement:--

  44 Morland Square, W.

    On Saturday night, March 22, 1884, at about midnight, I had a
    distinct impression that Mr. S.H.B. was present in my room,
    and I distinctly saw him whilst I was quite wide awake. He came
    towards me and stroked my hair. I _voluntarily_ gave him this
    information when he called to see me on Wednesday, April 2, telling
    him the time and the circumstances of the apparition, without any
    suggestion on his part. The appearance in my room was most vivid,
    and quite unmistakable.

  L.S. Verity.

Miss A.S. Verity corroborates as follows:--

    I remember my sister telling me that she had seen S.H.B., and that
    he had touched her hair, _before_ he came to see us on April 2.
    A.S.V.

Mr. B.'s own account is as follows:--

    On Saturday, March 22, I determined to make my presence perceptible
    to Miss V. at 44 Morland Square, Notting Hill, at twelve, midnight;
    and as I had previously arranged with Mr. Gurney that I should post
    him a letter on the evening on which I tried my next experiment
    (stating the time and other particulars), I sent a note to acquaint
    him with the above facts.

    About ten days afterwards I called upon Miss V., and she
    voluntarily told me that on March 22, at twelve o'clock, midnight,
    she had seen me so vividly in her room (whilst widely awake) that
    her nerves had been much shaken, and she had been obliged to send
    for a doctor in the morning.

  S.H.B.

Mr. Gurney adds:--

    "It will be observed that in all these instances the conditions
    were the same,--_the agent concentrating his thoughts on the object
    in view before going to sleep_. Mr. B. has never succeeded in
    producing a similar effect when he has been awake."

The foregoing instances have been quoted merely for the purpose
of showing that the power exists in mankind to cause telepathic
impressions to be conveyed from one to another, not only when the
percipient is awake and the agent is asleep, but when both are asleep.
It is true that they do not demonstrate the proposition that the power
can be employed for therapeutic purposes when both are asleep; but the
inference is irresistible that such is the case. They do, however,
demonstrate the existence of a power far greater than one would
naturally suppose would be required to convey a therapeutic suggestion.
In the cases cited, the impressions were brought above the threshold
of the consciousness of the percipients. It may well be inferred that
a power sufficiently great to cause the percipient, in his waking
moments, to see the image or apparition of the agent, or even to dream
of him when asleep so vividly as to remember the dream, must be easily
capable of imparting any thought, impression, or suggestion which is
not required to be raised above the threshold of consciousness.

All that would seem to be required is that the agent, before going
to sleep, should strongly will, desire, and direct his subjective
entity to convey the necessary therapeutic suggestions, influence, or
impressions to the sleeping patient.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 30: Suggestive Therapeutics, pp. 140, 141.]

[Footnote 31: Vol. vi. pp. 136-139.]

[Footnote 32: Vol. i. pp. 101, 102.]

[Footnote 33: Vol. i. pp. 103-109.]




[Illustration]




