
THE LAW OF PSYCHIC PHENOMENA




BY DR. HUDSON.


  THE LAW OF PSYCHIC PHENOMENA. 12mo                      $1.50

  A SCIENTIFIC DEMONSTRATION OF THE FUTURE LIFE. 12mo      1.50

  THE DIVINE PEDIGREE OF MAN. 12mo                         1.50

  THE LAW OF MENTAL MEDICINE. 12mo                        $1.20 _net_

  THE EVOLUTION OF THE SOUL. 12mo                          1.20 _net_


A.C. MCCLURG & CO.

CHICAGO.




  THE LAW

  OF

  PSYCHIC PHENOMENA

  A Working Hypothesis

  FOR THE

  SYSTEMATIC STUDY OF HYPNOTISM,
  SPIRITISM, MENTAL THERAPEUTICS,
  ETC.

  BY

  THOMSON JAY HUDSON, PH.D., LL.D.

  AUTHOR OF "A SCIENTIFIC DEMONSTRATION OF THE FUTURE LIFE,"
  "THE DIVINE PEDIGREE OF MAN," ETC.

  [Illustration]

  SIXTIETH THOUSAND

  CHICAGO
  A.C. MCCLURG & CO.
  1904




  COPYRIGHT
  BY A.C. MCCLURG AND CO.
  A.D. 1893


  UNIVERSITY PRESS, JOHN WILSON
  AND SON · CAMBRIDGE, U.S.A.




TO THE

Honorable Lester L. Bond,

THE COMPANION OF MY YOUTH, THE STEADFAST FRIEND OF MY MANHOOD, MY
MENTOR ALWAYS,

THIS VOLUME IS AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATED BY

  THE AUTHOR.




PREFACE.


I do not expect this book to stand upon its literary merits; for if it
is unsound in principle, felicity of diction cannot save it, and if
sound, homeliness of expression cannot destroy it. My primary object
in offering it to the public is to assist in bringing Psychology
within the domain of the exact sciences. That this has never been
accomplished is owing to the fact that no successful attempt has been
made to formulate a working hypothesis sufficiently comprehensive to
embrace all psychic phenomena. It has, however, long been felt by the
ablest thinkers of our time that all psychic manifestations of the
human intellect, normal or abnormal, whether designated by the name
of mesmerism, hypnotism, somnambulism, trance, spiritism, demonology,
miracle, mental therapeutics, genius, or insanity, are in some way
related; and consequently, that they are to be referred to some general
principle or law, which, once understood, will simplify and correlate
the whole subject-matter, and possibly remove it from the domain of
the supernatural. The London Society for Psychical Research, whose
ramifications extend all over the civilized world, was organized for
the purpose of making a systematic search for that law. The Society
numbers among its membership many of the ablest scientists now living.
Its methods of investigation are purely scientific, and painstaking
to the last degree, and its field embraces all psychic phenomena. It
has already accumulated and verified a vast array of facts of the most
transcendent interest and importance. In the mean time a large number
of the ablest scientists of Europe and America have been pursuing
independent investigations in the phenomena of hypnotism. They too
have accumulated facts and discovered principles of vast importance,
especially in the field of mental therapeutics,--principles which also
throw a flood of light upon the general subject of Psychology.

This vast array of facts, thus accumulated and verified, and awaiting
scientific classification and analysis, would seem to justify at least
a tentative effort to apply to them the processes of induction, to the
end that the fundamental law of psychic phenomena may be discovered.

In the following pages I have attempted such a classification of
verified phenomena, accounts of which I find in the literature current
on the subject; and I have tentatively formulated a working hypothesis
for the systematic study of all classes of psychic phenomena. It
will be observed that I have availed myself largely of the labors of
others, instead of confining myself to experimental researches of my
own. I have done this for two reasons: _first_, that I might avoid the
accusation of having conducted a series of experiments for the purpose
of sustaining a pet theory of my own; and _second_, because I hold that
substantial progress cannot be made in science until one is ready to
accord due credit to human integrity, and to give due weight to human
testimony.

In conclusion, I desire to say that I claim no credit for this work,
save that which is due to an honest desire to promote the truth for its
own sake. Sincerely believing in the correctness of my hypothesis, I
have not hesitated to follow it to its legitimate conclusion in every
field which I have entered. If at the close of the book I have seemed
to trespass upon the forbidden field of theological discussion, it was
not for the purpose of sustaining any preconceived opinions of my own;
far from it. It was because I was irresistibly led to my conclusions by
the terms of my hypothesis and the inflexible logic of its application.
I cannot but be aware that my conclusions sometimes oppose the
preconceived opinions of others. But no one who accepts my hypothesis
as the true one will be compelled more frequently than I have been to
renounce his former convictions.

  T.J.H.

  WASHINGTON, D.C.
  October 21, 1892.




CONTENTS.


    CHAPTER I.

    INTRODUCTORY.

                                                                      PAGE

    Necessity of a Working Hypothesis.--The Newtonian Hypothesis.--The
    Atomic Theory.--A Psychological Hypothesis
    necessary.--Theories of Hypnotism and Mesmerism.--Spiritism.--Mental
    Therapeutics.--Liébault's Law of Suggestion.--Duality
    of Mind.--A Working Hypothesis for
    Psychology formulated.--Its Three Terms                              19


    CHAPTER II.

    DUALITY AND SUGGESTION.

    The Doctrine of the Trinity of Man.--The Greek Philosophy.--The Early
    Christian Fathers.--Hermetic Philosophy.--Swedenborg.--Duality in
    Modern Philosophy.--"Objective" and "Subjective" Minds.--Their
    Distinctive Differences and Modes of Operation.--The Subjective
    Mind a Distinct Entity.--Illustrations from Hypnotism.--Suggestion.
    --Auto-Suggestion.--Universality of the Law of Suggestion            27


    CHAPTER III.

    REASONING POWERS OF THE TWO MINDS DIFFERENTIATED.

    The Subjective Mind incapable of Inductive Reasoning.--Its
    Processes always Deductive, or Syllogistic.--Its Premises
    the Result of Suggestion.--Illustrations by Hypnotism.--Hypnotic
    Interview with Socrates.--Reasons from an Assumed
    Major Premise.--Interview with a Philosophic Pig.--The
    Pig affirms the Doctrine of Reincarnation.--Dogmatism
    of Subjective Intelligence.--Incapable of Controversial
    Argument.--Persistency in following a Suggested Line of
    Thought                                                              33


    CHAPTER IV.

    PERFECT MEMORY OF THE SUBJECTIVE MIND.

    Confirmed by Hypnotic Phenomena.--Opinions of Psychologists.--Sir
    William Hamilton's Views.--Observations of Dr. Rush.--Talent for
    Poetry and Music developed by Abnormal Conditions.--Talent for Drawing
    evolved by Madness.--Resuscitation of Knowledge in the
    Insane.--Extraordinary Feats of Memory during Illness.--A Forgotten
    Language recovered.--Whole Pages of Greek and Hebrew remembered by
    an Illiterate Servant Girl.--Speaking in Unknown Tongues
    explained.--The Result of the Operations of Natural Law              40


    CHAPTER V.

    SUBJECTIVE MEMORY (_continued_).

    Practical Illustrations.--Reasons for Limitations of Subjective
    Power.--Its Practical Significance.--Its Application to the Solution of
    Problems of Insanity.--The Mental Phenomena of "Genius."--Napoleon
    Bonaparte.--Shakspeare.--Poets.--Artists.--Macaulay's Estimate of Poets
    and Poetry.--Dangers of Subjective Control.--Lord Byron.--Socrates'
    Estimate of Poets.--His Recognition of the Subjective Element in Poetic
    Composition.--Occasional Inconveniences.--Unconscious
    Plagiarism.--Observations of Holmes.--Improvisation.--Solution
    of the Shakspeare-Bacon Problem.--The Subjective in Art.--Madness in
    Art.--Great Orators.--Webster.--Clay.--Patrick
    Henry.--Incidents.--Practical Conclusions                            48


    CHAPTER VI.

    PERCEPTION OF THE FIXED LAWS OF NATURE.

    Three Sub-Classes of Mental Phenomena.--Mathematical
    Prodigies.--Musical Prodigies.--Measurement of Time.--Distinction
    between Results of Objective Education and
    Intuitive Perception.--Zerah Colburn, the Mathematical
    Prodigy.--The Lightning Calculator.--Blind Tom, the
    Musical Prodigy.--The Origin and Uses of Music.--East
    Indian Fakirs.--Measurement of Time.--The Power possessed
    by Animals.--Illustrative Incidents.--Hypnotic
    Subjects.--Jouffroy's Testimony.--Bernheim's Views.--Practical
    Observations.--The Normal Functions of Objective
    Intelligence.--The Limitations of Subjective Intelligence
    pertains to its Earthly State only.--Its Kinship to
    God demonstrated by its Limitations.--Omniscience cannot
    reason inductively.--Induction is Inquiry.--Perception the
    Attribute of Omniscience.--Conclusions regarding the
    Power of the Soul                                                    62


    CHAPTER VII.

    EFFECTS OF ADVERSE SUGGESTION.

    The Subjective Mind incapable of Controversial Argument.--A
    Sceptical Audience demoralizes it.--The Presence of an
    Avowed Sceptic prevents Successful Exhibition of Subjective
    Phenomena.--Labouchere and Bishop.--The Royal
    Academy of Medicine.--Its Offer to Clairvoyants.--Failure
    to earn Reward.--Harmonious Conditions required by
    Spiritists.--The Seybert Commission.--Trance-speaking
    Mediums.--How demoralized.--Adverse Suggestion the
    Cause of Failure in all Cases.--Possible Lack of Telepathic
    Conditions in Bishop's Case.--General Conclusions.--Failure
    Consistent with Honesty of Mediums                                   75


    CHAPTER VIII.

    HYPNOTISM AND MESMERISM.

    Warfare of the Schools.--History of the Science.--Mesmer's
    Career.--The Academicians.--The Successors of Mesmer.--The
    Royal Academy of Medicine.--Its Idiotic Prejudices.--Dr.
    Braid's Discovery.--Re-baptism of the Science.--Effects
    of Braid's Discoveries.--Liébault's Theory of Suggestion.--The
    Nancy School and the Paris School compared.--The
    Fluidic Theory.--The Law of Suggestion the Greatest
    Discovery in Psychic Science.--The Significance of
    Braid's Discoveries not appreciated.--Hypnotism of Animals.--The
    Charcot School.--The Sources of its Errors.--Reform
    in Terminology suggested.--The Mesmeric Theory.--Braid's
    Processes not productive of Higher Phenomena.--Mesmerization
    of Animals.--Recapitulation of Points                                81


    CHAPTER IX.

    HYPNOTISM AND MESMERISM (_continued_).

    Mesmeric Methods.--The Fluidic Theory.--Influence of the
    Mind of the Operator.--The Early Mesmerists.--Their
    Methods and their Effects.--Decadence of the Higher Phenomena
    under Braid's Methods.--The Causes explained.--Telepathic
    Powers developed by Mesmerism.--Mesmerism
    as a Therapeutic Agent.--Method of Operation recommended.--How
    to acquire the Power.--The Necessary
    Conditions of Success.--Will-Power explained.--The
    Fluidic Theory requires Revision.--Distinction between
    Mesmerism and Hypnotism sharply drawn.--Mesmerization
    of Animals distinguished from the Hypnotization of Animals.--Methods
    employed in each.--Tamers of Horses and Wild
    Beasts.--Dog-Trainers.--Primitive Man.--His Powers.--His
    Immunity from Harm.--Daniel.--The Adepts.--General
    Conclusions                                                         105


    CHAPTER X.

    HYPNOTISM AND CRIME.

    Platform Experiments misleading,--Their Utter Inutility as a
    Test.--So-called "Tests" described and explained.--Sexual
    Outrages impossible.--Auto-Suggestion protects the
    Virtuous.--A Willing Subject necessary.--Demonstrative
    Experiments.--Modern Authorities cited against Themselves.--Professor
    Gregory's Views.--The Elevated Moral
    Tone of Subjects when mesmerized.--Successful Suggestion
    of Suicide impossible.--The Three Normal Functions of
    the Subjective Mind.--Self-Preservation.--Propagation.--Preservation
    of Offspring.--Instinctive Auto-Suggestion.--Indifference
    on Near Approach of Death.--A Universal Law.--Illustrative
    Incidents.--Suggestive Criminal Abortion
    impossible.--Premonitions explained.--The Dæmon of
    Socrates.--Clairaudience.--The Instinct of Death.--Hypnotism
    in Jurisprudence.--Testimony valueless.--Vital
    Secrets impossible to obtain.--Doctors must not monopolize
    the Forces of Nature.--The Folly of Adverse Legislation             122


    CHAPTER XI.

    PSYCHO-THERAPEUTICS.

    Historical Notes.--Mind Cure in Ancient Times.--Bible
    Accounts.--Miracles of the Church.--Healing by the King's
    Touch.--Views of Paracelsus and Pomponazzi.--Bernheim's
    Experiments.--The Modern Schools.--Their Theories.--The
    True Hypothesis applicable to All Systems.--Illustrations
    of the Theory.--Producing a Blister by Suggestion.--Bloody
    Stigmata.--Letters of Blood.--Objective Control of Subjective
    Mind.--Subjective Control of Bodily Functions.--The
    Necessary Mental Conditions.--The Precepts and
    Example of Christ.--Subjective Faith alone required.--Discussion
    of Various Systems.--Christian Science, etc.--General
    Conclusions                                                         144


    CHAPTER XII.

    PSYCHO-THERAPEUTICS (_continued_).

    Methods classified in Two Divisions.--Mental and Oral
    Suggestions.--Absent Treatment.--Christian Scientists handicapped
    by Absurd Theories.--They claim too much.--The Use of Drugs.--Dangers
    arising from too Radical Change.--Importance of Favorable Mental
    Environment.--Mental Healing requires Mental Conditions.--Treatment
    by Hypnotism.--Bernheim's Methods.--Illustrative Cases.--The
    Practical Value of the System.--The Illogical Limitations
    of the Theory.--Potency of Telepathic Suggestion.--Researches
    of the Society for Psychical Research.--Mr. Gurney's Experiments.--They
    demonstrate the Theory of Effluent Emanations.--Diagnosis by
    Intuition.--Potency of Mesmerism.--Permanency of Cures.--Conditions
    necessary.--The Example of Jesus.--Self-Healing by Auto-suggestion  161


    CHAPTER XIII.

    A NEW SYSTEM OF MENTAL THERAPEUTICS.

    Telepathy the Normal Means of Communication between Subjective
    Minds.--Perfect Passivity required for Therapeutic
    Suggestions.--Natural Sleep the Most Perfect State of
    Passivity.--Hypnotic Sleep and Natural Sleep identical.--Phenomena
    of Dreams.--Subjective Mind controllable by
    Suggestion during Natural Sleep.--Illustrative Incidents.--Passivity
    a Necessity on the Part of the Operator.--The Subjective Mind can
    be caused to convey Telepathic Messages during Sleep.--Illustrative
    Experiments                                                         176


    CHAPTER XIV.

    A NEW SYSTEM OF MENTAL THERAPEUTICS (_continued_).

    Recapitulation of Propositions.--Natural Sleep the Best Condition
    attainable both for Healer and Patient.--Demonstrative
    Experiments.--Healing at a Distance of One Thousand
    Miles.--Distance no Obstacle.--Space does not exist for
    the Subjective Mind.--Objective Habits of Thought the
    only Adverse Factor.--Diseases treated.--Strabismus
    cured.--Mode of Operation.--Not a Good Money-making
    Scheme.--It promotes the Health of the Healer.--A
    Method of Universal Utility.--Self-Healing its most Important
    Function.--The Power absolute.--Within the Reach
    of All.--Method of Self-Healing.--The Patient's Credulity
    not overtaxed.--The Example of Christ.--Material Remedies
    not to be ignored.--Advice to Christian Scientists.--The
    Control of Dreams.--Practical Conclusions                           191


    CHAPTER XV.

    THE PHENOMENA OF SPIRITISM.

    If a Man die, shall he live again?--The Problem not solved by
    Spiritistic Phenomena.--The Phenomena admitted.--Their Supernatural
    Origin denied.--Explained by the Hypothesis.--Subsidiary
    Hypothesis.--An Intelligent Dynamic Force.--Its
    Characteristics.--Limited by Medium's Intelligence.--It is
    controlled by Suggestion.--Phenomena fail in Presence of
    Scepticism.--Reasons.--Mediumistic Frauds.--The Primary Lesson
    in Spiritistic Investigation.--Mediums not necessarily
    dishonest.--Their Honest Belief in the Phenomena.--Suggestion
    explains all.--Illustrations from Hypnotism.--Convincing Character
    of Alleged Communications.--Telepathic Explanations.--General
    Conclusions                                                         205


    CHAPTER XVI.

    THE PHENOMENA OF SPIRITISM (_continued_).

    Various Classes of Phenomena.--Clairvoyance.--Its Field not yet
    clearly defined.--Telepathy invades its Ancient Domain.--Simple
    Experiments in Telepathy.--Their Significance.--Telepathic Power
    in Mediums.--Telepathic Visions.--A Typical Séance.--Wonderful
    Exhibition of Telepathic Power.--An Affecting Interview of the
    Sitter with Himself.--Deductions.--Visions of Inanimate Things as
    well as of Deceased Persons.--Spirit of the Jack of
    Clubs.--Subjective Memory.--Spirit Identity.--Allan Kardec's
    Observations.--His Illogical Conclusions.--His Supreme
    Test.--Telepathic Explanation.--Four Ways of explaining his Test
    Case                                                                219


    CHAPTER XVII.

    THE PHENOMENA OF SPIRITISM (_continued_).

    Psychometry.--"The Souls of Things."--Professor Denton's
    Experiments.--Wonderful Visions of the Ancient Environment of
    Geological Specimens.--A Piece of Mortar from Cicero's
    House.--Supposed Scientific Tests.--Explanation on Telepathic
    Principles.--Experiments in Hypnotism compared.--Clairvoyance
    and Telepathy.--Their Boundary Lines in
    Transit.--Clairaudience.--Definitions of the Term.--Socrates
    and his Dæmon.--Modern Instances.--Mental
    Impressions.--Premonitions.--Their Unreliability.--Remarkable
    Examples of Clairaudience.--A Lawyer's Experience.--Subject
    to the Law of Suggestion.--Insanity sometimes results from
    Ignorance of the Cause.--Practical Suggestions                      238


    CHAPTER XVIII.

    THE PHENOMENA OF SPIRITISM (_continued_).

    The Planchette.--Modifications.--Easily operated.--Automatic
    Writing.--Governed by the Universal Law.--The Planchette without
    Spirits.--The Planchette and Telepathy.--Trance.--Ancient and
    Modern Superstitions relating to Trance.--Religious Systems
    founded on Trance.--Visions.--Swedenborg.--Oriental
    Philosophy.--Its Slow Growth and Stupendous Proportions.--Spiritistic
    Philosophy.--Its Evolution.--All founded on Trance Visions, in
    Ignorance of the Law of Suggestion.--Cahagnet's Mesmeric
    Seers.--Their Revelations.--Objective and Subjective
    Visions.--Orthodoxy and Heterodoxy.--Visions of the Holy
    Virgin.--The Physical and Mental Attitude of Prayer.--The Prayer of
    Faith.--Obsession.--Possession.--Casting out Devils.--Devils out
    of Fashion.--The Influence of Suggestion.--The Element of
    Telepathy.--Dual Personality.--Loss of Identity.--Characteristics.--The
    Case of Ansel Bourne.--Possible Explanation.--A Proof of the Dual
    Hypothesis.--Multiple Personality                                   251


    CHAPTER XIX.

    THE PHYSICAL PHENOMENA OF SPIRITISM.

    The Intelligence manifested.--It is a Human Intelligence.--Inherent
    Probabilities.--Conditions requisite.--The Best
    Conditions.--A Living Organism necessary.--The Laws of Telepathy
    and Suggestion prevail.--Slate-Writing.--A Wonderful Slate-Writing
    Séance.--Telepathic and Psycho-Physical Power displayed in
    Perfection.--Demonstration of its Mundane Origin.--An Unexpected
    Phenomenon.--Summary of Results.--Syllogism.--General
    Conclusions.--Spiritistic Phenomena do not constitute Valid
    Evidence of a Life beyond the Grave.--An Argument for Immortality   271


    CHAPTER XX.

    PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD.

    Ghosts.--Scientific Investigations.--Tentative Classification of
    Phenomena.--Power to create Phantasms demonstrated.--Investigations
    of the London Society for Psychical Research.--Spirit
    Photography.--Projection of the "Astral Body."--Witches.--Conditions
    necessary.--The same in all Cases.--Spirit
    "Materialization."--Magicians.--Ghosts the Creations of the
    Subjective Entity.--Eliphas Levi's Views.--Raising the
    Devil.--Crystal Visions.--Propositions established.--Embodied
    Thoughts.--Phantasms not Spirits.--Uniform Characteristics.--A New
    Classification.--Conditions of Objectivity and Persistency.--Haunted
    Houses.---No General Intelligence manifested.--D'Assier's
    Statements.--A Remarkable Case.--Ghosts Intensified Telepathic
    Visions.--Difference in Degree, not in Kind.--Ghosts not controllable
    by Suggestion.--Other Salient Peculiarities.--Ghosts
    neither prove nor disprove Immortality.--Mental Atmosphere
    of Houses.--Remarkable Cases.--Classification of Telepathic
    Phenomena.--Conclusions                                             286


    CHAPTER XXI.

    SUSPENDED ANIMATION AND PREMATURE BURIAL.

    Facts of Startling Import.--The Case of Washington Irving
    Bishop.--Other Instances of Suspended
    Animation.--Vampirism.--Catalepsy.--East Indian Fakirs buried
    alive for Months.--Fundamental Errors.--Catalepsy not a
    Disease.--A Recuperative Agent.--The Law of Suggestion governs
    the Phenomena.--Subjective Insensibility impossible.--Suggestion
    of Death deepens the Lethargy.--The Appalling Dangers of
    Catalepsy.--The Proper Treatment                                    309


    CHAPTER XXII.

    PRACTICAL CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS.

    The Normal Relations of the Objective and Subjective
    Faculties.--Their Distinctive Powers and Functions.--The
    Infinite Wisdom displayed in their Distribution.--It
    constitutes Man a Free Moral Agent.--Limitation of Subjective
    Powers and Responsibilities in this Life.--The Kinship of
    the Soul to God.--The Limitation of the Powers of the
    Objective Mind.--The Transcendent Powers of the Soul.--Errors
    of the Old
    Philosophers.--The Normal Functions of the Soul in Earthly
    Life.--Dangers of Abnormal Exercise of Subjective Power.--Nervous
    Disorders, Insanity, Imbecility, and Moral Degradation.--The
    Importance of a Knowledge of the Law of Suggestion.--Dangers
    of Mediumship.--Trance-Speakers.--Immoral Tendency of Ignorant
    Mediumship.--Tendency towards Free Love.--The Causes.--The
    Orientalists.--Their Greater Powers, and their Greater
    Facilities for Self-Delusion.--Practical Conclusions.--Warnings     321


    CHAPTER XXIII.

    THE PHYSICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND PHILOSOPHY OF CHRIST.

    The Great Stumbling-Block, Unbelief in the Physical History
    of Christ.--Modern Science confirms the New Testament.--Internal
    Evidence of the Truth of the History of Jesus.--The
    Scientific Accuracy of His Statements.--The Exoteric
    and the Esoteric Doctrines.--Parables.--Esoteric Doctrines
    reserved for Modern Science to discover.--The Spirit of
    Truth.--Jesus the first to proclaim the Scientific Truth.--The
    Doctrine of Faith.--Healing the Sick.--Natural Law.--Faith
    essential then as now.--Illustrative Incidents.--Jairus'
    Daughter.--Seven Scientific Steps.--Secrecy enjoined.--Scientific
    Reasons.--Rediscovery of the Science of Mental Therapeutics in
    Modern Times.--Nothing discovered that Jesus did not know.--Absent
    Treatment.--The Power to heal transmitted to all Future
    Generations.--The Conditions.--Conclusions                          338


    CHAPTER XXIV.

    THE PHYSICAL MANIFESTATIONS OF CHRIST (_continued_).

    The Word _Faith_ in its Application to Psychic Phenomena.--Its
    Definition.--An Epitome of the Law of Suggestion.--Subjective
    Faith only required.--Illustrative Incident.--The "Spoken
    Word."--Jesus knew the Law, and always acted within its
    Limitations.--Intuitive Perception of the Laws of
    the Soul.--His Manhood and its Limitations.--Our Warranty
    of Title as Sons of God.--Christ constantly controlled
    by Reason.--His Subjective Powers subservient.--The
    Three Temptations illustrative.--The Great Lesson to
    Mankind.--The Normal Exercise of Subjective Power.--Simon
    the Sorcerer.--Miracle not a Necessary Explanation of the
    Power of Christ.--Conclusions                                       359


    CHAPTER XXV.

    THE SPIRITUAL PHILOSOPHY OF CHRIST.

    The Necessity of Signs and Wonders.--Christ's Work was for
    All-Time.--His Consummate Wisdom.--Signs and Wonders
    as Evidence.--His Perception of Spiritual Laws.--The Perceptive
    Powers of the Soul.--Propositions.--Presumptive
    Evidence of His Knowledge of Spiritual Laws.--Condition
    precedent to Immortality.--Faith the Essential Condition.--The
    Declarations of Christ.--He meant just what He said.--The
    Doctrines of the Church.--Literal Extinction of the
    Soul through Unbelief.--Belief essential to Salvation.--Belief
    will not avert the Consequences of Sin.--Inherent
    Probabilities.--The Conscious Existence of the Soul.--The
    Law of Suggestion applied.--Scepticism constitutes a Fatal
    Suggestion.--Phenomena of Hypnotism illustrative.--Souls
    of Animals have no Conscious Existence; hence
    not Immortal.--Christ as a Saviour of Souls.--His Doctrine
    new to the World, but scientifically correct                        374


    CHAPTER XXVI.

    THE MISSION OF CHRIST. FUTURE REWARDS AND
    PUNISHMENTS.

    The Success of Christ's Mission.--Chaotic State of Spiritual
    Philosophy in His Time.--The Various Doctrines in Vogue.--Jesus
    the first to simplify the Doctrine of Immortality.--He
    gave it a Definite Status in Philosophy.--The Doctrine
    of Future Rewards and Punishments.--God will "Render
    to every Man according to his Deeds."--Spiritual Penalties
    for Violations of Spiritual Law.--The Sin against the Holy
    Ghost.--The Sin of Unbelief.--The Status of a Lost Soul.--Possible
    Reincarnation.--The Means of Punishment for
    Sin.--Affections.--Conscience.--Memory.--General
    Conclusions.--Scientific Basis of Christianity                      389


    CHAPTER XXVII.

    DEDUCTIONS FROM VARIOUS ATTRIBUTES OF THE SOUL.

    The Question of Identity.--Consciousness and Memory.--Identity
    considered in Reference to Rewards and
    Punishments.--Conscience.--Conflicting Theories of
    Psychologists.--Education and Intuition.--Different Standards
    of Morality.--The Soul's Perception of the Eternal Principles
    of Right and Wrong.--The Instinct of Worship.--Its Abnormal
    Manifestations.--The Law of Suggestion.--Universality of
    the Sentiment of Worship.--Its Normal Manifestations.--Demonstrative
    of the Existence of a God of Love.--Old Arguments invalid.--Socrates
    and Paley.--Argument predicated on the Affectional
    Emotions.--Syllogistic Deductions.--The Divine Pedigree of Man      400




[Illustration]




THE

LAW OF PSYCHIC PHENOMENA.




CHAPTER I.

INTRODUCTORY.

    Necessity of a Working Hypothesis.--The Newtonian Hypothesis.--The
    Atomic Theory.--A Psychological Hypothesis necessary.--Theories
    of Hypnotism and Mesmerism.--Spiritism.--Mental
    Therapeutics.--Liébault's Law of Suggestion.--Duality of Mind.--A
    Working Hypothesis for Psychology formulated.--Its Three Terms.


Substantial progress in any science is impossible in the absence
of a working hypothesis which is universal in its application to
the phenomena pertaining to the subject-matter. Indeed, until such
an hypothesis is discovered and formulated, no subject of human
investigation can properly be said to be within the domain of the exact
sciences. Thus, astronomy, previous to the promulgation of Kepler's
Laws and the formulation of the Newtonian hypothesis of gravitation,
was in a state of chaos, and its votaries were hopelessly divided by
conflicting theories. But the moment Newton promulgated his theorem a
revolution began which eventually involved the whole scientific world.
Astronomy was rescued from the domain of empiricism, and became an
exact science. What the Newtonian hypothesis did for astronomy, the
atomic theory has done for chemistry. It enables one skilled in that
science to practise it with a certainty of results in exact proportion
to his knowledge of its principles and his skill in applying them to
the work in hand. He knows that if he can combine hydrogen and oxygen,
in the proportion of two atoms of the former to one of the latter,
water will be the result. He knows that one atom, or part, of oxygen
and one of carbon combined under heat will produce carbonic oxide,--a
poisonous gas; that the addition of another atom, or part, of oxygen
will produce carbonic anhydride (dioxide),--a harmless gas; and so on
throughout the vast realm of chemical combinations.

The fact that the literal correctness of a given hypothesis is not
demonstrable except by results, in no wise militates against its
value in the domain to which it belongs. Indeed, it would cease to
be a hypothesis the moment it were demonstrated. Newton's theorem
is undemonstrable except from its results. Its correspondence,
however, with every known fact, the facility with which astronomical
calculations can be made, and the precision with which every result can
be predicted, constitute a sufficient demonstration of its substantial
correctness to inspire the absolute confidence of the scientific
world. No one would hesitate to act in the most important concerns of
life--nay, to stake his very existence--upon calculations based upon
Newton's hypothesis. Yet there are not found wanting men who deny or
doubt its abstract correctness. Volumes have been written to disprove
it. But as no one has yet discovered a fact or witnessed a phenomenon
outside of its domain, the world refuses to surrender its convictions.
When such a fact is discovered, then, and not till then, will there
arise a necessity for revising the "Principia." It is a trite and true
saying that one antagonistic fact will destroy the value of the finest
theory ever evolved.

It is equally impossible to demonstrate the abstract correctness of
the atomic theory. An appeal to the evidence found in uniform results
is all that is possible to one who would give a reason for the faith
that is in him. No one ever saw, felt, tasted, or smelled an atom.
It is beyond the reach of the senses; nor is it at all probable that
science or skill will ever be able to furnish instrumental aids capable
of enabling man to take cognizance of the ultimate unit of matter. It
exists for man only in hypothesis. Nevertheless, the fact remains,
that in all the wide range of human investigation there is not a more
magnificent generalization, nor one more useful to mankind in its
practical results, than the atomic theory. Yet there are those who
doubt its abstract correctness, and labor to disprove the existence
of the atom. If the ultimate object of chemical science were to
demonstrate the existence of the atom, or to seize it and harness it
to the uses of mankind, it might be worth while to set the chemical
fraternity right by demonstrating its non-existence. If the practice of
chemistry on the basis of the theory were defective in its practical
results, or failed in universal application, it would then be the duty
of scientists to discard it entirely, and to seek a better working
hypothesis.

The most that can be said of any scientific hypothesis is, that whether
true in the abstract or not, everything happens just as though it
were true. When this test of universality is applied, when no known
fact remains that is unexplained by it, the world is justified in
assuming it to be true, and in deducing from it even the most momentous
conclusions. If, on the contrary, there is one fact pertaining to the
subject-matter under investigation which remains outside the domain
of the hypothesis, or which is unexplained by it, it is indubitable
evidence that the hypothesis is unsafe, untrue, and consequently
worthless for all practical purposes of sound reasoning. Thus, Sir
Isaac Newton, after having formulated his theorem, threw it aside as
worthless, for a time, upon making the discovery that the moon, in its
relations with the earth, apparently did not come within the terms of
his hypothesis. His calculations were based upon the then accepted
estimate of the length of a degree of latitude. This estimate having
been corrected by the careful measurements of Picard, Newton revised
his figures, and found that the supposed discrepancy did not exist.
The last doubt in his mind having been thus set at rest, he gave to
the world a theorem which rendered possible substantial progress in
astronomical science.

In the field of psychological investigation a satisfactory working
hypothesis has never been formulated. That is to say, no theory has
been advanced which embraces all psychological phenomena. Many theories
have been advanced, it is true, to account for the various classes of
phenomena which have been observed. Some of them are very plausible and
satisfactory--to their authors--when applied to a particular class of
facts, but utterly fail when confronted with another class.

Thus, the students of the science of hypnotism are, and since the
days of Mesmer have been, hopelessly divided into schools which wage
war upon each other's theories, and dispute the correctness of each
other's observations of facts. Mesmer's theory of fluidic emanations,
which he termed "animal magnetism," seemed to account for the facts
which he observed, and is still held to be substantially true by many
votaries of this science. John Bovee Dods' electrical theory--positive
lungs and negative blood--was sufficiently plausible in its day to
attract many followers, as it afforded a satisfactory explanation of
many phenomena which came under his observation. Braid's physiological
explanation of certain classes of the phenomena afforded, in his time,
much comfort to those who believe that there is nothing in man which
cannot be weighed in a balance or carved with a scalpel. In our own
day we find the school of the Salpêtrière, which holds that hypnotism
is a disease of the nervous system, that its phenomena are explicable
on physiological principles, that the suggestions of the operator
play but a secondary _rôle_ in their production, and that they can be
produced, or successfully studied, only in diseased persons. On the
other hand, the Nancy school of hypnotists holds that the science can
be studied with profit only in perfectly healthy persons, and from a
purely psychological standpoint, and that suggestion is the all-potent
factor in the production of all hypnotic phenomena. All three of
the last-mentioned schools agree in ignoring the possibility of
producing the higher phenomena of hypnotism, known as clairvoyance and
thought-transference, or mind-reading; whilst the earlier hypnotists
demonstrated both beyond the possibility of a reasonable doubt. Indeed,
a committee of the ablest scientists of the Royal Academy of Medicine
of France, after an investigation extending over a period of six years,
reported that it had demonstrated the existence of such powers in the
human mind.

Another large class of psychological phenomena, which has been
productive of more conflicting theories than any other, and which from
time immemorial has puzzled and appalled mankind, is by a large class
of persons referred to the direct agency of the spirits of the dead.
It would require a volume to catalogue the various theories which have
been advanced to account for this class of phenomena, and when done
it would serve no useful purpose. It is safe to say, however, that
no two individuals, whether believers or unbelievers in the generic
doctrine of spiritism, exactly agree as to the ultimate cause of the
phenomena. The obvious reason is that no two persons have had exactly
the same experience, or have observed exactly the same phenomena. In
the absence of a working hypothesis applicable to all the infinite
variety of facts observed, it follows that each investigator must draw
his own conclusions from the limited field of his own experience. And
when we take into consideration the important _rôle_ which passion
and prejudice ever play in the minds of men when the solution of
an undemonstrable problem is attempted, it is easy to see that a
bewildering hodge-podge of heterogeneous opinions is inevitable.

Another class of phenomena, about which an infinite variety of
opinions prevails, may be mentioned under the general head of mental
therapeutics. Under this generic title may be grouped the invocations
of the gods by the Egyptian priests; the magic formulas of the
disciples of Esculapius; the sympathetic powder of Paracelsus; the
king's touch for the cure of goitre; the wonderful cures at the tomb of
Deacon Paris and at Lourdes; the miraculous power supposed to reside in
the relics of the saints; the equally miraculous cures of such men as
Greatrakes, of Gassner, and of the Abbot Prince of Hohenlohe; and the
no less wonderful healing power displayed by the modern systems known
as mind cure, faith cure, Christian science, animal magnetism, and
suggestive therapeutics.

One fact, pregnant with importance, pertains to all these systems;
and that is that marvellous cures are constantly effected through
their agencies. To the casual observer it would seem to be almost
self-evident that, underlying all, there must be some one principle
which, once understood, would show them to be identical as to cause and
mode of operation. Yet we find as many conflicting theories as there
are systems, and as many private opinions as there are individuals who
accept the facts. Some of the hypotheses gravely put forth in books are
so bizarre as to excite only the pity or the ridicule of the judicious.
One notable example is found in that system, the basic theory of which
is that matter has no existence, that nothing is real but mind, and
that, consequently, disease and pain, suffering and death, are mere
hallucinations of morbid intellects. Other theories there are, which,
if not equally absurd, are probably equally remote from the truth; and
each treats the persons as well as the opinions of the others with
that virulent contumely which is the ever-present resort of him who
would force upon his neighbor the acceptance of his own undemonstrable
article of faith. Nevertheless, as before remarked, the fact remains
that each of these systems effects some most wonderful results in the
way of curing certain diseases.

What is true of the phenomena embraced under the general head of
mental therapeutics is also true of the whole range of psychological
phenomena; namely, the want of a working hypothesis which shall apply
to all the facts that have been observed and authenticated.

No successful attempt has heretofore been made to supply this want;
nor has success been possible until within a very recent period,
for the simple reason that previous to the discovery of certain
facts in psychological science, the scientific world was without the
necessary data from which a correct hypothesis could be formulated.
The researches of Professor Liébault in the domain of hypnotism,
seconded by those of his pupil, Professor Bernheim, have resulted
in discoveries which throw a flood of light upon the whole field of
psychological investigation. Their field of observation being confined
to hypnotism, and chiefly to its employment as a therapeutic agent, it
is not probable that either of those eminent scientists realized the
transcendent importance of their principal discovery, or perceived that
it is applicable to psychological phenomena outside the domain of their
special studies. The discovery is this: _that hypnotic subjects are
constantly amenable to the power of suggestion; that suggestion is the
all-potent factor in the production of all hypnotic phenomena_. This
proposition has been demonstrated to be true beyond the possibility
of a reasonable doubt. In subsequent chapters of this book it will
be shown that this fact supplies the missing link in the chain of
propositions necessary for a complete working hypothesis for the
subject under consideration.

The general propositions applicable to all phases of psychological
phenomena are here only briefly stated, leaving the minor, or
subsidiary, propositions necessary for the elucidation of particular
classes and sub-classes of phenomena to be stated under their
appropriate heads.

The first proposition relates to the dual character of man's mental
organization. That is to say, man has, or appears to have, two minds,
each endowed with separate and distinct attributes and powers; each
capable, under certain conditions, of independent action. It should
be clearly understood at the outset that for the purpose of arriving
at a correct conclusion it is a matter of indifference whether we
consider that man is endowed with two distinct minds, or that his one
mind possesses certain attributes and powers under some conditions,
and certain other attributes and powers under other conditions. It
is sufficient to know that everything happens just as though he were
endowed with a dual mental organization.

Under the rules of correct reasoning, therefore, I have a right to
assume that MAN HAS TWO MINDS; and the assumption is so stated, in
its broadest terms, as the first proposition of my hypothesis. For
convenience I shall designate the one as the _objective_ mind, and
the other as the _subjective_ mind. These terms will be more fully
explained at the proper time.

The second proposition is, that THE SUBJECTIVE MIND IS CONSTANTLY
AMENABLE TO CONTROL BY SUGGESTION.

The third, or subsidiary, proposition is, that THE SUBJECTIVE MIND IS
INCAPABLE OF INDUCTIVE REASONING.




[Illustration]




