letter I have already alluded to will see that I have a soft and easy
position; that the thing is really a _pillowry_; and that I am, like
Perrette's pot of milk,

 "Bien posé sur un coussinet."[383]

Joanna Southcott[384] never had a follower who believed in her with more
humble piety than Mr. James Smith believes in himself. After all that has
happened to him, he asks me with high confidence to "favor the writer with
a proof" that I still continue of opinion that "the best of the argument is
in my jokes, and the best of the joke is in his arguments." I will not so
favor him. At the very outset I told him in plain English that he has the
whiphand of all the reasoners in the world, and in plain French that _il a
perdu le droit d'être frappé de l'évidence_[385]; I might have said
_pendu_.[386] To which I now add, in plain Latin, _Sapienti pauca, indocto
nihil_.[387] The law of Chancery says that he who will have equity must do
equity: the law of reasoning says that he who will have proof must see
proof.

The introduction of things quite irrelevant, by way of reproach, is an
argument in universal request: and it often happens that the argument so
produced really tells against the producer. So common is it that we forget
how boyish it is; but we are strikingly reminded when it actually comes
from a boy. In a certain police court, certain small boys were arraigned
for conspiring to hoot an obnoxious individual on his way from one of their
school exhibitions. This proceeding was necessary, because there seemed to
be a permanent conspiracy to annoy the gentleman; and the {240} masters did
not feel able to interfere in what took place outside the school. So the
boys were arraigned; and their friends, as silly in their way as
themselves, allowed one of them to make the defence, instead of employing
counsel; and did not even give them any useful hints. The defence was as
follows; and any one who does not see how richly it sets off the defences
of bigger boys in bigger matters has much to learn. The innocent conviction
that there was answer in the latter part is delightful. Of course fine and
recognizance followed.

A---- said the boys had received great provocation from B----. He was
constantly threatening them with a horsewhip which he carried in his hand
[the boy did not say what had passed to induce him to take such a weapon],
and he had repeatedly insulted the master, which the boys could not stand.
B---- had in his own drawing-room told him (A----) that he had drawn his
sword against the master and thrown away the scabbard. B---- knew well that
if he came to the college he would catch it, and then he went off through a
side door--which was no sign of pluck; and then he brought Mrs. B---- with
him, thinking that her presence would protect him.

My readers may expect a word on Mr. Thom's sermons, after my account of his
queer doings about 666. He is evidently an honest and devout man, much
wanting in discrimination. He has a sermon about private _judgment_, in
which he halts between the logical and legal meanings of the word. He
loathes those who apply their private judgment to the word of God: here he
means those who decide what it _ought to be_. He seems in other places
aware that the theological phrase means taking right to determine what it
_is_. He uses his own private judgment very freely, and is strong in the
conclusion that others ought not to use theirs except as he tells them how;
he leaves all the rest of mankind free to think with him. In this he is not
original: his fame must rest on his senary tripod. {241}



JAMES SMITH ONCE MORE.

Mr. James Smith's procedures are not caricature of reasoning; they are
caricature of blundering. The old way of proving that 2 = 1 is solemn
earnest compared with his demonstrations. As follows:[388]

  Let x = 1
  Then x^2 = x
  And x^2 - 1 = x - 1
  Divide both sides by x - 1; then x + 1 = 1; but x = 1, whence 2 = 1.

When a man is regularly snubbed, bullied, blown up, walked into, and put
down, there is usually some reaction in his favor, a kind of deostracism,
which cannot bear to hear him always called the blunderer. I hope it will
be so in this case. There is nothing I more desire than to see _sects_ of
paradoxers. There are fully five thousand adults in England who ought to be
the followers of some one false quadrature. And I have most hope of 3-1/8,
because I think Mr. James Smith better fitted to be the leader of an
organized infatuation than any one I know of. He wants no pity, and will
get none. He has energy, means, good humor, strong conviction, character,
and popularity in his own circle. And, most indispensable point of all, he
sticks at nothing;

 "In coelum jusseris, ibit."[389]

When my instructor found I did not print an acceptance of what I have
quoted, he addressed me as follows (_Corr._, Sept 23):--

"In this life, however, we must do our duty, and, when {242} necessary, use
the rod, not in a spirit of revenge, but for the benefit of the culprit and
the good of society. Now, Sir, the opportunity has been thrown in your way
of slipping out of the pillory without risk of serious injury; but, like an
obstinate urchin, you have chosen to quarrel with your opportunity and
remain there, and thus you compel me to deal with you as schoolmasters used
to do with stupid boys in bygone days--that is to say, you force me to the
use of the critic's rod, compel me to put you where little Jack Horner sat,
and, as a warning to other naughty boys, to ornament you with a dunce's
cap. The task I set you was a very simple one, as I shall make manifest at
the proper time."

In one or more places, as well as this, Mr. Smith shows that he does not
know the legend of little Jack Horner, whom he imagines to be put in the
corner as a bad boy. This is curious; for there had been many allusions to
the story in the journal he was writing in, and the Christmas pie had
become altered into the Seaforth [pi].

Mr. Smith is satisfied at last that--what between argument and punishment
he has convinced me. He says (_Corr._, Jan. 27, 1866): "I tell him without
hesitation that he knows the true ratio of diameter to circumference as
well as I do, and if he be wise he will admit it." I should hope I do, and
better; but there is no occasion to admit what everybody knows.

I have often wished that we could have a slight glimpse of the reception
which was given to some of the old cyclometers: but we have nothing, except
the grave disapprobation of historians. I am resolved to give the New
Zealander a chance of knowing a little more than this about one of them at
least; and, by the fortunate entrance into life of the _Correspondent_, I
am able to do it. I omit sober mathematical answers, of which there were
several. The following letter is grave earnest:

"Sir,--I have watched Mr. James Smith's writings on this subject from the
first, and I did hope that, as the more {243} he departs from truth the
more easy it must be to refute him, [this by no means always true] some of
your correspondents would by this time have done so. I own that I am unable
to detect the fallacy of his argument; and I am quite certain that '[Pi]'
is wrong, in No. 23, where he declares that Mr. Smith is 'ignorant of the
very elements of mathematical truth.' I have observed an immense amount of
geometrical reasoning on his part, and I cannot see that it is either fair
or honest to deny this, which may be regarded as the 'elements' of
mathematical truth. Would it not be better for '[Pi]' to answer Mr. Smith,
to refute his arguments, to point out their fallacies, and to save learners
from error, than to plunge into gross insult and unmanly abuse? Would it
not be well, also, that Professor De Morgan should favour us with a little
reasoning?

"I have hitherto seen no attempt to overthrow Mr. Smith's arguments; I
trust that this will not continue, since the subject is one of immense
importance to science in general, especially to nautical science, and all
that thereto belongs.

Yours, etc.,

A CAPTAIN, R.N."

On looking at this homoeopathic treatment of the 3-1/8
quadrature--remember, homoeopathic, _similia similibus_,[390] not
infinitesimal--and at the imputation thrown upon it, I asked myself, what
_is_ vulgarity? No two agree, except in this, that every one sees vulgarity
in what is directed against himself. Mark the world, and see if anything be
so common as the description of the other side's remarks as "vulgar attempt
at wit." "I suppose you think that very witty:" the answer is "No my
friend! your remark shows that you feel it as wit, so that the purpose is
answered; I keep my razor for something else than cutting blocks;" I am
inclined to think that "out of place" is a necessary attribute of true
vulgarity. And further, it is to be noticed that nothing is {244}
unproducible--_salvo pudore_[391]--which has classical authority, modern or
ancient, in its favor. "He is a vulgar fellow; I asked him what he was
upon, and what do you think he answered, My legs!"--"Well, and has he not
justification? what do you find in Terence? _Quid agitur? Statur._"[392] I
do not even blench from my principle where I find that it brings what is
called "taking a sight" within permissible forms of expression: Rabelais
not only establishes its antiquity, but makes it English. Our old
translation[393] has it thus (book 2. ch. 19):

"Then made the Englishman this sign. His left hand, all open, he lifted up
into the air, then instantly shut into his fist the four fingers thereof;
and his thumb extended at length he placed upon the tip of his nose.
Presently after he lifted up his right hand all open and abased and bent it
downwards, putting the thumb thereof in the very place where the little
finger of the left hand did close in the fist, and the four right hand
fingers he softly moved in the air. Then contrarily he did with the right
hand what he had done with the left, and with the left what he had done
with the right."

An impressive sight! The making of a fist of the left hand is a great
addition of power, and should be followed in modern practice. The gentle
sullation of the front fingers, with the clenched fist behind them, says as
plainly as possible, Put _suaviter in modo_ in the van, but don't forget to
have _fortiter in re_[394] in the rear.

{245}

My Budget was announced (March 23, 1867) for completion on the 30th. Mr.
James Smith wrote five letters, one before the completion, four after it;
the five contained 68 pages of quarto letter paper. Mr. J. S. had picked up
a clerical correspondent, with whom he was in the heat of battle.

"_March 27._--Dear Sir. Very truly yours. Duty; for my own sake; just time
left to retrieve my errors; sends copy of letter to clergyman; new proof
never before thought of; merest tyro would laugh if I were to stifle it,
whether by rhodomontade or silent contempt; keep your temper. I shall be
convinced; and if world be right in supposing me incapable of a foul act, I
shall proclaim glorious discovery in the _Athenæum_.

"_April 15._--Sir,... My dear Sir, Your sincere tutelary. Copy of another
letter to clergyman; discovery tested by logarithms; reasons such as none
but a knave or a sinner can resist. Let me advise you to take counsel
before it is too late! Keep your temper. Let not your _pride_ get the
better of your discretion! Screw up your courage, my good friend, and
_resolve_ to show the world that you are an _honest_ man....

"_April 20._--Sir ... Your very sincere and favorite tutelary. I have long
played the _cur_, snapping and snarling...; suddenly lost my power, and
became _half-starved_ dog without _spirit_ to bark; try if air cannot
restore me; calls himself the _thistle_ in allusion to my other tutelary,
the _thorn_; Would I prefer his next work to be, 'A whip for the
Mathematical Cur, Prof. De M.' In some previous letter which I have
mislaid, he told me his next would be 'a muzzle for the Mathematical Bull
dog, Prof. De M.'

"_April 23._--Sir. Very sincerely yours. More letters to clergyman; you may
as well knock your head against a stone wall to improve your intellect as
attempt to controvert my proofs. [I thought so too; and tried neither].
{246}

"_May 6._--My dear Sir. Very sincerely yours. All to myself, and nothing to
note.

"_July 2._--No more in this interval. All that precedes is a desperate
attempt to induce me to continue my descriptions: notoriety at any price."

I dare say the matter is finished: the record of so marked an instance of
self-delusion will be useful.

I append to the foregoing a letter from Dr. Whewell[395] to Mr. James
Smith. The Master of Trinity was conspicuous as a rough customer, an
intellectual bully, an overbearing disputant: the character was as well
established as that of Sam Johnson. But there was a marked difference. It
was said of Johnson that if his pistol missed fire, he would knock you down
with the butt end of it: but Whewell, in like case, always acknowledged the
miss, and loaded again or not, as the case might be. He reminded me of
Dennis Brulgruddery, who says to Dan, Pacify me with a good reason, and
you'll find me a dutiful master. I knew him from the time when he was my
teacher at Cambridge, more than forty years. As a teacher, he was anything
but dictatorial, and he was perfectly accessible to proposal of objections.
He came in contact with me in his slashing way twice in our after joint
lives, and on both occasions he acknowledged himself overcome, by that
change of manner, and apologetic mode of continuance, which I had seen him
employ towards others under like circumstances.

I had expressed my wish to have a _thermometer of probability_, with
impossibility at one end, as 2 and 2 make 5, and necessity at the other, as
2 and 2 make 4, and a graduated rise of examples between them. Down came a
blow: "What! put necessary and contingent propositions together! It's
absurd!" I pointed out that the two kinds of necessity are but such
extremes of probability as 0 and [infinity] are of number, and illustrated
by an urn with 1 white and _n_ black {247} balls, _n_ increasing without
limit. It was frankly seen, and the point yielded; a large company was
present.

Again, in a large party, after dinner, and politics being the subject, I
was proceeding, in discussion with Mr. Whewell, with "I think"...--"Ugh!
_you_ think!" was the answer. I repeated my phrase, and gave as a reason
the words which Lord Grey[396] had used in the House of Lords the night
before (the celebrated advice to the Bishops to set their houses in order).
He had not heard of this, and his manner changed in an instant: he was the
rational discutient all the rest of the evening, having previously been
nothing but a disputant with all the distinctions strongly marked.

I have said that Whewell was gentle with his pupils; it was the same with
all who wanted teaching: it was only on an armed enemy that he drew his
weapon. The letter which he wrote to Mr. J. Smith is an instance: and as it
applies with perfect fidelity to the efforts of unreasoning above
described, I give it here. Mr. James Smith is skilfully exposed, and felt
it; as is proved by "putting the writer in the stocks."

"The Lodge, Cambridge, September 14th, 1862.

"Sir,--I have received your explanation of your proposition that the
circumference of the circle is to its diameter as 25 to 8. I am afraid I
shall disappoint you by saying that I see no force in your proof: and I
should hope that you will see that there is no force in it if you consider
this: In the whole course of the proof, though the word cycle occurs, there
is no property of the circle employed. You may do this: you may put the
word _hexagon_ or _dodecagon_, or any other word describing a polygon in
the place of _Circle_ in your proof, and the proof would be just as good as
before. Does not this satisfy you that you cannot have proved a property of
that special figure--a circle? {248}

"Or you may do this: calculate the side of a polygon of 24 sides inscribed
in a circle. I think you are a Mathematician enough to do this. You will
find that if the radius of the circle be one, the side of this polygon is
.264 etc. Now, the arc which this side subtends is according to your
proposition 3.125/12 = .2604, and therefore the chord is greater than its
arc, which you will allow is impossible.

"I shall be glad if these arguments satisfy you, and

"I am, Sir, your obedient Servant,

"W. WHEWELL."



AN M.P.'S ARITHMETIC.

In the debate of May, 1866, on Electoral Qualifications, a question arose
about arithmetical capability. Mr. Gladstone asked how many members of the
House could divide 1330l. 7s. 6d. by 2l. 13s. 8d. Six hundred and
fifty-eight, answered one member; the thing cannot be done, answered
another. There is an old paradox to which this relates: it arises out of
the ignorance of the distinction between abstract and concrete arithmetic.
_Magnitude_ may be divided by _magnitude_; and the answer is number: how
often does 12d. contain 4d.; answer three times. _Magnitude_ may be divided
by _number_, and the answer is _magnitude_: 12d. is divided in four equal
parts, what is each part? Answer three _pence_. The honorable objector,
whose name I suppress, trusting that he has mended his ways, gave the
following utterance:

"With regard to the division sum, it was quite possible to divide by a sum,
but not by money. How could any one divide money by 2l. 16s. 8d.?
(Laughter.) The question might be asked, 'How many times 2s. will go into
1l.?' but that was not dividing by money; it was simply dividing 20 by 2.
He might be asked, 'How many times will 6s. 8d. go into a pound?' but it
was only required to divide 240 by 80. If the right hon. gentleman were to
ask the hon. {249} member for Brighton (Professor Fawcett),[397] or any
other authority, he would receive the same answer--viz., that it was
possible to divide by a sum, but not by money. (Hear.)"

I shall leave all comment for the second edition, if I publish one.[398] I
shall be sure to have something to laugh at. Anything said from a
respectable quarter, or supposed to be said, is sure to find defenders. Sam
Johnson, a sound arithmetician, comparing himself, and what he alone had
done in three years, with forty French Academicians and their forty years,
said it proved that an Englishman is to a Frenchman as 40 × 40 to 3, or as
1600 to 3. Boswell, who was no great hand at arithmetic, made him say that
an Englishman is to a Frenchman as 3 to 1600. When I pointed this out, the
supposed Johnson was defended through thick and thin in _Notes and
Queries_.

I am now curious to see whether the following will find a palliator. It is
from "Tristram Shandy," book V. chapter 3. There are two curious idioms,
"for for" and "half in half"; but these have nothing to do with my point:

"A blessing which tied up my father's tongue, and a misfortune which set it
loose with a good grace, were pretty equal: sometimes, indeed, the
misfortune was the better of the two; for, for instance, where the pleasure
of harangue was as _ten_, and the pain of the misfortune but as _five_, my
father gained half in half; and consequently was as well again off as if it
had never befallen him."

This is a jolly confusion of ideas; and wants nothing but a defender to
make it perfect. A person who invests five {250} with a return of ten, and
one who loses five with one hand and gains ten with the other, both leave
off five richer than they began, no doubt. The first gains "half in half,"
more properly "half _on_ half," that is, of the return, 10, the second 5 is
gain upon the first 5 invested. "Half _in_ half" is a queer way of saying
cent. per cent. If the 5l. invested be all the man had in the world, he
comes out, after the gain, twice as well off as he began, with reference to
his whole fortune. But it is very odd to say that balance of 5l. gain is
_twice_ as good as if nothing had befallen, either loss or gain. A
mathematician thinks 5 an infinite number of times as great as 0. The whole
confusion is not so apparent when money is in question: for money is money
whether gained or lost. But though pleasure and pain stand to one another
in the same algebraical relation as money gained and lost, yet there is
more than algebra can take account of in the difference.

Next, Ri. Milward[399] (Richard, no doubt, but it cannot be proved) who
published Selden's[400] Table Talk, which he had collected while serving as
amanuensis, makes Selden say, "A subsidy was counted the fifth part of a
man's estate; and so fifty subsidies is five and forty times more than a
man is worth." For _times_ read _subsidies_, which seems part of the
confusion, and there remains the making all the subsidies equal to the
first, though the whole of which they are to be the fifths is perpetually
diminished.

Thirdly, there is the confusion of the great misomath {251} of our own day,
who discovered two quantities which he avers to be identically the same,
but the greater the one the less the other. He had a truth in his mind,
which his notions of quantity were inadequate to clothe in language. This
erroneous phraseology has not found a defender; and I am almost inclined to
say, with Falstaff, The poor abuses of the time want countenance.



ERRONEOUS ARITHMETICAL NOTIONS.

"Shallow numerists," as Cocker[401] is made to call them, have long been at
work upon the question how to _multiply_ money by money. It is, I have
observed, a very common way of amusing the tedium of a sea voyage: I have
had more than one bet referred to me. Because an oblong of five inches by
four inches contains 5 × 4 or 20 _square_ inches, people say that five
inches multiplied by four inches _is_ twenty _square_ inches: and, thinking
that they have multiplied length by length, they stare when they are told
that money cannot be multiplied by money. One of my betters made it an
argument for the thing being impossible, that there is no _square money_:
what could I do but suggest that postage-stamps should be made legal
tender. Multiplication must be _repetition_: the repeating process must be
indicated by _number_ of times. I once had difficulty in persuading another
of my betters that if you repeat five shillings as often as there are hairs
in a horse's tail, you do not _multiply five shillings by a
horsetail_.[402]

I am very sorry to say that these wrong notions have found support--I think
they do so no longer--in the University of Cambridge. In 1856 or 1857, an
examiner was displaced by a vote of the Senate. The pretext was that he was
too severe an examiner: but it was well known that {252} great
dissatisfaction had been expressed, far and wide through the Colleges, at
an absurd question which he had given. He actually proposed such a fraction
as

   6s. 3d.
  --------.
  17s. 4d.

As common sense gained a hearing very soon, there is no occasion to say
more. In 1858, it was proposed at a college examination, to divide 22557
days, 20 hours, 20 minutes, 48 seconds, by 57 minutes, 12 seconds, and also
to explain the fraction

  32l. 18s. 8d.
  -------------.
  62l. 12s. 9d.

All paradoxy, in matters of demonstration, arises out of muddle about first
principles. Who can say how much of it is to be laid at the door of the
University of Cambridge, for not taking care of the elements of
arithmetical thought?



ON LITERARY BARGAINS.

The phenomena of the two ends of society, when brought together, give
interesting comparisons: I mean the early beginnings of thought and
literature, and our own high and finished state, as we think it. There is
one very remarkable point. In the early day, the letter was matter of the
closest adherence, and implied meanings were not admitted.

The blessing of Isaac meant for Esau, went to false Jacob, in spite of the
imposition; and the writer of Genesis seems to intend to give the notion
that Isaac had no power to pronounce it null and void. And "Jacob's policy,
whereby he became rich"--as the chapter-heading puts it--in speckled and
spotted stock, is not considered as a violation of the agreement, which
contemplated natural proportions. In {253} the story of Lycurgus the
lawgiver is held to have behaved fairly when he bound the Spartans to obey
his laws until he returned--intimating a short absence--he intending never
to return. And Vishnoo, when he asked the usurper for three steps of
territory as a dwarf, and then enlarged himself until he could bring heaven
and earth under the bargain, was thought clever, certainly, but quite fair.

There is nothing of this kind recognized in our day: so far good. But there
is a bad contrary: the age is apt, in interpretation, to upset the letter
in favor of the view--very often the after thought--of one side only. The
case of John Palmer,[403] the improver of the mail coach system, is
smothered. He was to have an office and a salary, and 2½ per cent for life
on the increased _revenue_ of the Post-Office. His rights turned out so
large, that Government would not pay them. For misconduct, real or
pretended, they turned him out of his _office_: but his bargain as to the
percentage had nothing to do with his future conduct; it was payment for
his _plan_. I know nothing, except from the debates of 1808 in the two
Houses: if any one can redeem the credit of the nation, the field is open.
When I was young, the old stagers spoke of this transaction sparingly, and
dismissed it speedily.

The government did not choose to remember what private persons must
remember, and are made to remember, if needful. When Dr. Lardner[404] made
his bargain with the {254} publishers for the _Cabinet Cyclopædia_ he
proposed that he, as editor, should have a certain sum for every hundred
sold above a certain number: the publishers, who did not think there was
any chance of reaching the turning sale of this stipulation, readily
consented. But it turned out that Dr. Lardner saw further than they: the
returns under this stipulation gave him a very handsome addition to his
other receipts. The publishers stared; but they paid. They had no idea of
standing out that the amount was too much for an editor; they knew that,
though the editor had a percentage, they had all the rest; and they would
not have felt aggrieved if he had received ten times as much. But
governments, which cannot be brought to book before a sworn jury, are ruled
only by public opinion. John Palmer's day was also the day of Thomas Fyshe
Palmer,[405] and the governments, in their prosecutions for sedition, knew
that these would have a reflex action upon the minds of all who wrote about
public affairs.



DECLARATION OF BELIEF

1864-65.--It often happens that persons combine to maintain and enforce an
opinion; but it is, in our state of society, a paradox to unite for the
sole purpose of blaming the opposite side. To invite educated men to do
this, and above all, men of learning or science, is the next paradoxical
thing of all. But this was done by a small combination in 1864. They got
together and drew up a _declaration_, to be signed by "students of the
natural sciences," who were to express their "sincere regret that
researches into {255} scientific truth are perverted by some in our own
times into occasion for casting doubt upon the truth and authenticity of
the Holy Scriptures." In words of ambiguous sophistry, they proceeded to
request, in effect, that people would be pleased to adopt the views of
churches as to the _complete_ inspiration of all the canonical books. The
great question whether the Word of God is _in_ the Bible, or whether the
Word of God is _all_ the Bible, was quietly taken for granted in favor of
the second view; to the end that men of science might be induced to blame
those who took the first view. The first public attention was drawn to the
subject by Sir John Herschel,[406] who in refusing to sign the writ sent to
him, administered a rebuke in the _Athenæum_, which would have opened most
eyes to see that the case was hopeless. The words of a man whose _suaviter
in modo_ makes his _fortiter in re_[407] cut blocks with a razor are worth
preserving:

"I consider the act of calling upon me publicly to avow or disavow, to
approve or disapprove, in writing, any religious doctrine or statement,
however carefully or cautiously drawn up (in other words, to append my name
to a religious manifesto) to be an infringement of that social forbearance
which guards the freedom of religious opinion in this country with especial
sanctity.... I consider this movement simply mischievous, having a direct
tendency (by putting forward a new Shibboleth, a new verbal test of
religious partisanship) to add a fresh element of discord to the already
too discordant relations of the Christian world.... But no nicety of
wording, no artifice of human language, will suffice to discriminate the
hundredth part of the shades of meaning in which the most world-wide
differences of thought on such subjects may be involved; or prevent the
most gentle worded and apparently justifiable expression of regret, so
embodied, from grating on the {256} feelings of thousands of estimable and
well-intentioned men with all the harshness of controversial hostility."

Other doses were administered by Sir J. Bowring,[408] Sir W. Rowan
Hamilton,[409] and myself. The signed declaration was promised for
Christmas, 1864: but nothing presentable was then ready; and it was near
Midsummer, 1865, before it was published. Persons often incautiously put
their names without seeing the _character_ of a document, because they
coincide in its _opinions_. In this way, probably, fifteen respectable
names were procured before printing; and these, when committed, were hawked
as part of an application to "solicit the favor" of other signatures. It is
likely enough no one of the fifteen saw that the declaration was, not
_maintenance_ of their own opinion, but _regret_ (a civil word for _blame_)
that others should _think differently_.

When the list appeared, there were no fewer than 716 names! But analysis
showed that this roll was not a specimen of the mature science of the
country. The collection was very miscellaneous: 38 were designated as
"students of the College of Chemistry," meaning young men who attended
lectures in that college. But as all the Royal Society had been applied to,
a test results as follows. Of Fellows of the Royal Society, 600 in number,
62 gave their signatures; of writers in the _Philosophical Transactions_,
166 in number, 19 gave their signatures. Roughly speaking, then, only one
out of ten could be got to express disapprobation of the free comparison of
the results of science with the statements of the canonical books. And I am
satisfied that many of these thought they were signing only a declaration
of difference of opinion, not of blame for that difference. The number of
persons is not small who, when it comes to signing printed documents, would
put their names to a declaration that the coffee-pot ought to be taken
down-stairs, meaning that the teapot ought to be brought {257} up-stairs.
And many of them would defend it. Some would say that the two things are
not contradictory; which, with a snort or two of contempt, would be very
effective. Others would, in the candid and quiet tone, point out that it is
all one, because coffee is usually taken before tea, and it keeps the table
clear to send away the coffee-pot before the teapot is brought up.

The original signatures were decently interred in the Bodleian Library: and
the advocates of scattering indefinite blame for indefinite sins of opinion
among indefinite persons are, I understand, divided in opinion about the
time at which the next attempt shall be made upon men of scientific
studies: some are for the Greek Calends, and others for the Roman
Olympiads. But, with their usual love of indefiniteness, they have
determined that the choice shall be argued upon the basis that which comes
first cannot be settled, and is of no consequence.

I give the declaration entire, as a curiosity: and parallel with it I give
a substitute which was proposed in the _Athenæum_, as worthy to be signed
both by students of theology, and by students of science, especially in
past time. When a new attempt is made, it will be worth while to look at
both:

_Declaration._                  _Proposed Substitute._

We, the undersigned Students    We, the undersigned Students
of the Natural Sciences,        of Theology and of Nature,
desire to express our sincere   desire to express our sincere
regret, that researches into    regret, that common notions of
scientific truth are perverted  religious truth are perverted
by some in our own times into   by some in our own times into
occasion for casting doubt      occasion for casting reproach
upon the Truth and              upon the advocates of
Authenticity of the Holy        demonstrated or highly
Scriptures.                     probable scientific theories.

                                {258}
We conceive that it is          We conceive that it is
impossible for the Word of      impossible for the Word of
God, as written in the book of  God, as correctly read in the
nature, and God's Word written  Book of Nature, and the Word
in Holy Scripture, to           of God, as truly interpreted
contradict one another,         out of the Holy Scripture, to
however much they may appear    contradict one another,
to differ.                      however much they may appear
                                to differ.
We are not forgetful that       We are not forgetful that
Physical Science is not         neither theological
complete, but is only in a      interpretation nor physical
condition of progress, and      knowledge is yet complete, but
that at present our finite      that both are in a condition
reason enables us only to see   of progress; and that at
as through a glass darkly,      present our finite reason
                                enables us only to see both
                                one and the other as through a
                                glass darkly [the writers of
                                the original declaration have
                                distinctively applied to
                                physical science the phrase by
                                which St. Paul denotes the
                                imperfections of theological
                                vision, which they tacitly
                                assume to be quite perfect],
and we confidently believe,     and we confidently believe,
that a time will come when the  that a time will come when the
two records will be seen to     two records will be seen to
agree in every particular. We   agree in every particular. We
cannot but deplore that         cannot but deplore that
Natural Science should be       Religion should be looked upon
looked upon with suspicion by   with suspicion by some and
many who do not make a study    Science by others, of the
of it, merely on account of     students of either who do not
the unadvised manner in which   make a study of the {259}
some are placing it in          other, merely on account of
opposition to Holy Writ.        the unadvised manner in which
                                some are placing Religion in
                                opposition to Science, and
                                some are placing Science in
                                opposition to Religion.
We believe that it is the duty  We believe that it is the duty
of every Scientific Student to  of every theological student
investigate nature simply for   to investigate the Scripture,
the purpose of elucidating      and of every scientific
truth,                          student to investigate Nature,
                                simply for the purpose of
                                elucidating truth.
and that if he finds that some  And if either should find that
of his results appear to be in  some of his results appear to
contradiction to the Written    be in contradiction, whether
Word, or rather to his own      to Scripture or to Nature, or
_interpretations_ of it, which  rather to his own
may be erroneous, he should     _interpretation_ of one or the
not presumptuously affirm that  other, which may be erroneous,
his own conclusions must be     he should not affirm as with
right, and the statements of    certainty that his own
Scripture wrong;                conclusion must be right, and
                                the other interpretation
                                wrong:
rather, leave the two side by   but should leave the two side
side till it shall please God   by side for further inquiry
to allow us to see the manner   into both, until it shall
in which they may be            please God to allow us to
reconciled;                     arrive at the manner in which
                                they may be reconciled.
and, instead of insisting upon  In the mean while, instead of
the seeming differences         insisting, and least of all
between Science and the         with acrimony or injurious
Scriptures, it would be as      {260} statements about others,
well to rest in faith upon the  upon the seeming differences
points in which they agree.     between Science and the
                                Scriptures, it would be a
                                thousand times better to rest
                                in faith as to our future
                                state, in hope as to our
                                coming knowledge, and in
                                charity as to our present
                                differences.

The distinctness of the fallacies is creditable to the composers, and shows
that scientific habits tend to clearness, even to sophistry. Nowhere does
it so plainly stand out that the _Written Word_ means the sense in which
the accuser takes it, while the sense of the other side is _their
interpretation_. The infallible church on one side, arrayed against
heretical pravity on the other, is seen in all subjects in which men
differ. At school there were various games in which one or another
advantage was the right of those who first called for it. In adult argument
the same thing is often attempted: we often hear--I cried _Church_ first!

I end with the answer which I myself gave to the application: its revival
may possibly save me from a repetition of the like. If there be anything I
hate more than another it is the proposal to place any persons, especially
those who allow freedom to me, under any abridgment of their liberty to
think, to infer, and to publish. If they break the law, take the law; but
do not make the law: [Greek: agoraioi agontai enkaleitôsan allêlois.][410]
I would rather be asked to take shares in an argyrosteretic company (with
limited liability) for breaking into houses by night on fork and spoon
errands. I should put aside this proposal with _nothing but laughter_. It
was a joke against Sam Rogers[411] that his appearance was very like that
of a corpse. The _John Bull_ {261} newspaper--suppose we now say Theodore
Hook[412]--averred that when he hailed a coach one night in St. Paul's
Churchyard, the jarvey said, "Ho! ho! my man; I'm not going to be taken in
that way: go back to your grave!" This is the answer I shall make for the
future to any relics of a former time who shall want to call me off the
stand for their own purposes. What obligation have I to admit that they
belong to our world?



"SCRIPTURE AND SCIENCE.

"_The Writ De Hæretico Commiserando._[413]

Nov. 14, 1864.

"This document was sent to me four days ago. It 'solicits the favor'--I
thought at first it was a grocer's supplication for tea and sugar
patronage--of my signature to expression of 'sincere regret' that some
persons unnamed--general warrants are illegal--differ from what I am
supposed--by persons whom it does not concern--to hold about Scripture and
Science in their real or alleged discrepancies.

"No such favor from me: for three reasons. First, I agree with Sir. J.
Herschel that the solicitation is an intrusion to be publicly repelled.
Secondly, I do _not_ regret that others should differ from me, think what I
may: those others are as good as I, and as well able to think, and as much
entitled to their conclusions. Thirdly, even if I did regret, I should be
ashamed to put my name to bad chemistry made to do duty for good reasoning.
The declaration is an awkward attempt to saturate sophism with truism; but
the sophism is left largely in excess.

{262}

"I owe the inquisitors a grudge for taking down my conceit of myself. For
two months I have crowed in my own mind over my friend Sir J. Herschel,
fancying that the promoters instinctively knew better than to bring their
fallacies before a writer on logic. Ah! my dear Sir John! thought I, if you
had shown yourself to be well up in _Barbara Celarent_,[414] and had ever
and anon astonished the natives with the distinction between _simpliciter_
and _secundum quid_, no autograph-hunters would have baited a trap with
_non sequitur_[415] to catch your signature. What can I say now? I hide my
diminished head, diminished by the horns which I have been compelled to
draw in.

"Those who make personal solicitation for support to an opinion about
religion are bound to know their men. The king had a right to Brother
Neale's money, because Brother Neale offered it. Had he put his hand into
purse after purse by way of finding out all who were of Brother Neale's
mind, he would have been justly met by a rap on the knuckles whenever he
missed his mark.

"The kind of test before me is the utmost our time will allow of that
inquisition into opinion which has been the curse of Christianity ever
since the State took Providence under its protection. The writ _de hæretico
commiserando_ is little more than the smell of the empty cask: and those
who issue it may represent the old woman with her

 "O suavis anima, quale in te dicam bonum
  Antehac fuisse; tales cum sint reliquiæ."[416]

It is no excuse that the illegitimate bantling is a very little one. Its
parents may think themselves hardly treated when they are called lineal
successors of Tony Fire-the-faggot: {263} but, degenerate though they be,
such is their ancestry. Let every allowance be made for them: but their
unholy fire must be trodden out; so long as a spark is left, nothing but
fuel is wanted to make a blaze. If this cannot be done, let the flame be
confined to theology, though even there it burns with diminished vigor: and
let charity, candor, sense, and ridicule, be ready to play upon it whenever
there is any chance of its extending to literature and science.

"What would be the consequence if this test-signing absurdity were to grow?
Deep would call unto deep; counter-declaration would answer declaration,
each stronger than the one before. The moves would go on like the dispute
of two German students, of whom each is bound to a sharper retort on a
graduated scale, until at last comes _dummer Junge_![417]--and then they
must fight. There is a gentleman in the upper fifteen of the signers of the
writ--the hawking of whose names appears to me very bad taste--whom I met
in cordial cooperation for many a year at a scientific board. All I knew
about his religion was that he, as a clergyman, must in some sense or other
receive the 39 Articles:--all that he could know about mine was that I was
some kind of heretic, or so reputed. If we had come to signing opposite
manifestoes, turn-about, we might have found ourselves in the lowest depths
of party discussion at our very council-table. I trust the list of
subscribers to the declaration, when it comes to be published, will show
that the bulk of those who have really added to our knowledge have seen the
thing in its true light.

"The promoters--I say nothing about the subscribers--of the movement will,
I trust, not feel aggrieved at the course I have taken or the remarks I
have made. Walter Scott says that before we judge Napoleon by the
temptation to which he yielded, we ought to remember how much he may have
resisted: I invite them to apply this rule to myself; they can have no idea
of the feeling with which I {264} contemplate all attempts to repress
freedom of inquiry, nor of the loathing with which I recoil from the
proposal to be art and part. They have asked me to give a public opinion
upon a certain point. It is true that they have had the kindness to tender
both the opinion they wish me to form, and the shape in which they would
have it appear: I will let them draw me out, but I will not let them take
me in. If they will put an asterisk to my name, and this letter to the
asterisk, they are welcome to my signature. As I do not expect them to
relish this proposal, I will not solicit the favor of its adoption. But
they have given a right to think, for they have asked me to think; to
publish, for they have asked me to allow them to publish; to blame them,
for they have asked me to blame their betters. Should they venture to find
fault because my direction of disapproval, publicly given, is half a
revolution different from theirs, they will be known as having presented a
loaded document at the head of a traveler in the highway of discussion,
with--Your signature or your silence!"



THE FLY-LEAF PARADOX.

The paradox being the proposition of something which runs counter to what
would generally be thought likely, may present itself in many ways. There
is a _fly-leaf paradox_, which puzzled me for many years, until I found a
probable solution. I frequently saw, in the blank leaves of old books,
learned books, Bibles of a time when a Bible was very costly, etc., the
name of an owner who, by the handwriting and spelling, must have been an
illiterate person or a child, followed by the date of the book itself.
Accordingly, this uneducated person or young child seemed to be the first
owner, which in many cases was not credible. Looking one day at a
Barker's[418] Bible of 1599, I saw an {265} inscription in a child's
writing, which certainly belonged to a much later date. It was "Martha
Taylor, her book, giuen me by Granny Scott to keep for her sake." With this
the usual verses, followed by 1599, the date of the book. But it so chanced
that the blank page opposite the title, on which the above was written, was
a verso of the last leaf of a prayer book, which had been bound before the
Bible; and on the recto of this leaf was a colophon, with the date 1632. It
struck me immediately that uneducated persons and children, having seen
dates written under names, and not being quite up in chronology, did
frequently finish off with the date of the book, which stared them in the
face.

Always write in your books. You may be a silly person--for though your
reading my book is rather a contrary presumption, yet it is not
conclusive--and your observations may be silly or irrelevant, but you
cannot tell what use they may be of long after you are gone where
Budgeteers cease from troubling.

I picked up the following book, printed by J. Franklin[419] at Boston,
during the period in which his younger brother Benjamin was his apprentice.
And as Benjamin was apprenticed very early, and is recorded as having
learned the mechanical art very rapidly, there is some presumption that
part of it may be his work, though he was but thirteen at the time. As this
set of editions of Hodder[420] (by {266} Mose[421]) is not mentioned, to my
knowledge, I give the title in full:

    "Hodder's Arithmetick: or that necessary art made most easy: Being
    explained in a way familiar to the capacity of any that desire to learn
    it in a little time. By James Hodder, Writing-master. The Five and
    twentieth edition, revised, augmented, and above a thousand faults
    amended, by Henry Mose, late servant and successor to the author.
    Boston: printed by J. Franklin, for S. Phillips, N. Buttolph, B.
    Elliot, D. Henchman, G. Phillips, J. Elliot, and E. Negus, booksellers
    in Boston, and sold at their shops. 1719."

The book is a very small octavo, the type and execution are creditable, the
woodcut at the beginning is clumsy. It is a perfect copy, page for page, of
the English editions of Mose's Hodder, of which the one called seventeenth
is of London, 1690. There is not a syllable to show that the edition above
described might not be of Boston in England. Presumptions, but not very
strong ones, might be derived from the name of _Franklin_, and from the
large number of booksellers who combined in the undertaking. It chanced,
however, that a former owner had made the following note in my copy:

    "Wednessday, July y^e 14, 1796, att ten in y^e forenoon we sail^d from
    Boston, came too twice, once in King Rode, and once in y^e Narrows.
    Sail^d by y^e lighthouse in y^e even^g."

{267}

No ordinary map would decide these points: so I had to apply to my friend
Sir Francis Beaufort,[422] and the charts at the Admiralty decided
immediately for Massachusetts.



PARADOXES OF ORTHOGRAPHY AND COMPUTATION.

The French are able paradoxers in their spelling of foreign names. The Abbé
Sabatier de Castres,[423] in 1772, gives an account of an imaginary
dialogue between Swif, Adisson, Otwai, and Bolingbrocke. I had hoped that
this was a thing of former days, like the literal roasting of heretics; but
the charity which hopeth all things must hope for disappointments. Looking
at a recent work on the history of the popes, I found referred to, in the
matter of Urban VIII[424] and Galileo, references to the works of two
Englishmen, the Rev. Win Worewel and the Rev. Raden Powen. [Wm. Whewell and
Baden Powell].[425]

I must not forget the "moderate computation" paradox. This is the way by
which large figures are usually obtained. Anything surprisingly great is
got by the "lowest computation," anything as surprisingly small by the
"utmost computation"; and these are the two great subdivisions of "moderate
computation." In this way we learn that 70,000 persons were executed in one
reign, and 150,000 persons {268} burned for witchcraft in one century.
Sometimes this computation is very close. By a card before me it appears
that all the Christians, including those dispersed in heathen countries,
those of Great Britain and Ireland excepted, are 198,728,000 people, and
pay their clergy 8,852,000l. But 6,400,000 people pay the clergy of the
Anglo-Irish Establishment 8,896,000l.; and 14,600,000 of other
denominations pay 1,024,000l. When I read moderate computations, I always
think of Voltaire and the "mémoires du fameux évêque de Chiapa, par
lesquels il paraît qu'il avait égorgé, ou brulé, ou noyé dix millions
d'infidèles en Amérique pour les convertir. Je crus que cet évêque
exaggérait; mais quand on réduisait ces sacrifices à cinq millions de
victimes, cela serait encore admirable."[426]



CENTRIFUGAL FORCE.

My Budget has been arranged by authors. This is the only plan, for much of
the remark is personal: the peculiarities of the paradoxer are a large part
of the interest of the paradox. As to subject-matter, there are points
which stand strongly out; the quadrature of the circle, for instance. But
there are others which cannot be drawn out so as to be conspicuous in a
review of writers: as one instance, I may take the _centrifugal force_.

When I was about nine years old I was taken to hear a course of lectures,
given by an itinerant lecturer in a country town, to get as much as I could
of the second half of a good, sound, philosophical omniscience. The first
half (and sometimes more) comes by nature. To this end I smelt chemicals,
learned that they were different kinds of _gin_, saw young wags try to kiss
the girls under the excuse of what was called _laughing gas_--which I was
sure {269} was not to blame for more than five per cent of the requisite
assurance--and so forth. This was all well so far as it went; but there was
also the excessive notion of creative power exhibited in the millions of
miles of the solar system, of which power I wondered they did not give a
still grander idea by expressing the distances in inches. But even this was
nothing to the ingenious contrivance of the centrifugal force. "You have
heard what I have said of the wonderful centripetal force, by which Divine
Wisdom has retained the planets in their orbits round the Sun. But, ladies
and gentlemen, it must be clear to you that if there were no other force in
action, this centripetal force would draw our earth and the other planets
into the Sun, and universal ruin would ensue. To prevent such a
catastrophe, the same wisdom has implanted a centrifugal force of the same
amount, and directly opposite," etc. I had never heard of Alfonso X of
Castile,[427] but I ventured to think that if Divine Wisdom had just let
the planets alone it would come to the same thing, with equal and opposite
troubles saved. The paradoxers deal largely in speculation conducted upon
the above explanation. They provide external agents for what they call the
centrifugal force. Some make the sun's rays keep the planets off, without a
thought about what would become of our poor eyes if the _push_ of the light
which falls on the earth were a counterpoise to all its gravitation. The
true explanation cannot be given here, for want of room.



CAMBRIDGE POETS.

Sometimes a person who has a point to carry will assert a singular fact or
prediction for the sake of his point; and {270} this paradox has almost
obtained the sole use of the name. Persons who have reputation to care for
should beware how they adopt this plan, which now and then eventuates a
spanker, as the American editor said. Lord Byron, in "English Bards, etc."
(1809), ridiculing Cambridge poetry, wrote as follows:

 "But where fair Isis rolls her purer wave,
  The partial muse delighted loves to lave;
  On her green banks a greener wreath she wove,
  To crown the bards that haunt her classic grove;
  Where Richards[428] wakes a genuine poet's fires,
  And modern Britons glory in their sires."[429]

There is some account of the Rev. Geo. Richards, Fellow of Oriel and Vicar
of Bampton, (M.A. in 1791) in the _Living Authors_ by Watkins[430] and
Shoberl[431] (1816). In Rivers's _Living Authors_, of 1798, which is best
fitted for citation, as being published before Lord Byron wrote, he is
spoken of in high terms. The _Aboriginal Britons_ was an Oxford (special)
prize poem, of 1791. Charles Lamb mentions Richards as his school-fellow at
Christ's Hospital, "author of the _Aboriginal Britons_, the most spirited
of the Oxford Prize Poems: a pale, studious Grecian."

As I never heard of Richards as a poet,[432] I conclude that his fame is
defunct, except in what may prove to be a very ambiguous kind of
immortality, conferred by Lord Byron. The awkwardness of a case which time
has broken down {271} is increased by the eulogist himself adding so
powerful a name to the list of Cambridge poets, that his college has placed
his statue in the library, more conspicuously than that of Newton in the
chapel; and this although the greatness of poetic fame had some serious
drawbacks in the moral character of some of his writings. And it will be
found on inquiry that Byron, to get his instance against Cambridge, had to
go back eighteen years, passing over seven intermediate productions, of
which he had either never heard, or which he would not cite as waking a
genuine poet's fires.

The conclusion seems to be that the _Aboriginal Britons_ is a remarkable
youthful production, not equalled by subsequent efforts.

To enhance the position in which the satirist placed himself, two things
should be remembered. First, the glowing and justifiable terms in which
Byron had spoken,--a hundred and odd lines before he found it convenient to
say no Cambridge poet could compare with Richards,--of a Cambridge poet who
died only three years before Byron wrote, and produced greatly admired
works while actually studying in the University. The fame of Kirke
White[433] still lives; and future literary critics may perhaps compare his
writings and those of Richards, simply by reason of the curious relation in
which they are here placed alongside of each other. And it is much to
Byron's credit that, in speaking of the deceased Cambridge poet, he forgot
his own argument and its exigencies, and proved himself only a paradoxer
_pro re nata_.

Secondly, Byron was very unfortunate in another passage of the same poem:

{272}

 "What varied wonders tempt us as they pass!
  The cow-pox, tractors, galvanism, and gas.
  In turns appear, to make the vulgar stare,
  Till the swoln bubble bursts--and all is air!"

Three of the bubbles have burst to mighty ends. The metallic tractors are
disused; but the force which, if anything, they put in action, is at this
day, under the name of mesmerism, used, prohibited, respected, scorned,
assailed, defended, asserted, denied, declared utterly obscure, and
universally known. It was hard lines to select for candidates for oblivion
not one of whom got in. I shall myself, I am assured, be some day cited for
laughing at the great discovery of ----: the blank is left for my reader to
fill up in his own way; but I think I shall not be so unlucky in four
different ways.



FALSIFIED PREDICTION.

The narration before the fact, as prophecy has been called, sometimes quite
as true as the narration after the fact, is very ridiculous when it is
wrong. Why, the pre-narrator could not know; the post-narrator might have
known. A good collection of unlucky predictions might be made: I hardly
know one so fit to go with Byron's as that of the Rev. Daniel Rivers,
already quoted, about Johnson's biographers. Peter Pindar[434] may be
excused, as personal satire was his object, for addressing Boswell and Mrs.
Piozzi[435] as follows:

 "Instead of adding splendor to his name,
  Your books are downright gibbets to his fame;
  You never with posterity can thrive,
 'Tis by the Rambler's death alone you live."

But Rivers, in prose narrative, was not so excusable. He says:

{273}

"As admirers of the learning and moral excellence of their hero, we glow at
almost every page with indignation that his weaknesses and his failings
should be disclosed to public view.... Johnson, after the luster he had
reflected on the name of Thrale ... was to have his memory tortured and
abused by her detested itch for scribbling. More injury, we will venture to
affirm, has been done to the fame of Johnson by this Lady and her late
biographical helpmate, than his most avowed enemies have been able to
effect: and if his character becomes unpopular with some of his successors,
it is to those gossiping friends he is indebted for the favor."

Poor dear old Sam! the best known dead man alive! clever, good-hearted,
logical, ugly bear! Where would he have been if it had not been for Boswell
and Thrale, and their imitators? What would biography have been if Boswell
had not shown how to write a life?

Rivers is to be commended for not throwing a single Stone at Mrs. Thrale's
second marriage. This poor lady begins to receive a little justice. The
literary world seems to have found out that a blue-stocking dame who keeps
open house for a set among them has a right, if it so please her, to marry
again without taking measures to carry on the cake-shop. I was before my
age in this respect: as a boy-reader of Boswell, and a few other things
that fell in my way, I came to a clearness that the conduct of society
towards Mrs. Piozzi was _blackguard_. She wanted nothing but what was in
that day a woman's only efficient protection, a male relation with a brace
of pistols, and a competent notion of using them.



BYRON AND WORDSWORTH.

Byron's mistake about Hallam in the Pindar story may be worth placing among
absurdities. For elucidation, suppose that some poet were now to speak--
{274}

 "Of man's first disobedience, and the fruit
  Eve gave to Adam in his birthday suit--"

and some critic were to call it nonsense, would that critic be laughing at
Milton? Payne Knight,[436] in his _Taste_, translated part of Gray's _Bard_
into Greek. Some of his lines are

  [Greek: therma d' ho tengôn dakrua stonachais]
  [Greek: oulon melos phoberai]
  [Greek: êeide phônai.]

Literally thus:

 "Wetting warm tears with groans,
  Continuous chant with fearful
  Voice he sang."

On which Hallam remarks: "The twelfth line [our first] is nonsense." And so
it is, a poet can no more wet his tears with his groans than wet his ale
with his whistle. Now this first line is from Pindar, but is only part of
the sense; in full it is:

  [Greek: therma de tengôn dakrua stonachais]
      [Greek: horthion phônase.]

Pindar's [Greek: tengôn] must be Englished by _shedding_, and he stands
alone in this use. He says, "shedding warm tears, he cried out loud, with
groans." Byron speaks of

 "Classic Hallam, much renowned for Greek:"

and represents him as criticising _the Greek_ of all Payne's lines, and not
discovering that "the lines" were Pindar's {275} until after publication.
Byron was too much of a scholar to make this blunder himself: he either
accepted the facts from report, or else took satirical licence. And why
not? If you want to laugh at a person, and he will not give occasion, whose
fault is it that you are obliged to make it? Hallam did criticise some of
Payne Knight's Greek; but with the caution of his character, he remarked
that possibly some of these queer phrases might be "critic-traps" justified
by some one use of some one author. I remember well having a Latin essay to
write at Cambridge, in which I took care to insert a few monstrous and
unusual idioms from Cicero: a person with a Nizolius,[437] and without
scruples may get scores of them. So when my tutor raised his voice against
these oddities, I was up to him, for I came down upon him with Cicero,
chapter and verse, and got round him. And so my own solecisms, many of
them, passed unchallenged.

Byron had more good in his nature than he was fond of letting out: whether
he was a soured misanthrope, or whether his _vein_ lay that way in poetry,
and he felt it necessary to fit his demeanor to it, are matters far beyond
me. Mr. Crabb Robinson[438] told me the following story more than once. He
was at Charles Lamb's chambers in the Temple when Wordsworth came in, with
the new _Edinburgh Review_ in his hand, and fume on his countenance. "These
reviewers," said he, "put me out of patience! Here is a young man--they say
he is a lord--who has written a volume of poetry; and these fellows, just
because he is a lord, set upon him, laugh at him, and sneer at his writing.
The young man will do something, if he goes on as he has begun. But these
reviewers seem to think {276} that nobody may write poetry, unless he lives
in a garret." Crabb Robinson told this long after to Lady Byron, who said,
"Ah! if Byron had known that, he would never have attacked Wordsworth. He
went one day to meet Wordsworth at dinner; when he came home I said, 'Well,
how did the young poet get on with the old one?' 'Why, to tell you the
truth,' said he, 'I had but one feeling from the beginning of the visit to
the end, and that was--_reverence_!'" Lady Byron told my wife that her
husband had a very great respect for Wordsworth. I suppose he would have
said--as the Archangel said to his Satan--"Our difference is po[li =
e]tical."

I suspect that Fielding would, if all were known, be ranked among the
unlucky railers at supposed paradox. In his _Miscellanies_ (1742, 8vo) he
wrote a satire on the Chrysippus or Guinea, an animal which multiplies
itself by division, like the polypus. This he supposes to have been drawn
up by Petrus Gualterus, meaning the famous usurer, Peter Walter. He calls
it a paper "proper to be read before the R----l Society": and next year,
1743, a quarto reprint was made to resemble a paper in the _Philosophical
Transactions_. So far as I can make out, one object is ridicule of what the
zoologists said about the polypus: a reprint in the form of the
_Transactions_ was certainly satire on the Society, not on Peter Walter and
his knack of multiplying guineas.

Old poets have recognized the quadrature of the circle as a well-known
difficulty. Dante compares himself, when bewildered, to a geometer who
cannot find the principle on which the circle is to be measured:

 "Quale è 'l geometra che tutto s' affige
  Per misurar lo cerchio, e non ritruova,
  Pensando qual principio ond' egli indige."[439]

{277} And Quarles[440] speaks as follows of the _summum bonum_:

 "Or is't a tart idea, to procure
  An edge, and keep the practic soul in ure,
  Like that dear chymic dust, or puzzling quadrature?"

The poetic notion of the quadrature must not be forgotten. Aristophanes, in
the _Birds_, introduces a geometer who announces his intention to _make a
square circle_. Pope, in the _Dunciad_, delivers himself as follows, with a
Greek pronunciation rather strange in a translator of Homer. Probably Pope
recognized, as a general rule, the very common practice of throwing back
the accent in defiance of quantity, seen in o´rator, au´ditor, se´nator,
ca´tenary, etc.

 "Mad _Mathesis_ alone was unconfined,
  Too mad for mere material chains to bind,--
  Now to pure space lifts her ecstatic stare,
  Now, running round the circle, finds it square."

The author's note explains that this "regards the wild and fruitless
attempts of squaring the circle." The poetic idea seems to be that the
geometers try to make a square circle. Disraeli quotes it as "finds _its_
square," but the originals do not support this reading.



DE BECOURT.

I have come in the way of a work, entitled _The Grave of Human
Philosophies_ (1827), translated from the French of R. de Bécourt[441] by
A. Dalmas. It supports, but I suspect not very accurately, the views of the
old Hindu books. {278} That the sun is only 450 miles from us, and only 40
miles in diameter, may be passed over; my affair is with the state of mind
into which persons of M. Bécourt's temperament are brought by a fancy. He
fully grants, as certain, four millions of years as the duration of the
Hindu race, and 1956 as that of the universe. It must be admitted he is not
wholly wrong in saying that our errors about the universe proceed from our
ignorance of its origin, antiquity, organization, laws, and final
destination. Living in an age of light, he "avails himself of that
opportunity" to remove this veil of darkness, etc. The system of the
Brahmins is the only true one: he adds that it has never before been
attempted, as it could not be obtained except by him. The author requests
us first, to lay aside prejudice; next, to read all he says in the order in
which he says it: we may then pronounce judgment upon a work which begins
by taking the Brahmins for granted. All the paradoxers make the same
requests. They do not see that compliance would bring thousands of systems
before the world every year: we have scores as it is. How is a poor candid
inquirer to choose. Fortunately, the mind has its grand jury as well as its
little one: and it will not put a book upon its trial without a _prima
facie_ case in its favor. And with most of those who really search for
themselves, that case is never made out without evidence of knowledge,
standing out clear and strong, in the book to be examined.



BEQUEST OF A QUADRATURE.

There is much private history which will never come to light, _caret quia
vate sacro_,[442] because no Budgeteer comes across it. Many years ago a
man of business, whose life was passed in banking, amused his leisure with
quadrature, was successful of course, and bequeathed the result in a sealed
book, which the legatee was enjoined not to sell {279} under a thousand
pounds. The true ratio was 3.1416: I have the anecdote from the legatee's
executor, who opened the book. That a banker should square the circle is
very credible: but how could a City man come by the notion that a thousand
pounds could be got for it? A friend of mine, one of the twins of my
zodiac, will spend a thousand pounds, if he have not done it already, in
black and white cyclometry: but I will answer for it that he, a man of
sound business notions, never entertained the idea of [pi] recouping him,
as they now say. I speak of individual success: of course if a company were
formed, especially if it were of unlimited lie-ability, the shares would be
taken. No offence; there is nothing but what a pun will either sanctify,
justify, or nullify:

 "It comes o'er the soul like the sweet South
  That breathes upon a bank of _vile hits_."

The shares would be at a premium of 3-1/8 on the day after issue. If they
presented me with the number of shares I deserve, for suggestion and
advertisement, I should stand up for the Archpriest of St. Vitus[443] and
3-1/5, with a view to a little more gold on the bridge.

I now insert a couple of reviews, one about Cyclopædias, one about
epistolary collections. Should any reader wish for explanation of this
insertion, I ask him to reflect a moment, and imagine me set to justify all
the additions now before him! In truth these reviews are the repositories
of many odds and ends: they were not made to the books; the materials were
in my notes, and the books came as to a ready-made clothes shop, and found
what would fit them. Many remember Curll's[444] bequest of some very good
titles {280} which only wanted treatises written to them. Well! here were
some tolerable reviews--as times go--which only wanted books fitted to
them. Accordingly, some tags were made to join on the books; and then as
the reader sees.

I should find it hard to explain why the insertion is made in this place
rather than another. But again, suppose I were put to make such an
explanation throughout the volume. The improver who laid out grounds and
always studied what he called _unexpectedness_, was asked what name he gave
it for those who walked over his grounds a second time. He was silenced;
but I have an answer: It is that which is given by the very procedure of
taking up my book a second time.



REVIEW OF CYCLOPÆDIAS.

    October 19, 1861. _The English Cyclopædia._ Conducted by Charles
    Knight.[445] 22 vols.: viz., _Geography_, 4 vols.; _Biography_, 6
    vols.; _Natural History_, 4 vols.; _Arts and Sciences_, 8 vols.
    (Bradbury & Evans.)

    _The Encyclopædia Britannica: a Dictionary of Arts, Sciences, and
    General Literature._ Eighth Edition. 21 vols. and Index. (Black.)

The two editions above described are completed at the same time: and they
stand at the head of the two great branches into which pantological
undertakings are divided, as at once the largest and the best of their
classes.

When the works are brought together, the first thing that strikes the eye
is the syllable of difference in the names. The word _Cyclopædia_ is a bit
of modern purism. Though [Greek: enkuklopaideia][446] is not absolutely
Greek of Greece, we learn from both Pliny[447] and Quintilian[448] that the
circle {281} of the sciences was so called by the Greeks, and
Vitruvius[449] has thence naturalized _encyclium_ in Latin. Nevertheless we
admit that the initial _en_ would have euphonized but badly with the word
_Penny_: and the _English Cyclopædia_ is the augmented, revised, and
distributed edition of the _Penny Cyclopædia_. It has indeed been said that
Cyclopædia should mean the education _of_ a circle, just as Cyropædia is
the education _of_ Cyrus. But this is easily upset by Aristotle's word
[Greek: kuklophoria],[450] motion _in_ a circle, and by many other cases,
for which see the lexicon.

The earliest printed Encyclopædia of this kind was perhaps the famous
"myrrour of the worlde," which Caxton[451] translated from the French and
printed in 1480. The original Latin is of the thirteenth century, or
earlier. This is a collection of very short treatises. In or shortly after
1496 appeared the _Margarita Philosophica_ of Gregory Reisch,[452] the same
we must suppose, who was confessor to the Emperor Maximilian.[453] This is
again a collection of treatises, of much more pretension: and the
estimation formed of it is proved by the number of editions it went
through. In 1531 appeared the little collection of _works_ of
Ringelberg,[454] which is truly called an Encyclopædia by {282} Morhof,
though the thumbs and fingers of the two hands will meet over the length of
its one volume. There are more small collections; but we pass on to the
first work to which the name of _Encyclopædia_ is given. This is a
ponderous _Scientiarum Omnium Encyclopædia_ of Alsted,[455] in four folio
volumes, commonly bound in two: published in 1629 and again in 1649; the
true parent of all the Encyclopædias, or collections of treatises, or works
in which that character predominates. The first great _dictionary_ may
perhaps be taken to be Hofman's _Lexicon Universale_[456] (1677); but
Chambers's[457] (so called) _Dictionary_ (1728) has a better claim. And we
support our proposed nomenclature by observing that Alsted accidentally
called his work _En_cyclopædia, and Chambers simply Cyclopædia.

We shall make one little extract from the _myrrour_, and one from
Ringelberg. Caxton's author makes a singular remark for his time; and one
well worthy of attention. The grammar rules of a language, he says, must
have been invented by foreigners: "And whan any suche tonge was perfytely
had and usyd amonge any people, than other people not used to the same
tonge caused rulys to be made wherby they myght lerne the same tonge ...
and suche rulys be called the gramer of that tonge." Ringelberg says that
if the right nostril bleed, the little finger of the right hand should be
crooked, and squeezed with great force; and the same for the left.

{283}

We pass on to _the_ Encyclopédie,[458] commenced in 1751; the work which
has, in many minds, connected the word _encyclopædist_ with that of
_infidel_. Readers of our day are surprised when they look into this work,
and wonder what has become of all the irreligion. The truth is, that the
work--though denounced _ab ovo_[459] on account of the character of its
supporters--was neither adapted, nor intended, to excite any particular
remark on the subject: no work of which D'Alembert[460] was co-editor would
have been started on any such plan. For, first, he was a real _sceptic_:
that is, doubtful, with a mind not made up. Next, he valued his quiet more
than anything; and would as soon have gone to sleep over an hornet's nest
as have contemplated a systematic attack upon either religion or
government. As to Diderot[461]--of whose varied career of thought it is
difficult to fix the character of any one moment, but who is very
frequently taken among us for a pure atheist--we will quote one sentence
from the article "_Encyclopédie_," which he wrote himself:--"Dans le moral,
il n'y a que Dieu qui doit servir de modèle a 1'homme; dans les art, que la
nature."[462]

A great many readers in our country have but a very hazy idea of the
difference between the political Encyclopædia, as we may call it, and the
_Encyclopédie Méthodique_,[463] which we always take to be meant--whether
rightly or not we cannot tell--when we hear of the "great French
Encyclopædia." This work, which takes much from its {284} predecessor,
professing to correct it, was begun in 1792, and finished in 1832. There
are 166 volumes of text, and 6439 plates, which are sometimes incorporated
with the text, sometimes make about 40 more volumes. This is still the
monster production of the kind; though probably the German Cyclopædia of
Ersch and Gruber,[464] which was begun in 1818, and is still in progress,
will beat it in size. The great French work is a collection of
dictionaries; it consists of Cyclopædias of all the separate branches of
knowledge. It is not a work, but a collection of works, one or another
department is to be bought from time to time; but we never heard of a
complete set for sale in one lot. As ships grow longer and longer, the
question arises what limit there is to the length. One answer is, that it
will never do to try such a length that the stern will be rotten before the
prow is finished. This wholesome rule has not been attended to in the
matter before us; the earlier parts of the great French work were
antiquated before the whole were completed: something of the kind will
happen to that of Ersch and Gruber.

The production of a great dictionary of either of the kinds is far from an
easy task. There is one way of managing the _En_cyclopædia which has been
largely resorted to; indeed, we may say that no such work has been free
from it. This plan is to throw all the attention upon the great treatises,
and to resort to paste and scissors, or some process of equally easy
character, for the smaller articles. However it may be done, it has been
the rule that the Encyclopædia of treatises should have its supplemental
Dictionary of a very incomplete character. It is true that the treatises
are intended to do a good deal; and that the Index, if it be good, knits
the treatises and the dictionary into one whole of reference. Still there
are two stools, and between them a great deal will fall to the ground. The
dictionary portion of the _Britannica_ is not to be compared with its {285}
treatises; the part called Miscellaneous and Lexicographical in the
_Metropolitana_[465] is a great failure. The defect is incompleteness. The
biographical portion, for example, of the Britannica is very defective: of
many names of note in literature and science, which become known to the
reader from the treatises, there is no account whatever in the dictionary.
So that the reader who has learnt the results of a life in astronomy, for
example, must go to some other work to know when that life began and ended.
This defect has run through all the editions; it is in the casting of the
work. The reader must learn to take the results at their true value, which
is not small. He must accustom himself to regard the Britannica as a
splendid body of treatises on all that can be called heads of knowledge,
both greater and smaller; with help from the accompanying dictionary, but
not of the most complete character. Practically, we believe, this defect
cannot be avoided: two plans of essentially different structure cannot be
associated on the condition of each or either being allowed to abbreviate
the other.

The defect of all others which it is most difficult to avoid is inequality
of performance. Take any dictionary you please, of any kind which requires
the association of a number of contributors, and this defect must result.
We do not merely mean that some will do their work better than others; this
of course: we mean that there will be structural differences of execution,
affecting the relative extent of the different parts of the whole, as well
as every other point by which a work can be judged. A wise editor will not
attempt any strong measures of correction: he will remember that if some
portions be below the rest, which is a disadvantage, it follows that some
portions must be above the rest, which is an advantage. The only practical
level, if {286} level there must be, is that of mediocrity, if not of
absolute worthlessness: any attempt to secure equality of strength will
result in equality of weakness. Efficient development may be cut down into
meager brevity, and in this way only can apparent equality of plan be
secured throughout. It is far preferable to count upon differences of
execution, and to proceed upon the acknowledged expectation that the
prominent merits of the work will be settled by the accidental character of
the contributors; it being held impossible that any editorial efforts can
secure a uniform standard of goodness. Wherever the greatest power is
found, it should be suffered to produce its natural effect. There are,
indeed, critics who think that the merit of a book, like the strength of a
chain, is that of its weakest part: but there are others who know that the
parallel does not hold, and who will remember that the union of many
writers must show exaggeration of the inequalities which almost always
exist in the production of one person. The true plan is to foster all the
good that can be got, and to give development in the directions in which
most resources are found: a Cyclopædia, like a plant, should grow towards
the light.

The _Penny Cyclopædia_ had its share of this kind of defect or excellence,
according to the way in which the measure is taken. The circumstance is not
so much noticed as might be expected, and this because many a person is in
the habit of using such a dictionary chiefly with relation to one subject,
his own; and more still want it for the pure dictionary purpose, which does
not go much beyond the meaning of the word. But the person of full and
varied reference feels the differences; and criticism makes capital of
them. The Useful Knowledge Society was always odious to the organs of
religious bigotry; and one of them, adverting to the fact that geography
was treated with great ability, and most unusual fullness, in the _Penny
Cyclopædia_, announced it by making it the sole merit of {287} the work
that, with sufficient addition, it would make a tolerably good gazetteer.

Some of our readers may still have hanging about them the feelings derived
from this old repugnance of a class to all that did not associate direct
doctrinal teaching of religion with every attempt to communicate knowledge.
I will take one more instance, by way of pointing out the extent to which
stupidity can go. If there be an astronomical fact of the telescopic
character which, next after Saturn's ring and Jupiter's satellites, was
known to all the world, it was the existence of multitudes of double stars,
treble stars, etc. A respectable quarterly of the theological cast, which
in mercy we refrain from naming, was ignorant of this common
knowledge,--imagined that the mention of such systems was a blunder of one
of the writers in the _Penny Cyclopædia_, and lashed the presumed ignorance
of the statement in the following words, delivered in April, 1837:

    "We have forgotten the name of that Sidrophel who lately discovered
    that the fixed stars were not single stars, but appear in the heavens
    like soles at Billingsgate, in pairs; while a second astronomer, under
    the influence of that competition in trade which the political
    economists tell us is so advantageous to the public, professes to show
    us, through his superior telescope, that the apparently single stars
    are really three. Before such wondrous mandarins of science, how
    continually must _homunculi_ like ourselves keep in the background,
    lest we come between the wind and their nobility."

Certainly these little men ought to have kept in the background; but they
did not: and the growing reputation of the work which they assailed has
chronicled them in literary history; grubs in amber.

This important matter of inequality, which has led us so far, is one to
which the _Encyclopædia_ is as subject as the _Cyclopædia_; but it is not
so easily recognized as a fault. {288} We receive the first book as mainly
a collection of treatises: we know their authors, and we treat them as
individuals. We see, for instance, the names of two leading writers on
Optics, Brewster[466] and Herschel.[467] It would not at all surprise us if
either of these writers should be found criticising the other by name, even
though the very view opposed should be contained in the same _Encyclopædia_
with the criticism. And in like manner, we should hold it no wonder if we
found some third writer not comparable to either of those we have named. It
is not so in the _Cyclopædia_: here we do not know the author, except by
inference from a list of which we never think while consulting the work. We
do not dissent from this or that author: we blame the book.

The _Encyclopædia Britannica_ is an old friend. Though it holds a proud
place in our present literature, yet the time was when it stood by itself,
more complete and more clear than anything which was to be found elsewhere.
There must be studious men alive in plenty who remember when they were
studious boys, what a literary luxury it was to pass a few days in the
house of a friend who had a copy of this work. The present edition is a
worthy successor of those which went before. The last three editions,
terminating in 1824, 1842, and 1861, seem to show that a lunar cycle cannot
pass without an amended and augmented edition. Detailed criticism is out of
the question; but we may notice the effective continuance of the plan of
giving general historical dissertations on the progress of knowledge. Of
some of these dissertations we have had to take separate notice; and all
will be referred to in our ordinary treatment of current literature.[468]

The literary excellence of these two extensive undertakings is of the same
high character. To many this will {289} need justification: they will not
easily concede to the cheap and recent work a right to stand on the same
shelf with the old and tried magazine, newly replenished with the best of
everything. Those who are cognizant by use of the kind of material which
fills the _Penny Cyclopædia_ will need no further evidence: to others we
shall quote a very remarkable and certainly very complete testimony. The
_Cyclopædia of the Physical Sciences_, published by Dr. Nichol[469] in 1857
(noticed by us, April 4), is one of the most original of our special
dictionaries. The following is an extract from the editor's preface:

    "When I assented to Mr. Griffin's proposal that I should edit such a
    Cyclopædia, I had it in my mind that I might make the _scissors_
    eminently effective. Alas! on narrowly examining our best Cyclopædias,
    I found that the scissors had become blunted through too frequent and
    vigorous use. One great exception exists: viz., the _Penny Cyclopædia_
    of Charles Knight.[470] The cheapest and the least pretending, it is
    really the most philosophical of our _scientific_ dictionaries. It is
    not made up of a series of treatises, some good and many indifferent,
    but is a thorough _Dictionary_, well proportioned and generally written
    by the best men of the time. The more closely it is examined, the more
    deeply will our obligation be felt to the intelligence and
    conscientiousness of its projector and editor."

After Dr. Nichol's candid and amusing announcement of his scissorial
purpose, it is but fair to state that nothing of the kind was ultimately
carried into effect, even upon the work in which he found so much to
praise. I quote this testimony because it is of a peculiar kind.

{290}

The success of the _Penny Magazine_ led Mr. Charles Knight in 1832 to
propose to the Useful Knowledge Society a Cyclopædia in weekly penny
numbers. These two works stamp the name of the projector on the literature
of our day in very legible characters. Eight volumes of 480 pages each were
contemplated; and Mr. Long[471] and Mr. Knight were to take the joint
management. The plan embraced a popular account of Art and Science, with
very brief biographical and geographical information. The early numbers of
the work had some of the _Penny Magazine_ character: no one can look at the
pictures of the Abbot and Abbess in their robes without seeing this. By the
time the second volume was completed, it was clearly seen that the plan was
working out its own extension: a great development of design was submitted
to, and Mr. Long became sole editor. Contributors could not be found to
make articles of the requisite power in the assigned space. One of them
told us that when he heard of the eight volumes, happening to want a shelf
to be near at hand for containing the work as it went on, he ordered it to
be made to hold twenty-five volumes easily. But the inexorable logic of
facts beat him after all: for the complete work contained twenty-six
volumes and two thick volumes of Supplement.

The penny issue was brought to an end by the state of the law, which
required, in 1833, that the first and last page of everything sold
separately should contain the name and address of the printer. The penny
numbers contained this imprint on the fold of the outer leaf: and _qui
tam_[472] informations were laid against the agents in various towns. {291}
It became necessary to call in the stock; and the penny issue was
abandoned. Monthly parts were substituted, which varied in bulk, as the
demands of the plan became more urgent, and in price from one sixpence to
three. The second volume of Supplement appeared in 1846, and during the
fourteen years of issue no one monthly part was ever behind its time. This
result is mainly due to the peculiar qualities of Mr. Long, who unites the
talents of the scholar and the editor in a degree which is altogether
unusual. If any one should imagine that a mixed mass of contributors is a
punctual piece of machinery, let him take to editing upon that hypothesis,
and he shall see what he shall see and learn what he shall learn.

The _English_ contains about ten per cent more matter than the _Penny
Cyclopædia_ and its supplements; including the third supplementary volume
of 1848, which we now mention for the first time. The literary work of the
two editions cost within 500l. and 50,000l.: that of the two editions of
the _Britannica_ cost 41,000l. But then it is to be remembered that the
_Britannica_ had matter to begin upon, which had been paid for in the
former editions. Roughly speaking, it is probable that the authorship of a
page of the same size would have cost nearly the same in one as in the
other.

The longest articles in the _Penny Cyclopædia_ were "Rome" in 98 columns
and "Yorkshire" in 86 columns. The only article which can be called a
treatise is the Astronomer Royal's "Gravitation," founded on the method of
Newton in the eleventh section, but carried to a much greater extent. In
the _English Cyclopædia_, the longest article of geography is "Asia," in 45
columns. In natural history the antelopes demand 36 columns. In biography,
"Wellington" uses up 42 columns, and his great military opponent 41
columns. In the division of Arts and Sciences, which includes much of a
social and commercial character, the length of articles often depends upon
the state of the {292} times with regard to the subject. Our readers would
not hit the longest article of this department in twenty guesses: it is
"Deaf and Dumb" in 60 columns. As other specimens, we may cite Astronomy,
19; Banking, 36; Blind, 24; British Museum, 35; Cotton, 27; Drama, 26;
Gravitation, 50; Libraries, 50; Painting, 34; Railways, 18; Sculpture, 36;
Steam, etc., 37; Table, 40; Telegraph, 30; Welsh language and literature,
39; Wool, 21. These are the long articles of special subdivisions: the
words under which the _En_cyclopædia gives treatises are not so prominent.
As in Algebra, 10; Chemistry, 12; Geometry, 8; Logic, 14; Mathematics, 5;
Music, 9. But the difference between the collection of treatises and the
dictionary may be illustrated thus: though "Mathematics" have only five
columns, "Mathematics, recent terminology of," has eight: and this article
we believe to be by Mr. Cayley,[473] who certainly ought to know his
subject, being himself a large manufacturer of the new terms which he
explains. Again, though "Music" _in genere_, as the schoolmen said, has
only nine columns, "Temperament and Tuning," has eight, and "Chord" alone
has two. And so on.

In a dictionary of this kind it is difficult to make a total clearance of
_personality_: by which we mean that exhibition of peculiar opinion which
is offensive to taste when it is shifted from the individual on the
corporate book. The treatise of the known author may, as we have said,
carry that author's controversies on its own shoulders: and even his
crotchets, if we may use such a word. But {293} the dictionary should not
put itself into antagonism with general feeling, nor even with the feelings
of classes. We refer particularly to the ordinary and editorial teaching of
the article. If, indeed, the writer, being at issue with mankind, should
confess the difference, and give abstract of his full grounds, the case is
altered: the editor then, as it were, admits a correspondent to a statement
of his own individual views. The dictionary portion of the Britannica is
quite clear of any lapses on this point, so far as we know: the treatises
and dissertations rest upon their authors. The Penny Cyclopædia was all but
clear: and great need was there that it should have been so. The Useful
Knowledge Society, starting on the principle of perfect neutrality in
politics and religion, was obliged to keep strict watch against the
entrance of all attempt even to look over the hedge. There were two--we
believe only two--instances of what we have called personality. The first
was in the article "Bunyan." It is worth while to extract all that is
said--in an article of thirty lines--about a writer who is all but
universally held to be the greatest master of allegory that ever wrote:

    "His works were collected in two volumes, folio, 1736-7: among them
    'The Pilgrim's Progress' has attained the greatest notoriety. If a
    judgment is to be formed of the merits of a book by the number of times
    it has been reprinted, and the many languages into which it has been
    translated, no production in English literature is superior to this
    coarse allegory. On a composition which has been extolled by Dr.
    Johnson, and which in our own times has received a very high critical
    opinion in its favor [probably Southey], it is hazardous to venture a
    disapproval, and we, perhaps, speak the opinion of a small minority
    when we confess that to us it appears to be mean, jejune and
    wearisome."

--If the unfortunate critic who thus individualized himself had been a
sedulous reader of Bunyan, his power over {294} English would not have been
so _jejune_ as to have needed that fearful word. This little bit of
criticism excited much amusement at the time of its publication: but it was
so thoroughly exceptional and individual that it was seldom or never
charged on the book. The second instance occurred in the article
"Socinians." It had been arranged that the head-words of Christian sects
should be intrusted to members of the sects themselves, on the
understanding that the articles should simply set forth the accounts which
the sects themselves give of their own doctrines. Thus the article on the
Roman Church was written by Dr. Wiseman.[474] But the Unitarians were not
allowed to come within the rule: as in other quarters, they were treated as
the gypsies of Christianity. Under the head "Socinians"--a name repudiated
by themselves--an opponent was allowed not merely to state their alleged
doctrines in his own way, but to apply strong terms, such as "audacious
unfairness," to some of their doings. The protests which were made against
this invasion of the understanding produced, in due time, the article
"Unitarians," written by one of that persuasion. We need not say that these
errors have been amended in the English Cyclopædia: and our chief purpose
in mentioning them is to remark, that this is all we can find on the points
in question against twenty-eight large volumes produced by an editor whose
task was monthly, and whose issue was never delayed a single hour. How much
was arrested before publication none but himself can say. We have not
alluded to one or two remonstrances on questions of absolute fact, which
are beside the present purpose.

Both kinds of encyclopædic works have been fashioned upon predecessors,
from the very earliest which had a predecessor to be founded upon; and the
undertakings before us will be themselves the ancestors of a line of
successors. Those who write in such collections should be {295} careful
what they say, for no one can tell how long a mis-statement may live. On
this point we will give the history of a pair of epithets. When the
historian De Thou[475] died, and left the splendid library which was
catalogued by Bouillaud[476] and the brothers Dupuis[477] (Bullialdus and
Puteanus), there was a manuscript of De Thou's friend Vieta,[478] the
_Harmonicon Coeleste_, of which it is on record, under Bouillaud's hand,
that he himself lent it to Cosmo de' Medici,[479] to which must be added
that M. Libri[480] found it in the Magliabecchi Library at Florence in our
own day. Bouillaud, it seems, entirely forgot what he had done. Something,
probably, that Peter Dupuis said to Bouillaud, while they were at work on
the catalogue, remained on his memory, and was published by him in 1645,
long after; to the effect that Dupuis lent the manuscript to Mersenne,[481]
from whom it was procured by some intending plagiarist, who would not give
it back. This was repeated by Sherburne,[482] in 1675, who speaks of the
work, which "being communicated to Mersennus was, by some perfidious
acquaintance of that honest-minded person, surreptitiously taken from him,
and irrecoverably lost or suppressed, to the unspeakable detriment of the
lettered world." Now let the {296} reader look through the dictionaries of
the last century and the present, scientific or general, at the article,
"Vieta," and he will be amused with the constant recurrence of
"honest-minded" Mersenne, and his "surreptitious" acquaintance. We cannot
have seen less than thirty copies of these epithets.



REVIEW OF MACCLESFIELD LETTERS.

    October 18, 1862. _Correspondence of Scientific Men of the Seventeenth
    Century, in the Collection of the Earl of Macclesfield._[483] 2 vols.
    (Oxford, University Press.)

Though the title-page of this collection bears the date 1841, it is only
just completed by the publication of its Table of Contents and Index.
Without these, a work of the kind is useless for consultation, and cannot
make its way. The reason of the delay will appear: its effect is well known
to us. We have found inquirers into the history of science singularly
ignorant of things which this collection might have taught them.

In the same year, 1841, the Historical Society of Science, which had but a
brief existence, published a collection of letters, eighty-three in number,
edited by Mr. Halliwell,[484] of English men of science, which dovetails
with the one before us, and is for the most part of a prior date. The two
should be bound up together. The smaller collection runs from 1562 to 1682;
the larger, from 1606 to past 1700. We shall speak of the two as the Museum
collection and the Macclesfield collection. And near them should be placed,
in every scientific library, the valuable collection published, by Mr.
Edleston,[485] for Trinity College, in 1850.

{297}

The history of these letters runs back to famous John Collins, the
attorney-general of the mathematics, as he has been called, who wrote to
everybody, heard from everybody, and sent copies of everybody's letter to
everybody else. He was in England what Mersenne[486] was in France: as
early as 1671, E. Bernard[487] addresses him as "the very Mersennus and
intelligence of this age." John Collins[488] was never more than accountant
to the Excise Office, to which he was promoted from teaching writing and
ciphering, at the Restoration: he died in 1682. We have had a man of the
same office in our own day, the late Prof. Schumacher,[489] who made the
little Danish Observatory of Altona the junction of all the lines by which
astronomical information was conveyed from one country to another. When the
collision took place between Denmark and the Duchies, the English
Government, moved by the Astronomical Society, instructed its diplomatic
agents to represent strongly to the Danish Government, when occasion should
arise, the great importance of the Observatory of Altona to the
astronomical communications of the whole world. But Schumacher had his own
celebrated journal, the _Astronomische Nachrichten_, by which to work out
part of his plan; private correspondence was his supplementary assistant.
Collins had only correspondence to rely on. Nothing is better known than
that it was Collins's collection which furnished the materials put forward
by the Committee of the Royal Society in 1712, as a defence of Newton
against the partisans of Leibnitz. The noted _Commercium Epistolicum_ is
but the abbreviation of a title which runs on with "D. Johannis Collins et
aliorum ..."

The whole of this collection passed into the hands of {298} William
Jones,[490] the father of the Indian Judge of the same name, who died in
1749. Jones was originally a teacher, but was presented with a valuable
sinecure by the interest of George, second Earl of Macclesfield, the mover
of the bill for the change of style in Britain, who died President of the
Royal Society. This change of style may perhaps be traced to the union of
energies which were brought into concert by the accident of a common
teacher: Lord Macclesfield and Lord Chesterfield,[491] the mover and the
seconder, and Daval,[492] who drew the bill, were pupils of De Moivre.[493]
Jones, who was a respectable mathematician though not an inventor,
collected the largest mathematical library of his day, and became possessor
of the papers of Collins, which contained those of Oughtred[494] and
others. Some of these papers passed into the custody of the Royal Society:
but the bulk was either bequeathed to, or purchased by, Lord Macclesfield;
and thus they found their way to Shirburn Castle, where they still remain.

A little before 1836, this collection attracted the attention of a
searching inquirer into points of mathematical history, the late Professor
Rigaud,[495] who died in 1839. He examined the whole collection of letters,
obtained Lord Macclesfield's consent to their publication, and induced the
Oxford Press to bear the expense. It must be particularly remembered that
there still remains at Shirburn Castle a {299} valuable mass of
non-epistolary manuscripts. So far as we can see, the best chance of a
further examination and publication lies in public encouragement of the
collection now before us: the Oxford Press might be induced to extend its
operations if it were found that the results were really of interest to the
literary and scientific world. Rigaud died before the work was completed,
and the publication was actually made by one of his sons, S. Jordan
Rigaud,[496] who died Bishop of Antigua. But this publication was little
noticed, for the reasons given. The completion now published consists of a
sufficient table of contents, of the briefest kind, by Professor De Morgan,
and an excellent index by the Rev. John Rigaud.[497] The work is now fairly
started on its career.

If we were charged to write a volume with the title "Small things in their
connection with great," we could not do better than choose the small part
of this collection of letters as our basis. The names, as well as the
contents, are both great and small: the great names, those which are known
to every mathematician who has any infusion of the history of his pursuit,
are Briggs,[498] Oughtred, Charles Cavendish,[499] Gascoigne,[500] Seth
Ward,[501] Wallis,[502] {300} Hu[y]gens,[503] Collins,[504] William
Petty,[505] Hooke,[506] Boyle,[507] Pell,[508] Oldenburg,[509]
Brancker,[510] Slusius,[511] Bertit,[512] Bernard,[513] Borelli,[514]
Mouton,[515] Pardies,[516] Fermat,[517] Towneley,[518] Auzout,[519] {301}
D. Gregory,[520] Halley,[521] Machin,[522] Montmort,[523] Cotes,[524]
Jones,[525] Saunderson,[526] Reyneau,[527] Brook Taylor,[528]
Maupertuis,[529] Bouguer,[530] La Condamine,[531] Folkes,[532]
Macclesfield,[533] {302} Baker,[534] Barrow,[535] Flamsteed,[536] Lord
Brounker,[537] J. Gregory,[538] Newton[539] and Keill.[540] To these the
Museum collection adds the names of Thomas Digges,[541] Dee,[542] Tycho
Brahe,[543] Harriot,[544] Lydyat,[545] Briggs,[546] Warner,[547] Tarporley,
Pell,[548] Lilly,[549] Oldenburg,[550] Collins,[551] Morland.[552]

{303}

The first who appears on the scene is the celebrated Oughtred, who is
related to have died of joy at the Restoration: but it should be added, by
way of excuse, that he was eighty-six years old. He is an animal of extinct
race, an Eton mathematician. Few Eton men, even of the minority which knows
what a sliding rule is, are aware that the inventor was of their own school
and college: but they may be excused, for Dr. Hutton,[553] so far as his
Dictionary bears witness, seems not to have known it any more than they. A
glance at one of his letters reminds us of a letter from the Astronomer
Royal on the discovery of Neptune, which we printed March 20, 1847. Mr.
Airy[554] there contends, and proves it both by Leverrier[555] and by
Adams,[556] that the limited publication of a private letter is more
efficient than the more general publication of a printed memoir. The same
may be true of a dead letter, as opposed to a dead book. Our eye was caught
by a letter of Oughtred (1629), containing systematic use of contractions
for the words _sine_, _cosine_, etc., prefixed to the symbol of the angle.
This is so very important a step, simple as it is, that Euler[557] is
justly held to have greatly advanced trigonometry by its introduction.
Nobody that we know of has noticed that Oughtred was master of the
improvement, and willing to have taught it, if people would have learnt.
After looking at his dead letter, we naturally turned to his dead book on
trigonometry, and there we found the abbreviations _s_, _sco_, _t_, _tco_,
_se_, _seco_, regularly established as part of the system of the work. But
not one of those who have investigated the contending claims of Euler and
Thomas {304} Simpson[558] has chanced to know of Oughtred's
"Trigonometrie": and the present revival is due to his letter, not to his
book.

A casual reader, turning over the pages, would imagine that almost all the
letters had been printed, either in the General Dictionary, or in
Birch,[559] etc.: so often does the supplementary remark begin with "this
letter has been printed in ----." For ourselves we thought, until we
counted, that a large majority of the letters had been given, either in
whole or in part. But the positive strikes the mind more forcibly than the
negative: we find that all of which any portion has been in type makes up
very little more than a quarter; the cases in which the whole letter is
given being a minority of this quarter. The person who has been best
ransacked is Flamsteed: of 36 letters from him, 34 had been previously
given in whole or in part. Of 59 letters to and from Newton, only 17 have
been culled.

The letters have been modernized in spelling, and, to some extent, in
algebraical notation; it also seems that conjectural methods of introducing
interpolations into the text have been necessary. For all this we are
sorry: the scientific value of the collection is little altered, but its
literary value is somewhat lowered. But it could not be helped: the
printers could not work from the originals, and Professor Rigaud had to
copy everything himself. A fac-simile must have been the work of more time
than he had to give: had he attempted it, his death would have cut short
the whole undertaking, instead of allowing him to prepare everything but a
preface, and to superintend the printing of one of the volumes. We may also
add, that we believe we have notices of _all_ the letters in the
Macclesfield collection. We judge this because several which are too
trivial to print are numbered and described; and those would certainly not
have been noticed if _any_ omissions had {305} been made. And we know that
every letter was removed from Shirburn Castle to Oxford.

Two persons emerge from oblivion in this series of letters. The first is
Michael Dary,[560] an obscure mathematician, who was in correspondence with
Newton and other stars. He was a gauger at Bristol, by the interest of
Collins; afterwards a candidate for the mathematical school at Christ's
Hospital, with a certificate from Newton: he was then a gunner in the
Tower, and is lastly described by Wallis as "Mr. Dary, the tobacco-cutter,
a knowing man in algebra." In 1674, Dary writes to Newton at Cambridge, as
follows:--"Although I sent you three papers yesterday, I cannot refrain
from sending you this. I have had fresh thoughts this morning." Two months
afterwards poor Newton writes to Collins, "Mr. Dary is very solicitous
about mathematics": but in spite of the persecution, he subscribes himself
to Dary "your loving friend." Dary's _problem_ is that of finding the rate
of interest of an annuity of which the value and term are given. Dary's
_theorem_, which he seems to have invented specially for the solution of
his problem, though it is of wide range, can be exhibited to mathematical
readers even in our columns. In modern language, it is that the limit of
[phi]^{_n_}_x_, when _n_ increases without limit, is a solution of [phi]_x_
= _x_. We have mentioned the I. Newton to whom Dary looked up; we add a
word about the one on whom he looked down. Dr. John Newton,[561] a sedulous
publisher of logarithms, tables of interest, etc., who began his career
before Isaac Newton, sometimes puzzles those who do not know him, when
described as I. Newton. The scientific world was of opinion that all that
was valuable in one of his works was taken from Dary's private
communications.

{306}

The second character above alluded to is one who carried mathematical
researches a far greater length than Newton himself: the assistance which
he rendered in this respect, even to Newton, has never been acknowledged in
modern times: though the work before us shows that his contemporaries were
fully aware of it, and never thought of concealing it. In his theory of
gravitation, in which, so far as he went, we have every reason to believe
he was prior to Newton, he did not extend his calculations to the distance
of the moon; his views in this matter were purely terrestrial, and led him
to charge according to weight. He was John Stiles, the London and Cambridge
carrier: his name is a household word in the Macclesfield Letters, and is
even enshrined in the depths of Birch's quartos. Dary informs Newton--let
us do his memory this justice--that he had paid John Stiles for the
carriage. At the time when the railroad to Cambridge was opened, a
correspondent recommended the directors, in our columns, to call an engine
by the name of John Stiles, and never to let that name go off the road. We
do not know whether the advice was followed: if not, we repeat it.

Little points of life and manners come out occasionally. Baker, the author
of a work on algebra much esteemed at the time, wrote to Collins that their
circumstances are alike, "having a just and equal number of chargeable
olive-branches, and being in the same predicament and blessed condemnation
with you, not more preaching than unpaid, and preaching the art of
contentment to others, am forced to practise it." But the last sentence of
his letter runs as follows: "I have sent by the bearer ... twenty
shillings, as a token to you; desiring you to accept of it, as a small
taste from Yours, Thos. Baker." In our day, men of a station to pay parish
taxes do not offer their friends hard money to buy liquor. But
Flamsteed[562] writes to Collins as follows: "Last week he sent us down the
counterpart, which {307} my father has scaled, and I return up to you by
the carrier, with 5l. to be paid to Mr. Leneve for the writing, I have
added 2s. 6d. over, which will pay the expenses and serve to drink, with
him." This would seem as odd to us as it would have seemed thirty years ago
that half-a-crown should pay carriage for a deed from Derby to London, and
leave margin for a bottle of wine: in our day, the Post-office and the
French treaty would just manage it between them. But Flamsteed does not
limit his friend to one bottle; he adds, "If you expend more than the
half-crown, I will make it good after Whitsuntide." Collins does not
remember exactly where he had met James Gregory, and mentions two equally
likely places thus: "Sir, it was once my good hap to meet with you in an
alehouse or in Sion College." There is a little proof how universally the
dinner-hour was twelve o'clock. Astronomers well know the method of finding
time by equal altitudes of the sun before and after noon: Huyghens calls it
"le moyen de deux égales hauteurs du soleil devant et après _dîner_."[563]

There is one mention of "Mr. Cocker,[564] our famous English graver and
writer, now a schoolmaster at Northampton." This is the true Cocker: his
genuine works are specimens of writing, such as engraved copy-books,
including some on arithmetic, with copper-plate questions and space for the
working; also a book of forms for law-stationers, with specimens of legal
handwriting. It is recorded somewhere that Cocker and another, whose name
we forget, competed with the Italians in the beauty of their flourishes.
This was his real fame: and in these matters he was great. The eighth
edition of his book of law forms (1675), published shortly after Cocker's
death, has a preface signed "J. H." This was John Hawkins, who became
possessed of Cocker's papers--at least he said so--and {308} subsequently
forged the famous Arithmetic,[565] a second work on Decimal Arithmetic, and
an English dictionary, all attributed to Cocker. The proofs of this are set
out in De Morgan's _Arithmetical Books_. Among many other corroborative
circumstances, the clumsy forger, after declaring that Cocker to his dying
day resisted strong solicitation to publish his Arithmetic, makes him write
in the preface _Ille ego qui quondam_[566] of this kind: "I have been
instrumental to the benefit of many, by virtue of those useful arts,
writing and engraving; and do _now_, with the same _wonted alacrity_, cast
this my arithmetical mite into the public treasury." The book itself is not
comparable in merit to at least half-a-dozen others. How then comes Cocker
to be the impersonation of Arithmetic? Unless some one can show proof,
which we have never found, that he was so before 1756, the matter is to be
accounted for thus.

Arthur Murphy,[567] the dramatist, was by taste a man of letters, and ended
by being the translator of Tacitus; though many do not know that the two
are one. His friends had tried to make him a man of business; and no doubt
he had been well plied with commercial arithmetic. His first dramatic
performance, the farce of "The Apprentice," produced in 1756, is about an
idle young man who must needs turn actor. Two of the best known books of
the day in arithmetic were those of Cocker and Wingate.[568] Murphy chooses
_Wingate_ to be the name of an old merchant who {309} delights in vulgar
fractions, and _Cocker_ to be his arithmetical catchword--"You read
Shakespeare! get Cocker's Arithmetic! you may buy it for a shilling on any
stall; best book that ever was wrote!" and so on. The farce became very
popular, and, as we believe, was the means of elevating Cocker to his
present pedestal, where Wingate would have been, if his name had had the
droller sound of the two to English ears.

A notoriety of an older day turns up, Major-General Lambert.[569] The
common story is that he was banished to Guernsey, where he passed thirty
years in confinement, rearing and painting flowers. But Baker, in 1678,
represents him as a prisoner at Plymouth, sending equations for solution as
a challenge: probably his place of confinement was varied, and his
occupation also.

[General Lambert was removed to Plymouth, probably about 1668. His daughter
captured the son of the Governor of Guernsey, who therefore probably was
reckoned an unsafe custodier thenceforward; though he assured the king that
he had turned the young couple out of doors, and had never given them a
penny. Great importance was attached to Lambert's safe detention: probably
the remaining republicans looked upon him as to be their next Cromwell, if
such a thing were to be. There were standing orders to shoot him at once on
the first appearance of any enemy before the island. See _Notes and
Queries_, 3d S. iv. 89.]

Collins informs James Gregory that "some of the Royal Academy wrote over to
Mr. Oldenburg, who was desired to impart the same to the Council of the
Royal Society, that the French King was willing to allow pensions to one or
two learned Englishmen, but they never made any answer {310} to such a
proposal." This was written in 1671, and the thing probably happened
several years before. Mr. De Morgan communicated the account of the
proposal to Lord Macaulay, who replied that he did not think that any
Englishman _received_ a literary pension from Louis; but that there is a
curious letter, about 1664, from the French Ambassador, in which he says
that he has, by his master's orders, been making inquiries as to the state
of learning in England, and that he is sorry to find that the best writer
is _the infamous Miltonus_. On two such independent testimonies it may be
held proved that the French King had attempted to buy a little adherence
from English literature and science; and the silent contempt of the Royal
Society is an honorable fact in their history.

Another little bit of politics is as follows. Oughtred is informed that
"Mr. Foster,[570] our Lecturer on Astronomy at Gresham College, is put out
because he will not kneel down at the communion-table. A Scotsman [Mungo
Murray], one that is _verbi bis minister_,[571] is now lecturer in Mr.
Foster's place." Ward in his work on the Gresham Professors,[572]
suppresses the reason, and the suppression lowers the character of his
book. Foster was expelled in 1636, and re-elected on a vacancy in 1641,
when Puritanism had gained strength.

The correspondence of Newton would require deeper sifting than could be
given in such an article as the present. The first of the letters (1669) is
curious, as presenting the {311} appearance of forms belonging to the great
calculus which, in this paragraph, we ought to call that of fluxions. We
find, of the date February 18, 1669-70, what we believe is the earliest
manifestation of that morbid part of Newton's temperament which has been so
variously represented. He had solved a problem--being that which we have
called Dary's--on which he writes as follows: "The solution of the annuity
problem, if it will be of any use, you have my leave to insert into the
_Philosophical Transactions_, so it be without my name to it. For I see not
what there is desirable in public esteem, were I able to acquire and
maintain it. It would perhaps increase my acquaintance, the thing which I
chiefly study to decline."

Three letters touch upon "the experiment of glass rubbed to cause various
motions in bits of paper underneath": they are supplements to the account
given by Newton to the Royal Society, and printed by Birch. It was Newton,
so far as appears, who added _glass_ to the substances known to be
electric. Soon afterwards we come to a little bit of the history of the
appointment to the Mint. It has appeared from the researches of late years
that Newton was long an aspirant for public employment: the only coolness
which is known to have taken place between him and Charles Montague[573]
[Halifax] arose out of his imagining that his friend was not in earnest
about getting him into the public service. March 14, 1696, Newton writes
thus to Halley: "And if the rumour of preferment for me in the Mint should
hereafter, upon the death of Mr. Hoar [the comptroller], or any other
occasion, be revived, I pray that you would {312} endeavour to obviate it
by acquainting your friends that I neither _put in_ for _any_ place in the
Mint, nor would meddle with _Mr. Hoar's place_, were it offered to me."
This means that Mr. Hoar's place had been suggested, which Newton seems to
have declined. Five days afterwards, Montague writes to Newton that he is
to have the _Wardenship_. It is fair to Newton to say that in all
probability this was not--or only in a smaller degree--a question of
personal dignity, or of salary. It must by this time have been clear to him
that the minister, though long bound to make him an object of patronage,
was actually seeking him for the Mint, because he wanted both Newton's name
and his talents for business--which he knew to be great--in the weighty and
dangerous operation of restoring the coinage. It may have been, and
probably was, the case that Newton had a tolerably accurate notion of what
he would have to do, and of what degree of power would be necessary to
enable him to do it in his own way.

We have said that the non-epistolary manuscripts are still unexamined.
There is a chance that one of them may answer a question of two centuries'
standing, which is worth answering, because it has been so often asked.
About 1640, Warner,[574] afterwards assisted by Pell,[575] commenced a
table of _antilogarithms_, of the kind which Dodson[576] afterwards
constructed anew and published. In the Museum collection there is inquiry
after inquiry from Charles Cavendish,[577] first, as to when the
_Analogics_, as he called them, would be finished; next, when they would be
printed. Pell answers, in 1644, that Warner left his papers to a kinsman,
who had become bankrupt, and proceeds thus:

"I am not a little afraid that all Mr. Warner's papers, {313} and no small
share of my labours therein, are seazed upon, and most unmathematically
divided between the sequestrators and creditors, who (not being able to
ballance the account where there appeare so many numbers, and much troubled
at the sight of so many crosses and circles in the superstitious Algebra
and that black art of Geometry) will, no doubt, determine once in their
lives to become figure-casters, and so vote them all to be throwen into the
fire, if some good body doe not reprieve them for pye-bottoms, for which
purposes you know analogicall numbers are incomparably apt, if they be
accurately calculated."

Pell afterwards told Wallis[578] that the papers had fallen into the hands
of Dr. Busby,[579] and Collins[580] writes that they were left in the hands
of Dr. Thorndike,[581] a prebendary of Westminster; whence Rigaud[582]
seems to say that Thorndike had left them to Dr. Busby. Birch[583] says
that he procured for the Royal Society four boxes from Busby's trustees,
containing papers of Warner and Pell: but there is no other tradition of
such things in the Society. But in the Birch manuscripts at the British
Museum, there turns up, as printed in what we call the Museum collection, a
list of Warner's papers, with _Collins's_ receipt to Dr. Thorndike at the
bottom, and engagement to restore them on demand. The date is December 14,
1667; Wallis's statement being in 1693. It is possible that Busby may be a
mistake altogether: he was very unlikely to have had charge of any
mathematical papers: there may have been a confusion between the Prebendary
of Westminster and the Head Master of Westminster School. If so, in all
probability Thorndike handed {314} the cumbrous lot over to the notorious
collector of mathematical papers, blessing himself that he got rid of them
in a manner which would insure their return if he were called upon by the
owners to restore them. It is much against this hypothesis that Dodson, who
certainly recalculated, can say nothing more about Warner than a repetition
of Wallis's story: though, had Collins kept the papers, they would probably
have been in Jones's possession at the very time when Dodson, who was a
friend of Jones and a user of his library, was engaged on his own
computations. But even books, and still more manuscripts, are often
singularly overlooked; and it remains not very improbable that Warner's
table is now at Shirburn Castle, among the unexamined manuscripts.



CYCLOMETRY AND STEEL PENS.

_Redit labor actus in orbem._[584] Among the matters which have come to me
since the Budget opened, there is a pamphlet of quadrature of two pages and
a half from Professor Recalcati,[585] already mentioned. It ends with
"Quelque objection qu'on fasse touchant les raisonnements ci-dessus on
tombera toujours dans l'absurde."[586] A civil engineer--so he says--has
made the quadrature "no longer a problem, but an axiom." As follows: "Take
the quadrant of a circle whose circumference is given, square the quadrant
which gives the true square of the circle. Because 30 ÷ 4 = 7.5 × 7.5 =
56.25 = the positive square of a circle whose circumference is 30."
Brevity, the soul of wit, is the "wings of mighty-winds" to quadrature, and
sends it "flying all abroad." A _surbodhicary_--something like M.A. or
LL.D., I understand--at Calcutta, published in 1863 the division of an
{315} angle into any odd number of parts, demonstration and all in--when
the diagram is omitted--one page, good-sized, well-leaded type, small
duodecimo. But in the Preface he acknowledges "sheer inability" to execute
his task. Mr. William Dean, of Todmorden, in 1863, announced 3-9/64 as
proved both practically and geometrically: he has been already mentioned
anonymously. Next I have the tract of Don Juan Larriva, published at Leiria
in 1856, and dedicated to Queen Victoria. Mr. W. Peters,[587] already
mentioned, who has for some months been circulating diagrams on a card,
publishes (August, 1865) _The Circle Squared_. He agrees with the
Archpriest of St. Vitus. He hints that a larger publication will depend
partly on the support he receives, and partly on the castigation, for which
last, of course, he looks to me. Cyclometers have their several styles of
wit; so have anticyclometers too, for that matter. Mr. Peters will not
allow me any extra-journal being: I am essentially a quotation from the
_Athenæum_; "A. De Morgan" _et præterea nihil_.[588] If he had to pay for
keeping me set up, he would find out his mistake, and would be glad to
compound handsomely for a stereotype. Next comes a magnificent sheet of
pasteboard, printed on both sides. Having glanced at it and detected
quadrature, I began methodically at the beginning--"By Royal Command," with
the lion and unicorn, and all that comes between. Mercy on us! thought I to
myself: has Her Majesty referred the question to the Judicial Committee of
the Privy Council, where all the great difficulties go now-a-days, and is
this proclamation the result? On reading further I was relieved by finding
that the first side is entirely an advertisement of Joseph Gillott's[589]
steel pens, with engraving of his {316} premises, and notice of novel
application of his unrivalled machinery. The second side begins with "the
circle rectified" by W. E. Walker,[590] who finds [pi] =
3.141594789624155.... This is an off-shoot from an accurate geometrical
rectification, on which is to be presumed Mr. Gillott's new machinery is
founded. I have no doubt that Mr. Walker's error, which is only in the
sixth place of decimals, will not hurt the pens, unless it be by the
slightest possible increase of the tendency to open at the points. This
arises from Mr. Walker having rectified above proof by .000002136034362....

Lastly, I, even I myself, who have long felt that I was a quadrature below
par, have solved the problem by means which, in the present state of the
law of libel, I dare not divulge. But the result is permitted; and it goes
far to explain all the discordances. The ratio of the circumference to the
diameter is not always the same! Not that it varies with the radius; the
geometers are right enough on that point: but it varies with the time, in a
manner depending upon the difference of the true longitudes of the Sun and
Moon. A friend of mine--at least until he misbehaved--insisted on the mean
right ascensions: but I served him as Abraham served his guest in
Franklin's parable. The true formula is, A and a being the Sun's and Moon's
longitudes,

  [pi] = 3-13/80 + 3/80 cos(A - a).

Mr. James Smith obtained his quadrature at full moon; the Archpriest of St.
Vitus and some others at new moon. Until I can venture to publish the
demonstration, I recommend the reader to do as I do, which is to adopt
3.14159..., and to think of the matter only at the two points of the lunar
month at which it is correct. The _Nautical Almanac_ will no doubt give
these points in a short time: I am in correspondence with the Admiralty,
with nothing {317} to get over except what I must call a perverse notion on
the part of the Superintendent of the _Almanac_, who suspects one
correction depending on the Moon's latitude; and the Astronomer Royal leans
towards another depending on the date of the Queen's accession. I have no
patience with these men: what can the Moon's node of the Queen's reign
possibly have to do with the ratio in question? But this is the way with
all the regular men of science; Newton is to them etc. etc. etc. etc.

The following method of finding the circumference of a circle (taken from a
paper by Mr. S. Drach[591] in the _Phil. Mag._, Jan. 1863, Suppl.) is as
accurate as the use of 3.14159265. From three diameters deduct
8-thousandths and 7-millionths of a diameter; to the result add five per
cent. We have then not quite enough; but the shortcoming is at the rate of
about an inch and a sixtieth of an inch in 14,000 miles.



JACOB BEHMEN.

Though I have met with nothing but a little tract from the school of Jacob
Behmen[592] (or Böhme; I keep to the old English version of his name), yet
there has been more, and of a more recent date. I am told of an
"Introduction to Theosophy [_Theo_ private, I suppose, as in theological];
or, the Science of the Mystery of Christ," published in 1854, mostly from
the writings of William Law[593]: and also of a volume of 688 pages, of the
same year, printed for private circulation, containing notes for a
biography of William Law. The editor of the first work wishes to grow "a
{318} generation of perfect Christians" by founding a Theosophic College,
for which he requests the public to raise a hundred thousand pounds. There
is a good account of Jacob Behmen in the _Penny Cyclopædia_. The author
mentions inaccurate accounts, one of which he quotes, as follows: "He
derived all his mystical and rapturous doctrine from Wood's[594] _Athenæ
Oxonienses_, Vol. I, p. 610, and _Hist. et Antiq. Acad. Oxon._, Vol. II, p.
308." On which the author remarks that Wood was born after Behmen's death.
There must have been a few words which slipped out: what is meant is that
Behmen "derived his doctrine from _Robert Fludd_,[595] _for whom see_
Wood's etc. etc." Even this is absurd enough: for Behmen began to publish
in 1610, and Fludd in 1616. Fludd was a Rosicrucian, and a mystic of a
different type from Behmen. I have some of his works, and could produce out
of them paradoxes enough, according to our ways of thinking, to fit out a
host. But the Rosicrucian system was a recognized school of its day, and
Fludd, a man of great learning, had abettors enough in all which he
advanced, and predecessors in most of it.

[A Correspondent has recently sent a short summary of the claims of Jacob
Behmen to rank higher than I have placed him. I shall gladly insert this
summary in the book I contemplate, as a statement of what is said of Behmen
far less liable to suspicion of exaggeration than anything I could write. I
shall add a few extracts from Behmen himself, in support of his right to be
in my list.]

"_Jacob Behmen._--That Prof. De Morgan classes Jacob Behmen among
paradoxers can only be attributed to the fact of his being avowedly
unacquainted with the writings {319} of that author. Perhaps you may think
a few words from one who knows them well of sufficient interest to the
learned Professor, and your readers in general, to be worthy of space in
your columns. The metaphysical system of Behmen--the most perfect and only
true one--still awaits a qualified commentator. Behmen's countryman,
Dionysius Andreas Freher,[596] who spent the greater part of his life in
this country, and whose exposition of Behmen exists only in MS., filling
many volumes, written in English, with the exception of two, written in
German, with numerous beautiful, highly ingenious, and elaborate
illustrations,--copies of some of which are in the British Museum, but all
the originals of which are in the possession of the gentleman who is the
editor of the two works alluded to by Professor De Morgan,--this Freher was
the first to philosophically expound Behmen's system, which was afterwards,
with the help of these MSS., as it were, popularized by William Law; but
both Freher and Law confined themselves chiefly to its theological aspect.
In Behmen, however, is to be found, not only the true ground of all
theology, but also that of all physical science. He demonstrated with a
fullness, accuracy, completeness and certainty that leave nothing to be
desired, the innermost ground of Deity and Nature; and, confining myself to
the latter, I can from my own knowledge assert, that in Behmen's writings
is to be found the true and clear demonstration of every physical fact that
has been discovered since his day. Thus, the science of electricity, which
was not yet in existence when he wrote, is there anticipated; and not only
does Behmen describe all the now known phenomena of that force, but he even
gives us the origin, generation and birth of electricity itself. Again,
positive evidence can be adduced that Newton derived all his knowledge of
gravitation and its {320} laws from Behmen, with whom gravitation or
attraction is, and very properly so, as he shows us, the first of the seven
properties of Nature. The theory defended by Mr. Grove,[597] at the
Nottingham meeting of last year, that all the apparently distinct causes of
moral and physical phenomena are but so many manifestations of one central
force, and that Continuity is the law of nature, is clearly laid down, and
its truth demonstrated, by Behmen, as well as the distinction between
spirit and matter, and that the moral and material world is pervaded by a
sublime unity. And though all this was not admitted in Behmen's days,
because science was not then sufficiently advanced to understand the deep
sense of our author, many of his passages, then unintelligible, or
apparently absurd, read by the light of the present age, are found to
contain the positive enunciation of principles at whose discovery and
establishment science has only just arrived by wearisome and painful
investigations. Every new scientific discovery goes to prove his profound
and intuitive insight into the most secret workings of nature; and if
scientific men, instead of sharing the prejudice arising from ignorance of
Behmen's system, would place themselves on the vantage ground it affords,
they would at once find themselves on an eminence whence they could behold
all the arcana of nature. Behmen's system, in fact, shows us the _inside_
of things, while modern physical science is content with looking at the
_outside_. Behmen traces back every outward manifestation or development to
its one central root,--to that one central energy which, as yet, is only
suspected; every link in the chain of his demonstration is perfect, and
there is not one link wanting. He carries us from the out-births of the
circumference, along the radius to the center, {321} or point, and beyond
that even to the zero, demonstrating the constitution of the zero, or
nothing, with mathematical precision. C. W. H."

And so Behmen is no subject for the Budget! I waited until I should chance
to light on one of his volumes, knowing that any volume would do, and
almost any page. My first hap was on the second volume of the edition of
1664 (4to, published by M. Richardson) and opening near the beginning, a
turn or two brought me to page 13, where I saw about _sulphur_ and
_mercurius_ as follows:



"Thus SUL is the soul, in an herb it is the oil, and in man also, according
to the spirit of _this_ world in the third principle, which is continually
generated out of the anguish of the will in the mind, and the
Brimstone-worm is the Spirit, which hath the fire and _burneth_: PHUR is
the sour wheel in itself which causeth that.

"_Mercurius_ comprehendeth all the four forms, even as the life springeth
up, and yet hath not its dark beginning in the Center as the PHUR hath, but
after the flash of fire, when the sour dark form is terrified, where the
hardness is turned into pliant sharpness, and where the second will (_viz._
the will of nature, which is called the Anguish) ariseth, there Mercurius
hath its original. For MER is the shivering wheel, very horrible, sharp,
venomous, and hostile; which assimulateth it thus in the sourness in the
flash of fire, where the sour wrathful life _ariseth_. The syllable CU is
the pressing out, of the _Anxious_ will of the mind, from Nature: which is
climbing up, and _willeth_ to be out aloft. RI is the comprehension of the
flash of fire, which in MER giveth a clear sound and tune. For the flash
maketh the tune, and it is the Salt-Spirit which _soundeth_, and its form
(or quality) is gritty like sand, and herein arise noises, sounds and
voices, and thus CU comprehendeth the flash, and so the pressure is as a
_wind_ which thrusteth, and giveth a spirit to the flash, so that it liveth
and burneth. Thus the {322} syllable US is called the burning fire, which
with the spirit continually driveth itself forth: and the syllable CU
presseth continually upon the flash."



Shades of Tauler[598] and Paracelsus,[599] how strangely you do mix! Well
may Hallam call Germany the native soil of Mysticism. Had Behmen been the
least of a scholar, he would not have divided _sulph-ur_ and _merc-ur-i-us_
as he has done: and the inflexion _us_, that boy of all work, would have
been rejected. I think it will be held that a writer from whom hundreds of
pages like the above could be brought together, is fit for the Budget. If
Sampson Arnold Mackay[600] had tied his etymologies to a mystical
Christology, instead of a mystical infidelity, he might have had a school
of followers. The nonsense about Newton borrowing gravitation from Behmen
passes only with those who know neither what Newton did, nor what was done
before him.

The above reminds me of a class of paradoxers whom I wonder that I forgot;
they are without exception the greatest bores of all, because they can put
the small end of their paradox into any literary conversation whatever. I
mean the people who have heard the local pronunciation of celebrated names,
and attempt not only to imitate it, but to impose on others their broken
German or Arabic, or what not. They also learn the vernacular names of
those who are generally spoken of in their Latin forms; at least, they
learn a few cases, and hawk them as evidences of erudition. They are
miserably mistaken: scholarship, as a rule, {323} always accepts the
vernacular form of a name which has vernacular celebrity. Hallam writes
Behmen: his index-maker, rather superfluously, gives "_Behmen_ or Boehm."
And he retains Melanchthon,[601] the name given by Reuchlin[602] to his
little kinsman Schwartzerd, because the world has adopted it: but he will
none of Capnio, the name which Reuchlin fitted on to himself, because the
world has not adopted it. He calls the old forms pedantry: but he sees that
the rejection of well-established results of pedantry would be greater
pedantry still. The paradoxers assume the question that it is more
_correct_ to sound a man by lame imitation of his own countrymen than as
usual in the country in which the sound is to be made. Against them are,
first, the world at large; next, an overpowering majority of those who know
something about surnames and their history. Some thirty years ago--a
fact--there appeared at the police-office a complainant who found his own
law. In the course of his argument, he asked, "What does Kitty
say?"--"Who's Kitty?" said the magistrate, "your wife, or your
nurse?"--"Sir! I mean Kitty, the celebrated lawyer."--"Oh!" said the
magistrate, "I suspect you mean Mr. Chitty,[603] the author of the great
work on pleading."--"I do sir! But Chitty is an Italian name, and ought to
be pronounced _Kitty_." This man was a full-blown flower: but there is many
a modest bud; and all ought either to blush when seen or to waste their
pronunciation on the desert air.

{324}



A PLEA FOR KING CUSTOM.

I stand up for King Custom, or _Usus_, as Horace called him, with whom is
_arbitrium_ the decision, and _jus_ the right, and _norma_ the way of
deciding, simply because he has _potestas_ the power. He may admit one and
another principle to advise: but Custom is not a constitutional king; he
may listen to his cabinet, but he decides for himself: and if the ministry
should resign, he blesses his stars and does without them. We have a
glorious liberty in England of owning neither dictionary, grammar, nor
spelling-book: as many as choose write by either of the three, and decide
all disputed points their own way, those following them who please.

Throughout this book I have called people by the names which denote them in
their books, or by our vernacular names. This is the intelligible way of
proceeding. I might, for instance (Vol. I, p. 44), have spoken of Charles
de Bovelles,[604] of Lefèvre d'Étaples,[605] of Pèlerin,[606] and of
Etienne.[607] But I prefer the old plan. Those who like another plan
better, are welcome to substitute with a pen, when they know what to write;
when they do not, it is clear that they would not have understood me if I
had given modern names.

The principal advisers of King Custom are as follows. First, there is
Etymology, the _chiffonnier_, or general rag-merchant, who has made such a
fortune of late years in his own business that he begins to be considered
highly respectable. He gives advice which is more thought of than followed,
partly on account of the fearful extremes into which he runs. He lately
asked some boys of sixteen, at a matriculation examination in _English_, to
what branch of {325} the Indo-Germanic family they felt inclined to refer
the Pushto language, and what changes in the force of the letters took
place in passing from Greek into Moeso-Gothic. Because all syllables were
once words, he is a little inclined to insist that they shall be so still.
He would gladly rule English with a Saxon rod, which might be permitted
with a certain discretion which he has never attained: and when opposed, he
defends himself with analogies of the Aryan family until those who hear him
long for the discovery of an Athanasyus. He will transport a word beyond
seas--he is recorder of Rhematopolis--on circumstantial evidence which
looks like mystery gone mad; but, strange to say, something very often
comes to light after sentence is passed which proves the soundness of the
conviction.

The next adviser is Logic, a swearing old justice of peace, quorum, and
rotulorum, whose excesses brought on such a fit of the gout that for many
years he was unable to move. He is now mending, and his friends say he has
sown his wild oats. He has some influence with the educated subjects of
Custom, and will have more, if he can learn the line at which interference
ought to stop: with them he has succeeded in making an affirmative of two
negatives; but the vulgar won't never have nothing to say to him. He has
always railed at Milton for writing that Eve was the fairest of her
daughters; but has never satisfactorily shown what Milton ought to have
said instead.

The third adviser has more influence with the mass of the subjects of King
Custom than the other two put together; his name is Fiddlefaddle, the
toy-shop keeper; and the other two put him forward to do their worst work.
In return, he often uses their names without authority. He took Etymology
to witness that _means_ to an end must be plural: and he would have any one
method to be a _mean_. But Etymology proved him wrong, King Custom referred
him to his Catechism, in which is "a means whereby we receive the same,"
and Analogy--a subordinate of {326} Etymology--asked whether he thought it
a great _new_ to hear that he was wrong. It was either this Fiddlefaddle,
or Lindley Murray[608] his traveler, who persuaded the Miss Slipslops, of
the Ladies Seminary, to put "The Misses Slipslop" over the gate. Sixty
years ago, this bagman called at all the girls' schools, and got many of
the teachers to insist on the pupils saying "Is it not" and "Can I not" for
"Isn't it" and "Can't I": of which it came that the poor girls were
dreadfully laughed at by their irreverent brothers when they went home for
the holidays. Had this bad adviser not been severely checked, he might by
this time have proposed our saying "The Queen's of England son," declaring,
in the name of Logic, that the prince was the Queen's son, not England's.

Lastly, there is Typography the metallurgist, an executive officer who is
always at work in secret, and whose lawless mode of advising is often done
by carrying his notions into effect without leave given. He it is who never
ceases suggesting that the same word is not to occur in a second place
within sight of the first. When the Authorized Version was first printed,
he began this trick at the passage, "Let there be light, and there was
light;" he drew a line on the proof under the second _light_, and wrote
"_luminosity?_" opposite. He is strongest in the punctuations and other
signs; he has a pepper-box full of commas always by his side. He puts
everything under marks of quotation which he has ever heard before. An
earnest preacher, in a very moving sermon, used the phrase Alas! and alack
a day! Typography stuck up the inverted commas because he had read the old
Anglo-Indian toast, "A lass and a lac a day!" If any one should have the
sense to leave out of his Greek {327} the unmeaning scratches which they
call accents, he goes to a lexicon and puts them in. He is powerful in
routine; but when two routines interlace or overlap, he frequently takes
the wrong one.

Subject to bad advice, and sometimes misled for a season, King Custom goes
on his quiet way and is sure to be right at last.

 "Treason does never prosper: what's the reason?
  Why, when it prospers, none dare call it treason."

Language is in constant fermentation, and all that is thrown in, so far as
it is not fit to assimilate, is thrown off; and this without any obvious
struggle. In the meanwhile every one who has read good authors, from
Shakspeare downward, knows what is and what is not English; and knows,
also, that our language is not one and indivisible. Two very different
turns of phrase may both be equally good, and as good as can be: we may be
relieved of the consequences of contempt of one court by _habeas corpus_
issuing out of another.



TEST OF LANGUAGE.

Hallam remarks that the Authorized Version of the Bible is not in the
language of the time of James the First: that it is not the English of
Raleigh or of Bacon. Here arises the question whether Raleigh and Bacon are
the true expositors of the language of their time; and whether they were
not rather the incipient promoters of a change which was successfully
resisted by--among other things--the Authorized Version of the Testaments.
I am not prepared to concede that I should have given to the English which
would have been fashioned upon that of Bacon by imitators, such as they
usually are, the admiration which is forced from me by Bacon's English from
Bacon's pen. On this point we have a notable parallel. Samuel Johnson {328}
commands our admiration, at least in his matured style: but we nauseate his
followers. It is an opinion of mine that the works of the leading writers
of an age are seldom the proper specimens of the language of their day,
when that language is in its state of progression. I judge of a language by
the colloquial idiom of educated men: that is, I take this to be the best
medium between the extreme cases of one who is ignorant of grammar and one
who is perched upon a style. Dialogue is what I want to judge by, and plain
dialogue: so I choose Robert Recorde[609] and his pupil in the _Castle of
Knowledge_, written before 1556. When Dr. Robert gets into his altitudes of
instruction, he differs from his own common phraseology as much as probably
did Bacon when he wrote morals and philosophy. But every now and then I
come to a little plain talk about a common thing, of which I propose to
show a specimen. Anything can be made to look old by such changes as
_makes_ into _maketh_, with a little old spelling. I shall invert these
changes, using the newer form of inflexion, and the modern spelling: with
no other variation whatever.

"_Scholar._ Yet the reason of that is easy enough to be conceived, for when
the day is at the longest the Sun must needs shine the more time, and so
must it needs shine the less time when the day is at the shortest: this
reason I have heard many men declare.

_Master._ That may be called a crabbed reason, for it {329} goes backward
like a crab. The day makes not the Sun to shine, but the Sun shining makes
the day. And so the length of the day makes not the Sun to shine long,
neither the shortness of the day causes not [_sic_] the Sun to shine the
lesser time, but contrariwise the long shining of the Sun makes the long
day, and the short shining of the Sun makes the lesser day: else answer me
what makes the days long or short?

_Scholar._ I have heard wise men say that Summer makes the long days, and
Winter makes the long nights.

_Master._ They might have said more wisely, that long days make summer and
short days make winter.

_Scholar._ Why, all that seems one thing to me.

_Master._ Is it all one to say, God made the earth, and the earth made God?
Covetousness overcomes all men, and all men overcome covetousness?

_Scholar._ No, not so; for here the effect is turned to be the cause, and
the agent is made the patient.

_Master._ So is it to say Summer makes long days, when you should say: Long
days make summer.

_Scholar._ I perceive it now: but I was so blinded with the vulgar error,
that if you had demanded of me further what did make the summer, I had been
like to have answered that green leaves do make summer; and the sooner by
remembrance of an old saying that a year should come in which the summer
should not be known but by the green leaves.

_Master._ Yet this saying does not import that green leaves do make summer,
but that they betoken summer; so are they the sign and not the cause of
summer."

I have taken a whole page of our author, without omission, that the reader
may see that I do not pick out sentences convenient for my purpose. I have
done nothing but alter the third person of the verb and the spelling: but
great is the effect thereof. We say "the Sun shining makes the day";
Recorde, "the Sonne shynynge maketh the daye." {330} These points apart, we
see a resemblance between our English and that of three hundred years ago,
in the common talk of educated persons, which will allow us to affirm that
the language of the authorized Bible must have been very close to that of
its time. For I cannot admit that much change can have taken place in fifty
years: and the language of the version represents both our common English
and that of Recorde with very close approximation. Take sentences from
Bacon and Raleigh, and it will be apparent that these writers will be held
to differ from all three, Recorde, the version, and ourselves, by
differences of the same character. But we speak of Recorde's conversation,
and of our own. We conclude that it is the plain and almost colloquial
character of the Authorized Version which distinguishes it from the English
of Bacon and Raleigh, by approximating it to the common idiom of the time.
If any one will cast an eye upon the letters of instruction written by
Cecil[610] and the Bishop of London to the translators themselves, or to
the general directions sent to them in the King's name, he will find that
these plain business compositions differ from the English of Bacon and
Raleigh by the same sort of differences which distinguish the version
itself.



PRONUNCIATION.

The foreign word, or the word of a district, or class of people, passes
into the general vernacular; but it is long before the specially learned
will acknowledge the right of those with whom they come in contact to
follow general usage. The rule is simple: so long as a word is technical or
local, those who know its technical or local pronunciation may reasonably
employ it. But when the word has become general, the specialist is not very
wise if he refuse to follow {331} the mass, and perfectly foolish if he
insist on others following him. There have been a few who demanded that
Euler should be pronounced in the German fashion:[611] Euler has long been
the property of the world at large; what does it matter how his own
countrymen pronounce the letters? Shall we insist on the French pronouncing
_Newton_ without that final _tong_ which they never fail to give him? They
would be wise enough to laugh at us if we did. We remember that a pedant
who was insisting on all the pronunciations being retained, was met by a
maxim in contradiction, invented at the moment, and fathered upon
Kaen-foo-tzee,[612] an authority which he was challenged to dispute. Whom
did you speak of? said the bewildered man of accuracy. Learn your own
system, was the answer, before you impose it on others; Confucius says that
too.[613]

The old English has _fote_, _fode_, _loke_, _coke_, _roke_, etc., for
_foot_, etc. And _above_ rhymes in Chaucer to _remove_. Suspecting that the
broader sounds are the older, we may surmise that _remove_ and _food_ have
retained their old sounds, and that _cook_, once _coke_, would have rhymed
to our _Luke_, the vowel being brought a little nearer, perhaps, to the _o_
in our present _coke_, the fuel, probably so called as used by cooks. If
this be so, the Chief Justice _Cook_[614] of our lawyers, and the _Coke_
(pronounced like the fuel) of the greater part of the world, are equally
wrong. The lawyer has no right whatever to fasten his pronunciation upon
us: even leaving aside the general custom, he cannot prove himself right,
and is probably wrong. Those who {332} know the village of Rokeby
(pronounced Rookby) despise the world for not knowing how to name Walter
Scott's poem: that same world never asked a question about the matter, and
the reception of the parody of _Jokeby_, which soon appeared, was a
sufficient indication of their notion. Those who would fasten the hodiernal
sound upon us may be reminded that the question is, not what they call it
now, but what it was called in Cromwell's time. Throw away general usage as
a lawgiver, and this is the point which emerges. Probably _R[=u]ke-by_
would be right, with a little turning of the Italian [=u] towards [=o] of
modern English.

[Some of the above is from an old review. I do not always notice such
insertions: I take nothing but my own writings. A friend once said to me,
"Ah! you got that out of the _Athenæum_!" "Excuse me," said I. "the
_Athenæum_ got that out of me!"]



APOLOGIES TO CLUVIER.

It is part of my function to do justice to any cyclometers whose methods
have been wrongly described by any orthodox sneerers (myself included). In
this character I must notice _Dethlevus Cluverius_,[615] as the Leipzig
Acts call him (probably Dethleu Cluvier), grandson of the celebrated
geographer, Philip Cluvier. The grandson was a Fellow of the Royal Society,
elected on the same day as Halley,[616] November 30, 1678: I suppose he
lived in England. This {333} man is quizzed in the Leipzig Acts for 1686;
and, if Montucla insinuate rightly, by Leibnitz, who is further suspected
of wanting to embroil Cluvier with his own opponent Nieuwentiit,[617] on
the matter of infinitesimals. So far good: I have nothing against Leibnitz,
who though he was ironical, told us what he laughed at. But Montucla has
behaved very unfairly: he represents Cluvier as placing the essence of his
method in the solution of the problem _construere mundum divinæ menti
analogum_, to construct a world corresponding to the divine mind. Nothing
to begin with: no way of proceeding. Now, it ought to have been _ex data
linea construere_,[618] etc.: there is a given line, which is something to
go on. Further, there is a way of proceeding: it is to find the product of
1, 2, 3, 4, etc. for ever. Moreover, Montucla charges Cluvier with
_unsquaring_ the parabola, which Archimedes had squared as tight as a
glove. But he never mentions how very nearly Cluvier agrees with the Greek:
they only differ by 1 divided by 3n^2, where n is the infinite number of
parts of which a parabola is composed. This must have been the conceit that
tickled Leibnitz, and made him wish that Cluvier and Nieuwentiit should
fight it out. Cluvier, was admitted, on terms of irony, into the Leipzig
Acts: he appeared on a more serious footing in London. It is very rare for
one cyclometer to refute another: _les corsaires ne se battent pas_.[619]
The only instance I recall is that of M. Cluvier, who (_Phil. Trans._,
1686, No. 185) refuted M. Mallemont de Messange,[620] who {334} published
at Paris in 1686. He does it in a very serious style, and shows himself a
mathematician. And yet in the year in which, in the _Phil. Trans._, he was
a geometer, and one who rebukes his squarer for quoting Matthew xi. 25, in
that very year he was the visionary who, in the Leipzig Acts, professed to
build a world resembling the divine mind by multiplying together 1, 2, 3,
4, etc. up to infinity.



THE RAINBOW PARADOX.

There is a very pretty opening for a paradox which has never found its
paradoxer in print. The philosophers teach that the rainbow is not
material: it comes from rain-drops, but those rain-drops do not _take_
color. They only _give_ it, as lenses and mirrors; and each one drop gives
_all_ the colors, but throws them in different directions. Accordingly, the
same drop which furnishes red light to one spectator will furnish violet to
another, properly placed. Enter the paradoxer whom I have to invent. The
philosopher has gulled you nicely. Look into the water, and you will see
the reflected rainbow: take a looking-glass held sideways, and you see
another reflection. How could this be, if there were nothing colored to
reflect? The paradoxer's facts are true: and what are called the reflected
rainbows are _other_ rainbows, caused by those _other_ drops which are
placed so as to give the colors to the eye after reflection, at the water
or the looking-glass. A few years ago an artist exhibited a picture with a
rainbow and its apparent reflection: he simply copied what he had seen.
When his picture was examined, some started the idea that there could be no
reflection of a rainbow; they were right: they inferred that the artist had
made a mistake; they were wrong. When it was explained, some agreed and
some dissented. Wanted, {335} immediately, an able paradoxer: testimonials
to be forwarded to either end of the rainbow, No. 1. No circle-squarer need
apply, His Variegatedness having been pleased to adopt 3.14159... from Noah
downwards.



TYCHO BRAHE REVIVED.

The system of Tycho Brahé,[621] with some alteration and addition, has been
revived and contended for in our own day by a Dane, W. Zytphen,[622] who
has published _The Motion of the Sun in the Universe_, (second edition)
Copenhagen, 1865, 8vo, and _Le Mouvement Sidéral_, 1865, 8vo. I make an
extract.

"How can one explain Copernically that the velocity of the Moon must be
added to the velocity of the Earth on the one place in the Earth's orbit,
to learn how far the Moon has advanced from one fixed star to another; but
in another place in the orbit these velocities must be subtracted (the
movements taking place in opposite directions) to attain the same result?
In the Copernican and other systems, it is well known that the Moon,
abstracting from the insignificant excentricity of the orbit, always in
twenty-four hours performs an equally long distance. Why has Copernicus
never been denominated Fundamentus or Fundator? Because he has never
convinced anybody so thoroughly that this otherwise so natural epithet has
occurred to the mind."

Really the second question is more effective against Newton than against
Copernicus; for it upsets gravity: the first is of great depth.

{336}



JAMES SMITH WILL NOT DOWN.

The _Correspondent_ journal makes a little episode in the history of my
Budget (born May, 1865, died April, 1866). It consisted entirely of letters
written by correspondents. In August, a correspondent who signed "Fair
Play"--and who I was afterwards told was a lady--thought it would be a good
joke to bring in the Cyclometers. Accordingly a letter was written,
complaining that though Mr. Sylvester's[623] demonstration of Newton's
theorem--then attracting public attention--was duly lauded, the possibly
greater discovery of the quadrature seemed to be blushing unseen, and
wasting etc. It went on as follows:

"Prof. De Morgan, who, from his position in the scientific world, might
fairly afford to look favourably on less practised efforts than his own,
seems to delight in ridiculing the discoverer. Science is, of course, a
very respectable person when he comes out and makes himself useful in the
world [it must have been a lady; each sex gives science to the other]: but
when, like a monk of the Middle Ages, he shuts himself up [it must have
been a lady; they always snub the bachelors] in his cloistered cell,
repeating his mumpsimus from day to day, and despising the labourers on the
outside, we begin to think of Galileo,[624] Jenner,[625] Harvey,[626] and
other glorious trios, who have been contemned ..."

The writer then called upon Mr. James Smith[627] to come {337} forward. The
irony was not seen; and that day fortnight appeared the first of more than
thirty letters from his pen. Mr. Smith was followed by Mr. Reddie,[628]
Zadkiel,[629] and others, on their several subjects. To some of the letters
I have referred; to others I shall come. The _Correspondent_ was to become
a first-class scientific journal; the time had arrived at which truth had
an organ: and I received formal notice that I could not stifle it by
silence, nor convert it into falsehood by ridicule. When my reader sees my
extracts, he will readily believe my declaration that I should have been
the last to stifle a publication which was every week what James Mill[630]
would call a dose of capital for my Budget. A few anti-paradoxers brought
in common sense: but to the mass of the readers of the journal it all
seemed to be the difference between Tweedledum and Tweedledee. Some said
that the influx of scientific paradoxes killed the journal: but my belief
is that they made it last longer than it otherwise would have done. Twenty
years ago I recommended the paradoxers to combine and publish their views
in a common journal: with a catholic editor, who had no pet theory, but a
stern determination not to exclude anything merely for absurdity. I suspect
it would answer very well. A strong title, or motto, would be wanted: not
so coarse as was roared out in a Cambridge mob when I was an
undergraduate--"No King! No Church! No House of Lords! No nothing, blast
me!"--but something on that _principle_.

At the end of 1867 I addressed the following letter to the _Athenæum_:

PSEUDOMATH, PHILOMATH, AND GRAPHOMATH.

_December 31, 1867_

Many thanks for the present of Mr. James Smith's letters {338} of Sept. 28
and of Oct. 10 and 12. He asks where you will be if you read and digest his
letters: you probably will be somewhere first. He afterwards asks what the
WE of the _Athenæum_ will be if, finding it impossible to controvert, it
should refuse to print. I answer for you, that We-We of the _Athenæum_, not
being Wa-Wa the wild goose, so conspicuous in "Hiawatha," will leave what
controverts itself to print itself, if it please.

_Philomath_ is a good old word, easier to write and speak than
_mathematician_. It wants the words between which I have placed it. They
are not well formed: _pseudomathete_ and _graphomathete_ would be better:
but they will do. I give an instance of each.

The _pseudomath_ is a person who handles mathematics as the monkey handled
the razor. The creature tried to shave himself as he had seen his master
do; but, not having any notion of the angle at which the razor was to be
held, he cut his own throat. He never tried a second time, poor animal! but
the pseudomath keeps on at his work, proclaims himself clean-shaved, and
all the rest of the world hairy. So great is the difference between moral
and physical phenomena! Mr. James Smith is, beyond doubt, the great
pseudomath of our time. His 3-1/8 is the least of a wonderful chain of
discoveries. His books, like Whitbread's barrels, will one day reach from
Simpkin & Marshall's to Kew, placed upright, or to Windsor laid
length-ways. The Queen will run away on their near approach, as Bishop
Hatto did from the rats: but Mr. James Smith will follow her were it to
John o' Groats.

The _philomath_, for my present purpose, must be exhibited as giving a
lesson to presumption. The following anecdote is found in Thiébault's[631]
_Souvenirs de vingt ans de séjours à Berlin_, published in 1804. The book
itself got a high character for truth. In 1807 Marshal Mollendorff[632]
{339} answered an inquiry of the Duc de Bassano,[633] by saying that it was
the most veracious of books, written by the most honest of men. Thiébault
does not claim personal knowledge of the anecdote, but he vouches for its
being received as true all over the north of Europe.[634]

Diderot[635] paid a visit to Russia at the invitation of Catherine the
Second. At that time he was an atheist, or at least talked atheism: it
would be easy to prove him either one thing or the other from his writings.
His lively sallies on this subject much amused the Empress, and all the
younger part of her Court. But some of the older courtiers suggested that
it was hardly prudent to allow such unreserved exhibitions. The Empress
thought so too, but did not like to muzzle her guest by an express
prohibition: so a plot was contrived. The scorner was informed that an
eminent mathematician had an algebraical proof of the existence of God,
which he would communicate before the whole Court, if agreeable. Diderot
gladly consented. The mathematician, who is not named, was Euler.[636] He
came to Diderot with the gravest air, and in a tone of perfect conviction
said, "_Monsieur!_

  (a + b^n)/n = x

_donc Dieu existe; répondez!_"[637] Diderot, to whom algebra was Hebrew,
though this is expressed in a very roundabout way by Thiébault--and whom we
may suppose to have expected some verbal argument of alleged algebraical
closeness, was disconcerted; while peals of laughter sounded on all sides.
Next day he asked permission to return to France, which was granted. An
algebraist would have {340} turned the tables completely, by saying,
"Monsieur! vous savez bien que votre raisonnement demande le développement
de x suivant les puissances entières de n".[638] Goldsmith could not have
seen the anecdote, or he might have been supposed to have drawn from it a
hint as to the way in which the Squire demolished poor Moses.

The _graphomath_ is a person who, having no mathematics, attempts to
describe a mathematician. Novelists perform in this way: even Walter Scott
now and then burns his fingers. His dreaming calculator, Davy Ramsay,
swears "by the bones of the immortal Napier." Scott thought that the the
philomaths worshiped relics: so they do, in one sense. Look into
Hutton's[639] Dictionary for _Napier's Bones_, and you shall learn all
about the little knick-knacks by which he did multiplication and division.
But never a bone of his own did he contribute; he preferred elephants'
tusks. The author of _Headlong Hall_[640] makes a grand error, which is
quite high science: he says that Laplace proved the precession of the
equinoxes to be a periodical inequality. He should have said the variation
of the obliquity. But the finest instance is the following: Mr.
Warren,[641] in his well-wrought tale of the martyr-philosopher, was
incautious enough to invent the symbols by which his _savant_ satisfied
himself Laplace[642] was right on a doubtful point. And this is what he put
together--

  [sqrt]-3a^2, [rectangle]y^2 / z^2 + 9 - n = 9, n × log e.

Now, to Diderot and the mass of mankind this might be Laplace all over:
and, in a forged note of Pascal, would {341} prove him quite up to
gravitation. But I know of nothing like it, except in the lately received
story of the American orator, who was called on for some Latin, and
perorated thus: "Committing the destiny of the country to your hands,
Gentlemen, I may without fear declare, in the language of the noble Roman
poet,

  E pluribus unum,
  Multum in parvo,
  Ultima Thule,
  Sine qua non."[643]

But the American got nearer to Horace than the martyr-philosopher to
Laplace. For all the words are in Horace, except _Thule_, which might have
been there. But [rectangle] is not a symbol wanted by Laplace; nor can we
see how it could have been; in fact, it is not recognized in algebra. As to
the junctions, etc., Laplace and Horace are about equally well imitated.

Further thanks for Mr. Smith's letters to you of Oct. 15, 18, 19, 28, and
Nov. 4, 15. The last of these letters has two curious discoveries. First,
Mr. Smith declares that he has _seen_ the editor of the _Athenæum_: in
several previous letters he mentions a name. If he knew a little of
journalism he would be aware that editors are a peculiar race, obtained by
natural selection. They are never seen, even by their officials; only heard
down a pipe. Secondly, "an ellipse or oval" is composed of four arcs of
circles. Mr. Smith has got hold of the construction I was taught, when a
boy, for a pretty four-arc oval. But my teachers knew better than to call
it an ellipse: Mr. Smith does not; but he produces from it such
confirmation of 3-1/8 as would convince any _honest_ editor.

Surely the cyclometer is a Darwinite development of a spider, who is always
at circles, and always begins again when his web is brushed away. He
informs you that he {342} has been privileged to discover truths unknown to
the scientific world. This we know; but he proceeds to show that he is
equally fortunate in art. He goes on to say that he will make use of you to
bring those truths to light, "just as an artist makes use of a dummy for
the purpose of arranging his drapery." The painter's lay-figure is for
flowing robes; the hairdresser's dummy is for curly locks. Mr. James Smith
should read Sam Weller's pathetic story of the "four wax dummies." As to
_his_ use of a dummy, it is quite correct. When I was at University
College, I walked one day into a room in which my Latin colleague was
examining. One of the questions was, "Give the lives and fates of Sp.
Mælius,[644] and Sp. Cassius."[645] Umph! said I, surely all know that
Spurius Mælius was whipped for adulterating flour, and that Spurius Cassius
was hanged for passing bad money. Now, a robe arranged on a dummy would
look just like the toga of Cassius on the gallows. Accordingly, Mr. Smith
is right in the drapery-hanger which he has chosen: he has been detected in
the attempt to pass bad circles. He complains bitterly that his geometry,
instead of being read and understood by you, is handed over to me to be
treated after my scurrilous fashion. It is clear enough that he would
rather be handled in this way than not handled at all, or why does he go on
writing? He must know by this time that it is a part of the institution
that his "untruthful and absurd trash" shall be distilled into mine at the
rate of about 3-1/8 pages of the first to one column of the second. Your
readers will never know how much they gain by the process, until Mr. James
Smith publishes it all in a big book, or until they get hold of what he has
already published. I have six pounds avoirdupois of pamphlets and letters;
and there is more than half a pound of letters {343} written to you in the
last two months. Your compositor must feel aggrieved by the rejection of
these clearly written documents, without erasures, and on one side only.
Your correspondent has all the makings of a good contributor, except the
knowledge of his subject and the sense to get it. He is, in fact, only a
mask: of whom the fox

 "O quanta species, inquit, cerebrum non habet."[646]

I do not despair of Mr. Smith on any question which does not involve that
unfortunate two-stick wicket at which he persists in bowling. He has
published many papers; he has forwarded them to mathematicians: and he
cannot get answers; perhaps not even readers. Does he think that he would
get more notice if you were to print him in your journal? Who would study
his columns? Not the mathematician, we know; and he knows. Would others?
His balls are aimed too wide to be blocked by any one who is near the
wicket. He has long ceased to be worth the answer which a new invader may
get. Rowan Hamilton,[647] years ago, completely knocked him over; and he
has never attempted to point out any error in the short and easy method by
which that powerful investigator condescended to show that, be right who
may, he must be wrong. There are some persons who feel inclined to think
that Mr. Smith should be argued with: let those persons understand that he
has been argued with, refuted, and has never attempted to stick a pen into
the refutation. He stated that it was a remarkable paradox, easily
explicable; and that is all. After this evasion, Mr. James Smith is below
the necessity of being told that he is unworthy of answer. His friends
complain that I do nothing but _chaff_ him. Absurd! I winnow him; and if
nothing but chaff results, whose fault is that? I am usefully employed: for
he is the type of a class which ought to be known, and which I have done
much to make known.

{344}

Nothing came of this until July 1869, when I received a reprint of the
above letter, with a comment, described as Appendix D of a work in course
of publication on the geometry of the circle. The _Athenæum_ journal
received the same: but the Editor, in his private capacity, received the
whole work, being _The Geometry of the Circle and Mathematics as applied to
Geometry by Mathematicians, shown to be a mockery, delusion, and a snare_,
Liverpool, 8vo, 1869. Mr. J. S. here appears in deep fight with Professor
Whitworth,[648] and Mr. Wilson,[649] the author of the alleged amendment of
Euclid. How these accomplished mathematicians could be inveigled into
continued discussion is inexplicable. Mr. Whitworth began by complaining of
Mr. Smith's attacks upon mathematicians, continued to correspond after he
was convinced that J. S. proved an arc and its chord to be equal, and only
retreated when J. S. charged him with believing in 3-1/8, and refusing
acknowledgment. Mr. Wilson was introduced to J. S. by a volunteer defense
of his geometry from the assaults of the _Athenæum_. This the editor would
not publish; so J. S. sent a copy to Mr. Wilson himself. Some
correspondence ensued, but Mr. Wilson soon found out his man, and withdrew.

There is a little derision of the _Athenæum_ and a merited punishment for
"that unscrupulous critic and contemptible mathematical twaddler, De
Morgan."



MR. REDDIE'S ASTRONOMY.

At p. 183 I mentioned Mr. Reddie,[650] the author of _Vis Inertiæ Victa_
and of _Victoria toto coelo_,[651] which last is not {345} an address to
the whole heaven, either from a Roman Goddess or a British Queen, whatever
a scholar may suppose. Between these Mr. Reddie has published _The
Mechanics of the Heavens_, 8vo, 1862: this I never saw until he sent it to
me, with an invitation to notice it, he very well knowing that it would
catch. His speculations do battle with common notions of mathematics and of
mechanics, which, to use a feminine idiom, he blasphemes so you can't
think! and I suspect that if you do not blaspheme them too, _you_ can't
think. He appeals to the "truly scientific," and would be glad to have
readers who have read what he controverts, i.e., Newton's _Principia_: I
wish he may get them; I mean I hope he may obtain them. To none but these
would an account of his speculations be intelligible: I accordingly
disposed of him in a very short paragraph of description. Now many
paradoxers desire notice, even though it be disparaging. I have letters
from more than one--besides what have been sent to the Editor of the
_Athenæum_--complaining that they are not laughed at; although they deserve
it, they tell me, as much as some whom I have inserted. Mr. Reddie informs
me that I have not said a single word against his books, though I have
given nearly a column to sixteen-string arithmetic, and as much to
animalcule universes. What need to say anything to readers of Newton
against a book from which I quoted that revolution by gravitation is
_demonstrably_ impossible? It would be as useless as evidence against a man
who has pleaded guilty. Mr. Reddie derisively thanks me for "small
mercies"; he wrote me private letters; he published them, and more, in the
_Correspondent_. He gave me, _pro viribus suis_,[652] such a dressing you
can't think, both for my Budget non-notice, and for reviews which he
assumed me to have written. He outlawed himself by declaring
(_Correspondent_, Nov. 11, 1856) that I--in a review--had made a quotation
which was "garbled, evidently on purpose {346} to make it appear that" he
"was advocating solely a geocentric hypothesis, which is not true." In
fact, he did his best to get larger "mercy." And he shall have it; and at a
length which shall content him, unless his mecometer be an insatiable
apparatus. But I fear that in other respects I shall no more satisfy him
than the Irish drummer satisfied the poor culprit when, after several times
changing the direction of the stroke at earnest entreaty, he was at last
provoked to call out, "Bad cess to ye, ye spalpeen! strike where one will,
there's no _plasing_ ye!"

Mr. Reddie attaches much force to Berkeley's[653] old arguments against the
doctrine of fluxions, and advances objections to Newton's second section,
which he takes to be new. To me they appear "such as have been often made,"
to copy a description given in a review: though I have no doubt Mr. Reddie
got them out of himself. But the whole matter comes to this: Mr. Reddie
challenged answer, especially from the British Association, and got none.
He presumes that this is because he is right, and cannot be answered: the
Association is willing to risk itself upon the counter-notion that he is
wrong, and need not be answered; because so wrong that none who could
understand an answer would be likely to want one.

Mr. Reddie demands my attention to a point which had already particularly
struck me, as giving the means of showing to _all_ readers the kind of
confusion into which paradoxers are apt to fall, in spite of the clearest
instruction. It is a very honest blunder, and requires notice: it may
otherwise mislead some, who may suppose that no one able to read could be
mistaken about so simple a matter, {347} let him be ever so wrong about
Newton. According to his own mis-statement, in less than five months he
made the Astronomer Royal abandon the theory of the solar motion in space.
The announcement is made in August, 1865, as follows: the italics are not
mine:

    "The third (_Victoria ..._), although only published in September,
    1863, has already had its triumph. _It is the book that forced the
    Astronomer Royal of England, after publicly teaching the contrary for
    years, to come to the conclusion, "strange as it may appear," that "the
    whole question of solar motion in space is at the present time in doubt
    and abeyance."_ This admission is made in the Annual Report of the
    Council of the Royal Astronomical Society, published in the Society's
    _Monthly Notices_ for February, 1864."

It is added that solar motion is "full of self-contradiction, which "the
astronomers" simply overlooked, but which they dare not now deny after
being once pointed out."

The following is another of his accounts of the matter, given in the
_Correspondent_, No. 18, 1865:

    "... You ought, when you came to put me in the 'Budget,' to have been
    aware of the Report of the Council of the Royal Astronomical Society,
    where it appears that Professor Airy,[654] with a better appreciation
    of my demonstrations, had admitted--'strange,' say the Council, 'as it
    may appear,'--that 'the whole question of solar motion in space [and
    here Mr. Reddie omits some words] is now in _doubt and abeyance_.' You
    were culpable as a public teacher of no little pretensions, if you were
    'unaware' of this. If aware of it, you ought not to have suppressed
    such an important testimony to my really having been 'very successful'
    in drawing the teeth of the pegtops, though you thought them so firmly
    fixed. And if you still suppress {348} it, in your Appendix, or when
    you reprint your 'Budget,' you will then be guilty of a _suppressio
    veri_, also of further injury to me, who have never injured you...."

Mr. Reddie must have been very well satisfied in his own mind before he
ventured such a challenge, with an answer from me looming in the distance.
The following is the passage of the Report of the Council, etc., from which
he quotes:

    "And yet, strange to say, notwithstanding the near coincidence of all
    the results of the before-mentioned independent methods of
    investigation, the inevitable logical inference deduced by Mr. Airy is,
    that the whole question of solar motion in space, _so far at least as
    accounting for the proper motion of the stars is concerned_, [I have
    put in italics the words omitted by Mr. Reddie] appears to remain at
    this moment in doubt and abeyance."

Mr. Reddie has forked me, as he thinks, on a dilemma: if unaware, culpable
ignorance; if aware, suppressive intention. But the thing is a _trilemma_,
and the third horn, on which I elect to be placed, is surmounted by a
doubly-stuffed seat. First, Mr. Airy has not changed his opinion about the
_fact_ of solar motion in space, but only suspends it as to the sufficiency
of present means to give the amount and direction of the motion. Secondly,
all that is alluded to in the Astronomical Report was said and printed
before the Victoria proclamation appeared. So that the author, instead of
drawing the tooth of the Astronomer Royal's pegtop, has burnt his own
doll's nose.

William Herschel,[655] and after him about six other astronomers, had aimed
at determining, by the proper motions of the stars, the point of the
heavens towards which the solar system is moving: their results were
tolerably accordant. Mr. Airy, in 1859, proposed an improved method, and,
applying it to stars of large proper motion, produced {349} much the same
result as Herschel. Mr. E. Dunkin,[656] one of Mr. Airy's staff at
Greenwich, applied Mr. Airy's method to a very large number of stars, and
produced, again, nearly the same result as before. This paper was read to
the Astronomical Society in _March_, 1863, was printed in abstract in the
_Notice_ of that month, was printed in full in the volume then current, and
was referred to in the Annual Report of the Council in _February_, 1864,
under the name of "the Astronomer Royal's elaborate investigation, as
exhibited by Mr. Dunkin." Both Mr. Airy and Mr. Dunkin express grave doubts
as to the sufficiency of the data: and, regarding the coincidence of all
the results as highly curious, feel it necessary to wait for calculations
made on better data. The report of the Council states these doubts. Mr.
Reddie, who only published in _September_, 1863, happened to see the Report
of February, 1864, assumes that the doubts were then first expressed, and
declares that his book of September had the triumph of forcing the
Astronomer Royal to abandon the _fact_ of motion of the solar system by the
February following. Had Mr. Reddie, when he saw that the Council were
avowedly describing a memoir presented some time before, taken the
precaution to find out _when_ that memoir was presented, he would perhaps
have seen that doubts of the results obtained, expressed by one astronomer
in March, 1863, and by another in 1859, could not have been due to his
publication of September, 1863. And any one else would have learnt that
neither astronomer doubts the _solar motion_, though both doubt the
sufficiency of present means to determine its _amount_ and _direction_.
This is implied in the omitted words, which Mr. Reddie--whose omission
would have been dishonest if he had seen their meaning--no doubt took for
pleonasm, superfluity, overmuchness. The rashness which pushed him headlong
{350} into the quillet that _his_ thunderbolt had stopped the chariot of
the Sun and knocked the Greenwich Phaeton off the box, is the same which
betrayed him into yet grander error--which deserves the full word,
_quidlibet_--about the _Principia_ of Newton. There has been no change of
opinion at all. When a person undertakes a long investigation, his opinion
is that, at a certain date, there is _prima facie_ ground for thinking a
sound result may be obtained. Should it happen that the investigation ends
in doubt upon the sufficiency of the grounds, the investigator is not put
in the wrong. He knew beforehand that there was an alternative: and he
takes the horn of the alternative indicated by his calculations. The two
sides of this case present an instructive contrast. Eight astronomers
produce nearly the same result, and yet the last two doubt the sufficiency
of their means: compare them with the what's-his-name who rushes in where
thing-em-bobs fear to tread.

I was not aware, until I had written what precedes, that Mr. Airy had given
a sufficient answer on the point. Mr. Reddie says (_Correspondent_, Jan.
20, 1866):

    "I claim to have forced Professor Airy to give up the notion of 'solar
    motion in space' altogether, for he admits it to be 'at present in
    doubt and abeyance.' I first made that claim in a letter addressed to
    the Astronomer Royal himself in June, 1864, and in replying, very
    courteously, to other portions of my letter, he did not gainsay that
    part of it."

Mr. Reddie is not ready at reading satire, or he never would have so missed
the meaning of the courteous reply on one point, and the total silence upon
another. Mr. Airy must be one of those peculiar persons who, when they do
not think an assertion worth notice, let it alone, without noticing it by a
notification of non-notice. He would never commit the bull of "Sir! I will
not say a word on that subject." He would put it thus, "Sir! I will only
say ten words on that subject,"--and, having thus said them, would {351}
proceed to something else. He assumed, as a matter of form, that Mr. Reddie
would draw the proper inference from his silence: and this because he did
not care whether or no the assumption was correct.

The _Mechanics of the Heavens_, which Mr. Reddie sends to be noticed, shall
be noticed, so far as an extract goes:



"My connection with this subject is, indeed, very simply explained. In
endeavoring to understand the laws of physical astronomy as generally
taught, I happened to entertain some doubt whether gravitating bodies could
revolve, and having afterwards imbibed some vague idea that the laws of the
universe were chemical and physical rather than mechanical, and somehow
connected with electricity and magnetism as opposing correlative
forces--most probably suggested to my mind, as to many others, by the
transcendent discoveries made in electro-magnetism by Professor
Faraday[657]--my former doubts about gravitation were revived, and I was
led very naturally to try and discover whether a gravitating body really
could revolve; and I became convinced it could not, before I had ever
presumed to look into the demonstrations of the _Principia_."



This is enough against the book, without a word from me: I insert it only
to show those who know the subject what manner of writer Mr. Reddie is. It
is clear that "presumed" is a slip of the pen; it should have been
_condescended_.

Mr. Reddie represents me as dreaming over paltry paradoxes. He is right;
many of my paradoxes are paltry: he is wrong; I am wide awake to them. A
single moth, beetle, or butterfly, may be a paltry thing; but when a
cabinet is arranged by genus and species, we then begin to admire the {352}
infinite variety of a system constructed on a wonderful sameness of leading
characteristics. And why should paradoxes be denied that collective
importance, paltry as many of them may individually be, which is accorded
to moths, beetles, or butterflies? Mr. Reddie himself sees that "there is a
method in" my "mode of dealing with paradoxes." I hope I have atoned for
the scantiness of my former article, and put the demonstrated impossibility
of gravitation on that level with Hubongramillposanfy arithmetic and
inhabited atoms which the demonstrator--not quite without reason--claims
for it.

In the Introduction to a collected edition of the three works, Mr. Reddie
describes his _Mechanism of the Heavens_, from which I have just quoted,
as--



"a public challenge offered to the British Association and the
mathematicians at Cambridge, in August, 1862, calling upon them to point to
a single demonstration in the _Principia_ or elsewhere, which even attempts
to prove that Universal Gravitation is possible, or to show that a
gravitating body could possibly revolve about a center of attraction. The
challenge was not accepted, and never will be. No such demonstration
exists. And the public must judge for themselves as to the character of a
so-called "certain science," which thus shrinks from rigid examination, and
dares not defend itself when publicly attacked: also of the character of
its teachers, who can be content to remain dumb under such circumstances."



ON PARADOXERS IN GENERAL.

The above is the commonplace talk of the class, of which I proceed to speak
without more application to this paradoxer than to that. It reminds one of
the funny young rascals who used, in times not yet quite forgotten, to
abuse the passengers, as long as they could keep up with the {353} stage
coach; dropping off at last with "Why don't you get down and thrash us?
You're afraid, you're afraid!" They will allow the public to judge for
themselves, but with somewhat of the feeling of the worthy uncle in _Tom
Jones_, who, though he would let young people choose for themselves, would
_have them_ choose wisely. They try to be so awfully moral and so ghastly
satirical that they must be answered: and they are best answered in their
own division. We have all heard of the way in which sailors cat's-pawed the
monkeys: they taunted the dwellers in the trees with stones, and the
monkeys taunted them with cocoa-nuts in return. But these were silly
dendrobats: had they belonged to the British Association they would have
said--No! No! dear friends; it is not in the itinerary: if you want nuts,
you must climb, as we do. The public has referred the question to Time: the
procedure of this great king I venture to describe, from precedents, by an
adaptation of some smart anapæstic tetrameters--your anapæst is the foot
for satire to halt on, both in Greek and English--which I read about twenty
years ago, and with the point of which I was much tickled. Poetasters were
laughed at; but Mr. Slum, whom I employed--Mr. Charles Dickens obliged me
with his address--converted the idea into that of a hit at
mathematicasters, as easily as he turned the Warren acrostic into Jarley.
As he observed, when I settled his little account, it is cheaper than any
prose, though the broom was not stolen quite ready made:

  _Forty stripes save one for the smaller Paradoxers._

  Hark to the wisdom the sages preach
  Who never have learnt what they try to teach.
  We are the lights of the age, they say!
  We are the men, and the thinkers we!
  So we build up guess-work the livelong day,
  In a topsy-turvy sort of way,
  Some with and some wanting _a_ plus b.
  Let the British Association fuss;
  What are theirs to the feats to be wrought by us?
  {354}
  Shall the earth stand still? Will the round come square?
  Must Isaac's book be the nest of a mare?
  Ought the moon to be taught by the laws of space
  To turn half round without right-about-face?
  Our whimsey crotchets will manage it all;
  Deep! Deep! posterity will them call!
  Though the world, for the present, lets them fall
  Down! Down! to the twopenny box of the stall!

  Thus they--But the marplot Time stands by,
  With a knowing wink in his funny old eye.
  He grasps by the top an immense fool's cap,
  Which he calls a philosophaster-trap:
  And rightly enough, for while these little men
  Croak loud as a concert of frogs in a fen,
  He first singles out one, and then another,
  Down goes the cap--lo! a moment's pother,
  A spirit like that which a rushlight utters
  As just at the last it kicks and gutters:
  When the cruel smotherer is raised again
  Only snuff, and but little of that, will remain.

  But though _uno avulso_ thus comes every day
  _Non deficit alter_ is also in play:
  For the vacant parts are, one and all,
  Soon taken by puppets just as small;
  Who chirp, chirp, chirp, with a grasshopper's glee,
  We're the lamps of the Universe, We! We! We!
  But Time, whose speech is never long,--
  He hasn't time for it--stops the song
  And says--Lilliput lamps! leave the twopenny boxes,
  And shine in the Budget of Paradoxes!

When a paradoxer parades capital letters and diagrams which are as good as
Newton's to all who know nothing about it, some persons wonder why science
does not rise and triturate the whole thing. This is why: all who are fit
to read the refutation are satisfied already, and can, if they please,
detect the paradoxer for themselves. Those who are not fit to do this would
not know the difference between the true answer and the new capitals and
diagrams on which the delighted paradoxer would declare {355} that he had
crumbled the philosophers, and not they him. Trust him for having the last
word: and what matters it whether he crow the unanswerable sooner or later?
There are but two courses to take. One is to wait until he has committed
himself in something which all can understand, as Mr. Reddie has done in
his fancy about the Astronomer Royal's change of opinion: he can then be
put in his true place. The other is to construct a Budget of Paradoxes,
that the world may see how the thing is always going on, and that the
picture I have concocted by cribbing and spoiling a bit of poetry is drawn
from life. He who wonders at there being no answer has seen one or two: he
does not know that there are always fifty with equal claims, each of whom
regards his being ranked with the rest as forty-nine distinct and several
slanders upon himself, the great Mully Ully Gue. And the fifty would soon
be five hundred if any notice were taken of them. They call mankind to
witness that science _will not_ defend itself, though publicly attacked in
terms which might sting a pickpocket into standing up for his character:
science, in return, allows mankind to witness or not, at pleasure, that it
_does not_ defend itself, and yet receives no injury from centuries of
assault. Demonstrative reason never raises the cry of _Church in Danger_!
and it cannot have any Dictionary of Heresies except a Budget of Paradoxes.
Mistaken claimants are left to Time and his extinguisher, with the
approbation of all thinking non-claimants: there is no need of a succession
of exposures. Time gets through the job in his own workmanlike manner as
already described.

On looking back more than twenty years, I find among my cuttings the
following passage, relating to a person who had signalized himself by an
effort to teach comets to the conductor of the _Nautical Almanac_:



"Our brethren of the literary class have not the least idea of the small
amount of appearance of knowledge {356} which sets up the scientific
charlatan. Their world is large, and there are many who have that moderate
knowledge, and perception of what is knowledge, before which extreme
ignorance is detected in its first prank. There is a public of moderate
cultivation, for the most part sound in its judgment, always ready in its
decisions. Accordingly, all their successful pretenders have _some
pretension_. It is not so in science. Those who have a right to judge are
fewer and farther between. The consequence is, that many scientific
pretenders have _nothing but pretension_."



This is nearly as applicable now as then. It is impossible to make those
who have not studied for themselves fully aware of the truth of what I have
quoted. The best chance is collection of cases; in fact, a Budget of
Paradoxes. Those who have no knowledge of the subject can thus argue from
the seen to the unseen. All can feel the impracticability of the
Hubongramillposanfy numeration, and the absurdity of the equality of
contour of a regular pentagon and hexagon in one and the same circle. Many
may accordingly be satisfied, on the assurance of those who have studied,
that there is as much of impracticability, or as much of absurdity, in
things which are hidden under

 "Sines, tangents, secants, radius, cosines
  Subtangents, segments and all those signs;
  Enough to prove that he who read 'em
  Was just as mad as he who made 'em."

Not that I mean to be disrespectful to mathematical terms: they are short
and easily explained, and compete favorably with those of most other
subjects: for instance, with

 "Horse-pleas, traverses, demurrers,
  Jeofails, imparlances, and errors,
  Averments, bars, and protestandos,
  And puis d'arreign continuandos."

{357}

From which it appears that, taking the selections made by satirists for our
samples, there are, one with another, four letters more in a law term than
in one of mathematics. But pleading has been simplified of late years.

All paradoxers can publish; and any one who likes may read. But this is not
enough; they find that they cannot publish, or those who can find they are
_not_ read, and they lay their plans athwart the noses of those who, they
think, ought to read. To recommend them to be content with publication,
like other authors, is an affront: of this I will give the reader an
amusing instance. My good nature, of which I keep a stock, though I do not
use it all up in this Budget, prompts me to conceal the name.

I received the following letter, accompanied by a prospectus of a work on
metaphysics, physics, astronomy, etc. The author is evidently one whom I
should delight to honor:

"Sir,--A friend of mine has mentioned your name in terms of panigeric
[_sic_], as being of high standing in mathematics, and of greatly original
thought. I send you the enclosed without comment; and, assuming that the
bent of your mind is in free inquiry, shall feel a pleasure in showing you
my portfolio, which, as a mathematician, you will acknowledge to be deeply
interesting, even in an educational point of view. The work is complete,
and the system so far perfected as to place it above criticism; and, so far
as regards astronomy, as will Ptolemy beyond rivalry [_sic_: no doubt some
words omitted]. Believe me to be, Sir, with the profoundest respect, etc.
The work is the result of thirty-five years' travel and observation, labor,
expense, and self-abnegation."

I replied to the effect that my time was fully occupied, and that I was
obliged to decline discussion with many persons who have views of their
own; that the proper way is to publish, so that those who choose may read
when they can find leisure. I added that I should advise a precursor in the
shape of a small pamphlet, as two octavo volumes {358} would be too much
for most persons. This was sound advice; but it is not the first, second,
or third time that it has proved very unpalatable. I received the following
answer, to which I take the liberty of prefixing a bit of leonine wisdom:

 "Si doceas stultum, lætum non dat tibi vultum;
  Odit te multum; vellet te scire sepultum.[658]"

"Sir,--I pray you pardon the error I unintentionally have fallen into;
deceived by the F.R.S. [I am not F.R.S.] I took you to be a man of science
[_omnis homo est animal, Sortes est homo, ergo Sortes est animal_][659]
instead of the mere mathematician, or human calculating-machine. Believe
me, Sir, you also have mistaken your mission, as I have mine. I wrote to
you as I would to any other man well up in mathematics, with the intent to
call your attention to a singular fact of omission by Euclid, and other
great mathematicians: and, in selecting you, I did you an honor which, from
what I have just now heard, was entirely out of place. I think, considering
the nature of the work set forth in the prospectus, you are guilty of both
folly and presumption, in assuming the character of a patron; for your own
sense ought to have assured you that was such my object I should not have
sought him in a De Morgan, who exists only by patronage of others. On the
other hand, I deem it to be an unpardonable piece of presumption in
offering your advice upon a subject the magnitude, importance, and real
utility of which you know nothing about: by doing so you have offered me a
direct insult. The system is a manual of Philosophy, a one inseparable
whole of metaphysics and physic; embracing points the most interesting,
laws the most important, {359} doctrines the most essential to advance man
in accordance with the spirit of the times. I may not live to see it in
print; for, at ----, life at best is uncertain: but, live or die, be
assured Sir, it is not my intention to debase the work by seeking
patronage, or pandering to the public taste. Your advice was the less
needed, seeing I am an old-established ----. I remain, etc.--P.S. You will
oblige me by returning the prospectus of my work."



My reader will, I am sure, not take this transition from the "profoundest
respect" to the loftiest insolence for an _apocraphical_ correspondence, to
use a word I find in the Prospectus: on my honor it is genuine. He will be
better employed in discovering whether I exist by patronizing others, or by
being patronized by them. I make any one who can find it out a fair offer:
I will give him my patronage if I turn out to be Bufo, on condition he
gives me his, if I turn out to be Bavius.[660] I need hardly say that I
considered the last letter to be one of those to which no answer is so good
as no answer.

These letters remind me in one respect of the correspondents of the
newspapers. My other party wrote because a friend had pointed me out: but
he would not have written if he had known what another friend told him just
in time for the second letter. The man who sends his complaint to the
newspaper very often says, in effect, "Don't imagine, Sir, that I read your
columns; but a friend who sometimes does has told me ..." It is worded
thus: "My attention {360} has been directed to an article in your paper of
..." Many thanks to my friend's friends for not mentioning the Budget: had
my friend's attention been directed to it I might have lost a striking
example of the paradoxer in search of a patron. That my Friend was on this
scent in the first letter is revealed in the second. Language was given to
man to conceal his thoughts; but it is not every one who can do it.

Among the most valuable information which my readers will get from me is
comparison of the reactions of paradoxers, when not admitted to argument,
or when laughed at. Of course, they are misrepresented; and at this they
are angry, or which is the same thing, take great pains to assure the
reader that they are not. So far natural, and so far good; anything short
of concession of a case which must be seriously met by counter-reasons is
sure to be misrepresentation. My friend Mr. James Smith and my friend Mr.
Reddie are both terribly misrepresented: they resent it by some
insinuations in which it is not easy to detect whether I am a conscious
smotherer of truth, or only muddle-headed and ignorant. [This was written
before I received my last communication from Mr. James Smith. He tells me
that I am wrong in saying that his work in which I stand in the pillory is
all reprint: I have no doubt I confounded some of it with some of the
manuscript or slips which I had received from my much not-agreed-with
correspondent. He adds that my mistake was intentional, and that my reason
is obvious to the reader. This _is_ information, as the sea-serpent said
when he read in the newspaper that he had a mane and tusks.]



THE DOUBLE VAHU PROCESS.

My friend Dr. Thorn[661] sees deeper into my mystery. By the way, he still
sends an occasional touch at the old {361} subject; and he wants me
particularly to tell my readers that the Latin numeral letters, if M be
left out, give 666. And so they do: witness DCLXVI. A person who thinks of
the origin of symbols will soon see that 666 is our number because we have
five fingers on each hand: had we had but four, our mystic number would
have been expressed by 555, and would have stood for our present 365. Had n
been the number on each hand, the great number would have been

  (n + 1) (4n^2 + 2n + 1)

With no finger on each hand, the number would have been 1: with one finger
less than none at all on each hand, it would have been 0. But what does
this mean? Here is a question for an algebraical paradoxer! So soon as we
have found out how many fingers the inhabitants of any one planet have on
each hand, we have the means of knowing their number of the Beast, and
thence all about them. Very much struck with this hint of discovery, I
turned my attention to the means of developing it. The first point was to
clear my vision of all the old cataracts. I propose the following
experiment, subject of course to the consent of parties. Let Dr. Thorn
Double-Vahu Mr. James Smith, and Thau Mr. Reddie: if either be deparadoxed
by the treatment, I will consent to undergo it myself. Provided always that
the temperature required be not so high as the Doctor hints at: if the
Turkish Baths will do for this world, I am content.

The three paradoxers last named and myself have a pentasyllable convention,
under which, though we go far beyond civility, we keep within civilization.
Though Mr. James Smith pronounced that I must be dishonest if I did not see
his argument, which he knew I should not do [to say nothing of recent
accusation]; though Dr. Thorn declared me a competitor for fire and
brimstone--and my wife, too, which doubles the joke: though Mr. Reddie
{362} was certain I had garbled him, evidently on purpose to make falsehood
appear truth; yet all three profess respect for me as to everything but
power to see truth, or candor to admit it. And on the other hand, though
these were the modes of opening communication with me, and though I have no
doubt that all three are proper persons of whom to inquire whether I should
go up-stairs or down-stairs, etc., yet I am satisfied they are thoroughly
respectable men, as to everything but reasoning. And I dare say our several
professions are far more true in extent than in many which are made under
more parliamentary form. We find excuses for each other: they make
allowances for my being hoodwinked by Aristotle, by Newton, by the Devil;
and I permit them to feel, for I know they cannot get on without it, that
their reasons are such as none but a knave or a sinner can resist. But
_they_ are content with cutting a slice each out of my character: neither
of them is more than an uncle, a Bone-a-part; I now come to a dreadful
nephew, Bone-the-whole.

I will not give the name of the poor fellow who has fallen so far below
both the _honestum_ and the _utile_, to say nothing of the _decorum_ or the
_dulce_.[662] He is the fourth who has taken elaborate notice of me; and my
advice to him would be, _Nec quarta loqui persona laboret_.[663] According
to him, I scorn humanity, scandalize learning, and disgrace the press; it
admits of no manner of doubt that my object is to mislead the public and
silence truth, at the expense of the interests of science, the wealth of
the nation, and the lives of my fellow men. The only thing left to be
settled is, whether this is due to ignorance, natural distaste for truth,
personal malice, a wish to curry favor with the Astronomer Royal, or mere
toadyism. The only accusation which has truth in it is, that I have made
myself a "public scavenger of science": the assertion, which is the {363}
most false of all is, that the results of my broom and spade are "shot
right in between the columns of" the _Athenæum_. I declare I never in my
life inserted a word between the columns of the _Athenæum_: I feel huffed
and miffed at the very supposition. I _have_ made myself a public
scavenger; and why not? Is the mud never to be collected into a heap? I
look down upon the other scavengers, of whom there have been a few--mere
historical drudges; Montucla, Hutton, etc.--as not fit to compete with me.
I say of them what one crossing-sweeper said of the rest: "They are well
enough for the common thing; but put them to a bit of fancy-work, such as
sweeping round a post, and see what a mess they make of it!" Who can touch
me at sweeping round a paradoxer? If I complete my design of publishing a
separate work, an old copy will be fished up from a stall two hundred years
hence by the coming man, and will be described in an article which will end
by his comparing our century with his own, and sighing out in the best New
Zealand pronunciation--

 "Dans ces tems-là
  C'était déjà comme ça!"[664]



ORTHODOX PARADOXERS.

And pray, Sir! I have been asked by more than one--do your orthodox never
fall into mistake, nor rise into absurdity? They not only do both, but they
admit it of each other very freely; individually, they are convinced of
sin, but not of any particular sin. There is not a syndoxer among them all
but draws his line in such a way as to include among paradoxers a great
many whom I should exclude altogether from this work. My worst specimens
are but exaggerations of what may be found, occasionally, in the thoughts
of sagacious investigators. At the end of the {364} glorious dream, we
learn that there is a way to Hell from the gates of Heaven, as well as from
the City of Destruction: and that this is true of other things besides
Christian pilgrimage is affirmed at the end of the Budget of Paradoxes. If
D'Alembert[665] had produced _enough_ of a quality to match his celebrated
mistake on the chance of throwing head in two throws, he would have been in
my list. If Newton had produced _enough_ to match his reception of the
story that Nausicaa, Homer's Phæacian princess, invented the celestial
sphere, followed by his serious surmise that she got it from the
Argonauts,--then Newton himself would have had an appearance entered for
him, in spite of the _Principia_. In illustration, I may cite a few words
from _Tristram Shandy_:



"'A soldier,' cried my uncle Toby, interrupting the Corporal, 'is no more
exempt from saying a foolish thing, Trim, than a man of letters.'--'But not
so often, an' please your honor,' replied the Corporal. My uncle Toby gave
a nod."



I now proceed to die out. Some prefatory remarks will follow in time.[666]
I shall have occasion to insist that all is not barren: I think I shall
find, on casting up, that two out of five of my paradoxers are not to be
utterly condemned. Among the better lot will be found all gradations of
merit; at the same time, as was remarked on quite a different subject,
there may be little to choose between the last of the saved and the first
of the lost. The higher and better class is worthy of blame; the lower and
worse class is worthy of praise. The higher men are to be reproved for not
taking up things in which they could do some good: the lower men are to be
commended for taking up things in which they can do no great harm. The
circle problem is like Peter Peebles's lawsuit:

{365}



"'But, Sir, I should really spoil any cause thrust on me so hastily.'--'Ye
cannot spoil it, Alan,' said my father, 'that is the very cream of the
business, man,--... the case is come to that pass that Stair or Arniston
could not mend it, and I don't think even you, Alan, can do it much harm.'"



I am strongly reminded of the monks in the darker part of the Middle Ages.
To a certain proportion of them, perhaps two out of five, we are indebted
for the preservation of literature, and their contemporaries for good
teaching and mitigation of socials evils. But the remaining three were the
fleas and flies and thistles and briars with whom the satirist lumps them,
about a century before the Reformation:

 "Flen, flyys, and freris, populum domini male cædunt;
  Thystlis and breris crescentia gramina lædunt.
  Christe nolens guerras qui cuncta pace tueris,
  Destrue per terras breris, flen, flyys, and freris.
  Flen, flyys, and freris, foul falle hem thys fyften yeris,
  For non that her is lovit flen, flyys ne freris."[667]

I should not be quite so savage with my second class. Taken together, they
may be made to give useful warning to those who are engaged in learning
under better auspices: aye, even useful hints; for bad things are very
often only good things spoiled or misused. My plan is that of a predecessor
in the time of Edward the Second:

 "Meum est propositum genti imperitæ
  Artes frugi reddere melioris vitæ."[668]

To this end I have spoken with freedom of books as books, of opinions as
opinions, of ignorance as ignorance, of {366} presumption as presumption;
and of writers as I judge may be fairly inferred from what they have
written. Some--to whom I am therefore under great obligation--have
permitted me to enlarge my plan by assaults to which I have alluded;
assaults which allow a privilege of retort, of which I have often availed
myself; assaults which give my readers a right of partnership in the
amusement which I myself have received.

For the present I cut and run: a Catiline, pursued by a chorus of Ciceros,
with _Quousque tandem? Quamdiu nos? Nihil ne te?_[669] ending with, _In te
conferri pestem istam jam pridem oportebat, quam tu in nos omnes jamdiu
machinaris!_ I carry with me the reflection that I have furnished to those
who need it such a magazine of warnings as they will not find elsewhere; _a
signatis cavetote_:[670] and I throw back at my pursuers--_Valete, doctores
sine doctrina; facite ut proxima congressu vos salvos corporibus et sanos
mentibus videamus._[671] Here ends the Budget of Paradoxes.

{367}

       *       *       *       *       *


APPENDIX.

I think it right to give the proof that the ratio of the circumference to
the diameter is incommensurable. This method of proof was given by
Lambert,[672] in the _Berlin Memoirs_ for 1761, and has been also given in
the notes to Legendre's[673] Geometry, and to the English translation of
the same. Though not elementary algebra, it is within the reach of a
student of ordinary books.[674]

Let a continued fraction, such as

  a
  -----
  b + c
      -----
      d + e
          -
          f + etc.,

be abbreviated into a/b+ c/d+ e/f+ etc.: each fraction being understood as
falling down to the side of the preceding sign +. In every such fraction we
may suppose b, d, f, etc. {368} positive; a, c, e, &c. being as required:
and all are supposed integers. If this succession be continued ad
infinitum, and if a/b, c/d, e/f, etc. all lie between -1 and +1, exclusive,
the limit of the fraction must be incommensurable with unity; that is,
cannot be A/B, where A and B are integers.

First, whatever this limit may be, it lies between -1 and +1. This is
obviously the case with any fraction p/(q + [omega]), where [omega] is
between ±1: for, p/q, being < 1, and p and q integer, cannot be brought up
to 1, by the value of [omega]. Hence, if we take any of the fractions

  a/b, a/b+ c/d, a/b+ c/d+ e/f, etc.

say a/b+ c/d+ e/f+ g/h we have, g/h being between ±1, so is e/f+ g/h, so
therefore is c/d+ e/f+ g/h; and so therefore is a/b+ c/d+ e/f+ g/h.

Now, if possible, let a/b+ c/d+ etc. be A/B at the limit; A and B being
integers. Let

  P = A c/d+ e/f+ etc., Q = P e/f+ g/h+ etc., R = Q g/h + i/k + etc.

P, Q, R, etc. being integer or fractional, as may be. It is easily shown
that all must be integer: for

{369}

  A/B = a/b+ P/A, or, P = aB - bA

  P/A = c/d+ Q/P, or, Q = cA - dP

  Q/P = e/f+ R/Q, or, R = eP - fQ

etc., etc. Now, since a, B, b, A, are integers, so also is P; and thence Q;
and thence R, etc. But since A/B, P/A, Q/P, R/Q, etc. are all between -1
and +1, it follows that the unlimited succession of integers P, Q, R, are
each less in numerical value than the preceding. Now there can be no such
_unlimited_ succession of _descending_ integers: consequently, it is
impossible that a/b+ c/d+, etc. can have a commensurable limit.

It easily follows that the continued fraction is incommensurable if a/b,
c/d, etc., being at first greater than unity, become and continue less than
unity after some one point. Say that i/k, l/m,... are all less than unity.
Then the fraction i/k+ l/m+ ... is incommensurable, as proved: let it be
[kappa]. Then g/(h + [kappa]) is incommensurable, say [lambda]; e/(f +
[lambda]) is the same, say [mu]; also c/(d + [mu]), say [nu], and a/(b +
[nu]), say [rho]. But [rho] is the fraction a/b+ c/d+ ... itself; which is
therefore incommensurable.

Let [phi]z represent

      a     a^2          a^3
  1 + - + ------- + -------------- + ....
      z   2z(z+1)   2·3·z(z+1)(z+2)

{370} Let z be positive: this series is convergent for all values of a, and
approaches without limit to unity as z increases without limit. Change z
into z + 1, and form [phi]z - [phi](z+1): the following equation will
result--

                        a
  [phi]z-[phi](z+1) = ------([phi](z+2))
                      z(z+1)

         a [phi](z+1)       a [phi](z+1)    a  [phi](z+2)
  or a = - ---------- · z + - ---------- · --- ----------
         z   [phi]z         z   [phi]z     z+1 [phi](z+1)

  a = [psi]z(z+[psi](z+1))

[psi]z being (a/z)([phi](z+1)/[phi]z); of which observe that it diminishes
without limit as z increases without limit. Accordingly, we have

  [psi]z = a/z+ [psi](z+1) = a/z+ a/(z+1)+ [psi](z+2)
                           = a/z+ a/(z+1)+ a/(z+2)+ [psi](z+3), etc.

And, [psi](z + n) diminishing without limit, we have

  a/z · [phi](z+1)/[phi]z = (a/z+) (a/(z+1)+) (a/(z+2)+) (a/((z+3)+ ...))

Let z = ½; and let 4a = -x^2. Then (a/z)[phi](z+1) is -(x^2/2) ( 1 -
x^2/(2·3) + x^4/(2·3·4·5...)) or -(x/2) sin x. Again [phi]z is 1 - x^2/2 +
x^4/(2·3·4) or cos x: and the continued fraction is

  (¼)x^2/(½)+ (¼)x^2/(3/2)+ (¼)x^2/(5/2)+ ... or -x/2 x/1+ -x^2/3+ -x^2/5+
      ...

{371} whence tan x = x/1+ -x^2/3+ -x^2/5+ -x^2/7+ ...

Or, as written in the usual way,

  tan x = x
          -------
          1 - x^2
              -------
              3 - x^2
                  -------
                  5 - x^2
                      -------
                      7 - ...

This result may be proved in various ways: it may also be verified by
calculation. To do this, remember that if

  a_1/b_1+ a_2/b_2+ a_3/b_3+ ...  a_n/b_n = P_n/Q_n; then

  P_1=a_1, P_2=b_2 P_1,     P_3=b_3 P_2+a_3 P_1, P_4=b_4 P_3+a_4 P_2, etc.
  Q_1=b_1, Q_2=b_2 Q_1+a_2, Q_3=b_3 Q_2+a_3 Q_1, Q_4=b_4 Q_3+a_4 Q_2, etc.

in the case before us we have

  a_1=x, a_2=-x^2, a_3=-x^2, a_4=-x^2, a_5=-x^2, etc.
  b_1=1, b_2=3,    b_3=5,    b_4=7,    b_5=9, etc.

  P_1=x                     Q_1=1
  P_2=3x                    Q_2=3-x^2
  P_3=15x-x^3               Q_3=15-6x^2
  P_4=105x-10x^3            Q_4=105-45x^2+x^4
  P_5=945x-105x^3+x^5       Q_5=945-420x^2+15x^4
  P_6=10395x-1260x^3+21x^5  Q_6=10395-4725x^2+210x^4-x^6

We can use this algebraically, or arithmetically. If we divide P_n by Q_n,
we shall find a series agreeing with the known series for tan x, _as far
as_ n _terms_. That series is

  x + x^3/3 + 2x^5/15 + 17x^7/315 + 62x^9/2835 + ...

{372} Take P_5, and divide it by Q_5 in the common way, and the first five
terms will be as here written. Now take _x_ = .1, which means that the
angle is to be one tenth of the actual unit, or, in degrees 5°.729578. We
find that when x = .1, P_6 = 1038.24021, Q_6 = 10347.770999; whence P_6
divided by Q_6 gives .1003346711. Now 5°.729578 is 5°43'46½"; and from the
old tables of Rheticus[675]--no modern tables carry the tangents so
far--the tangent of this angle is .1003347670.

Now let x = ¼[pi]; in which case tan x = 1. If ¼[pi] be commensurable with
the unit, let it be (m/n), m and n being integers: we know that ¼[pi] < 1.
We have then

  1=(m/n)/1- (m^2/n^2)/3- (m^2/n^2)/5- ...  = m/n- m^2/3n- m^2/5n- m^2/7n-
      ...

Now it is clear that m^2/3n, m^2/5n, m^2/7n, etc. must at last become and
continue severally less than unity. The continued fraction is therefore
incommensurable, and cannot be unity. Consequently [pi]^2 cannot be
commensurable: that is, [pi] is an incommensurable quantity, and so also is
[pi]^2.



I thought I should end with a grave bit of appendix, deeply mathematical:
but paradox follows me wherever I go. The foregoing is--in my own
language--from Dr. (now Sir David) Brewster's[676] English edition of
Legendre's Geometry, (Edinburgh, 1824, 8vo.) translated by some one who is
not named. I picked up a notion, which others had at Cambridge in 1825,
that the translator was the late Mr. Galbraith,[677] then known at
Edinburgh as a writer and teacher.

{373} But it turns out that it was by a very different person, and one
destined to shine in quite another walk; it was a young man named Thomas
Carlyle.[678] He prefixed, from his own pen, a thoughtful and ingenious
essay on Proportion, as good a substitute for the fifth Book of Euclid as
could have been given in the space; and quite enough to show that he would
have been a distinguished teacher and thinker on first principles. But he
left the field immediately.

       *       *       *       *       *

(The following is the passage referred to at Vol. II, page 54.)

Michael Stifelius[679] edited, in 1554, a second edition of the Algebra
(_Die Coss._), of Christopher Rudolff.[680] This is one of the earliest
works in which + and - are used.

Stifelius was a queer man. He has introduced into this very work of Rudolff
his own interpretation of the number of the Beast. He determined to fix the
character of Pope Leo: so he picked the numeral letters from LEODECIMVS,
and by taking in X from LEO X. and striking out M as standing for
_mysterium_, he hit the number exactly. This discovery completed his
conversion to Luther, and his determination to throw off his monastic vows.
Luther dealt with him as straight-forwardly as with Melanchthon about his
astrology: he accepted the conclusions, but told him to clear his mind of
all the premises about the Beast. Stifelius {374} did not take the advice,
and proceeded to settle the end of the world out of the prophet Daniel: he
fixed on October, 1533. The parishioners of some cure which he held, having
full faith, began to spend their savings in all kinds of good eating and
drinking; we may charitably hope this was not the way of preparing for the
event which their pastor pointed out. They succeeded in making themselves
as fit for Heaven as Lazarus, so far as beggary went: but when the time
came, and the world lasted on, they wanted to kill their deceiver, and
would have done so but for the interference of Luther. {375}

       *       *       *       *       *


INDEX.

Pages denoted by numerals of this kind (_287_) refer to biographical notes,
chiefly by the editor. Numerals like 426 refer to books discussed by De
Morgan, or to leading topics in the text. Numerals like 126 indicate minor
references.

  Abbott, Justice, I, _181_.
  Abernethy, J., II, _219_.
  Aboriginal Britons, a poem, II, 270.
  Academy of Sciences, French, I, 163.
  Adair, J., I, _223_.
  Adam, M., I, _65_.
  Adams, J. C., I, _43_, 82, 385, 388; II, 131, 135, 140, 303.
  Ady, Joseph, II, 42, _42_.
  Agnew, H. C., I, 328.
  Agricola, J., I, 394.
  Agricultural Laborer's letter, II, 16.
  Agrippa, H. C., I, _48_, 48.
  Ainsworth, W. H., II, _132_.
  Airy, I, _85_, 88, 152, 242; II, 85, 140, 150, 303, 347.
  Alchemy, I, 125.
  Alfonso X (El Sabio), II, _269_.
  Alford, H., II, _221_.
  Alfred, King, Ballad of, II, 22.
  Algebra, I, 121.
  Algebraic symbols, I, 121.
  Almanac, I, 300; II, 147, 148, 207.
    (_See Easter._)
  Aloysius Lilius, I, 362.
  Alsted, J. H., II, _282_.
  Ameen Bey, II, 15.
  Amicable Society, I, 347.
  Ampère, I, 86.
  Amphisbæna serpent, I, 31.
  Anagrams, De Morgan, I, 138.
  Anaxagoras, II, _59_.
  Angherà, II, 60, _60_, 61, 279.
  Annuities, Fallacies of, I, 157.
  Antichrist, I, 130.
  Antimony, I, 125.
  Antinewtonism, I, 162.
  Antinomians, I, 394.
  Antiphon, II, _59_.
  Antonie, F., I, _126_, 126.
  Apollonius, I, 41, 107.
  Apparitions, II, 47.
  Arago, I, _243_, 390.
  Aratus, II, _167_.
  Arbuthnot, I, _133_, 134.
  Archer, H., II, 90.
  Archimedes,  I, 5, 11, 42, 83, 107.
  Archytas, I, _53_.
  Argoli, I, _104_.
  Aristocrat, as a scientist, I, 131.
  Aristotle, I, 5, 331.
  Arnobius, II, _73_.
  Arson, P. J., II, _207_.
  Ashton, R., II, _99_.
  Astrology, I, 118, 127, 128, 350; II, 43.
  Astronomer's Drinking Song, I, 380.
  Astronomical Aphorisms, I, 398.
    Paradox, I, 394.
    Police Report, I, 390.
    Society. (_See Royal Astronomical Society._)
  Astronomy, Bailly's exaggerated view of, I, 166.
  Astunica, Didacas, I, 90.
  Athanasian Creed, I, 371.
  Atheists, Philosophical, I, 1.
  Atoms, II, 191.
  {376}
  Attraction, I, 136, 151, 155.
  Augustine, St., II, _23_.
  Aurora borealis, I, 134.
  Austen, Jane, I, 191.
  Auzout, A., II, _300_.
  Aviation, Early ideas of, II, 8.

  Babbage, C., I, _207_, 290, 291; II, 181.
  Bachet, de Méziriac, I, _161_.
  Bacon, F., I, 5, _75_, 75, 76, 79, 89, 145, 331.
  Bacon, R., I, 5, _126_, 126, 360; II, 94.
  Baconian controversy, I, 141.
  Baden Powell, II, _267_.
  Bailly, J. S., I, 166, _166_, 308.
  Baily, F., I, 308, _309_; II, 16, 143, 188.
  Baily, R., II, 16.
  Baker, T., II, _302_.
  Bakewell, F. C., II, 156, _156_.
  Banks, J., I, 28.
  Barberini, M., II, _267_.
  Barker, C., II, _262_.
  Baronius, I, 33, 35; II, _62_.
  Barrême, I, _42_.
  Barrett, G., II, _188_.
  Barrow, I., I, _160_; II, 302.
  Baruel, de, I, 165.
  Bassano, Duc de, II, 3, 339.
  Baxter, T., I, 146.
  Bayle, P., II, _73_.
  Beaufort, F., II, _267_.
  Beaugrand, I, 119, _121_.
  Beaulieu, I, _119_, 119, 121.
  Beaune, de, II, _59_.
  Bécourt, R., II, 277.
  Bedford, Duke of, (6th), I, _182_.
  Behmen, I, _168_, 254; II, 317.
  Bellenden, W., I, _175_.
  Bentley, I, _110_.
  Berkeley, G., II, 346.
  Bernard, E., II, _297_, 300.
  Bernardus Trevisanus, I, _126_, 126.
  Bernoullis, I, 130, _150_, _335_, 336.
  Bertius, P., II, _300_.
  Bèse, I, _66_.
  Bessel, I, _384_; II, 2.
  Bethune, I, _99_, 279, 291.
  Bettesworth, I, 19.
  Beza. (_See Bèse._)
  Bickersteth, E. H., I, _238_.
  Bidder, I, _86_.
  Biden, J., II, 158, _160_.
  Bidle, (Biddle), I, 239.
  Biot, I, _85_.
  Birch, T., I, _108_; II, 304, 313.
  Birks, T. R., II, 158, _158_.
  Bishop, G., I, _386_.
  Bishops as Paradoxers, I, 226.
  Boccaccio, I, 38.
  Boethius, I, _42_, 45.
  Böhme. (_See Behmen._)
  Boncompagni, I, _298_.
  Boniface, St., I, 32.
  Bonnycastle, J., II, _16_.
  Booker, I, 115.
  Boole, G., I, _261_, 332; II, 75, 79.
    --A tribute to, II, 79.
  Borelli, G. A., II, _300_.
  Borello, I, _69_.
  Boreman,  I, 113.
  Borron, Mrs., II, 7.
  Boscovich, I, _156_, 164.
  Bouguer, II, _301_.
  Bouillaud, I, _87_; II, 295.
  Bouvard, A., I, _327_.
  Bovillus, I, _44_; II, 324.
    --Epitome of, I, 44.
  Bowdler, H. M., I, _194_.
  Bowring, J., I, _352_; II, 256.
  Boyle, R., I, 24, _125_; II, 300.
  Bradley, I, 24.
  Bradwardine, I, _227_, 228, 229.
  Brahe. (_See Tycho B._)
  Brancker, I, 107; II, _300_.
  Brenan, J., I, 330, _330_.
  Brewster, D., I, 39, _137_, 140; II, 214, 288, 372.
  Briggs, I, _69_; II, 299, 302.
  Bright, J., II, _235_.
  Brinkley, J., I, _311_.
  Britannicus, D., II, 8.
  British Museum library, I, 151.
  Brothers, R., I, _315_; II, 97.
  Brougham, Henry, Lord, I, _191_.
  Brouncker (Brounker), I, _132_; II, 302.
  Brown, W., II, _168_.
  Browne, T., I, 31.
  Brucker, I, _61_.
  Brunet, I, _402_.
  Brünnow, I, _386_.
  Bruno, I, _59_, 59.
  Bryson, II, _59_.
  Bürgi, I, 52.
  Buffon, I, _282_.
  Bulstrode, II, 84.
  Bungus, I, _55_, 55, 57.
  Buoncompagno, U., I, _362_.
  {377}
  Burgon, J. W., II, _30_.
  Buridan, I, _37_.
    --Questiones morales, I, 37.
  Buridan's Ass, I, 37.
  Burke, E., I, _173_.
  Burlesque, Frend's, I, 208.
  Burnet, G., I, _107_.
  Burney, Frances, I, _190_.
  Burton, Frances B., I, 374.
  Busby, R., II, _313_.
  Buteo, I, _51_.
  Butler, G., I, _199_.
  Butler, S., II, _218_.
  Buxton, J., I, _86_.
  Byrgius. (_See Bürgi._)
  Byrne, O., I, _329_; II, 186, 190.
  Byron, I, 186; II, 270, 273.

  Cabbala, I, 272.
  Calculating Boys, I, 86.
  Calculus, I, 129.
  Calendar. (_See Easter._)
  Cambridge Poets, II, 269.
  Campanus, I, 42, _43_.
  Canning, Geo., II, _145_.
  Carcavi, I, _106_.
  Cardanus, II, _59_.
  Carlile, R., I, _271_.
  Carlyle, T., II, _373_.
  Carnot, I, 107.
  Caroline tables, I, 124.
  Casaubon, I, _111_.
  Case, J., I, _128_, 128.
  Cassini, J., I, _172_.
  Castel, I, _148_, 148.
  Castiglioni, I, _139_.
  Castlereagh, I, 185, _186_.
  Cataldi, I, _69_, 69.
  Catcott, A., I, _237_.
  Causans, de, I, _298_.
  Cavalieri, I, _106_.
  Cavendish, C., I, _106_; II, 299, 312.
  Cavendish, W., I, _290_.
  Caxton, W., II, _281_.
  Cayley, A., II, _292_.
  Cecil, R. (1st Earl of Salisbury), II, _330_.
  Centrifugal force, II, 268.
  Ceulen. (_See Van Ceulen._)
  Challis, J., I, _390_; II, 141.
  Chalmers, I, _102_; II, 219.
  Chambers, E., II, _282_.
  Chambers, R., I, _344_, 344.
  Charles IX, II, 94.
  Charles X, II, 1.
  Chasles, I, _39_, 229.
  Chesterfield, Earl of (4th), II, _298_.
  Chiffinch, W., II, _50_.
  Ch'in Chiu-shang, II, 66.
  Chitty, J., II, _323_.
  Chiu-chang, Suan-shu, II, 67.
  Christian Evidence Society, I, 270.
  Christie, I, 27.
  Christmann, I, 272, _272_.
  Church question, I, 62.
  Church, The word, II, 30.
  Circle squarers. (_See Squaring the Circle._)
  Circulating media of mathematics, I, 107.
  Ciruelo. (_See Sanchez._)
  Clairaut, I, _219_, 382.
  Clarence, Duke of, I, 179.
  Clarke, R., I, _255_.
  Clavius, I, 11, _69_, 111, 112, 335, 362, 363, 372; II,
      59.
  Clayton., Geo., II, _98_.
  Cluvier, D., II, 332, _332_.
  Cobb, Mary, II, 117.
  Cobbett, W., I, _177_, 200, 399.
  Cobden, R., II, 217.
  Cocker, I, _42_; II, 64, 173, 251, 307.
  Cody, P., II, 208.
  Coke, E., II, _331_.
  Colburn, Z., I, _86_.
  Colenso, I, _63_, 247; II,  191.
  Collins, J., I, _107_; II, 297, 300,  302, 313.
  Colvill, W. H., II, 68.
  Cometic astrology, I, 128.
  Comets, I, 128; II, 68, 83.
  Cominale, C., I, _162_, 162.
  Compton, S. J. A., II, _19_.
  Computation, Paradoxes of, II, 251, 267.
  Condamine, C. M. de la, II, _301_.
  Conduitt, John, I, _397_.
  Conduitt, Mrs., I, _136_.
  Congregation of the Index, I, 90.
  Converse propositions, I, 295.
  Convocation at Oxford, I, 96.
  Cooke, Margaret, I, _310_.
  Cooper, A. A. (Shaftsbury), II, _181_.
  Copernicus, I, 5, 6, _76_, 90, 121, 172, 380; II, 165, 335.
  Copley, J. S., I, _198_.
  Cormouls, I, 225.
  Cosmology, I, 172.
  {378}
  Cotes, R., II, _301_.
  Cottle, Mrs., II, 97, _97_, 161.
  Craig, J., I, _129_, 129.
  Creed, Mathematics of a, I, 329.
  Cribb, T., I, _314_.
  Crotus, J., I, 318.
  Cruickshank, G., I, _186_.
  Cube, Duplication of, I, 349.
  Cumyns, Eliza, I, 299.
  Cunningham, I, 172, _172_.
  Curabelle, I, _221_.
  Curious Calculations, II, 66.
  Curll, E., II, _279_.
  Cusa, I, _44_, 47, 360.
  Custom, II, 324.
  Cyclometry, II, 208. (_See  Squaring of the Circle._)
  Cyclopædias, Review of, II, 280.

  D'Alembert, I, _382_; II, 283, 364.
  Dalgarno, I, 116, _117_.
  Dalton, J., I, _255_.
  D'Arblay, Mme., I, _190_.
  Darwin, E., II, _8_.
  Darwinism, Primitive, I, 344.
  Dary, M., II, _305_.
  Daval, P., II, _298_.
  Davies, T. S., II, 151, _151_, 188.
  Day, A., I, 295, _295_.
  De Baruel, I, 165.
  De Beaune. (_See Beaune._)
  De Becourt, II, 277, _277_.
  Debenham, J., I, _393_.
  De Causans. (_See Causans._)
  Dechales. (_See de Challes._)
  De Challes, I, _45_.
  Decimal coinage, II, 80, 168, 169.
  Decimals run riot, II, 80.
  Dee, J., II, _302_.
  De Fauré, I, 149.
  De la Leu, I, _297_.
  Delambre, I, _160_, 167, 354; II, 165.
  Democritus, II, _34_.
  De Moivre, I, 24, _376_; II, 298.
  De Molières, I, _220_.
  De Molina, I, _297_.
  Demonville, I, 291, 293.
  De Morgan, A., I, 191, 383; II, 194.
    --Refusal of LL. D., I, 191.
  De Morgan, G. C., I, 383.
  De Morgan, Mrs., I, _196_; II, 194.
  Denison, J., I, 348, 353.
  Desaguliers, I, _153_, 156, 157.
  Desargues, I, _119_, 221.
  Descartes, I, 5, 59, 105, 132, 165, 204, 220; II, 94.
  De Serres, II, _60_.
  De Sluse. (_See Sluse._)
  De Thou, I, 51, _111_, 113; II, 295.
  De Vausenville, I, 12.
  Devonshire, Duke of (7th), I, _290_.
  Diamandi, I, 86.
  Didacus Astunica, I, 90.
  Diderot, II, _4_, 283, 339.
  Digby, K., I, _108_.
  Digges, T., and L., II, _302_.
  Dionysius Exiguus, I, _360_.
  Dircks, H., II, 138, _138_.
  Discoverers and discoveries, II, 206.
  Discovery, Basis of, I, 85.
  D'Israeli, I., I, _115_, 118, 136, 188, 227.
  Ditton, I, _133_, 133.
  Division, Nature of, II, 248.
  Dobson, J., I, _234_, 234.
  Dodson, J., II, _312_.
  Dodt, I, _52_.
  Doggerel verse, I, 341.
  Dolland, I, _377_.
  Double Vahu Process, II, 360.
  Douglas, G., I, _232_.
  Drach, S. M., II, _317_.
  Drayson, G. A. W., II, _132_, 132.
  Dryden, II, _71_.
  Dual arithmetic, II, 186.
  Duchesne, I, _52_.
  Dumortier, I, 313.
  Duncan, A., I, _179_.
  Dunkin, E., II, _349_.
  Duodecimal scale, II, 68.
  Duplication Problem, I, 349.
  Dupuy, J. and P., II, _295_.
  Dutens, L., II, _90_.
  Dyer, G., I, _178_.

  Earth, Figure of, II, 54.
  Easter, I, 359.
  Easter Day Paradoxes, I, 353.
  Ebrington, Thos., I, _247_.
  Edgeworth, Maria, I,  _191_.
  Editorial System, I, 15.
  Edleston, I, _140_; II, 296.
  Edwards, J., I, _144_.
  Edwards, T., I, _112_.
  Eirenæus Philalethes, I, _125_, 125, 126.
  Eldon, Lord (1st), II, _197_.
  Elephant story, I, 58.
  Elizabeth, Queen, I, 128.
  Ellenborough, Baron, I, _181_.
  {379}
  Ellicot, I, 24.
  Ellis, I, _76_, 82.
  Engel, I, 230.
  English language, Origin of, I, 215.
  Enriques, F., II, _367_.
  Epps, J., I, _153_; II, 143.
  Equation of fifth degree, I, 250, 373.
  Erasmus, I, 110.
  Erastus, I, _65_.
  Erichsen, I, 163.
  Ersch, II, _193_, 282.
  Erskine, T., II, _127_.
  Esperanto, Forerunner of, I, 116.
  Euclid, I, 5, 43; II, 118, 151.
    --Without Axioms, I, 287.
  Eudoxus, II, _164_.
  Euler, I, 221, _382_; II, 3, 4, 303, 331, 339.
  Eusebius, II, _220_.
  Eustace, J. C., II, _46_.
  Eutocius, I, _41_; II, 60.
  Evelyn, J., I, _108_.
  Everett, J., I, _346_.
  Evidence, I, 57, 58.

  Faber. (_See Stapulensis._)
  Fairfax, Mary, I, _242_.
  Falco, I, 53.
  Faraday, M., II, _351_.
  Fauré, de, I, 149; II, 238.
  Fawcett, H., II, _249_.
  Ferguson, J., II, _20_.
  Fermat, I, 122, 221; II, _300_.
  Ferrari, S., II, 68.
  Fiction, New era in, I, 189.
  Fienus, I, _74_, 74.
  Filopanti, Q. B., II, _93_.
  Finæus, I, _50_, 50, 113.
  Finleyson, J., I, 314, _314_.
  Flamsteed, I, _87_, 309; II, 45, 143, 302, 306.
  Fletcher, I, 378.
  Fludd, II, _318_.
  Fly-leaf Paradox, II, 264.
  Folkes, M., I, _136_; II, 301.
  Fontenelle, I, _103_.
  Forbes, D., I, _237_.
  Forman, W., I, 296, _296_, 306.
  Forster, T. I. M., I, 320, _320_.
  Foscarini, I, _90_.
  Foster, S., II, _310_.
  Fourier, II, _66_.
  Fox, G., I, _397_.
  Francis, P., II, _96_.
  Francoeur, I, _365_.
  Frankland, W. B., I, 230, 287.
  Franklin, J., II, _265_.
  Freedom of opinion, Growth of, I, 265.
  Freher, A., II, 319.
  French academy on circle squaring, I, 163.
  Frend, W., I, _196_, 196, 206, 208, 252.
  Fresnel, II, _48_.
  Fromondus, I, _74_, 74, 99.
  Frost, I. and J., I, 394.
  Fry, Elizabeth, I, 224.
  Fuller, T., I, _86_.
  Fulton, R., I, _148_.

  Gadbury, J., I, _115_, 115.
  Galbraith, J. A., II, 372.
  Galileo, I, 5, 6, 32, _76_, 82, 83, 96, 122, 381.
  Galle, J. G., I, _386_; II, 7.
  Galloway, I, _56_, 57; II, 143.
  Gamblers, I, 280.
  Garrick, I, 21.
  Gascoigne, W., II, _299_.
  Gassendi, I, _107_.
  Gauss, I, 86, 107, 310.
  Gemistus, G., I, _188_.
  Gentleman's Monthly, Miscellany, I, 208.
  Gephryander. (_See Salicetus._)
  Gergonne, I, _336_.
  Ghetaldi, I, _83_; II, 59.
  Ghost paradox, II, 47.
  Giddy (Gilbert), II, _174_.
  Gilbert, Davies, II, 66, _174_.
  Gilbert, William, I, 6, _68_, 68, 76.
  Gillot, II, _315_.
  Glazier (Glazion), II, 7.
  Godwin, F., I, _103_.
  Godwin, W., I, _174_.
  Golius, I, _106_.
  Gompertz, B., I, _378_.
  Goulburn, I, _288_.
  Goulden, S., II, 88.
  Graham, I, 24.
  Grandamicus, I, _104_, 104.
  Granger, J., I, _156_.
  Grant, A. R., II, 131.
  Grant, R., I, _392_; II, 131.
  Grassi, O., I, _262_.
  Grassini, I, _231_.
  Graunt, J., I, 113, _114_, 154.
  Gravity, I, 151, 244, 348, 353.
  {380}
    --Newton's apple, I, 136.
  Greek numerals, II, _77_.
  Greene, R., I, _135_, 135.
  Greenhill, Sir G., I, 136.
  Greenwich observatory,  I, 87.
  Gregg, T. D., II, 75, _75_.
  Gregorian Calendar, I, 363.
  Gregory, D., I, _66_; II, 301.
  Gregory, J., I, _118_, 118, 207; II, 302.
  Gregory O., II, _71_.
  Gregory, Pope, I, 362.
  Grevil, I, _202_.
  Grey, C., (2d Earl), I, _315_; II, 247.
  Grosart, I, _141_, 141, 145.
  Grove, W. R., II, _320_.
  Gruber, II, _193_, 282.
  Gruenberger, I, _70_.
  Grynaeus, I, _66_.
  Guaricus, I, _43_.
  Guillim, J., II, _28_.
  Guldin, I, _83_.
  Gumpach, Von, II, 137, _137_.
  Gunning, H., I, _198_.
  Gurney. (_See Fry, E._)
  Guthrie, W., I, _395_.

  Hailes, J. D., II, 135, _135_.
  Hailesean system of astronomy, II, 135.
  Hale, M., I, _123_, 123.
  Hales, S., I, _123_.
  Hall, B., II, _181_.
  Hallam, I, 159.
  Halley, I, 24, _124_, 311; II, 301, 332.
  Halliwell-Phillips, II, _148_, 296.
  Hamilton, W., I, _112_, 117, 331, 335, 339, 341, 342; II,
      52, 53, 111.
  Hamilton, W. Rowan, I, _332_; II, 104, 256, 343.
  Hanover, King of, I, 201.
  Hardy, C., I, _298_.
  Hardy, T., I, _178_.
  Harriot, T., II, _302_.
  Harvey, I, _76_, 78; II, 201.
  Hauff, I, _230_.
  Haughton, S., II, 372.
  Hauksbee, F., I, _156_.
  Hayes, C., I, _132_, 132.
  Heath, D. D., I, _76_.
  Heinfetter, H., II, 94, _94_.
  Helmont, J. B. van, I, _125_.
  Henson, II, 8.
  Heraclitus, II, _34_.
  Herbart, J. F., I, 253, _253_; II, 78.
  Hérigone, II, _59_.
  Herschel, J., I, _80_, 299, 326, 383, 386; II, 88, 95, 181,
      255, 261, 262.
  Herschel, W., I, _81_, 151, 192, 225, 233, 299; II, 288, 348.
  Heywood, F., II, _49_.
  Hicks, J. P., II, _67_.
  Higgins, G., I, _257_, 274.
  Hilarius, Pope, I, _359_.
  Hill, J., I, 21, 22, 23, 24.
  Hill, Rev. R., I, _192_.
  Hill, Sir R., I, _165_, 232.
  Hind, J. R., I, _384_.
  Hippocrates, II, _59_.
  Hoax, An interesting, I, 163.
    --Lunar Caustic, I, 288.
    --Moon (Herschel), I, 326; II, 131.
  Hobbes, I, _105_, 109, 143, 144; II, 80.
  Hobhouse, J. C., II, _126_.
  Hodder, J., II, _265_.
  Hodge, C. B., I, 114.
  Hodges, W., I, 237.
  Hoffmann, J. J., II, _282_.
  Hoffmann, J. J. I. von, I, _230_.
  Holloway, B., I, _237_.
  Holmes, O. W., I, 109.
  Holyoake, G. J., I, _399_, 399.
  Hone, W., I, 124, 180, 184, 185.
  Hook, T. E., II, _261_.
  Hooke, I, _77_; II, 300.
  Hooker, R., II, _201_.
  Hopkins, J., II, 41.
  Horace, I, 40.
  Horne, G., I, _152_, 152, 154, 155, 236.
  Horne, J., I, _178_.
  Horner, L., I, _176_.
  Horner, W. G., II, _66_, 151, 187.
  Houlston, W., II, 156, _156_.
  Howard, E., I, 131.
  Howison, W., I, 256, _256_.
  Howitt, W., II, 193, _193_.
  Howley, I, 63.
  Hulls, I, _147_, 147; II, 8.
  Hume, J., I, _352_; II, 174.
  Husaín Rifki, II, 16.
  Hussein Effendi, II, 15.
  Hutchinson, J., I, 154, _154_.
  Hutton, C., I, _153_, 161; II, 303, 340.
  Huyghens, I, _100_, 133; II, 300.

  Imaginary numbers, II, 186.
  Impalement by request, II, 133.
  Inaudi, I, 86.
  Index Expurgatorius, I, 90.
  {381}
  Infant prodigies, I, 86.
  Inglis, J. B., II, _52_.
  Inglis, R. H., I, _352_.
  Ingliz Selim Effendi, II, 15.
  Innocent I., I, _359_.
  Irving, E., II, _54_.
  Ivory, J., II, 142, _142_.

  Jabir ben Aflah, II, _59_.
  Jack, R., I, 149.
  Jacotot, J., I, 278, _278_.
  Jameson, Mrs., II, _63_.
  Jeffreys, G., I, _183_.
  Jenner, E., II, _205_.
  Jesuit contributions, I, 164.
  Johnson, H. C., I, 350.
  Johnson, S., I, 20, _190_, 259; II, 117.
  Johnston, W. H., II, 67.
  Jombert, I, _161_.
  Jonchère, I, _146_, 146.
  Jones, W., I, _135_; II, 298, 301.
  Jones, Rev. W., I, _237_.
  Jonson, B., I, 13.
  Journals, Three classes of, II,  144.

  Kantesian Jeweler,  I, 258.
  Karsten, I, _230_.
  Kästner, I, _43_, 110, 112.
  Kater, I, 11.
  Keckermann, I, 3.
  Keill, J., II, _302_.
  Kepler, I, 52, _76_, 82, 381; II, 166.
  Kerigan, T., I, _308_, 353.
  Keroualle, De, II, 50.
  Kersey, I, 107.
  King, Wm., I, _246_.
  Kircher, Adolphe, I, 229.
  Kircher, Athanasius, I, _103_.
  Kirkringius, T., I, 125, _125_.
  Kittle, I, 236.
  Klein, F., II, 367.
  Knight, C., II, _109_, 280, 289.
  Knight, G., I, 151, _151_.
  Knight, R. P., II, _274_.
  Knight, Wm., I, _97_.
  Koenig, S., I, _150_.

  Lacomme, I, 46.
  La Condamine, II, _301_.
  Lacroix, I, 41, 159, 207.
  Lactantius, I, 33, _96_.
  Lagrange, I, 221, _288_, 313, 382; II, 86.
  Laing, F. H., II, _186_, 186.
  Lalande, I, _159_.
  Lamb, C., I, 178; II, 270.
  Lambert, J. H., I, _336_; II, 214, 367.
  Lambert, John, II, _309_.
  Language, Test of, II, 327.
  Lansbergius, I, _70_, 70.
  Laplace, I, 24, _255_, 382; II, 1, 340.
  Lardner, D., II, _253_.
  Lardner, N., I, 14; II, _221_.
  Laud, I, _145_.
  Lauder, W., I, 297.
  Laurent, P., I, _309_, 309.
  Laurie, J., II, 4.
  Laurie, P., II, _42_.
  Laurus, I, 381.
  Law, Edmund, I, _181_.
  Law, Edward, I, _181_.
  Law, W., I, 168, _254_; II, 317.
  Le Coq, I, _86_.
  Lee, R., I, _66_.
  Lee, S., I, _131_.
  Lee, W., I, 157.
  Legate, I, _59_.
  Legendre, I, _229_; II, 215, 367.
  Legh, P., II, _68_, 83.
  Leibnitz, I, 5, 7; II, 46.
  Leo, St., I, _359_.
  Leverrier, I, _43_, 82, 383, 386, 388, 390; II, 7, 135, 140,
      303.
  Lewis, G. C., II, 162, _162_.
  Libri, I, _40_, 62; II, 295.
  Lilius, Aloysius, I, 362.
  Lilly, I, _115_; II, 302.
  Lipen, M., I, _298_.
  Little, J., I, 206.
  Livingston, R., I, _148_.
  Locke, J., I, _142_, 142, 144;
    --and Socinianism, I, 142.
  Locke, R., I, 146.
  Locke, R. A., I, _326_; II, 86, 131.
  Logan, W. E., I, _337_.
  Logic, Formal, I, 158; II, 75.
    --Has no paradoxes, I, 330.
  London Mathematical Society, I, 383.
  London, University of, I, 259; II, 71.
  Long, G., II, _290_.
  Long, J. St. J., II. _38_, 205.
  Longitude problems, I, 132, 146, 249.
  Longley, C. T., I, _325_.
  Longomontanus, I, _105_, 105.
  Lottery, I. 281.
  Lovett, R., I, 165, _166_.
  Lowe, R., II, _169_.
  Lowndes, W. T., I. _402_.
  Lubbock, J., I, _279_; II, 148.
  {382}
  Lucas, F., II, _28_.
  Lucian, I, _102_.
  Lunar Caustic Joke, I, 288.
  Lunn, J. R., II, _66_.
  Lydiat, T., II, _302_.
  Lyndhurst, I, _198_.

  Macclesfield, Earls of, I, 7; II, _296_, 301.
  Macclesfield, Letters, II, 296.
  MacElshender, II, 87.
  Machin, J., II, _301_.
  Mackey, John,  I, 349.
  Mackey, S. A., I, _256_.
  Maclear, T., II, _181_.
  Macleod, H. D., II, 184, _184_.
  Magic, I, 118.
  Magna Charta, I, 25.
  Magnus, I, 42.
  Maitland, S., I, _63_, 163.
  Malacarne, I, 119.
  Malden, H., II, _162_.
  Malius, II, _342_.
  Mallemens, II, _333_.
  Mankind gullible, I, 115.
  Manning, H. E., (Card.), II, _233_.
  Mansel, H. L., II, _162_.
  Marcelis, J., I, _129_, 129.
  Maret, II, _3_.
  Margarita Philosophica. (_See Reisch._)
  Marryat, Capt., II, _87_.
  Marsh, H., I, _199_, 271.
  Martin, B., I, _152_, 153.
  Martin, R., II, _236_.
  Maseres, F., I, _197_, 203.
  Mason, M., II, _132_.
  Mathematical Illustrations of Doctrine, II, 70;
    --Psychology, I, 253;
    --Society, I, 374, 376, 382;
    --Theology, I, 149.
  Mathematics, Condensed history of, II, 58.
  Matter to Spirit, II, 194.
  Maty, I, 23.
  Maupertuis, II, _301_.
  Maurice, F. D., II, _101_.
  Maurolycus, I, _121_.
  Maxwell, A., I, _102_.
  Meadley, G. W., I, _223_.
  Mechanics Magazine, II, 141, 145.
  Medici, Cosmo de, II, _295_.
  Medicine, Status of, I, 266.
  Melanchthon, II, _323_.
  Menestrier, I, _127_, 127.
  Mercator, G., II, _92_.
  Mercator's projection, I, 84.
  Mersenne, I, _106_, 107; II, 295, 297.
  Meslier, J., II, _195_.
  Meteorologist, An early, I, 320.
  Meteorology, I, 327.
  Metius, A. and P., I, _52_, _99_, 99.
  Meton, II, 167.
  Metric System, Forerunner of, I, 171.
  Méziriac, I, 161.
  Milbanke, A. I., I, 225.
  Mill, Jas., I, 260.
  Miller, Joe, I, _182_.
  Miller, S., I, 167.
  Mills, Elizabeth, W., II, 7.
  Milne, J., I, _286_.
  Milner, I., I, _251_, 251.
  Milner, J., II, _23_.
  Milner's lamp, I, 252.
  Milward, II, _250_.
  Miracles _vs_. Nature, II, 6.
  Mitchell, J., I, _242_.
  Molière, I, _232_.
  Molina, A. C. de, I, _297_.
  Mollendorff, von, II, _3_, 338.
  Mondeux, I, 86.
  Montague, C., II, _311_.
  Montmort, P. R. de, II, _301_.
  Montucla, I, 40, 45, 54, 65, 117, 120, 159, 163; II, 60.
  Moon Hoax, I, 326; II, 131.
  Moon, Nature of, II, 84;
    --Rotation of, II, 4, 19, 84, 87.
  More, Hannah, I, _189_, 192.
  More, Henry, I, 123.
  Moore, Dr. John, I, _190_.
  Moore, Sir John, I, _190_.
  Morgan, S., I, 6.
  Morgan, T., I, 191.
  Morgan, W., I, _223_, 224.
  Morhof, I, _61_.
  Morin, I, _99_, 99.
  Morinus, J. B., I, 149.
  Morland, S., II, _302_.
  Mormonism, II, 69.
  Morrison, R. J., I, _321_; II, 43.
  Mose, H., II, _266_.
  Mottelay, I, 68.
  Motti, II, 60.
  Mouton, I, _172_; II, 300.
  Muggleton, I, 394, _395_.
  Multiplication, Nature of, II, 251.
  Murchison, R. I., I, _384_.
  Murhard, I, _43_, 298.
  {383}
  Murphy, A., II, _308_.
  Murphy, J. L., II, 54, _54_.
  Murphy, P., I, _327_, 398.
  Murphy, R., I, 349, _349_.
  Murray, J., I, _186_; II, 145.
  Murray, L., II, _326_.
  Murray, Mungo, II, 310.
  Musgrave, T., I, _324_.
  Mydorge, I, _298_.
  Mystrom, J. W., II, 182.
  Mythological paradoxes, I, 256.

  Names of Religious Bodies, II, 22.
  Napier, J., I, 5, 66, _67_, 82.
  Napoleon, Doubts as to, I, 246.
  Nautical Almanac, I, 300; II, 147.
  Neal, I, _98_.
  Negative numbers, I, 196, 203.
  Neile, W., II, _190_.
  Neptune, Discovery of, I, 387; II, 140. (_See Adams, Leverrier._)
  Nesse, C, I, _128_, 128.
  Newcomb, S., I, 162.
  Newcomen, T., I, _147_.
  Newton, Sir Isaac, I, 5, 6, 8, 24, 39, 84, 88, 130,
      136, 139, 144, 145, 148, 152, 154, 155, 162, 165,
      167, 197, 225, 237, 242, 257, 282, 296, 297, 309,
      311, 382, 394, 395, 396, 397; II, 2, 70, 184, 297, _302_,
      305.
  Newton, John, II, _305_.
  Nicene Creed, I, 371.
  Nichol, J. P., II, _289_.
  Nicholas. (_See Cusa._)
  Nichols, J., I, _175_.
  Nicolas, N. H., I, _354_.
  Nicollet, I, _326_; II, 131.
  Nicolson, W., I, _201_.
  Nieuwentijt, II, _333_.
  Nizzoli, M., II, 275.
  Non-Euclidean geometry, II, 83.
  Northampton, Marquis of (2d), II, _19_.
  Novum Organum Moralium, II, 74.
  Number, Mystery of, I, 55, 56, 169.
  Number of the Beast (666), I, 55, 130, 272, 298, 352; II, 77,
      159, 217, 218, 361, 373.
  Numeral system, II, 68.
  Nursery rhymes, II, 150.

  Occam, Wm. of, II, _40_.
  Odgers, N., II, 191, _191_.
  Oinopides of Chios, II, _59_.
  Oldenburgh, H., II, _300_, 302.
  Orthodox Paradoxes, II, 363.
  Orthography, Paradoxes of, II, 267.
  Ortwinus, I, 319.
  Oughtred, W., II, _298_, 303.
  Owenson, I, _191_.
  Ozanam, I, _161_, 312.

  Pagi, I, 32.
  Paine, T., I, 173, _173_, 271.
  Paley, W., I, _222_; II, 226.
  Palmer, C., I, 225.
  Palmer, H., I, _141_, 141, 145.
  Palmer, J., II, _253_.
  Palmer, T. F., II, _254_.
  Palmer, W., II, _37_.
  Palmerston, Viscount (3d), I, _290_, 352.
  Palmézeaux, I, 167.
  Panizzi, A., I, _151_.
  Papist, II, 26.
  Paracelsus, II, 322.
  Paradox defined, I, 2, 31.
  Paradox, religious, I, 236.
  Paradoxers in general, II, 352.
  Parallels, Theory of, I, 229, 344.
  Pardies, I. G., II, _300_.
  Park, Mungo, II, _91_, 132.
  Parker, F., II, _94_.
  Parker, G. (Earl of Macclesfield), II, _296_.
  Parr, S., I, 173, _173_, 175, 176, 184.
  Parsey, I, 293, _293_.
  Partridge, J., I, _305_.
  Pasbergius, I, 381.
  Pascal, I, 39, 119, 122, _220_, _221_; II, 73.
  Pascal's Hexagram, I, 221.
  Passot, I, 279, _279_.
  Passover, I, 358, 372.
  Patriotic paradox, I, 231.
  Paucton, I, _172_.
  Paulian, I, 165, _165_.
  Peacock, Geo., I, _196_, 350.
  Peacock, T. L., I, _190_, 340.
  Pearce, A. J., II, 43.
  Pearne, T., I, _239_.
  Peel, Sir R., I, 290, _352_.
  Peel, W. Y., I, _290_.
  Pèlerin, J., II, _324_.
  Pell, J., I, _105_, 105, 107; II, 300, 302, 312.
  Pepys, I, _113_, 114.
  Perigal, H., II, 19, _20_.
  {384}
  Perpetual motion, I, 118, 348; II, 55, 138.
  Perspective, New theory of, I, 293.
  Peters, W., II, 11, 315.
  Petitioning Comet, I, 127.
  Petrie, W. M. F., I, _328_.
  Petty, I, _114_; II, 300.
  Philalethes, Eirenaeus, I, _125_, 125, 126.
  Philalethes, Eugenius, I, _255_.
  Phillips, R., I, 242, _242_, 245.
  Philo of Gadara, I, 40, _40_.
  Philosopher's stone, I, 118, 125.
  Philosophical atheists, II, 1.
  Philosophy and Religion, II, 37.
  Phonetic spelling, II, 81.
  [pi], values of, I, 11, 43, 45, 46, 52, 69, 100, 110,
      129, 135, 146, 245, 283, 284, 294, 347, 348, 349,
      350; II, 60, 63, 105, 110, 118, 135, 156, 209, 279, 315, 316.
  Pighius, I, _372_.
  Pike, S., I, 236, _236_.
  Pindar, P., II, _272_.
  Piozzi, Mrs., I, _235_; II, 272.
  Piscator, B., II, 25.
  Pitman, F., II, 81, _81_.
  Place, F., I, _199_.
  Planets inhabitable, I, 100, 102.
  Plato, I, 5.
  Platt, H., I, _126_, 126.
  Playfair, J., I, _233_.
  Pletho, G., I, _188_.
  Pliny, II, 280.
  Ploucquet, I, _336_, 337.
  Poe, E. A., II, 132.
  Poincaré, I, 136.
  Poisson, I, _292_; II, 2.
  Pollock, J. F., II, _174_.
  Pons, II, _45_.
  Pope, Wm., I, 277, _277_.
  Porta, I, _68_, 68, 83.
  Porteus, B., I, _193_, 203.
  Porteus, H. F. A., II, 157, _157_.
  Porus, I, 44.
  Powell, Baden, II, _267_.
  Powell, W. S., I, _222_.
  Pratt, H. F. A., II, 157, _157_.
  Pratt, O., II, _69_.
  Predaval, Count de, I, _348_.
  Prescot, B., I, 270, _270_, 278.
  Prester John, I, 70, _71_, 152.
  Price, R., I, _223_.
  Probability, Discourse on, I, 279.
  Proclus, I, 188, _188_.
  Prodigies, Youthful, I, 219, 332.
  Pronunciation, II, 330.
  Protestant and Papal Christendom, II, 33.
  Protimalethes, II, 6.
  Ptolemy, I, 5, 33, _380_.
  Pullicino, II, 61, _61_.
  Pusey, I, _64_.
  Pyramids, The, I, 328; II, 95, 136.
  Pythagoras, II, _59_.

  Quadrature problem. (_See Squaring the circle._)
  Quarles, F., II, _277_.
  Quintilian, II, 280.
  Quotem, C., I, 399.

  Rabelais, I, _102_.
  Rainbow Paradox, II, 334.
  Ramachandra, Y., I, _374_.
  Ramchundra, I, 374.
  Ramus, I, 5.
  Recalcati, II, 208, 314.
  Recorde, R., II, _328_.
  Reddie, Jas., II, 183, _183_, 344, 360.
  Reeve, J., I, _395_.
  Regiomontanus, I, _48_, 360.
  Reisch, I, _45_; II, 281.
  Religion and Philosophy, II, 37.
  Religious bodies, Names of, II, 22;
    --customs, Attacks on, I, 177;
    --Insurance, I, 345;
    --Paradox, I, 236;
    --Tract society, I, 192.
  Remigius, I, _50_.
  Reuchlin, J., II, _323_.
  Revelations, Napier on, I, 66.
  Revilo, (O. Byrne), I, 241, 329, _329_.
  Reyneau, C. R., II, _301_.
  Rheticus, I, _69_; II, 372.
  Rhonius, II, 300.
  Ribadeneira, P. de, II, _62_.
  Riccioli, I, _96_.
  Richards, G., II, _270_.
  Rigaud, J., II, _299_.
  Rigaud, S. J., II, _299_.
  Rigaud, S. P., I, _140_; II, 298, 313.
  Ringelbergh, J. S., II, _281_.
  Ripley, G., I, _126_, 126.
  Ritchie, W., I, 295, _295_.
  Ritterhusius, I, _60_.
  Rive, J.-J., I, _160_.
  Robertson, Jas., I, _237_.
  Roberval, I, _105_, 122.
  {385}
  Robinson, B., I, _148_, 148.
  Robinson, H. C., I, _314_; II, 52, 275.
  Robinson, R., I, _177_.
  Robinson, T. R., II, _181_.
  Roblin, J., II, 136.
  Rogers, S., II, _260_.
  Roget, P. M., I, _398_.
  Roomen, A. van, I, _110_.
  Ross, J. C., I, _303_.
  Rosse, I, 26.
  Rossi, G., I, 231, _231_.
  Rotation of the Moon, II, 4, 19.
  Rough, W., I, 198.
  Rowning, J., I, _155_.
  Royal Astronomical Society, I, 27;
    --Forerunner of, I, 374.
  Royal Society, I, 21, 22, 24-30, 56, 57, 136, 153, 163,
      164, 165.
  Rudio, I, 159; II, 367.
  Rudolff, C., II, 373.
  Russell, Earl (1st), I, _296_.
  Rutherford, W., II, _109_.

  Sabatíer, A., II, _267_.
  Sabellius, I, _241_.
  Sacrobosco, I, _360_.
  Sadler, T., I, _238_, 241.
  Saint-Martin, I, 167, _168_, 206.
  St.-Mesmin, M. de., I, 280.
  St. Vincent, G. de., I, _110_, 117.
  St. Vitus, Patron of Cyclometers, II, 60.
  Sales, de, I, 167.
  Salicetus, I, 64.
  Salisbury, Earl of (1st), II, _330_.
  Salmasius, Claudius, II, _168_.
  Salusbury, Hester, I, _235_.
  Sanchez, Petro, I, 229, _229_.
  Sanders, W., I, 207.
  Sanderson, R., I, _135_.
  Sara, R., I, _297_.
  Saunderson, N., I, _377_; II, 301.
  Scaliger, I, _44_, 110, 111, 112, 113; II, 238.
  Scévole de St. Marthe, I, 113.
  Schooten, Van, II, _59_.
  Schopp, I, _60_.
  Schott, I, _64_; II, 64.
  Schumacher, H. C., I, _107_; II, 297.
  Schwab, I, _230_.
  Scientific paradoxes, I, 232.
  Scott, Michael, I, _38_.
  Scott's Devils, I, 38.
  Scott, W., I, 20, 27, 38, 39, 155, _191_.
  Scripture and Science, II, 261.
  Search, John, I, 247.
  Selden, J., II, _250_.
  Sénarmont, II, _48_.
  Serres, De, II, _60_.
  Shaftesbury, Earl of, II, _181_.
  Shakespeare, I, 13.
  Shanks, II, _63_, 65, 109.
  Shaw, P., I, _142_.
  Sheepshanks, J., I, _147_.
  Sheepshanks, R., I, _290_.
  Shelley, I, 174.
  Shepherd, S., I, _124_.
  Sherburne, E., II, _295_.
  Sheridan, R. B., I, _175_.
  Sheridan, T., I, _175_.
  Shoberl, F., II, _270_.
  Shrewsbury, I, _108_.
  Siddons, Mrs., I, 189.
  Simms, W., I, _152_.
  Simplicius, II, _164_.
  Simpson, T., I, 377; II, 304.
  Simson, R., I, _197_, 202, 233.
  Sinclair, G., I, _207_.
  Slander Paradoxes, II, 138.
  Sloane, I, 24.
  Sluse, R. de, I, _118_, 118; II, 300.
  Smith, Adam, II, _112_.
  Smith, Jas., I, _46_; II, 103, _103_, 154, 236, 237, 238, 241, 336,
      360.
  Smith, Jas., II, _217_.
  Smith, Jas. (Shepherd), II, _55_, 193.
  Smith, Joseph, II, _69_.
  Smith, Richarda, I, _242_.
  Smith, Thomas, I, 346, _346_.
  Smith, Wm., II, _152_.
  Smyth, C. P., I, _328_; II, 65.
  Snell, I, _75_, 75.
  Socinianism, I, 142, 143.
  Socinus, I, 3, _143_.
  Socrates Scholasticus, I, _358_.
  Sohncke, L. A., II, _131_.
  Somerville, Mrs., I, _242_.
  South, J., II, _181_.
  Southcott, Joanna, II, _58_, 97, 239.
  Spearman, R., I, _237_.
  Speculative thought in England, I, 374.
  Spedding, I, _76_, 82, 142.
  Speed, J., I, _201_.
  Speke, I, _70_.
  Spelling, phonetic, II, 81.
  Spence, W., I, _231_, 231.
  Spencer, Earl (3d), II, _9_.
  {386}
  Spinoza, I, 3, _37_.
  Spiritualism, II, 47, 55, 207.
  Spurius Cassius Viscellinus, II, _342_.
  Spurius Maelius, II, _342_.
  Squaring the circle, I, 8, 42, 44, 46, 47, 50, 52, 53,
      69, 70, 75, 109, 117, 119, 129, 135, 146, 149,
      159, 163, 164, 347, 348, 374; II, 10, 11, 60, 105, 154,
      156, 208, 278, 314.
  Stäckel, I, 230.
  Stanhope, P. D., (Earl of Chesterfield), II, _298_.
  Stapulensis, I, _44_; II, 324.
  Star polygons, I, 229.
  Starkie, G., I, _126_, 126.
  Statter, D., II, 80.
  Steamship suggested, I, 147.
  Steel, Jas., II, 68.
  Stenography, II, 81.
  Stephens, I, _44_; II, 324.
  Stephenson, G., II, _138_.
  Stephenson, R., II, _138_.
  Stevin, I, _83_, 313; II, 59.
  Stewart, D., II, _53_.
  Stewart, R., I, _186_.
  Stifel, M., II, _373_.
  Strafford, Earl of, I, _240_.
  Stratford, W. S., I, _300_.
  Street, T., I, _124_.
  Stukely, W., I, _236_.
  Suffield, G., II, _66_.
  Suidas, II, _29_.
  Sumner, C. R., I, _324_.
  Sumner, J. B., I, _324_.
  Sun as an electric space, II, 41.
  Supernatural, The, II, 193.
  Suvaroff, II, _85_.
  Swastika, II, 231.
  Swedenborg, E., I, _255_.
  Swift, I, 19, 133.
  Sylvester, J. J., II, _336_.
  Symington, W., I, _148_.
  Symons, II, 4, 5, 20, 84, 85.
  Sympathetic powder, I, 108.
  Synesius, I, 125.

  Talbot, G., I, _22_, _108_.
  Talbot's powder, I, 108.
  Tartaglia, II, 59.
  Tasse, I, _106_.
  Tate, J., I, _199_.
  Tauler, J., II, _322_.
  Taylor, Brook, II, _301_.
  Taylor, John, I, _352_; II, 95.
  Taylor, Robt., I, _270_.
  Taylor, T., I, 188, _188_.
  Teissier, I, _113_.
  Temple, H. J., I, 290.
  Tenterden, Chief Justice, I, _181_.
  Thales, II, _59_, 83.
  Theism independent of Revelation, I, 399.
  Thelwall, J., I, _178_.
  Theodoretus, I, _358_.
  Theological Paradoxes, I, 316.
  Theology, Mathematical, I, 129, 149.
  Theophrastus, II, _167_.
  Thiébault, II, _3_, 338.
  Thom, D., II, _226_, 240.
  Thom, J. H., II, _226_.
  Thompson, P., I, _7_.
  Thompson, T. P., I, _252_, 287, 344; II, 83, 185.
  Thomson, Dr., I, 21.
  Thomson, W., I, _325_.
  Thorn, W., II, 158, _158_, 360.
  Thorndike, H., II, _313_.
  Thrale, Mrs., I, _235_.
  Thurlow, Baron, I, _222_.
  Thyræus, I, 50.
  Tides, New theory of, I, 393.
  Tombstones of mathematicians, I, 106.
  Tonal System, II, 182.
  Tooke, H., I, _178_.
  Torriano, E., I, 250.
  Towneley, II, 300.
  Townley, C., II, _300_.
  Trisection problem, I, 118; II, 10, 12, 13, 15.
  Troughton, I, _152_.
  Turnor, E., I, _137_.
  Tycho Brahe, I, 5, _76_, 381; II, 302, 335.

  Upton, W., II, 12, _12_, 15.
  Ursus, I, _52_.

  Valentine, B., I, _125_, 125.
  Van Ceulen, I, 52, 70, 100.
  Van de Weyer, I, _313_.
  Van Etten, I, _161_.
  Van Helmont, I, _125_, 125.
  Van Roomen, I, _110_.
  Van Schooten, II, _59_.
  Vaughan, T., I, _255_.
  Victorinus, I, _359_.
  Viète, I, _51_; II, 210, 295.
  Virgil, St., I, 32, _33_, 34, 99.
  {387}
  Virginia, University of, I, 233.
  Viscellinus, II, _342_.
  Vitruvius, II, _281_.
  Vivian, T., I, 172, _172_.
  Vogel, A. F., I, 373.
  Voltaire, I, 103, 165, 166, 167, 168, 248; II, 268.
  Von Gumpach, II, 137, _137_.
  Von Hutten, I, 318.
  Von Wolzogen. (_See Wolzogen._)
  Vyse, R. W. H., I, _328_.

  Walker, W. E., II, _316_.
  Walkingame, F., II, _173_.
  Wallich, N., II, _14_.
  Wallis, J., I, 107, 109, 110; II, 299, 313.
  Walpole, I, _23_, 131.
  Walsh, John, I, 260, _260_; II, 157.
  Wapshare, J., II, _230_.
  Warburton, H., I, _349_.
  Warburton, Wm., I, _55_, 112; II, 174.
  Ward, S., II, _299_.
  Waring, E., I, _203_, 222.
  Warner, W., II, _302_, 312.
  Warren, S., II, _340_.
  Watkins, J., II, _270_.
  Watson, Bp., I, _223_.
  Watt, R., I, _102_, 402.
  Watts, I., II, 18.
  Weddle, T., II, _187_.
  Wentworth, Thos., I, _240_.
  Wharton, I, 115.
  Whately, R., I, 246, _246_, 324.
  Whately's Paradox, I, 246.
  Whewell, I, _101_, 101, 273, 314, 380; II, 104, 246, 247.
  Whigs, II, 22.
  Whiston, J., I, _147_.
  Whiston, W., I, 133, _133_, 146, 156, 311.
  White, H. K., II, _271_.
  White, J. B., I, 248.
  White, R., I, 11.
  Whitford, I, 105.
  Whitworth, W. A., II, _344_.
  Whizgig, On the, I, 254.
  Wightman, I, 59.
  Wilberforce, W., II, _236_.
  Wilkins, J., I, 96, _100_, 116, 226.
  Williams, J. B., I, _378_.
  Williams, T., I, 171, _171_.
  Wilson, Sir J., I, _221_.
  Wilson, J. M., II, _344_.
  Wilson, R., II, 7, _7_.
  Wilson's Theorem, I, _222_.
  Wingate, E., II, _308_.
  Winter, I, 46.
  Wirgman, T., I, 258, _258_.
  Wiseman, N. P. S., II, _26_, 61, 294.
  Wolcot, J. (Peter Pindar), II, _272_.
  Wollstonecraft, I, 173, _173_.
  Wolzogen, I, _106_.
  Wood, A., I, _98_.
  Wood, John, I, _233_.
  Wood, Wm., I, 246, _246_.
  Woodley, W., I, 307, _307_.
  Wordsworth, II, 273.
  Wright, E., I, 84.
  Wright, T., I, 151, _151_, 152, 153.
  Wright, W., II, 9.
  Wronski, I, 249, _250_.
  Wrottesley, J. (Baron), II, _181_.

  Young, B., II, _69_.
  Young, J. W. A., II, 367.
  Young, T., I, 24, 30, _250_.
  Youthful Prodigies, I, 219.
  Yvon, I, _297_.

  Zach, von, II, _45_, 196.
  Zachary, Pope, I, 32, 34.
  Zadkiel, I, _321_; II, 43.
  Zetetic Astronomy, II, 88.
  Zodiac, II, 136.
  Zytphen, II, _335_.

       *       *       *       *       *


Notes

Transcriber's note: References to Notes in Volume I are shown as in the
printed book, with the resequenced footnote numbers in the Project
Gutenberg Edition (EText-No. 23100) added thus {123}.

[1] See Vol. I, page 255, note 6 {584}.

[2] "I have no need for this hypothesis."

[3] "Ah, it is a beautiful hypothesis; it explains many things."

[4] "What we know is very slight; what we don't know is immense."

[5] Brewster relates (_Life of Sir Isaac Newton_, Vol. II, p. 407) that, a
short time before his death, Newton remarked: "I do not know what I may
appear to the world, but to myself I seem to have been only like a boy
playing on the seashore, and diverting myself in now and then finding a
smoother pebble or a prettier shell than ordinary, whilst the great ocean
of truth lay all undiscovered before me."

[6] See Vol. I, p. 292, note 1 {632}.

[7] "What is all that!"

[8] "I have some good news to tell you: at the Bureau of Longitudes they
have just received a letter from Germany announcing that M. Bessel has
verified by observation your theoretical discoveries on the satellites of
Jupiter."

[9] "Man follows only phantoms."

[10] See Vol. I, page 382, note 13 {786}.

[11] Dieudonné Thiébault (1733-1807) was a Jesuit in his early life, but he
left the order and took up the study of law. In 1765 he went to Prussia and
became a favorite of Frederick the Great. He returned to France in 1785 and
became head of the Lycée at Versailles.

[12] _Memories of Twenty Years of Residence in Berlin._ There was a second
French and an English edition in 1805.

[13] Richard Joachim Heinrich von Mollendorff (1724-1816) began his career
as a page of Frederick the Great (1740) and became field marshal (1793) and
commander of the Prussian army on the Rhine (1794).

[14] Hugues Bernard Maret (1763-1839) was not Duc de Bassano in 1807, this
title not being conferred upon him until 1809. He was ambassador to England
in 1792 and to Naples in 1793. Napoleon made him head of the cabinet and
his special confidant. The Bourbons exiled him in 1816.

[15] Denis Diderot (1713-1784), whose _Lettre sur les aveugles_ (1749)
introduced him to the world as a philosopher, and whose work on the
_Encyclopédie_ is so well known.

[16] "Sir, (a + b^{n}) / n = x, whence God exists; answer!"

[17] This was one James Laurie of Musselburgh.

[18] Jelinger Cookson Symons (1809-1860) was an office-holder with a
decided leaning towards the improvement of education and social conditions.
He wrote _A Plea for Schools_ (1847), _The Industrial Capacities of South
Wales_ (1855), and _Lunar Motion_ (1856), to which last work the critic
probably refers.

[19] "Protimalethes" followed this by another work along the same line the
following year, _The Independence of the Testimony of St. Matthew and St.
John tested and vindicated by the theory of chances_.

[20] Wilson had already taken up the lance against science in his
_Strictures on Geology and Astronomy, in reference to a supposed want of
harmony between these sciences and some parts of Divine Revelation_,
Glasgow, 1843. He had also ventured upon poetry in his _Pleasures of
Piety_, Glasgow, 1837.

[21] Mrs. Borron was Elizabeth Willesford Mills before her marriage. She
made an attempt at literature in her _Sibyl's Leaves_, London (printed at
Devonport), 1826.

[22] See Vol. I, page 386, note 10 {801}.

[23] See Vol. I, page 43, notes 7 {32} and 8 {33}.

[24] His flying machine, designed in 1843, was one of the earliest attempts
at aviation on any extensive scale.

[25] Erasmus Darwin (1731-1802) was the grandfather of Charles Darwin. The
work here mentioned had great influence, being translated into French,
Portuguese, and Italian. Canning parodied it in his _Loves of the
Triangles_.

[26] See Vol. I, page 147, note 1 {312}.

[27] The notes on this page were written on the day of the funeral of
Wilbur Wright, June 1, 1912, the man who realized all of these prophecies,
and then died a victim of municipal crime,--of typhoid fever.

[28] John Charles, third Earl Spencer (1782-1845), to whose efforts the
Reform Bill was greatly indebted for its final success.

[29] This was published in London in 1851 instead of 1848.

[30] This appeared in 1846.

[31] This was done in _The Circle Squared_, published at Brighton in 1865.

[32] It first appeared in 1847, under the title, _The Scriptural Calendar
and Chronological Reformer, 1848. Including a review of tracts by Dr.
Wardlaw and others on the Sabbath question. By W. H. Black._ The one above
mentioned, for 1849, was printed in 1848, and was also by Black
(1808-1872). He was pastor of the Seventh Day Baptists and was interested
in archeology and in books. He catalogued the manuscripts of the Ashmolean
Museum at Oxford.

[33] William Upton, a Trinity College man, Dublin. He also wrote _Upton's
Physioglyphics_, London, 1844; _Pars prima. Geometria vindicata;
antiquorumque Problematum, ad hoc tempus desperatorum, Trisectionis Anguli,
Circulique Quadraturae, Solutio, per Eucliden effecta, London_ (printed at
Southampton), 1847; _The Uptonian Trisection_, London, 1866; and _The
Circle Squared_, London, 1872.

[34] For example, if [theta] = 90° we should have 3 cos 30° = 1 + [root](4
- sin^2 90°), or 3.½ [root]3 = 1 + [root]3, or ½ [root]3 = 1.

[35] Nathaniel Wallich (1786-1854) was surgeon at the Danish settlement at
Serampore when the East India Company took over the control in 1807. He
entered the British medical service and was invalided to England in 1828.
His _Plantae Asiaticae Rariores_ (3 vols., London, 1830-1832) was
recognized as a standard. He became vice-president of the Linnean Society,
F. R. S., and fellow of the Royal Asiatic Society.

[36] But if [theta] = 90° this asserts that

  cos 30° = (sin 270° . cos 225° + sin^2 90° . sin 225°) / [root](sin^2
      270° . cos^2 225° + sin^{4} 90° + sin 270° . sin 450° . sin^2 90°),

or that

  ½ [root]3 = (-1 . (-1 /[root]2) + 1 . (-1/[root]2) / [root]1 . ½ + 1 - 1
      . 1 . 1) = 0 / [root]½,

so that De Morgan must have made some error in copying.

[37] John Bonnycastle (died in 1821) was professor of mathematics at
Woolwich. His edition of Bossut's _History of Mathematics_ (1803), and his
works on elementary mathematics were well known.

[38] The bibliographies give Husaín Rifki as the translator, a practical
geometry as the work, and 1802 as the date.

[39] See Vol. I, page 309, note 2 {670}.

[40] Probably in _The Improvement of the Mind_ which Isaac Watts
(1674-1748) published in 1741. His _Horae Lyricae_ appeared in 1706, and
the _Hymns_, by which he is still well known, in 1707.

[41] Spencer Joshua Alwyne Compton, second Marquis of Northampton
(1790-1851), was a poet, a scientist, and a statesman. He was president of
the Royal Society from 1838 to 1849.

[42] Besides the writings here mentioned Perigal published a work on
_Geometric Maps_ (London, 1853), and _Graphic Demonstrations of Geometric
Problems_ (1891).

[43] See Vol. II, page 5, note 18.

[44] James Ferguson (1710-1776) was a portrait painter, an astronomer, and
a popular writer and lecturer on various subjects.

[45] In the old ballad of King Alfred and the Shepherd, when the latter is
tempting the disguised king into his service, he says:

 "Of whig and whey we have good store,
  And keep good pease-straw fire."

_Whig_ is then a preparation of milk. But another commonly cited derivation
may be suspected from the word _whiggamor_ being used before _whig_, as
applied to the political party; _whig_ may be a contraction. Perhaps both
derivations conspired: the word _whiggamor_, said to be a word of command
to the horses, might contract into _whig_, and the contraction might be
welcomed for its own native meaning.--A. De M.

[46] This was p. 147 in the first edition.

[47] St. Augustine (354-430) was bishop of Hippo. His _Confessiones_, in 13
books, was written in 397, and his _De Civitate Dei_ in 426.

[48] "He was wont to indulge in certain Punic subtleties lest he should
weary the reader by much speaking."

[49] John Milner (1751-1826), bishop of Castabala, a well-known
antiquarian.

[50] It will be said that when the final happiness is spoken of in "sure
and certain hope," it is _the_ Resurrection, generally; but when afterwards
application is made to the individual, simple "hope" is all that is
predicated which merely means "wish?" I know it: but just before the
general declaration, it is declared that it _has_ pleased God of his great
mercy to _take unto Himself_, the soul of our dear brother: and between the
"hopes" hearty thanks are given that it _has_ pleased God to deliver our
dear brother out of the miseries of this wicked world, with an additional
prayer that the number of the elect may shortly be accomplished. All which
means, that our dear brother is declared to be taken to God, to be in a
place not so miserable as this world--a description which excludes the
"wicked place"--and to be of the elect. Yes, but it will be said again! do
you not know that when this Liturgy was framed, all who were not in the
road to Heaven were excommunicated burial service read over them. Supposing
the fact to have been true in old time, which is a very spicy supposition,
how does that excuse the present practice? Have you a right _always_ to say
what you believe _cannot always_ be true, because you think it was once
_always_ true? Yes, but, choose whom you please, you cannot be _certain_ He
is _not_ gone to Heaven. True, and choose which Bishop you please, you
cannot be demonstratively _certain_, he is _not_ a concealed unbeliever:
may I therefore say of the whole bench, _singulatim et seriatim_, that they
_are_ unbelievers? No! No! The voice of common sense, of which common logic
is a part, is slowly opening the eyes of the multitude to the unprincipled
reasoning of theologians. Remember 1819. What chance had Parliamentary
Reform when the House of Commons thanked the Manchester sabre-men? If you
do not reform your Liturgy, it will be reformed for you, and sooner than
you think! The dishonest interpretations, by defence of which even the
minds of children are corrupted, and which throw their shoots into
literature and commerce, will be sent to the place whence they came: and
over the door of the established organization for teaching religion will be
posted the following notice:

 "Shift and Subterfuge, Shuffle and Dodge,
  No longer here allowed to lodge!"

All this ought to be written by some one who belongs to the Establishment:
in him, it would be quite prudent and proper; in me, it is kind and
charitable.--A. De M.

[51] But few do have access to it, for the work is not at all common, and
this Piscator is rarely mentioned.

[52] This derivation has been omitted.--S. E. De M.

[53] A blow for a blow. Roland and Oliver were two of the paladins of
Charlemagne whose exploits were so alike that each was constantly receiving
credit for what the other did. Finally they met and fought for five days on
an island in the Rhine, but even at the end of that period it was merely a
drawn battle.

[54] "In the name of the church."

[55] "From the chair," officially.

[56] Nicholas Patrick Stephen Wiseman (1802-1865), whose elevation to the
archbishopric of Westminster and the cardinalate (1850) led to the act
prohibiting Roman Catholics from assuming episcopal titles in England, a
law that was never enforced.

[57] He was born in 1812 and was converted to Catholicism in 1839. He
founded the _Tablet_ in London in 1840, removing its office to Dublin in
1849. He became M. P. in 1852, and at the time of his death (1855) he was
preparing a memorial to the Pope asking him to annul the proclamation of an
Irish bishop prohibiting his priests from taking part in politics.

[58] John Guillim (1565-1621) was the first to systematize and illustrate
the whole science of heraldry. He published _A display of Heraldrie:
manifesting a more easie accesse to the knowledge thereof_ in 1610.

[59] "Faith."

[60] "Faithful."

[61] "For the faith vindicated."

[62] The words are of the same root, and hence our word _fiddle_. Some
suppose this root means a _rope_, which, as that to which you trust,
becomes, in one divergence, confidence itself--just as a _rock_, and other
words, come to mean reliance--and in another, a little string.--A. De M.

[63] The Greek lexicographer, a Christian, living after 1000 A. D. His
lexicon was first printed at Milan in 1499.

[64] _Skindapsos._

[65] This was John William Burgon (1813-1888), Gresham professor of
theology (1867) and dean of Chichester. He was an ultra-conservative,
opposing the revised version of the New Testament, and saying of the
admission of women to the university examinations that it was "a thing
inexpedient and immodest."

[66] _Ekklesia_, or _ecclesia_.

[67] _Ennomos ekklesia._

[68] "Without doubt I shall perish forever."

[69] "Every man is an animal." "Sortes is a man." "Sortes is an animal."

[70] "For a special purpose."

[71] Heraclitus of Ephesus, the weeping philosopher, 6th century B. C.

[72] Democritus, the laughing philosopher, founder of the atomistic theory,
5th century B. C.

[73] "Ends to which."

[74] "Ends from which."

[75] "In just as many syllables," "With just as many letters," "In just as
many words."

[76] "I shall make a way," "I shall find a way."

[77] The notion that the Evil Spirit is a functionary liable to be
dismissed for not attending to his duty, is, so far as my reading goes,
utterly unknown in theology. My first wrinkle on the subject was the remark
of the Somersetshire farmer upon Palmer the poisoner-- "Well! if the Devil
don't take he, he didn't ought to be allowed to be devil no longer."--A. De
M.

William Palmer (1824-1856) was a member of the Royal College of Surgeons
and practised medicine at London. He was hanged in 1856 for having poisoned
a friend and was also suspected of having poisoned his wife and brother for
their insurance money, besides being guilty of numerous other murders. His
trial was very much in the public attention at the time.

[78] Advantages and dangers.

[79] The old priory of St. Mary of Bethlehem in London, was used as an
asylum for the insane. The name was corrupted to Bedlam.

[80] Referring to the common English pronunciation of St. John, almost
Sinjin. John St. John Long (1798-1834), an Irishman by birth, practised
medicine in London. He claimed to have found a specific for rheumatism and
tuberculosis, but upon the death of one of his patients in 1830 he was
tried for manslaughter. He died of tuberculosis four years later, refusing
to take his own treatment.

[81] William of Occam (d. 1349), so called from his birthplace, Ockham, in
Surrey. He was a Franciscan, and lectured on philosophy in the Sorbonne.

[82] He signs himself "James Hopkins, schoolmaster," and this seems to have
been his only published effort.

[83] Joseph Ady (1770-1852) was a famous swindler. One of his best-known
schemes was to send out letters informing the recipients that they would
learn something to their advantage on payment of a certain sum. He spent
some time in prison.

[84] Sir Peter Laurie (c. 1779-1861) was worth referring to, for he was
prominent as a magistrate and was honored because of his interest in all
social reforms. He made a fortune as a contractor, became sheriff of London
in 1823, and was knighted in the following year. He became Lord Mayor of
London in 1832.

[85] See Vol. I, page 321, note 2 {691}. The _Astronomy in a nutshell_
appeared in 1860. _The Herald of Astrology_ was first published in London
in 1831, "by Zadkiel the Seer." It was continued as _The Astrological
Almanac_ (London, 1834), as _Zadkiel's Almanac and Herald of Astrology_
(_ibid._, 1835, edited by R. J. Morrison, and subsequently by A. J.
Pearce), and as _Raphael's Prophetic Almanac_ (1840-1855).

[86] See Vol. I, page 172, note 3 {382}.

[87] See Vol. I, page 87, note 4 {133}.

[88] Franz Xaver, Freiherr von Zach (1754-1832) was director of the
observatory at Seeberge near Gotha. He wrote the _Tabulae speciales
aberrationis et mutationis_ (1806-7), _Novae et correctae tabulae solis_
(1792), and _L'attraction des montagnes et ses effets sur le fil à plomb_
(1814).

[89] Jean Louis Pons (1761-1831) was connected with the observatory at
Marseilles for thirty years (1789-1819). He later became director of the
observatory at Marlia, near Lucca, and subsequently filled the same office
at Florence. He was an indefatigable searcher for comets, discovering 37
between 1801 and 1827, among them being the one that bears Encke's name.

[90] This hypothesis has now become an established fact.

[91] John Chetwode Eustace (c. 1762-1815) was born in Ireland. Although a
Roman Catholic priest he lived for a time at Cambridge where he did some
tutoring. His _Classical Tour_ appeared in 1813 and went through several
editions.

[92] "Crimes should be exposed when they are punished, but disgraceful acts
should be hidden."

[93] Henri Hureau de Sénarmont (1808-1862) was professor of mineralogy at
the _Ecole des mines_ and examiner at the _Ecole polytechnique_ at Paris.

[94] Augustin Jean Fresnel (1788-1827), "Ingenieur des ponts et chaussées,"
gave the first experimental proofs of the wave theory of light. He studied
the questions of interference and polarization, and determined the
approximate velocity of light.

[95] "As is my custom."

[96] Francis Heywood (1796-1858) made the first English translation of
Kant's _Critick of Pure Reason_ (1838, reprinted in 1848). The _Analysis_
came out, as here stated, in 1844.

[97] Louise Renée de Keroualle, Duchess of Portsmouth and Aubigny
(1649-1734), was a favorite of Charles II. She used her influence to keep
him under the control of Louis XIV.

[98] William Chiffinch (c. 1602-1688) was page of the king's bed-chamber
and keeper of the private closet to Charles II. He was one of the king's
intimates and was an unscrupulous henchman.

[99] "Well devised."

[100] "John Bellingham Inglis. His _Philobiblion_ "translated from the
first edition (of Ricardus d'Aungervile, Bishop of Durham), 1473," appeared
at London in 1832. It was republished in America (Albany, N. Y.) in 1864.

[101] "What are you laughing at?"

[102] See Vol. I, page 314, note 4 {681}.

[103] See Vol. I, page 112, note 7 {211}.

[104] Referring to Hamilton's edition of the _Collected Works of Dugald
Stewart_, 10 volumes, Edinburgh, 1854-58. It is not commonly remembered
that Stewart (1753-1828) taught mathematics at the University of Edinburgh
before he took up philosophy.

[105] This was Hamilton's edition of the _Works of Thomas Reid_ (2 vols.,
Edinburgh, 1846-1863). Reid (1710-1796) included mathematics in his work in
philosophy at Aberdeen. In 1764 he succeeded Adam Smith at Glasgow.

[106] Edward Irving (1792-1834), the famous preacher. At first he assisted
Dr. Chalmers at Glasgow, but in 1822 he went to London where he met with
great success. A few years later he became mentally unbalanced and was
finally expelled from his church (1832) for heresy. He was a great friend
of Carlyle.

[107] He also wrote a number of other paradoxes, including _An Essay
towards a Science of Consciousness_ (1838), _Instinctive Natural Religion_
(1858), _Popular Treatise on the structure, diseases, and treatment of the
human teeth_ (1837), and _On Headache_ (1859).

[108] James Smith (1801-1857), known as Shepherd Smith, was a socialist and
a mystic, with a philosophy that was wittily described as "Oriental
pantheism translated into Scotch." He was editor of several journals.

[109] Joanna Southcott (1750-1814) was known for her rhyming prophecies in
which she announced herself as the woman spoken of in Revelations xii. She
had at one time as many as 100,000 disciples, and she established a sect
that long survived her.

[110] Thales, c. 640-548 B. C.

[111] Pythagoras, 580-501 B. C.

[112] Anaxagoras, 499-428 B. C., the last of the Ionian school, teacher of
Euripides and Pericles. Plutarch speaks of him as having squared the
circle.

[113] Oinopides of Chios, contemporary of Anaxagoras. Proclus tells us that
Oinopides was the first to show how to let fall a perpendicular to a line
from an external point.

[114] Bryson and Antiphon, contemporaries of Socrates, invented the
so-called method of exhaustions, one of the forerunners of the calculus.

[115] He wrote, c. 440 B. C., the first elementary textbook on mathematics
in the Greek language. The "lunes of Hippocrates" are well known in
geometry.

[116] Jabir ben Aflah. He lived c. 1085, at Seville, and wrote on astronomy
and spherical trigonometry. The _Gebri filii Affla Hispalensis de
astronomia libri_ IX was published at Nuremberg in 1533.

[117] Hieronymus Cardanus, or Girolamo Cardano (1501-1576), the great
algebraist. His _Artis magnae sive de regulis Algebrae_ was published at
Nuremberg in 1545.

[118] Nicolo Tartaglia (c. 1500-1557), the great rival of Cardan.

[119] See note 5 {98}, Vol. I, page 69.

[120] See note 10 {124}, Vol. I., page 83.

[121] See note 9 {123}, Vol. I, page 83.

[122] Pierre Hérigone lived in Paris the first half of the 17th century.
His _Cours mathématique_ (6 vols., 1634-1644) had some standing but was not
at all original.

[123] Franciscus van Schooten (died in 1661) was professor of mathematics
at Leyden. He edited Descartes's _La Géométrie_.

[124] Florimond de Beaune (1601-1652) was the first Frenchman to write a
commentary on Descartes's _La Géométrie_. He did some noteworthy work in
the theory of curves.

[125] See note 3 {23}, Vol. I, page 41.

[126] Olivier de Serres (b. in 1539) was a writer on agriculture. Montucla
speaks of him in his _Quadrature du cercle_ (page 227) as having asserted
that the circle is twice the inscribed equilateral triangle, although, as
De Morgan points out, this did not fairly interpret his position.

[127] Angherà wrote not only the three works here mentioned, but also the
_Problemi del più alto interesse scientifico, geometricamente risoluti e
dimostrati_, Naples, 1861. His quadrature was defended by Giovanni Motti in
a work entitled _Matematica Vera. Falsità del sistema ciclometrico
d'Archimede, quadratura del cerchio d'Angherà, ricerca algebraica dei lati
di qualunque poligono regolare inscritto in un circolo_, Voghera, 1877. The
_Problemi_ of 1861 contains Angherà's portrait, and states that he lived at
Malta from 1849 to 1861. It further states that the Malta publications are
in part reproduced in this work.

[128] This was his friend Paolo Pullicino whose _Elogio_ was pronounced by
L. Farrugia at Malta in 1890. He wrote a work _La Santa Effegie della Blata
Vergine Maria_, published at Valetta in 1868.

[129] St. Vitus, St. Modestus, and St. Crescentia were all martyred the
same day, being torn limb from limb after lions and molten lead had proved
of no avail. At least so the story runs.

[130] The reference is to Cardinal Wiseman. See Vol. II, page 26, note 56.

[131] "Worthy of esteem."

[132] Pedro de Ribadeneira (Ribadeneyra, Rivadeneira), was born at Toledo
in 1526 and died in 1611. He held high position in the Jesuit order. The
work referred to is the _Flos Sanctorum o libro de las vidas de los
santos_, of which there was an edition at Barcelona in 1643. His life of
Loyola (1572) and _Historia ecclesiástica del Cisma del reino de
Inglaterra_ were well known.

[133] Cæsar Baronius (1538-1607) was made a cardinal in 1595 and became
librarian at the Vatican in 1597. The work referred to appeared at Rome in
1589.

[134] Mrs. Jameson's (1794-1860) works were very popular half a century
ago, and still have some circulation among art lovers. The first edition of
the work mentioned appeared in 1848.

[135] The barnyard cock.

[136] Shanks did nothing but computing. The title should, of course, read
"to 607 Places of _Decimals_." He later carried the computation to 707
decimal places. (_Proc. Roy. Society_, XXI, p. 319.) He also prepared a
table of prime numbers up to 60,000. (_Proc. Roy. Society_, XXII, p. 200.)

[137] See Vol. I, page 42, note 4 {24}.

[138] See Vol. I, page 64, note 1 {78}.

[139] See Vol. I, page 328, note 1 {704}.

[140] George Suffield published _Synthetic Division in Arithmetic_, to
which reference is made, in 1863.

[141] John Robert Lunn wrote chiefly on Church matters, although he
published a work on motion in 1859.

[142] Jean Baptiste Joseph, Baron Fourier (1768-1830), sometime professor
in the Military School at Paris, and later at the _Ecole polytechnique_. He
is best known by his _Théorie analytique de la chaleur_ (Paris, 1822), in
which the Fourier series is used. The work here referred to is the _Analyse
des équations déterminées_ (Paris, 1831).

[143] William George Horner (1786-1837) acquired a name for himself in
mathematics in a curious manner. He was not a university man nor was he a
mathematician of any standing. He taught school near Bristol and at Bath,
and seems to have stumbled upon his ingenious method for finding the
approximate roots of numerical higher equations, including as a special
case the extracting of the various roots of numbers. Davies Gilbert
presented the method to the Royal Society in 1819, and it was reprinted in
the _Ladies' Diary_ for 1838, and in the _Mathematician_ in 1843. The
method was original as far as Horner was concerned, but it is practically
identical with the one used by the Chinese algebraist Ch'in Chiu-shang, in
his _Su-shu Chiu-chang_ of 1247. But even Ch'in Chiu-shang can hardly be
called the discoverer of the method since it is merely the extension of a
process for root extracting that appeared in the _Chiu-chang Suan-shu_ of
the second century B. C.

[144] He afterwards edited Loftus's _Inland Revenue Officers' Manual_
(London, 1865). The two equations mentioned were x^3 - 2x = 5 and y^3 -
90y^2 + 2500y - 16,000 = 0, in which y = 30 - 10x. Hence each place of y is
the complement of the following place of x with respect to 9.

[145] Probably the John Power Hicks who wrote a memoir on T. H. Key,
London, 1893.

[146] Possibly the one who wrote on the quadrature of the circle in 1881.

[147] As it is. But what a pity that we have not 12 fingers, with
duodecimal fractions instead of decimals! We should then have 0.6 for ½,
0.4 for 1/3, 0.8 for 2/3, 0.3 for ¼, 0.9 for ¾, and 0.16 for 1/8, instead
of 0.5, 0.333+, 0.666+, 0.25, 0.75, and 0.125 as we now have with our
decimal system. In other words, the most frequently used fractions in
business would be much more easily represented on the duodecimal scale than
on the decimal scale that we now use.

[148] He wrote Hints for an _Essay on Anemology and Ombrology_ (London,
1839-40) and _The Music of the Eye_ (London, 1831).

[149] Brigham Young (1801-1877) was born at Whitingham, Vermont, and
entered the Mormon church in 1832. In 1840 he was sent as a missionary to
England. After the death of Joseph Smith he became president of the Mormons
(1847), leading the church to Salt Lake City (1848).

[150] Joseph Smith (1805-1844) was also born in Vermont, and was four years
the junior of Brigham Young. The _Book of Mormon_ appeared in 1827, and the
church was founded in 1830. He was murdered in 1844.

[151] Orson Pratt (1811-1881) was one of the twelve apostles of the Mormon
Church (1835), and made several missionary journeys to England. He was
professor of mathematics in the University of Deseret (the Mormon name for
Utah). Besides the paper mentioned Pratt wrote the _Divine Authenticity of
the Book of Mormon_ (1849), _Cubic and Biquadratic Equations_ (1866), and a
_Key to the Universe_ (1866).

[152] "It does not follow."

[153] Dryden (1631-1700) published his _Religio Laici_ in 1682. The use of
the word "proportion" in the sense of ratio was common before his time, but
he uses it in the sense of having four terms; that is, that price is to
price as offence is to offence.

[154] Olinthus Gilbert Gregory (1774-1841) succeeded Hutton as professor of
mathematics at Woolwich. He was, with De Morgan, much interested in
founding the University of London. He wrote on astronomy (1793), mechanics
(1806), practical mathematics (1825), and Christian evidences (1811).

[155] See Vol. I, page 220, note 6 {482}. The _Pensées_ appeared
posthumously in 1670.

[156] "The right thing to do is not to wager at all." "Yes, but you ought
to wager; you have started out; and not to wager at all that God exists is
to wager that he does not exist."

[157] He lived about 300 A.D., in Africa, and wrote _Libri septem adversus
Gentes_. This was printed at Rome in 1542-3.

[158] Pierre Bayle (1647-1706) was professor of philosophy at the
Prostestant University at Sedan from 1675 until its dissolution in 1681. He
then became professor at Rotterdam (1681-1693). In 1684 he began the
publication of his journal of literary criticism _Nouvelles de la
République des Lettres_. He is best known for his erudite _Dictionnaire
historique et critique_ (1697).

[159] "But Christ himself does not prove what he promises. It is true. For,
as I have said, there cannot be any absolute proof of future events.
Therefore since it is a condition of future events that they cannot be
grasped or comprehended by any efforts of anticipation, is it not more
reasonable, out of two alternatives that are uncertain and that are hanging
in doubtful expectation, to give credence to the one that gives some hope
rather than to the one that offers none at all? For in the former case
there is no danger if, as is said to threaten, it becomes empty and void;
while in the latter case the danger is greatest, that is, the loss of
salvation, if when the time comes it is found that it was not a falsehood."

[160] Gregg wrote several other paradoxes, including the following: _The
Authentic Report of the extraordinary case of Tresham Dames Gregg ... his
committal to Bridewell for refusing to give his recognizance_ (Dublin,
1841), _An Appeal to Public Opinion upon a Case of Injury and Wrong ... in
the case of a question of prerogative that arose between_ [R. Whately] _...
Archbishop of Dublin and the author_ (London, 1861), _The Cosmology of Sir
Isaac Newton proved to be in accordance with the Bible_ (London, 1871),
_The Steam Locomotive as revealed in the Bible_ (London 1863) and _On the
Sacred Law of 1866, conferring perpetual life with immunity from decay and
disease. A cento of decisive scriptural oracles strangely discovered_
(London and Dublin, 1875). These titles will help the reader to understand
the man whom De Morgan so pleasantly satirizes.

[161] See Vol. I, page 261, note 2 {592}.

[162] "They have found it."

[163] The late Greeks used the letters of their alphabet as numerals,
adding three early alphabetic characters. The letter [chi] represented 600,
[xi] represented 60, and [digamma] stood for 6. This gives 666, the number
of the Beast given in the Revelation.

[164] "Allowing for necessary exceptions."

[165] Mr. Gregg is not alone in his efforts to use the calculus in original
lines, as any one who has read Herbart's application of the subject to
psychology will recall.

[166] See Vol. I, page 105, note 4 {188}; page 109, note 1 {197}.

[167] The full title shows the plan,--_The Decimal System as a whole, in
its relation to time, measure, weight, capacity, and money, in unison with
each other._ But why is this so much worse than the French plan of which we
have only the metric system and the decimal division of the angle left?

[168] One of the brothers of Sir Isaac Pitman (1813-1897), the inventor of
modern stenography. Of these brothers, Benjamin taught the art in America,
Jacob in Australia, and Joseph, Henry, and Frederick in England.

[169] For example, _The Phonographic Lecturer_ (London, 1871 etc.), _The
Phonographic Student_ (1867, etc.), and _The Shorthand Magazine_ (1866,
etc.).

[170] See Vol. II, page 68, note 148.

[171] It involves the theory of non-Euclidean geometry, Euclid's postulate
of parallels being used in proving this theorem.

[172] Referring to the fact that none of the works of Thales is extant.

[173] The author was one B. Bulstrode. Parts 4 and 5 were printed at
Calcutta.

[174] See Vol. II, page 5, note 18.

[175] See Vol. I, page 85, note 2 {129}.

[176] Alexander Vasilievich Suvaroff (1729-1800), a Russian general who
fought against the Turks, in the Polish wars, and in the early Napoleonic
campaigns. When he took Ismail in 1790 he sent this couplet to Empress
Catherine.

[177] "Newton hath determined rightly," "Newton hath not determined
rightly."

[178] See Vol. I, page 288, note 3 {621}.

[179] See Vol. I, page 326, note 1 {700}.

[180] "With great honor."

[181] Apparently unknown to biographers. He seems to have written nothing
else.

[182] Captain Marryat (1792-1848) published _Snarley-yow, or the Dog Fiend_
in 1837.

[183] He is not known to biographers, and published nothing else under this
name.

[184] See Vol. I, page 80, note 5 {119}.

[185] He published a _Family and Commercial Illustrated Almanack and Year
Book ... for 1861_ (Bath, 1860).

[186] Louis Dutens (1730-1812) was born at Tours, but went to England as a
young man. He made the first collection of the works of Leibnitz, against
the advice of Voltaire, who wrote to him: "Les écrits de Leibnitz sont
épars comme les feuilles de la Sybille, et aussi obscurs que les écrits de
cette vieille." The work appeared at Geneva, in six volumes, in 1769.

[187] Mungo Park (1771-1806), the first European to explore the Niger
(1795-6). His _Travels in the Interior of Africa_ appeared in 1799. He died
in Africa.

[188] Gerhard Mercator (1512-1594) the well-known map maker of Louvain. The
"Mercator's Projection" was probably made as early as 1550, but the
principle of its construction was first set forth by Edward Wright (London,
1599).

[189] Quirico Barilli Filopanti wrote a number of works and monographs. He
succeeded in getting his _Cesare al Rubicone_ and _Degli_ _usi idraulici
della Tela_ in the _Memoria letta ... all' Accademia delle Scienze in
Bologna_ (1847, 1866). He also wrote _Dio esiste_ (1881), _Dio Liberale_
(1880), and _Sunto della memoria sulle geuranie ossia di alcune singolari
relazioni cosmiche della terra e del cielo_ (1862).

[190] The periods of disembodiment may be interesting. They will be seen
from the following dates: Descartes (1596-1650), William III (1650-1702);
Roger Bacon (1214 to c. 1294), Boccaccio (1313-1375). Charles IX was born
in 1550 and died in 1574.

[191] His real name was Frederick Parker, and he wrote several works on the
Greek language and on religion. Among these were a translation of the New
Testament from the Vatican MS. (1864), _The Revealed History of Man_
(1854), _An Enquiry respecting the Punctuation of Ancient Greek_ (1841),
and _Rules for Ascertaining the sense conveyed in Ancient Greek
Manuscripts_ (1848, the seventh edition appearing in 1862).

[192] See Vol. I, page 352, second note 1 {736}.

The literature on the subject of the Great Pyramid, considered from the
standpoint of metrology, is extensive.

[193] See Vol. I, page 80, note 5 {119}.

[194] Sir Philip Francis (1740-1818) was a Whig politician. The evidence
that he was the author of the _Letters of Junius_ (1769-1772) is purely
circumstantial. He was clerk in the war office at the time of their
publication. In 1774 he was made a member of the Supreme Council of Bengal,
and was a vigorous opponent of Warren Hastings, the two fighting a duel in
1780. He entered parliament in 1784 and was among the leaders in the
agitation for parliamentary reform.

[195] Mrs. Cottle published a number of letters that attracted attention at
the time. Among these were letters to the emperor of France and king of
Sardinia (1859) relating to the prophecies of the war between France and
Austria; to G. C. Lavis and Her Majesty's Ministers (1859) relating to her
claims as a prophetess; and to the "Crowned Heads" at St. James, the King
of Prussia, and others (1860), relating to certain passages of Scripture.
She also wrote _The Lamb's Book of Life for the New Jerusalem Church and
Kingdom, interpreted for all nations_ (1861).

[196] See Vol. I, page 315, note 2 {685}, and Vol. II, page 58, note 109.

[197] A Congregational minister, who published a number of sermons, chiefly
obituaries, between 1804 and 1851. His _Frailty of Human Life_, two sermons
delivered on the occasion of the death of Princess Charlotte, went through
at least three editions.

[198] He was secretary of the Congregational Board and editor of the
_Congregational Year Book_ (from 1846) and the _Congregational Manual_.

[199] Frederick Denison Maurice (1805-1872) began his preaching as a
Unitarian but entered the Established Church in 1831, being ordained in
1834. He was professor of English and History at King's College, London,
from 1840 to 1853. He was one of the founders of Queen's College for women,
and was the first principal of the Working Men's College, London. The
subject referred to by De Morgan is his expression of opinion in his
_Theological Essays_ (1853) that future punishment is not eternal. As a
result of this expression he lost his professorship at King's College. In
1866 he was made Knightbridge Professor of Casuistry, Moral Theology, and
Moral Philosophy at Cambridge.

[200] See Vol. I, page 46, note 1 {42}. Besides the books mentioned in
this list he wrote _The Ratio between Diameter and Circumference
demonstrated by angles, and Euclid's Theorem, Proposition 32, Book I,
proved to be fallacious_ (Liverpool, 1870). This is the theorem which
asserts that the exterior angle of a triangle is equal to the sum of the
two opposite interior angles, and that the sum of the interior angles
equals two right angles. He also published his _Curiosities of Mathematics_
in 1870, a work containing an extensive correspondence with every one who
would pay any attention to him. De Morgan was then too feeble to show any
interest in the final effort of the subject of some of his keenest satire.

[201] See Vol. I, page 332, note 4 {709}.

[202] See Vol. I, page 101, note 4 {174}.

[203] "The circle-squaring disease"; literally, "the circle-measuring
disease."

[204] See Vol. II, page 63, note 136.

[205] William Rutherford (c. 1798-1871), teacher of mathematics at
Woolwich, secretary of the Royal Astronomical Society, editor of _The
Mathematician_, and author of various textbooks. _The Extension of [pi] to
440 places_, appeared in the _Proceedings_ of the Royal Society in 1853 (p.
274).

[206] Charles Knight (1791-1873) was associated with De Morgan for many
years. After 1828 he superintended the publications of the Society for the
Diffusion of Useful Knowledge, to which De Morgan contributed, and he
edited the _Penny Cyclopedia_ (1833-1844) for which De Morgan wrote the
articles on mathematics.

[207] Sir William Hamilton. See Vol. I, page 112, note 7 {211}.

[208] Adam Smith (1723-1790) was not only known for his _Wealth of Nations_
(1776), but for his _Theory of Moral Sentiments_ (1759), published while he
was professor of moral philosophy at Glasgow (1752-1764). He was Lord
Rector of the university in 1787.

[209] See Vol. I, page 332, note 4 {709}.

[210] "Whip."

[211] "Terrible lash."

[212] "An accomplished fact [an accomplished fault]."

[213] See _Extracts from the Diary and Letters of Mrs. Mary Cobb_, London,
1805.

[214] "Gentle in manner."

[215] "Brave in action." The motto of Earl Newborough was "Suaviter in
modo, fortiter in re."

[216] "Reduction to an absurdity," a method of proof occasionally used in
geometry and in logic.

[217] "He has lost the right of being moved (struck) by evidence."

[218] For _radix quadratus_. The usual root sign is supposed to be derived
from _r_ (for radix), and at one time _q_ was commonly used for square, as
in Viète's style of writing Aq for A^2.

[219] The Garde Douloureuse was a castle in the marches of Wales and
received its name because of its exposure to attacks by the Welsh.

[220] "Out of the fight."

[221] "Hidden."

[222] John Cam Hobhouse (1786-1869), Baron Broughton, was committed to
Newgate for two months in 1819 for his anonymous pamphlet, _A Trifling
Mistake_. This was a great advertisement for him, and upon his release he
was at once elected to parliament for Westminster. He was a strong
supporter of all reform measures, and was Secretary for War in 1832. He was
created Baron Broughton de Gyfford in 1851.

[223] Thomas Erskine (1750-1823), the famous orator. He became Lord
Chancellor in 1806, but sat in the House of Commons most of his life.

[224] The above is explained in the MS. by a paragraph referring to some
anagrams, in one of which, by help of the orthography suggested, a
designation for this cyclometer was obtained from the letters of his
name.--S. E. De M.

[225] "A personal verb agrees with its subject."

[226] See Vol. I, page 326, note 1 {700}.

[227] See Vol. I, page 326, note 2 {701}.

[228] Apparently unknown to biographers.

[229] The _Bibliotheca Mathematica_ of Ludwig Adolph Sohncke (1807-1853),
professor of mathematics at Königsberg and Halle, covered the period from
1830 to 1854, being completed by W. Engelmann. It appeared in 1854.

[230] See Vol. I, page 392, note 2 {805}.

[231] See Vol. I, page 43, note 7 {32}.

[232] See Vol. II, page 91, note 187.

[233] Mason made a notable balloon trip from London to Weilburg, in the
Duchy of Nassau, in November, 1836, covering 500 miles in 18 hours. He
published an account of this trip in 1837, and a work entitled
_Aeronautica_ in 1838.

[234] William Harrison Ainsworth (1805-1885) the novelist.

[235] On this question see Vol. I, page 326, note 2 {701}.

[236] Major General Alfred Wilks Drayson, author of various works on
geology, astronomy, military surveying, and adventure.

[237] Hailes also wrote several other paradoxes on astronomy and circle
squaring during the period 1843-1872.

[238] See Vol. I, page 43, note 8 {33}.

[239] See Vol. I, page 43, note 7 {32}.

[240] "Very small errors are not to be condemned."

[241] He seems to have written nothing else.

[242] Besides the paradoxes here mentioned by De Morgan he wrote several
other works, including the following: _Abriss der Babylonisch-Assyrischen
Geschichte_ (Mannheim, 1854), _A Popular Inquiry into the Moon's rotation
on her axis_ (London, 1856), _Practical Tables for the reduction of the
Mahometan dates to the Christian kalendar_ (London, 1856), _Grundzüge einer
neuen Weltlehre_ (Munich, 1860), and _On the historical Antiquity of the
People of Egypt_ (London, 1863).

[243] Dircks (1806-1873) was a civil engineer of prominence, and a member
of the British Association and the Royal Society of Edinburgh. He wrote
(1863) on "Pepper's Ghost," an ingenious optical illusion invented by him.
There was a second edition of the _Perpetuum Mobile_ in 1870.

[244] George Stephenson (1781-1848), the inventor of the first successful
steam locomotive. His first engine was tried in 1814.

[245] Robert Stephenson (1803-1859), the only son of George. Most of the
early improvements in locomotive manufacture were due to him. He was also
well known for his construction of great bridges.

[246] "In its proper place."

[247] "A fool always finds a bigger fool to admire him."

[248] See Vol. I, page 43, note 7 {32}.

[249] See Vol. I, page 43, note 8 {33}.

[250] See Vol. I, page 85, note 2 {129}.

[251] See Vol. I, page 390, note 1 {390}.

[252] From 1823 to 1852 it was edited by I. C. Robertson; from 1852 to 1857
by R. A. Brooman; and from 1857 to 1863 by Brooman and E. J. Reed.

[253] Sir James Ivory (1765-1842) was, as a young man, manager of a flax
mill in Scotland. In 1804 he was made professor of mathematics at the Royal
Military College, then at Marlow and later at Sandhurst. He was deeply
interested in mathematical physics, and there is a theorem on the
attraction of ellipsoids that bears his name. He was awarded three medals
of the Royal Society, and was knighted together with Herschel and Brewster,
in 1831.

[254] See Vol. I, page 56, note 1 {64}.

[255] See Vol. I, page 153, note 5 {338}.

[256] See Vol. I, page 309, note 2 {670}.

[257] See Vol. I, page 87, note 4 {133}.

[258] George Canning (1770-1857), the Tory statesman and friend of Scott,
was much interested in founding the _Quarterly Review_ (1808) and was a
contributor to its pages.

[259] See Vol. I, page 186, note 14 {418}.

[260] See Vol. II, page 141, note 252.

[261] De Morgan had a number of excellent articles in this publication.

[262] See Vol. I, page 279, note 1 {611}.

[263] James Orchard Halliwell (1820-1889), afterwards Halliwell-Phillips,
came into prominence as a writer at an early age. When he was seventeen he
wrote a series of lives of mathematicians for the _Parthenon_. His _Rara
Mathematica_ appeared when he was but nineteen. He was a great bibliophile
and an enthusiastic student of Shakespeare.

[264] This was written at the age of twenty-two.

[265] The subject of this criticism is of long past date, and as it has
only been introduced by the author as an instance of faulty editorship, I
have omitted the name of the writer of the libel, and a few lines of
further detail.--S. E. De M.

[266] "Condemned souls."

[267] The editor of the _Mechanics' Magazine_ died soon after the above was
written.--S. E. De M.

[268] Thomas Stephens Davies (1795-1851) was mathematical master at
Woolwich and F. R. S. He contributed a series of "Geometrical Notes" to the
_Mechanics' Magazine_ and edited the _Mathematician_. He also published a
number of text-books.

[269] See Vol. II, page 66, note 143.

[270] The _Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography_ (1849), edited by Sir
William Smith (1813-1893), whose other dictionaries on classical and
biblical matters are well known.

[271] "O J. S.! This is the worst! the greatest possible injury!"

[272] See Vol. I, page 44, note 9 {34} and page 110, note 5 {201}.

[273]

 "If there's a man whom the judge's pitiless sentence awaiteth,
  His head condemned to penalties and tribulations,
  Let neither penitentiaries tire him with laborer's burdens
  Nor let his stiffened hands be harrassed by work in the mines.
  He must square the circle! For what else do I care?--all
  Known punishments this one task hath surely included."

[274] Houlston was in the customs service. He also published _Inklings of
Areal Autometry_, London, 1874.

[275] This is Frederick C. Bakewell. He had already published _Natural
Evidence of a Future Life_ (London, 1835), _Philosophical Conversations_
(London, 1833, with other editions), and _Electric Science_ (London, 1853,
with other editions).

[276] Henry F. A. Pratt had already published _A Dissertation on the power
of the intercepted pressure of the Atmosphere_ (London, 1844) and _The
Genealogy of Creation_ (1861). Later he published a work _On Orbital
Motion_ (1863), and _Astronomical Investigations_ (1865).

[277] See Vol. I, page 260, note 1 {591}.

[278] Thomas Rawson Birks (1810-1883), a theologian and controversialist,
fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, and (1872) professor of moral
philosophy in that university. He wrote _Modern Rationalism_ (1853), _The
Bible and Modern Thought_ (1861), _The First Principles of Moral Science_
(1873), and _Modern Physical Fatalism and the Doctrine of Evolution_
(1876), the last being an attack on Herbert Spencer's _First Principles_.

[279] Pseudonym for William Thorn. In the following year (1863) he
published a second work, _The Thorn-Tree: being a History of Thorn
Worship_, a reply to Bishop Colenso's work entitled _The Pentateuch and the
Book of Joshua critically examined_.

[280] Besides _The Pestilence_ (1866) he published _The True Church_
(1851), _The Church and her destinies_ (1855), _Religious reformation
imperatively demanded_ (1864), and _The Bible plan unfolded_ (second
edition, 1872).

[281] See Vol. II, page 97, note 195.

[282] Sir George Cornewall Lewis (1806-1863) also wrote an _Essay on the
Origin and Formation of the Romance Languages_ (1835), an _Essay on the
Government of Dependencies_ (1841), and an _Essay on Foreign Jurisdiction
and the Extradition of Criminals_ (1859). He was Chancellor of the
Exchequer in 1855 and Home Secretary in 1859.

[283] Henry Malden (1800-1876), a classical scholar, fellow of Trinity
College, Cambridge, and professor of Greek at University College
(1831-1876), then (1831) the University of London. He wrote a _History of
Rome to 390 B. C._ (1830), and _On the Origin of Universities and
Academical Degrees_ (1835).

[284] Henry Longueville Mansel (1820-1871), theologian and metaphysician,
reader in theology at Magdalen College, Oxford (1855), and professor of
ecclesiastical history and Dean of St. Paul's (1866). He wrote on
metaphysics, and his Bampton Lectures (1858) were reprinted several times.

[285] "Hejus gave freely, gave freely. God is propitious, God is favorable
to him who gives freely. God is honored with a banquet of eggs at the cross
roads, the god of the world. God, with benignant spirit, desired in
sacrifice a goat, a bull to be carried within the precincts of the holy
place. God, twice propitiated, blesses the pit of the sacred libation."

[286] Eudoxus of Cnidus (408-355 B. C.) had much to do with the early
scientific astronomy of the Greeks. The fifth book of Euclid is generally
attributed to him. His astronomical works are known chiefly through the
poetical version of Aratus mentioned in note 13, page 167.

[287] Simplicius, a native of Cilicia, lived in the 6th century of our era.
He was driven from Athens by Justinian and went to Persia (531), but he
returned later and had some fame as a teacher.

[288] See Vol. I, page 160, note 3 {348}.

[289] See Vol. I, page 76, note 3 {112}.

[290] "Through right and wrong."

[291] "It is therefore to arrive at this parallelism, or to preserve it,
that Copernicus feared to be obliged to have recourse to this equal and
opposite movement which destroys the effect which he attributed so freely
to the first, of deranging the parallelism."

[292] A contemporary of Plato and a disciple of Aristotle.

[293] Meton's solstice, the beginning of the Metonic cycles, has been
placed at 432 B. C. Ptolemy states that he made the length of the year 365¼
+ 1/72 days.

[294] Aratus lived about 270 B. C., at the court of Antigonus of Macedonia,
and probably practiced medicine there. He was the author of two
astronomical poems, the [Greek: Phainomena], apparently based on the lost
work of Eudoxus, and the [Greek: Diosêeia] based on Aristotle's
_Meteorologica_ and _De Signis Ventorum_ of Theophrastus.

[295] "The nineteen (-year) cycle of the shining sun."

[296] Claudius Salmasius (1588-1653), or Claude Saumaise, was a
distinguished classicist, and professor at the University of Leyden. The
word [Greek: êleioio] means Elian, thus making the phrase refer to the
brilliant one of Elis.

[297] Sir William Brown (1784-1864). In 1800 the family moved to Baltimore,
and there the father, Alexander Brown, became prominent in the linen trade.
William went to Liverpool where he acquired great wealth as a merchant and
banker. He was made a baronet in 1863.

[298] Robert Lowe (1811-1892), viscount Sherbrooke, was a fellow of
Magdalen College, Oxford (1835). He went to Australia in 1842 and was very
successful at the bar. He returned to England in 1850 and became leader
writer on the _Times_. He was many years in parliament, and in 1880 was
raised to the peerage.

[299] See Vol. I, page 42, note 4 {24}.

[300] Francis Walkingame (fl. about 1751-1785), whose _Tutor's Assistant_
went through many editions from 1751-1854.

[301] Davies Gilbert (1767-1839). His family name was Giddy, but he assumed
his wife's name. He sat in parliament from 1806 to 1832. In 1819 he secured
the establishment of the Cape of Good Hope observatory. He was Treasurer
(1820-1827) and President (1827-1830) of the Royal Society.

[302] See Vol. I, page 55, note 2 {63}.

[303] Sir Jonathan Frederick Pollock (1783-1870) entered parliament in 1831
and was knighted in 1834.

[304] Joseph Hume (1777-1855) entered parliament in 1812 and for thirty
years was leader of the Radical party.

[305] "What! when I say, 'Nicole, bring me my slippers,' is that prose?"

[306] Captain Basil Hall (1788-1844), a naval officer, carried on a series
of pendulum observations in 1820-1822, while on a cruise of the west coast
of North America. The results were published in 1823 in the _Philosophical
Transactions_. He also wrote two popular works on travel that went through
numerous editions.

[307] Anthony Ashley Cooper (1801-1885), Earl of Shaftesbury. His name is
connected with philanthropic work and factory legislation.

[308] See Vol. I, page 207, note 12 {469}.

[309] See Vol. I, page 80, note 5 {119}.

[310] Sir Thomas Maclear (1794-1879), an Irishman by birth, became
Astronomer Royal at the Cape of Good Hope in 1833. He was an indefatigable
observer. He was knighted in 1860.

[311] Thomas Romney Robinson (1792-1882), another Irish astronomer of
prominence. He was a deputy professor at Trinity College, Dublin, but took
charge of the Armagh observatory in 1823 and remained there until his
death.

[312] Sir James South (1785-1867) was in early life a surgeon, but gave up
his practice in 1816 and fitted up a private observatory. He contributed to
the science of astronomy, particularly with respect to the study of double
stars.

[313] Sir John Wrottesley (1798-1867), second Baron Wrottesley. Like Sir
James South, he took up the study of astronomy after a professional
career,--in his case in law. He built a private observatory in 1829 and
made a long series of observations, publishing three star catalogues. He
was president of the Astronomical Society from 1841 to 1843, and of the
Royal Society from 1854 to 1857.

[314] He seems to have written nothing else.

[315] See Vol. II, page 68, note 147.

[316] "The wills are free, and I wish neither the one nor the other."

[317] "The force of inertia conquered."

[318] Reddie also wrote _The Mechanics of the Heavens_, referred to later
in this work. He must not be confused with Judge James Reddie (1773-1852),
of Glasgow, who wrote on international law, although this is done in the
printed edition of the British Museum catalogue, for he is mentioned by De
Morgan somewhat later as alive in 1862.

[319] Henry Dunning Macleod (1821-1902), a lawyer and writer on political
economy, was a Scotchman by birth. He wrote on economical questions, and
lectured on banking at Cambridge (1877) and at King's College, London
(1878). He was a free lance in his field, and was not considered orthodox
by the majority of economists of his time. He was an unsuccessful candidate
for the chairs of political economy at Cambridge (1863), Edinburgh (1871),
and Oxford (1888).

[320] See Vol. I, page 252, note 2 {576}.

[321] Francis Henry Laing (1816-1889) was a graduate of Queen's College,
Cambridge, and a clergyman in the Church of England until 1846, when he
entered the Church of Rome. He taught in various Jesuit colleges until
1862, when his eccentricity was too marked to warrant the Church in
allowing him to continue. He published various controversial writings
during his later years. Of course if he had known the works of Wessel,
Gaus, Buée, Argand, and others, he would not have made such a sorry
exhibition of his ignorance of mathematics.

[322] See Vol. I, page 329, note 1 {705}. The book went into a second
edition in 1864.

[323] Thomas Weddle (1817-1853) was, at the time of publishing this paper,
a teacher in a private school. In 1851 he became professor of mathematics
at Sandhurst. He contributed several papers to the _Cambridge and Dublin
Mathematical Journal_, chiefly on geometry.

[324] See Vol. II, page 109, note 205.

[325] See Vol. II, page 66, note 143.

[326] See Vol. II, page 151, note 268.

[327] George Barrett (1752-1821) worked from 1786 to 1811 on a set of life
insurance and annuity tables. He invented a plan known as the "columnar
method" for the construction of such tables, and as De Morgan states, this
was published by Francis Baily, appearing in the appendix to his work on
annuities, in the edition of 1813. Some of his tables were used in
Babbage's _Comparative View of the various Institutions for the Assurance
of Lives_ (1826).

[328] See Vol. I, page 309, note 2 {670}.

[329] This was his _Practical short and direct Method of Calculating the
Logarithm of any given Number, and the Number corresponding to any given
Logarithm_ (1849).

[330] This is William Neile (1637-1670), grandson of Richard Neile (not
Neal), Archbishop of York. At the age of 19, in 1657, he gave the first
rectification of the semicubical parabola. Although he communicated it to
Brouncker, Wren, and others, it was not published until 1639, when it
appeared in John Wallis's _De Cycloide_.

[331] I myself "was a considerable part."

[332] He also wrote _A Glance at the Universe_ ("2d thousand" in 1862), and
_The Resurrection Body_ (1869).

[333] See Vol. I, page 63, note 1 {74}.

[334] As Swift gave it in his _Poetry. A Rhapsody_, it is as follows:

 "So, naturalists observe, a flea
  Has smaller fleas that on him prey;
  And these have smaller still to bite 'em.
  And so proceed _ad infinitum_."

[335] Perhaps 1,600,000,000 years, if Boltwood's recent computations based
on radium disintegration stand the test. This would mean, according to
MacCurdy's estimate, 60,000,000 years since life first appeared on the
earth.

[336] De Morgan wrote better than he knew, for this work, the _Allgemeine
Encyclopädie der Wissenschaften und Künste_, begun at Leipsic in 1818, is
still (1913) unfinished. Section I, A-G, consists of 99 parts in 56
volumes; Section II, H-N, consists of 43 volumes and is not yet completed;
and Section III, O-Z, consists of 25 volumes thus far, with most of the
work still to be done. Johann Samuel Ersch (1766-1828), the founder, was
head librarian at Halle. Johann Gottfried Gruber (1774-1851), his
associate, was professor of philosophy at the same university.

[337] William Howitt (1792-1879) was a poet, a spiritualist, and a
miscellaneous writer. He and his wife became spiritualists about 1850. He
wrote numerous popular works on travel, nature and history.

[338] See Vol. II, page 55, note 108.

[339] As will be inferred from the text, C. D. was Mrs. De Morgan, and
A. B. was De Morgan.

[340] Jean Meslier (1678-1733), curé of Estrepigny, in Champagne, was a
skeptic, but preached only strict orthodoxy to his people. It was only in
his manuscript, _Mon Testament_, that was published after his death, and
that caused a great sensation in France, that his antagonism to
Christianity became known.

[341] Baron Zach relates that a friend of his, in a writing intended for
publication, said _Un esprit doit se frotter contre un autre_. The censors
struck it out. The Austrian police have a keen eye for consequences.--A. De
M.

"One mind must rub against another." On Baron Zach, see Vol. II, page 45,
note 4.

[342] Referring to the first Lord Eldon (1751-1838), who was Lord
Chancellor from 1799 to 1827, with the exception of one year.

[343] "Sleeping power."

[344] "Causes sleep."

[345] Richard Hooker (c. 1554-1600), a theologian, "the ablest living
advocate of the Church of England as by law established."

[346] See Vol. I, page 76, note 3 {112}.

[347] "Other I,"--other self.

[348] This "utter rejection" has been repeated (1872) by the same
writer.--S. E. De M.

[349] Edward Jenner (1749-1823) was a physician and biologist. His first
experiments in vaccination were made in 1796, and his discovery was
published in 1798.

[350] See Vol. II, page 38, note 80.

[351] "You will go most safely in the middle (way)."

[352] Pierre Joseph Arson was known early in the 19th century for his
controversy with Hoëné Wronski the mathematician, whom he attacked in his
_Document pour l'histoire des grands fourbes qui ont figuré sur la terre_
(1817-1818).

[353] "We enter the course by night and are consumed by fire."

[354] See Vol. I, page 51, note 3 {51}.

[355] See Vol. I, page 336, note 8 {713}.

[356] See Vol. I, page 137, note 8 {286}.

[357] See Vol. I, page 229, note 2 {515}.

[358] Richard Cobden (1804-1865), the cotton manufacturer and statesman who
was prominent in his advocacy of the repeal of the Corn Laws.

[359] James Smith (1775-1839), solicitor to the Board of Ordnance. With his
brother Horatio he wrote numerous satires. His _Horace in London_ (1813)
imitated the Roman poet. His works were collected and published in 1840.

[360] Samuel Butler (1612-1680), the poet and satirist, author of
_Hudibras_ (1663-1678).

[361] "Is it not fine to be sure of one's action when entering in a combat
with another? There, push me a little in order to see. NICOLE. Well! what's
the matter? M. JOURDAIN. Slowly. Ho there! Ho! gently. Deuce take the
rascal! NICOLE. You told me to push. M. JOURDAIN. Yes, but you pushed me
_en tierce_, before you pushed _en quarte_, and you did not give me time to
parry."

[362] John Abernethy (1764-1831), the famous physician and surgeon.

[363] See Vol. I, page 102, note 5 {175}.

[364] "With what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again."

[365] Eusebius of Cæsarea (c. 260-340), leader of the moderate party at the
Council of Nicæa, and author of a _History of the Christian Church_ in ten
books (c. 324 A. D.).

[366] Nathaniel Lardner (1684-1768), a non-conformist minister and one of
the first to advocate the scientific study of early Christian literature.

[367] Henry Alford (1810-1871) Dean of Canterbury (1857-1871) and editor of
the Greek Testament (1849-1861).

[368] The work was _The Number and Names of the Apocalyptic Beasts: with an
explanation and application. Part I._ London, 1848, as mentioned below.
Thom also wrote _The Assurance of Faith, or Calvinism identified with
Universalism_ (London, 1833), and various other religious works.

[369] See Vol. I, page 222, note 14 {490}.

[370] John Hamilton Thom (1808-1894) was converted to Unitarianism and was
long a minister in that church, preaching in the Renshaw Street Chapel from
1831 to 1866. De Morgan refers to the Liverpool Unitarian controversy
conducted by James Martineau and Henry Giles in response to a challenge by
thirteen Anglican Clergy. In 1839 Thom contributed four lectures and a
letter to this controversy. Among his religious works were a _Life of
Blanco White_ (1845) and _Hymns, Chants, and Anthems_ (1854).

[371] The spelling of these names is occasionally changed to meet the
condition that the numerical value of the letters shall be 666, "the number
of the beast" of Revelations. The names include Julius Cæsar; Valerius
Jovius Diocletianus (249-313), emperor from 287 to 305, persecutor of the
Christians; Louis, presumably Louis XIV; Gerbert (940-1003), who reigned as
Pope Sylvester II from 999 to 1003, known to mathematicians for his abacus
and his interest in geometry, and accused by his opponents as being in
league with the devil; Linus, the second Bishop of Rome, the successor of
Peter; Camillo Borghese (1552-1621), who reigned as Pope Paul V from 1605
to 1621, and who excommunicated all Venice in 1606 for its claim to try
ecclesiastics before lay tribunals, thus taking a position which he was
forced to abandon; Luther, Calvin; Laud (see Vol. I, page 145, note 7
{307}); Genseric (c. 406-477), king of the Vandals, who sacked Rome in 455
and persecuted the orthodox Christians in Africa; Boniface III, who was
pope for nine months in 606; Beza (see Vol. I, page 66, note 6 {83});
Mohammed; [Greek: braski], who was Giovanni Angelo Braschi (1717-1799), and
who reigned as Pope Pius VI from 1775 to 1799, dying in captivity because
he declined to resign his temporal power to Napoleon; Bonaparte; and, under
[Greek: Ion Paune], possibly Pope John XIV, who reigned in 983 and 984
during the absence of Boniface VII in Constantinople.

[372] The Greek words and names are also occasionally misspelled so as to
fit them to the number 666. They are [Greek: Lateinos] (Latin), [Greek: hê
latinê basileia] (the Latin kingdom), [Greek: ekklêsia italika] (the
Italian Church), [Greek: euanthas] (blooming), [Greek: teitan] (Titan),
[Greek: arnoume] (renounce), [Greek: lampetis] (the lustrous), [Greek: ho
nikêtês] (conqueror), [Greek: kakos hodêgos] (bad guide), [Greek: alêthês
blaberos] (truthful harmful one), [Greek: palai baskanos] (a slanderer of
old), [Greek: amnos adikos] (unmanageable lamb), [Greek: antemos]
(Antemos), [Greek: gensêrikos] (Genseric), [Greek: euinas] (with stout
fibers), [Greek: Benediktos] (Benedict), [Greek: Bonibazios g. papa x. ê.
e. e. a.] (Boniface III, pope 68, bishop of bishops I), [Greek: oulpios]
(baneful), [Greek: dios eimi hê hêras] (I, a god, am the), [Greek: hê missa
hê papikê] (the papal brief), [Greek: loutherana] (Lutheran), [Greek:
saxoneios] (Saxon), [Greek: Bezza antitheos] (Beza antigod), [Greek: hê
alazoneia biou] (the illusion of life), [Greek: Maometis] (Mahomet);
[Greek: Maometês b.] (Mahomet II), [Greek: theos eimi epi gaiês] (I am lord
over the earth), [Greek: iapetos] (Iapetos, father of Atlas), [Greek:
papeiskos] (Papeiskos), [Greek: dioklasianos] (Diocletian), [Greek: cheina]
(Cheina = Cain? China?), [Greek: braski] (Braschi, as explained in note
10), [Greek: Ion Paune] (Paunian violet, but see note 10), [Greek: koupoks]
(cowpox), [Greek: Bonnepartê] (Bonneparte), [Greek: N. Bonêparte] (N.
Boneparte), [Greek: euporia] (facility), [Greek: paradosis] (surrender),
[Greek: to megathêrion] (the megathereum, the beast).

[373] James Wapshare, whose _Harmony of the Word of God in Spirit and in
Truth_ appeared in 1849.

[374] The literature relating to the _Swastika_ is too extended to permit
of any adequate summary in these notes.

[375] Henry Edward Manning (1808-1892), at first an Anglican clergyman, he
became a Roman Catholic priest in 1851, and became Cardinal in 1875. He
succeeded Cardinal Wiseman as Archbishop of Westminster in 1865. He wrote a
number of religious works.

[376] John Bright (1811-1889), Quaker, cotton manufacturer, and statesman.
He worked with Cobden for free trade, peace, and reform of the electorate.

[377] "The fallacy of many questions."

[378] William Wilberforce (1759-1833), best known for his long fight for
the abolition of the slave trade.

[379] Richard Martin (1754-1834), high sheriff of County Galway and owner
of a large estate in Connemara. Curiously enough, he was known both for his
readiness in duelling and for his love for animals. He was known as
"Humanity Martin," and in 1822 secured the passage of an act "to prevent
the cruel and improper treatment of cattle." He was one of the founders
(1824) of the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. He is
usually considered the original of Godfrey O'Malley in Lever's novel,
_Charles O'Malley_.

[380] See Vol. I, page 149, note 1 {323}, also text on same page.

[381] See Vol. I, page 44, note 9 {34}, also text, Vol. I, page 110.

[382] "Penitential seat."

[383] "Well placed upon the cushion."

[384] See Vol. II, page 58, note 109.

[385] "He has lost the right of being influenced by evidence."

[386] "Hung up."

[387] "A few things to the wise, nothing to the unlettered."

[388] The fallacy results from dividing both members of an equation by 0, x
- 1 being the same as 1 - 1, and calling the quotients finite.

[389] "If you order him to the sky he will go."

[390] _Similia similibus curanter_, "Like cures like," the homeopathic
motto.

[391] "Without harm to the proprieties."

[392] "What are you doing? I am standing here."

[393] Lors feist l'Anglois tel signe. La main gausche toute ouverte il leva
hault en l'aer, puis ferma au poing les quatres doigtz d'icelle et le
poulce estendu assit sus la pinne du nez. Soubdain après leva la dextre
toute ouverte, et toute ouverte la baissa, joignant la poulce au lieu que
fermait le petit doigt de la gausche, et les quatre doigtz d'icelle mouvoit
lentement en l'aer. Puis au rebours feit de la dextre ce qu'il avoit faict
de la gausche, et de la gausche ce que avoit faict de la dextre.--A. De M.

[394] _Suaviter in modo, fortiter in re_, "Gentle in manners, firm in
action."

[395] See Vol. I, page 101, note 4 {174}.

[396] See Vol. I, page 315, note 3 {686}.

[397] Henry Fawcett (1833-1884) became totally blind in 1858, but in spite
of this handicap he became professor of political economy at Cambridge and
sat in parliament for a number of years. He championed the cause of reform
and in particular he was prominent in the protection of the native
interests of India. The establishing of the parcels post (1882) took place
while he was postmaster general (1880-1884).

[398] Of course the whole thing depends upon what definition of division is
taken. We can multiply 2 ft. by 3 ft. if we define multiplication so as to
allow it, or 2 ft. by 3 lb, getting foot-pounds, as is done in physics.

[399] Richard Milward (1609-1680), for so the name is usually given, was
rector of Great Braxted (Essex) and canon of Windsor. He was long the
amanuensis of John Selden, and the _Table Talk_ was published nine years
after Milward's death, from notes that he left. Some doubt has been cast
upon the authenticity of the work owing to many of the opinions that it
ascribes to Selden.

[400] John Selden (1584-1654) was a jurist, legal antiquary, and Oriental
scholar. He sat in the Long Parliament, and while an advocate of reform he
was not an extremist. He was sent to the Tower for his support of the
resolution against "tonnage and poundage," in 1629. His _History of Tythes_
(1618) was suppressed at the demand of the bishops. His _De Diis Syriis_
(1617) is still esteemed a classic on Semitic mythology.

[401] See Vol. I, page 42, note 4 {24}.

[402] See Vol. II, page 249, note 398.

[403] John Palmer (1742-1818) was a theatrical manager. In 1782 he set
forth a plan for forwarding the mails by stage coaches instead of by
postmen. Pitt adopted the plan in 1784. Palmer was made comptroller-general
of the post office in 1786 and was dismissed six years later for
arbitrarily suspending a deputy. He had been verbally promised 2½% on the
increased revenue, but Pitt gave him only a pension of £3000. In 1813 he
was awarded £50,000 in addition to his pension.

[404] Dionysius Lardner (1793-1859), professor of natural philosophy in
London University (now University College). His _Cabinet Cyclopædia_
(1829-1849) contained 133 volumes. De Morgan wrote on probabilities, and
Lardner on various branches of mathematics, and there were many other
well-known contributors. Lardner is said to have made $200,000 on a lecture
tour in America.

[405] Thomas Fysche Palmer (1747-1802) joined the Unitarians in 1783, and
in 1785 took a charge in Dundee. He was arrested for sedition because of an
address that it was falsely alleged that he gave before a society known as
the "Friends of Liberty." As a matter of fact the address was given by an
uneducated weaver, and Palmer was merely asked to revise it, declining to
do even this. Nevertheless he was sentenced to Botany Bay (1794) for seven
years. The trial aroused great indignation.

[406] See Vol. I, page 80, note 5 {119}.

[407] See Vol. II, page 244, note 394.

[408] See Vol. I, page 352, note 1 {731}.

[409] See Vol. I, page 332, note 4 {709}.

[410] "The lawyers are brought into court; let them accuse each other."

[411] Samuel Rogers (1763-1855), the poet and art connoisseur. He declined
the laureateship on the death of Wordsworth (1850). Byron, his pretended
friend, wrote a lampoon (1818) ridiculing his cadaverous appearance.

[412] Theodore Edward Hook (1788-1841), the well-known wit. He is satirized
as Mr. Wagg in _Vanity Fair_. The _John Bull_ was founded in 1820 and Hook
was made editor.

[413] "On pitying the heretic."

[414] A term of medieval logic. Barbara: All M is P, all S is M, hence all
S is P. Celarent: No M is P, all S is M, hence no S is P.

[415] "Simply," "According to which," "It does not follow."

[416]

 "O sweet soul, what good shall I declare
  That heretofore was thine, since such are thy remains!"

[417] "Stupid fellow!"

[418] Christopher Barker (c. 1529-1599), also called Barkar, was the
Queen's printer. He began to publish books in 1569, but did no actual
printing until 1576. In 1575 the Geneva Bible was first printed in England,
the work being done for Barker. He published 38 partial or complete
editions of the Bible from 1575 to 1588, and 34 were published by his
deputies (1588-1599).

[419] James Franklin (1697-1735) was born in Boston, Mass., and was sent to
London to learn the printer's trade. He returned in 1717 and started a
printing house. Benjamin, his brother, was apprenticed to him but ran away
(1723). James published the _New England Courant_ (1721-1727), and Benjamin
is said to have begun his literary career by writing for it.

[420] James Hodder was a writing master in Tokenhouse Yard, Lothbury, in
1661, and later kept a boarding school in Bromley-by-Bow. His famous
arithmetic appeared at London in 1661 and went through many editions. It
was the basis of Cocker's work. (See Vol. I, page 42, note 4 {24}.) It was
long thought to have been the first arithmetic published in America, and it
was the first English one. There was, however, an arithmetic published much
earlier than this, in Mexico, the _Sumario compendioso ... con algunas
reglas tocantes al Aritmética_, by "Juan Diaz Freyle," in 1556.

[421] Henry Mose, Hodder's successor, kept a school in Sherborne Lane,
London.

[422] Rear Admiral Sir Francis Beaufort (1774-1857), F.R.S., was
hydrographer to the Navy from 1829 to 1855. He prepared an atlas that was
printed by the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge.

[423] Antoine Sabatier (1742-1817), born at Castres, was known as the Abbé
but was really nothing more than a "clerc tonsuré." He lived at Court and
was pensioned to write against the philosophers of the Voltaire group. He
posed as the defender of morality, a commodity of which he seems to have
possessed not the slightest trace.

[424] Maffeo Barberini was pope, as Urban VIII, from 1623 to 1644. It was
during his ambitious reign that Galileo was summoned to Rome to make his
recantation (1633), the exact nature of which is still a matter of dispute.

[425] This Baden Powell (1796-1860) was the Savilian professor of geometry
(1827-1860) at Oxford.

[426] "Memoirs of the famous bishop of Chiapa, by which it appears that he
had butchered or burned or drowned ten million infidels in America in order
to convert them. I believe that this bishop exaggerated; but if we should
reduce these sacrifices to five million victims, this would still be
admirable."

[427] Alfonso X (1221-1284), known as El Sabio (the Wise), was interested
in astronomy and caused the Alphonsine Tables to be prepared. These table
were used by astronomers for a long time. It is said that when the
Ptolemaic system of the universe was explained to him he remarked that if
he had been present at the Creation he could have shown how to arrange
things in a much simpler fashion.

[428] George Richards (c. 1767-1837), fellow of Oriel (1790-1796), Bampton
lecturer (1800), Vicar of St. Martin's-in-the-Fields, Westminster (1824),
and a poet of no mean ability.

[429] The "Aboriginal Britons," an excellent poem, by Richards. (Note by
Byron.)--A. De M.

[430] John Watkins (d. after 1831), a teacher and miscellaneous writer.

[431] Frederic Shoberl (1775-1853), a miscellaneous writer.

[432] He wrote, besides the _Aboriginal Britons_, _Songs of the Aboriginal
Bards_ (1792), _Modern France: a Poem_ (1793), _Odin, a drama_ (1804),
_Emma, a drama on the model of the Greek theatre_ (1804), _Poems_ (2
volumes, 1804), and a _Monody on the Death of Lord Nelson_ (1806).

[433] Henry Kirke White (1785-1806), published his first volume of poems at
the age of 18. Southey and William Wilberforce became interested in him and
procured for him a sizarship at St. John's College, Cambridge. He at once
showed great brilliancy, but he died of tuberculosis at the age of 21.

[434] John Wolcot, known as Peter Pindar (1738-1819), was a London
physician. He wrote numerous satirical poems. His _Bozzy and Piozzi, or the
British Biographers_, appeared in 1786, and reached the 9th edition in
1788.

[435] See Vol. I, page 235, note 8 {532}.

[436] Richard Payne Knight (1750-1824) was a collector of bronzes, gems,
and coins, many of his pieces being now in the British Museum. He sat in
parliament for twenty-six years (1780-1806), but took no active part in
legislation. He opposed the acquisition of the Elgin Marbles, holding them
to be of little importance. His _Analytical Inquiry into the Principles of
Taste_ appeared in 1808.

[437] Mario Nizzoli (1498-1566), a well-known student of Cicero, was for a
time professor at the University of Parma. His _Observationes in M. Tullium
Ciceronem_ appeared at Pratalboino in 1535. It was revised by his nephew
under the title _Thesaurus Ciceronianus_ (Venice, 1570).

[438] See Vol. I, page 314, note 4 {681}.

[439]

 "Like the geometer, who bends all his powers
  To measure the circle, and does not succeed,
  Thinking what principle he needs."

[440] Francis Quarles (1592-1644), a religious poet. He wrote paraphrases
of the Bible and numerous elegies. In the early days of the revolutionary
struggle he sided with the Royalists. One of his most popular works was the
_Emblems_ (1635), with illustrations by William Marshall.

[441] Regnault de Bécourt wrote _La Création du monde, ou Système
d'organisation primitive suivi de l'interprétation des principaux
phénomènes et accidents que se sont opérés dans la nature depuis l'origine
de univers jusqu'à nos jours_ (1816). This may be the work translated by
Dalmas.

[442] "Because it lacks a holy prophet."

[443] Angherà. See Vol. II, page 60, note 127.

[444] Edmund Curll (1675-1747), a well-known bookseller, publisher, and
pamphleteer. He was for a time at "The Peacock without Temple Bar," and
later at "The Dial and Bible against St. Dunstan's Church." He was fined
repeatedly for publishing immoral works, and once stood in the pillory for
it. He is ridiculed in the _Dunciad_ for having been tossed in a blanket by
the boys of Westminster School because of an oration that displeased them.

[445] See Vol. II, page 109, note 206.

[446] Encyclopædia.

[447] Author of the _Historia Naturalis_ (77 A.D.)

[448] Author of the _De Institutione Oratorio Libri_ XII (c. 91 A.D.)

[449] His _De Architectures Libri_ X was not merely a work on architecture
and building, but on the education of the architect.

[450] Cyclophoria.

[451] William Caxton (c. 1422-c.1492), sometime Governor of the Company of
Merchant Adventurers in Bruges (between 1449 and 1470). He learned the art
of printing either at Bruges or Cologne, and between 1471 and 1477 set up a
press at Westminster. Tradition says that the first book printed in England
was his _Game and Playe of Chesse_ (1474). The _Myrrour of the Worlde and
th'ymage of the same_ appeared in 1480. It contains a brief statement on
arithmetic, the first mathematics to appear in print in England.

[452] See Vol. I, page 45, note 6 {40}. De Morgan is wrong as to the date
of the _Margarita Philosophica_. The first edition appeared at Freiburg in
1503.

[453] Reisch was confessor to Maximilian I (1459-1519), King of the Romans
(1486) and Emperor (1493-1519).

[454] Joachim Sterck Ringelbergh (c. 1499-c. 1536), teacher of philosophy
and mathematics in various cities of France and Germany. His _Institutionum
astronomicarum libri III_ appeared at Basel in 1528, his _Cosmographia_ at
Paris in 1529, and his _Opera_ at Leyden in 1531.

[455] Johannes Heinrich Alsted (1588-1638) was professor of philosophy and
theology at his birthplace, Herborn, in Nassau, and later at Weissenberg.
He published several works, including the _Elementale mathematicum_ (1611),
_Systema physicae harmonicae_ (1612), _Methodus admirandorum
mathematicorum_ (1613), _Encyclopædia septem tomis distincta_ (1630), and
the work mentioned above.

[456] Johann Jakob Hoffmann (1635-1706), professor of Greek and history at
his birthplace, Basel. He also wrote the _Epitome metrica historiæ
universalis civilis et sacræ ab orbe condito_ (1686).

[457] Ephraim Chambers (c. 1680-1740), a crotchety, penurious, but
kind-hearted freethinker. His _Cyclopædia, or an Universal Dictionary_ was
translated into French and is said to have suggested the great
_Encyclopédie_.

[458] _Encyclopédie, ou Dictionnaire raisonné des sciences, des arts et des
métiers, par un société de gens de lettres. Mis en ordre et publié par M.
Diderot, et quant à la partie mathématique, par M. d'Alembert._ Paris,
1751-1780, 35 volumes.

[459] "From the egg" (state).

[460] See Vol. I, page 382, note 12 {785}.

[461] See Vol. II, page 4, note 15.

[462] "In morals nothing should serve man as a model but God; in the arts,
nothing but nature."

[463] _Encyclopédie Méthodique, ou par ordre de matières._ Paris,
1782-1832, 166½ volumes.

[464] See Vol. II, page 193, note 336.

[465] _Encyclopædia Metropolitana; or, Universal Dictionary of Knowledge._
London, 1845, 29 volumes. A second edition came out in 1848-1858 in 40
volumes.

[466] See Vol. I, page 137, note 8 {286}.

[467] See Vol. I, page 80, note 5 {119}.

[468] De Morgan should be alive to satirize some of the statements on the
history of mathematics in the eleventh edition.

[469] John Pringle Nichol (1804-1859), Regius professor of astronomy at
Glasgow and a popular lecturer on the subject. He lectured in the United
States in 1848-1849. His _Views of the Architecture of the Heavens_ (1838)
was a very popular work, and his _Planetary System_ (1848, 1850) contains
the first suggestion for the study of sun spots by the aid of photography.

[470] See Vol. II, page 109, note 206.

[471] George Long (1800-1879), a native of Poulton, in Lancashire, was
called to the University of Virginia when he was only twenty-four years old
as professor of ancient languages. He returned to England in 1828 to become
professor of Greek at London University. From 1833 to 1849 he edited the
twenty-nine volumes of the _Penny Cyclopædia_. He was an authority on Roman
law.

[472] A legal phrase, "Qui tam pro domina regina, quam pro se ipso
sequitur,"--"Who sues as much on the Queen's account as on his own."

[473] Arthur Cayley (1821-1895) was a fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge
(1842-1846) and was afterwards a lawyer (1849-1863). During his fourteen
years at the bar he published some two hundred mathematical papers. In 1863
he became professor of mathematics at Cambridge, and so remained until his
death. His collected papers, nine hundred in number, were published by the
Cambridge Press in 13 volumes (1889-1898). He contributed extensively to
the theory of invariants and covariants. De Morgan's reference to his
coining of new names is justified, although his contemporary, Professor
Sylvester, so far surpassed him in this respect as to have been dubbed "the
mathematical Adam."

[474] See Vol. II, page 26, note 56.

[475] See Vol. I, page 111, note 3 {207}.

[476] See Vol. I, page 87, note 6 {135}.

[477] Pierre Dupuy (1582-1651) was a friend and relative of De Thou. With
the collaboration of his brother and Nicolas Rigault he published the 1620
and 1626 editions of De Thou's History. He also wrote on law and history.
His younger brother, Jacques (died in 1656), edited his works. The two had
a valuable collection of books and manuscripts which they bequeathed to the
Royal Library at Paris.

[478] See Vol. I, page 51, note 3 {51}.

[479] It was Cosmo de' Medici (1590-1621) who was the patron of Galileo.

[480] See Vol. I, page 40, note 4 {20}.

[481] See Vol. I, page 106, note 4 {188}.

[482] Sir Edward Sherburne (1618-1702), a scholar of considerable
reputation. The reference by De Morgan is to _The Sphere of Marcus
Manilius_, in the appendix to which is a _Catalogue of Astronomers, ancient
and modern_.

[483] George Parker, second Earl of Macclesfield (1697-1764). He erected an
observatory at Shirburn Castle, Oxfordshire, in 1739, and fitted it out
with the best equipment then available. He was President of the Royal
Society in 1752.

[484] See Vol. II, page 148, note 263.

[485] See Vol. I, page 140, note 7 {296}.

[486] See Vol. I, page 106, note 4 {188}.

[487] Edward Bernard (1638-1696), although Savilian professor of astronomy
at Oxford, was chiefly interested in archeology.

[488] See Vol. I, page 107, note 1 {190}.

[489] See Vol. I, page 107, note 1 {190}.

[490] See Vol. I, page 135, note 3 {281}.

[491] Philip Dormer Stanhope, fourth Earl of Chesterfield (1694-1773), well
known for the letters written to his son which were published posthumously
(1774).

[492] Peter Daval (died in 1763), Vice-President of the Royal Society, and
an astronomer of some ability.

[493] See Vol. I, page 376, note 1 {766}.

[494] William Oughtred (c. 1573-1660), a fellow of King's College,
Cambridge, and afterwards vicar of Aldbury, Surrey, wrote the best-known
arithmetic and trigonometry of his time. His _Arithmeticæ in Numero &
Speciebus Institutio ... quasi Clavis Mathematicæ est_ (1631) went through
many editions and appeared in English as _The Key to the Mathematicks new
forged and filed_ in 1647.

[495] See Vol. I, page 140, note 5 {294}.

[496] Stephen Jordan Rigaud (1816-1859) was senior assistant master of
Westminster School (1846) and head master of Queen Elizabeth's School at
Ipswich (1850). He was made Bishop of Antigua in 1858 and died of yellow
fever the following year.

[497] He also wrote a memoir of his father, privately printed at Oxford in
1883.

[498] See Vol. I, page 69, note 3 {96}.

[499] See Vol. I, page 106, note 4 {188}.

[500] William Gascoigne was born at Middleton before 1612 and was killed in
the battle of Marston Moor in 1644. He was an astronomer and invented the
micrometer with movable threads (before 1639).

[501] Seth Ward (1617-1689) was deprived of his fellowship at Cambridge for
refusing to sign the covenant. He became professor of astronomy at Oxford
(1649), Bishop of Exeter (1662), Bishop of Salisbury (1667), and Chancellor
of the Garter (1671). He is best known for his solution of Kepler's problem
to approximate a planet's orbit, which appeared in his _Astronomia
geometrica_ in 1656.

[502] See Vol. I, page 110, note 2 {198}.

[503] See Vol. I, page 100, note 2 {172}.

[504] See Vol. I, page 107, note 1 {190}.

[505] See Vol. I page 114, note 6 {220}.

[506] See Vol. I, page 77, note 4 {118}.

[507] See Vol. I, page 125, note 3 {253}.

[508] See Vol. I, page 105, note 2 {186}.

[509] Heinrich Oldenburgh (1626-1678) was consul in England for the City of
Bremen, his birthplace, and afterwards became a private teacher in London.
He became secretary of the Royal Society and contributed on physics and
astronomy to the _Philosophical Transactions_.

[510] Thomas Brancker, or Branker (1636-1676) wrote the _Doctrinæ sphæricæ
adumbratio et usus globorum artificialium_ (1662) and translated the
algebra of Rhonius with the help of Pell. The latter work appeared under
the title of _An Introduction to Algebra_ (1668), and is noteworthy as
having brought before English mathematicians the symbol ÷ for division. The
symbol never had any standing on the Continent for this purpose, but
thereafter became so popular in England that it is still used in all the
English-speaking world.

[511] See Vol. I, page 118, note 1 {230}.

[512] Pierre Bertius (1565-1629) was a native of Flanders and was educated
at London and Leyden. He became a professor at Leyden, and later held the
chair of mathematics at the Collège de France. He wrote chiefly on
geography.

[513] See Vol. II, page 297, note 487.

[514] Giovanni Alphonso Borelli (1608-1679) was professor of mathematics at
Messina (1646-1656) and at Pisa (1656-1657), after which he taught in Rome
at the Convent of St. Panteleon. He wrote several works on geometry,
astronomy, and physics.

[515] See Vol. I, page 172, note 2 {381}.

[516] Ignace Gaston Pardies (c. 1636-1673), a Jesuit, professor of ancient
languages and later of mathematics and physics at the Collège of Pau, and
afterwards professor of rhetoric at the Collège Louis-le-Grand at Paris. He
wrote on geometry, astronomy and physics.

[517] Pierre Fermat was born in 1608 (or possibly in 1595) near Toulouse,
and died in 1665. Although connected with the parliament of Toulouse, his
significant work was in mathematics. He was one of the world's geniuses in
the theory of numbers, and was one of the founders of the theory of
probabilities and of analytic geometry. After his death his son published
his edition of Diophantus (1670) and his _Varia opera mathematica_ (1679).

[518] This may be Christopher Townley (1603-1674) the antiquary, or his
nephew, Richard, who improved the micrometer already invented by Gascoigne.

[519] Adrien Auzout a native of Rouen, who died at Rome in 1691. He
invented a screw micrometer with movable threads (1666) and made many
improvements in astronomical instruments.

[520] See Vol. I, page 66, note 9 {86}.

[521] See Vol. I, page 124, note 7 {248}.

[522] John Machin (d. 1751) was professor of astronomy at Gresham College
(1713-1751) and secretary of the Royal Society. He translated Newton's
_Principia_ into English. His computation of [pi] to 100 places is given in
William Jones's _Synopsis palmariorum matheseos_ (1706).

[523] Pierre Rémond de Montmort (1678-1719) was canon of Notre Dame until
his marriage. He was a gentleman of leisure and devoted himself to the
study of mathematics, especially of probabilities.

[524] Roger Cotes (1682-1716), first Plumian professor of astronomy and
physics at Cambridge, and editor of the second edition of Newton's
_Principia_. His posthumous _Harmonia Mensurarum_ (1722) contains "Cotes's
Theorem" on the binomial equation. Newton said of him, "If Mr. Cotes had
lived we had known something."

[525] See Vol. I, page 135, note 3 {281}.

[526] See Vol. I, page 377, note 4 {769}.

[527] Charles Réné Reyneau (1656-1728) was professor of mathematics at
Angers. His _Analyse démontrée, ou Manière de resoudre les problèmes de
mathématiques_ (1708) was a successful attempt to popularize the theories
of men like Descartes, Newton, Leibnitz, and the Bernoullis.

[528] Brook Taylor (1685-1731), secretary of the Royal Society, and student
of mathematics and physics. His _Methodus incrementorum directa et inversa_
(1715) was the first treatise on the calculus of finite differences. It
contained the well-known theorem that bears his name.

[529] Pierre Louis Moreau de Maupertuis (1698-1759) was sent with Clairaut
(1735) to measure an arc of a meridian in Lapland. He was head of the
physics department in the Berlin Academy from 1745 until 1753. He wrote
_Sur la figure de la terre_ (1738) and on geography and astronomy.

[530] Pierre Bouguer (1698-1758) was professor of hydrography at Paris, and
was one of those sent by the Academy of Sciences to measure an arc of a
meridian in Peru (1735). The object of this and the work of Maupertuis was
to determine the shape of the earth and see if Newton's theory was
supported.

[531] Charles Marie de la Condamine (1701-1774) was a member of the Paris
Academy of Sciences and was sent with Bouguer to Peru, for the purpose
mentioned in the preceding note. He wrote on the figure of the earth, but
was not a scientist of high rank.

[532] See Vol. I, page 136, note 5 {283}.

[533] See Vol. II, page 296, note 483.

[534] Thomas Baker (c. 1625-1689) gave a geometric solution of the
biquadratic in his _Geometrical Key, or Gate of Equations unlocked_ (1684).

[535] See Vol. I, page 160, note 5 {350}.

[536] See Vol. I, page 87, note 4 {133}.

[537] See Vol. I, page 132, note 2 {272}.

[538] See Vol. I, page 118, second note 1 {231}.

[539] The name of Newton is so well known that no note seems necessary. He
was born at Woolsthorpe, Lincolnshire, in 1642, and died at Kensington in
1727.

[540] John Keill (1671-1721), professor of astronomy at Oxford from 1710,
is said to have been the first to teach the Newtonian physics by direct
experiment, the apparatus being invented by him for the purpose. He wrote
on astronomy and physics. His _Epistola de legibus virium centripetarum_,
in the Philosophical Transactions for 1708, accused Leibnitz of having
obtained his ideas of the calculus from Newton, thus starting the priority
controversy.

[541] Thomas Digges (d. in 1595) wrote _An Arithmeticall Militare Treatise,
named Stratioticos_ (1579), and completed _A geometrical practise, named
Pantometria_ (1571) that had been begun by his father, Leonard Digges.

[542] John Dee (1527-1608), the most famous astrologer of his day, and
something of a mathematician, wrote a preface to Billingsley's translation
of Euclid into English (1570).

[543] See Vol. I, page 76, note 3 {112}.

[544] Thomas Harriot (1560-1621) was tutor in mathematics to Sir Walter
Raleigh, who sent him to survey Virginia (1585). He was one of the best
English algebraists of his time, but his _Artis Analyticæ Praxis ad
Aequationes Algebraicas resolvendas_ (1631) did not appear until ten years
after his death.

[545] Thomas Lydiat (1572-1626), rector of Alkerton, devoted his life
chiefly to the study of chronology, writing upon the subject and taking
issue with Scaliger (1601).

[546] See Vol. I, page 69, note 3 {96}.

[547] Walter Warner edited Harriot's _Artis Analyticae Praxis_ (1631).
Tarporley is not known in mathematics.

[548] See Vol. I, page 105, note 2 {186}.

[549] See Vol. I, page 115, note 3 {224}.

[550] See Vol. II, page 300, note 509.

[551] See Vol. I, page 107, note 1 {190}.

[552] Sir Samuel Morland (1625-1695) was a diplomat and inventor. For some
years he was assistant to John Pell, then ambassador to Switzerland. He
wrote on arithmetical instruments invented by him (1673), on hydrostatics
(1697) and on church history (1658).

[553] See Vol. I, page 153, note 4 {337}.

[554] See Vol. I, page 85, note 2 {129}.

[555] See Vol. I, page 43, note 8 {33}.

[556] See Vol. I, page 43, note 7 {32}.

[557] See Vol. I, page 382, note 13 {786}. The history of the subject may
be followed in Braunmühl's _Geschichte der Trigonometrie_.

[558] See Vol. I, page 377, note 3 {768}.

[559] See Vol. I, page 108, note 2 {192}.

[560] Michael Dary wrote _Dary's Miscellanies_ (1669), _Gauging epitomised_
(1669), and _The general Doctrine of Equation_ (1664).

[561] John Newton (1622-1678), canon of Hereford (1673), educational
reformer, and writer on elementary mathematics and astronomy.

[562] See Vol. I, page 87, note 4 {133}.

[563] "The average of the two equal altitudes of the sun before and after
dinner."

[564] See Vol. I, page 42, note 4 {24}.

[565] London, 1678. It went though many editions.

[566] "This I who once ..."

[567] Arthur Murphy (1727-1805) worked in a banking house until 1754. He
then went on the stage and met with some success at Covent Garden. His
first comedy, _The Apprentice_ (1756) was so successful that he left the
stage and took to play writing. His translation of Tacitus appeared in
1793, in four volumes.

[568] Edmund Wingate (1596-1656) went to Paris in 1624 as tutor to Princess
Henrietta Maria and remained there several years. He wrote _L'usage de la
règle de proportion_ (Paris, 1624, with an English translation in 1626),
_Arithmétique Logarithmétique_ (Paris, 1626, with an English translation in
1635), and _Of Natural and Artificial Arithmetick_ (London, 1630, revised
in 1650-1652), part I of which was one of the most popular textbooks ever
produced in England.

[569] John Lambert (1619-1694) was Major-General during the Revolution and
helped to draw up the request for Cromwell to assume the protectorate. He
was imprisoned in the Tower by the Rump Parliament. He was confined in
Guernsey until the clandestine marriage of his daughter Mary to Charles
Hatton, son of the governor, after which he was removed (1667) to St.
Nicholas in Plymouth Sound.

[570] Samuel Foster (d. in 1652) was made professor of astronomy at Gresham
College in March, 1636, but resigned in November of that year, being
succeeded by Mungo Murray. Murray vacated his chair by marriage in 1641 and
Foster succeeded him. He wrote on dialling and made a number of
improvements in geometric instruments.

[571] "Twice of the word a minister," that is, twice a minister of the
Gospel.

[572] This is _The Lives of the Professors of Gresham College to which is
prefixed the Life of the Founder, Sir Thomas Gresham_, London, 1740. It was
written by John Ward (c. 1679-1758), professor of rhetoric (1720) at
Gresham College and vice-president (1752) of the Royal Society.

[573] Charles Montagu (1661-1715), first Earl of Halifax, was Lord of the
Treasury in 1692, and was created Baron Halifax in 1700 and Viscount
Sunbury and Earl of Halifax in 1714. He introduced the bill establishing
the Bank of England, the bill becoming a law in 1694. He had troubles of
his own, without considering Newton, for he was impeached in 1701, and was
the subject of a damaging resolution of censure as auditor of the exchequer
in 1703. Although nothing came of either of these attacks, he was out of
office during much of Queen Anne's reign.

[574] See Vol. II, page 302, note 547.

[575] See Vol. I, page 105, note 2 {186}.

[576] James Dodson (d. 1757) was master of the Royal Mathematical School,
Christ's Hospital. He was De Morgan's great-grandfather. The
_Anti-Logarithmic Canon_ was published in 1742.

[577] See Vol. I, page 106, note 4 {188}.

[578] See Vol. I, page 110, note 2 {198}.

[579] Richard Busby, (1606-1695), master of Westminster School (1640) had
among his pupils Dryden and Locke.

[580] See Vol. I, page 107, note 1 {190}.

[581] Herbert Thorndike (1598-1672), fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge
(1620-1646), and Prebend of Westminster (1661), was a well-known
theological writer of the time.

[582] See Vol. I, page 140, note 5 {294}.

[583] See Vol. I, page 108, note 2 {192}.

[584] "Labor performed returns in a circle."

[585] See Vol. II, page 208.

[586] "Whatever objections one may make to the above arguments, one always
falls into an absurdity."

[587] See Vol. II. page 11, note 29. _The Circle Squared; and the solution
of the problem adapted to explain the difference between square and
superficial measurement_ appeared at Brighton in 1865.

[588] "And beyond that nothing."

[589] Gillott (1759-1873) was the pioneer maker of steel pens by machinery,
reducing the price from 1s. each to 4d. a gross. He was a great collector
of paintings and old violins.

[590] William Edward Walker wrote five works on circle squaring (1853,
1854, 1857, 1862, 1864), mostly and perhaps all published at Birmingham.

[591] Solomon M. Drach wrote _An easy Rule for formulizing all Epicyclical
Curves_ (London, 1849), _On the Circle area and Heptagon-chord_ (London,
1864), _An easy general Rule for filling up all Magic Squares_ (London,
1873), and _Hebrew Almanack-Signs_ (London, 1877), besides numerous
articles in journals.

[592] See Vol. I, page 168, note 3 {371}.

[593] See Vol. I, page 254, note 2 {580}.

[594] See Vol. I, page 98, note 6 {163}.

[595] Robert Fludd or Flud (1574-1637) was a physician with a large London
practice. He denied the diurnal rotation of the earth, and was attacked by
Kepler and Mersenne, and accused of magic by Gassendi. His _Apologia
Compendiania, Fraternitatem de Rosea Cruce suspicionis ... maculis
aspersam, veritatis quasi Fluctibus abluens_ (Leyden, 1616) is one of a
large number of works of the mystic type.

[596] Consult _To the Christianity of the Age. Notes ... comprising an
elucidation of the scope and contents of the writings ... of Dionysius
Andreas Freher_ (1854).

[597] Sir William Robert Grove (1811-1896), although called to the bar
(1835) and to the bench (1853), is best known for his work as a physicist.
He was professor of experimental philosophy (1840-1847) at the London
Institution, and invented a battery (1839) known by his name. His
_Correlation of Physical Forces_ (1846) went through six editions and was
translated into French.

[598] Johann Tauler (c. 1300-1361), a Dominican monk of Strassburg, a
mystic, closely in touch with the Gottesfreunde of Basel. His _Sermons_
first appeared in print at Leipsic in 1498.

[599] Paracelsus (c. 1490-1541). His real name was Theophrastes Bombast von
Hohenheim, and he took the name by which he is generally known because he
held himself superior to Celsus. He was a famous physician and pharmacist,
but was also a mystic and neo-Platonist. He lectured in German on medicine
at Basel, but lost his position through the opposition of the orthodox
physicians and apothecaries.

[600] See Vol. I, page 256, note 2 {588}.

[601] Philip Schwarzerd (1497-1560) was professor of Greek at Wittenberg.
He helped Luther with his translation of the Bible.

[602] Johann Reuchlin (1455-1522), the first great German humanist, was
very influential in establishing the study of Greek and Hebrew in Germany.
His lectures were mostly delivered privately in Heidelberg and Stuttgart.
Unlike Melanchthon, he remained in the Catholic Church.

[603] Joseph Chitty (1776-1841) published his _Precedents of Pleading_ in
1808 and his _Reports of Cases on Practice and Pleading_ in 1820-23 (2
volumes).

[604] See Vol. I, page 44, note 1 {35}.

[605] See Vol. I, page 44, note 4 {38}.

[606] Jean Pèlerin, also known as Viator, who wrote on perspective. His
work appeared in 1505, with editions in 1509 and 1521.

[607] Henry Stephens. See Vol. I, page 44, note 3 {37}.

[608] The well-known grammarian (1745-1826). He was born at Swatara, in
Pennsylvania, and practised law in New York until 1784, after which he
resided in England. His grammar (1795) went through 50 editions, and the
abridgment (1818) through 120 editions. Murray's friend Dalton, the
chemist, said that "of all the contrivances invented by human ingenuity for
puzzling the brains of the young, Lindley Murray's grammar was the worst."

[609] Robert Recorde (c. 1510-1558) read and probably taught mathematics
and medicine at Cambridge up to 1545. After that he taught mathematics at
Oxford and practised medicine in London. His _Grounde of Artes_, published
about 1540, was the first arithmetic published in English that had any
influence. It went through many editions. The _Castle of Knowledge_
appeared in 1551. It was a textbook on astronomy and the first to set forth
the Copernican theory in England. Like Recorde's other works it was written
on the catechism plan. His _Whetstone of Witte ... containying thextraction
of Rootes: The Cosike practise, with the rule of Equation: and the woorkes
of Surde Nombres_ appeared in 1557, and it is in this work that the modern
sign of equality first appears in print. The word "Cosike" is an adjective
that was used for a long time in Germany as equivalent to algebraic, being
derived from the Italian _cosa_, which stood for the unknown quantity.

[610] Robert Cecil (c. 1563-1612), first Earl of Salisbury, Secretary of
State under Elizabeth (1596-1603) and under James I (1603-1612).

[611] In America the German pronunciation is at present universal among
mathematicians, as in the case of most other German names. This is due, no
doubt, to the great influence that Germany has had on American education in
the last fifty years.

[612] The latest transliteration is substantially K'ung-fu-tz[vu].

[613] The tendency seems to be, however, to adopt the forms used of
individuals or places as rapidly as the mass of people comes to be prepared
for it. Thus the spelling Leipzig, instead of Leipsic, is coming to be very
common in America.

[614] Sir Edward Coke (1552-1634), the celebrated jurist.

[615] Dethlef Cluvier or Clüver (d. 1708 at Hamburg) was a nephew, not a
grandson, of Philippe Cluvier, or Philipp Clüver (1580-c. 1623). Dethlef
traveled in France and Italy and then taught mathematics in London. He
wrote on astronomy and philosophy and also published in the _Acta
Eruditorum_ (1686) his _Schediasma geometricum de nova infinitorum
scientia_. _Quadratura circuli infinitis modis demonstrata_, and his
_Monitum ad geometras_ (1687). Philippe was geographer of the Academy of
Leyden. His _Introductionis in universam geographiam tam veterem quam novam
libri sex_ appeared at Leyden in 1624, about the time of his death.

[616] See Vol. I, page 124, note 7 {248}.

[617] Bernard Nieuwentijt (1654-1718), a physician and burgomaster at
Purmerend. His _Considerationes circa Analyseos ad quantitates infinite
parvas applicatæ Principia et Calculi Differentialis usum_ (Amsterdam,
1694) was attacked by Leibnitz. He replied in his _Considerationes secundæ_
(1694), and also wrote the _Analysis Infinitorum, seu Curvilineorum
Proprietates ex Polygonorum Natura deductæ_ (1695). His most famous work
was on the existence of God, _Het Regt Gebruik der Werelt Beschouwingen_
(1718).

[618] "From a given line to construct" etc.

[619] "Pirates do not fight one another."

[620] Claude Mallemens (Mallement) de Messanges (1653-1723) was professor
of philosophy at the Collège du Plessis, in Paris, for 34 years. The work
to which De Morgan refers is probably the _Fameux Problème de la quadrature
du cercle, résolu géometriquement par le cercle et a ligne droite_ that
appeared in 1683.

[621] On Tycho Brahe see Vol. I, page 76, note 3 {112}.

[622] Wilhelm Frederik von Zytphen also published the _Tidens Ström_, a
chronological table, in 1840. The work to which De Morgan refers, the
_Solens Bevægelse i Verdensrummet_, appeared first in 1861. De Morgan seems
to have missed his _Nogl Ord om Cirkelens Quadratur_ which appeared in
1865, at Copenhagen.

[623] James Joseph Sylvester (1814-1897), professor of natural philosophy
at University College, London (1837-1841), professor of mathematics at the
University of Virginia (1841-1845), actuary in London (1845-1855),
professor of mathematics at Woolwich (1877-1884) and at Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore (1877-1884), and Savilian professor of geometry at
Oxford (1884-1894).

[624] See Vol. I, page 76, note 3 {112}.

[625] See Vol. II, page 205, note 349.

[626] See Vol. I, page 76, note 3 {112}.

[627] See Vol. I, page 46, note 1 {42}.

[628] See Vol. II, page 183, note 318.

[629] See Vol. I, page 321, note 2 {691}.

[630] James Mill, born 1773, died 1836.

[631] See Vol. II, page 3, note 11.

[632] See Vol. II, page 3, note 13.

[633] See Vol. II, page 3, note 14.

[634] This anecdote is printed at page 4 (Vol. II); but as it is used in
illustration here, and is given more in detail, I have not omitted
it.--S.E. De M.

[635] See Vol. II, page 4, note 15.

[636] See Vol. I, page 382, note 13 {786}.

[637] "Monsieur, (a + b^{n})/n = x, whence God exists; answer that!"

[638] "Monsieur, you know very well that your argument requires the
development of x according to integral powers of n."

[639] See Vol. I, page 153, note 4 {337}.

[640] Thomas Love Peacock (1785-1866) an English novelist and poet.

[641] Perhaps Dr. Samuel Warren (1807-1877), the author of _Ten Thousand a
Year_ (serially in Blackwood's in 1839; London, 1841).

[642] See Vol. I, page 255, note 6 {584}.

[643] "From many, one; much in little; Ultima Thule (the most remote
region); without which not."

[644] Spurius Mælius (fl. 440 B. C.), who distributed corn freely among the
poor in the famine of 440 B. C. and was assassinated by the patricians.

[645] Spurius Cassius Viscellinus, Roman consul in 502, 493, and 486 B. C.
Put to death in 485.

[646] "O what a fine bearing, he said, that has no brain."

[647] Sir William Rowan Hamilton. See Vol. I, page 332, note 4 {709}.

[648] William Allen Whitworth, the author of the well-known _Choice and
Chance_ (Cambridge, 1867), and other works.

[649] James Maurice Wilson, whose _Elementary Geometry_ appeared in 1868
and went through several editions.

[650] See Vol. II, page 183, note 315.

[651] "Force of inertia conquered," and "Victory in the whole heavens."

[652] "With all his might."

[653] George Berkeley (1685-1753), Bishop of Cloyne, the idealistic
philosopher and author of the _Principles of Human Knowledge_ (1710), _The
Analyst, or a Discourse addressed to an Infidel Mathematician_ (1734), and
_A Defense of Freethinking in Mathematics_ (1735). He asserted that space
involves the idea of movement without the sensation of resistance. Space
sensation less than the "minima sensibilia" is, therefore, impossible. From
this he argues that infinitesimals are impossible concepts.

[654] See Vol. I, page 85, note 2 {129}.

[655] See Vol. I, page 81, note 6 {120}.

[656] Edwin Dunkin revised Lardner's _Handbook of Astronomy_ (1869) and
Milner's _The Heavens and the Earth_ (1873) and wrote _The Midnight Sky_
(1869).

[657] Michael Faraday (1791-1867) the celebrated physicist and chemist. He
was an assistant to Sir Humphrey Davy (1813) and became professor of
chemistry at the Royal Institution, London, in 1827.

[658] "If you teach a fool he shows no joyous countenance; he cordially
hates you; he wishes you buried."

[659] "Every man is an animal, Sortes is a man, therefore Sortes is an
animal."

[660]

 "May some choice patron bless each grey goose quill;
  May every Bavius have his Bufo still."--POPE, _Prologue to the Satires._

Bavius has become proverbial as a bad poet from the lines in Vergil's
_Eclogues_ (III, 90):

 "Qui Bavium non odit, amet tua carmina, Maevi,
  Atque idem jungat vulpes, et mulgeat hircos."

"He who does not hate Bavius shall love thy verses, O Maevius; and the same
shall yoke foxes and shall milk he-goats."

Bavius and Maevius were the worst of Latin poets, condemned by Horace as
well as Vergil.

[661] See Vol. II, page 158, note 279.

[662] "Honest," "useful," "handsome," "sweet."

[663] "Let not the fourth man attempt to speak."

[664]

 "In those old times,--ah
 'Twas just like this, ah!"

[665] See Vol. I, page 382, note 12 {785}.

[666] These remarks were never written.--S. E. De M.

[667]

 "Fleas, flies, and friars, are masters who sadly the people abuse,
  And thistles and briars are sure growing grains to abuse.
  O Christ, who hatest strife and slayst all things in peace,
  Destroy where'er are rife, briars, friars, flies and fleas.
  Fleas, flies, and friars foul fall them these fifteen years
  For none that there is loveth fleas, flies, nor freres."

[668] "It is my plan to restore to an unskilled race the worthy arts of a
better life."

[669] The first sentences of the first oration of Cicero against Catiline:
"Quo usque tandem abutere, Catilina, patientia nostra?" (How long, O
Catiline, will you abuse our patience?) "Quamdiu etiam furor iste tuus nos
eludet?" (How long will this your madness baffle us?) "Nihilne te nocturnum
praesidium Palati, ... nihil horum ora voltusque moverunt?" (Does the night
watch of the Palatium, ... do the faces and expressions of all these men
fail to move you?) "In te conferri ..." (This plague should have been
inflicted upon you long ago, which you have plotted against us so long.)

[670] "Beware of the things that are marked."

[671] "Farewell, ye teachers without learning! See to it that at our next
meeting we may find you strong in body and sound in mind."

[672] See Vol. I, page 336, note 8 {713}.

[673] See Vol. I, page 229, note 2 {515}.

[674] This proof, although capable of improvement, is left as in the
original. Those who may be interested in the mathematics of the question,
may consult F. Enriques, _Fragen der Elementargeometrie_ (German by
Fleischer), Leipsic, 1907, Part II, p. 267; F. Rudio, _Archimedes_,
_Huygens_, _Lambert_, _Legendre_. _Vier Abhandlungen über die
Kreismessung_, Leipsic, 1892; F. Klein, _Famous Problems of Elementary
Geometry_ (English by Beman and Smith), Boston, 1895; J. W. A. Young,
_Monographs on Modern Mathematics_, New York, 1911, Chap. IX (by the editor
of the present edition of De Morgan.)

[675] See Vol. I, page 69, note 2 {95}.

[676] See Vol. I, page 137, note 8 {286}.

[677] Joseph Allen Galbraith who, with Samuel Haughton, wrote the Galbraith
and Haughton's _Scientific Manuals_. (Euclid, 1856; Algebra, 1860;
Trigonometry, 1854; Optics, 1854, and others.)

[678] This note on Carlyle (1795-1881) is interesting. The translation of
Legendre appeared in the same year (1824) as his translation of Goethe's
_Wilhelm Meister_.

[679] Michael Stifel (1487-1567), also known as Stiefel, Styfel, and
Stifelius, was an Augustine monk but became a convert to Lutheranism. He
was professor of mathematics at Jena (1559-1567). His edition of the _Coss_
appeared at Königsberg in 1553, the first edition having been published in
1525. The + and - signs first appeared in print in Widman's arithmetic of
1489, but for purposes of algebra this book was one of the first to make
them known.

[680] Christoff Rudolff was born about 1500 and died between 1540 and 1552.
_Die Coss_ appeared in 1525 and his arithmetic in 1526.

       *       *       *       *       *


Corrections made to printed original.

Page 9, "long-fostered prejudice": 'perjudice' in original.

Page 73, "Pensées, ch. 7": 'Pansées' in original.

Page 127, "and pulled out a plum": 'und' in original.

Page 147, "did not come forward": 'forword' in original.

Page 172, "come into general circulation": 'circulalation' in original.

Ibid., "the more difficult fractions which we have got": 'he have got' in
original.

Page 192, "it has been stated": 'started' in original.

Page 216, "the obsolete word tetch of the same meaning": 'meaing' in
original.

Page 228, "[Greek: dioklasianos]": 'dioklalasianos' in original.

Page 233. After `Henry E. Manning' were printed two paragraphs `Shilling
versus Franc.' and `Teutonic Long Hundred 120 versus 100 or the Decimal
question.' These appear to have been set in error, there is no applicable
context.

Page 316, "in a manner depending upon the difference": 'maner' in original.

Page 322, "neither what Newton did, nor what was done before him.": 'not'
(for 'nor') in original.

Page 344, "Victoria toto coelo": 'tolo' in original.

Page 368, "cannot be brought up to 1": 'up to ±' in original.

Page 371, "Q_2=b_2 Q_1+a_2": 'Q_2=b_2 Q_1-a_2' in original.

Note 50, "all who were not in the road to Heaven were excommunicated":
'excomunicated' in original.

Note 372, "[Greek: hê alazoneia biou]": 'alaxoneia' in original.

Ibid., "Iapetos": 'Ispetos' in original.

Ibid., "Papeiskos": 'Paspeisoks' in original.

Ibid., "[Greek: dioklasianos]": 'dioklalasianos' in original.





