CHAPTER I.

THE HARPOON.


"The Sailor who sights Greenland," says Captain John Ross, with a
grave simplicity, "finds nothing to delight him with the sight." I can
very well believe it. In the first place, it is an iron-bound coast of
most pitiless aspect, whose dark granite does not even preserve a
vestment of snow. Everywhere else, Ice; not a trace of vegetation.
That desolate land which hides the Pole from us, seems a veritable
land of Famine and of Death.

During the brief time when the water remains unfrozen, one might
contrive to live there; but the place is frozen up for nine months in
the year, and during all that time, what is to be done? And what can
one get to eat? One can scarcely even search for food. The night lasts
for months together, and at times the darkness is so dense that Kane,
surrounded by his dogs, could only discover them by the humid warmth
of their breath. In that long, long, darkness, on that sterile land,
clothed in impenetrable ice, there wander, however, two Hermits, who
persist in living in that land of horror. One of these is the fishing
Bear, a bold and eager prowler, in rich fur, and in so thick an under
vestment of fat, that he can for a long time defy both cold and
hunger. The other, a grotesque creature, looks, when seen from a
distance, like a fish reared upwards, standing on the tip of its tail;
a fish clumsily and awkwardly built, and having long hanging fins. But
this seeming fish is a man. Each scents the other, the brute and the
man; both are fierce with hunger, yet the Bear sometimes declines the
combat, and retreats before the fiercer, and still more famished, man.

A famishing man is very terrible in his cruel courage. With no other
weapon than a sharpened bone, our Greenlander pursues the enormous
Bear. But he would have long since perished of famine, had he no other
food than his terrible compatriot. He saved himself from death only by
a crime. The earth affording nothing, he turned his attention to the
Sea, and as it was closed by the ice, he found nothing there to kill
except his gentle acquaintance the Seal. In him he found the oil
without which he would be dead of cold, even sooner than of hunger.

The day dream of the Greenlander is that at his death he will pass to
the Moon, where he will have wood, fire, the light of the hearth.
Here below, in Greenland, oil supplies the place of all these. He
drinks it, in huge draughts, and is at once warmed and nourished.

A great contrast between that man and the somnolent, amphibious
creatures, that, even in that climate, can live without any very
severe suffering! The gentle eye of the Seal, sufficiently indicates
that. Nursling of the Sea he is always, in connection with her, and
there are always clefts in the ice, at which the excellent swimmer
knows how to provide himself with food. Heavy and clumsy as we may
take him to be, he can adroitly mount on a piece of ice and steer
himself in search of a convenient fishing place. The water, thick with
molluscs, and fat with animated atoms, richly nourishes the fish, for
the use of the Seal, who, having well filled himself, returns to his
rock, and sleeps too soundly to feel the cold, or to fear anything.

The man's life in Greenland, is the very contrary of this. He seems to
be there in spite of Nature, an accursed being, upon whom everything
makes pitiless war. Looking upon the photographs that we have of the
Esquimaux, we can read their terrible destiny in the fixity of their
gaze, and in the harsh, dark eye; black as midnight. They look as
though petrified by perpetually seeing before them the vision of an
infinite wretchedness. That gazing upon eternal terror, has hidden
beneath a mask of iron the man's strong intelligence, which, however,
is rapid and full of the expedients suggested by the endless dangers
and sufferings of such a life.

What was he to do. His family was famishing, his children cried for
bread, and his wife shivered upon the snow. The North wind, pitilessly
assailed them all with mingled hail and snow, that horrid pelting
which blinds, stupefies, deprives one of sense and voice. The Sea was
frozen up; so, fish was out of the question. But the Seal was there,
and how many fish there were in one Seal; what an accumulation of the
richest oil! The Seal was there, defenceless, sleeping. Nay, had he
even been awake, he would not have tried to escape. He is like the Sea
Cow; you must beat him if you wish to drive him away. Take one of
their young and it is in vain that you throw him into the Sea, he will
get out and still follow you, gentle and attached as your favorite
dog. This facile, this affectionate, trait in the creature's
character, must have terribly troubled the man who first thought of
killing such a creature; must have made him hesitate and resist the
temptation. But at length cold and famine got the upper hand, and he
committed the assassination; from that moment he was rich.

The flesh nourished the famishing people, the oil served to warm and
cheer them, and the bone and sinews served for many domestic uses,
while the skin served to clothe them. And what was still more useful
was, that by industriously sowing the skins together they made a
vehicle, at once light, and strong, and water proof, which the man
called his canoe, and in which he dared to put out to sea.

A miserable little vehicle it was; long, slender, and weighing
scarcely anything. But it was every where very firmly closed up,
except an opening in which the rower seated himself, drawing the skin
tightly around his waist. One would suppose that such a craft must
upset and be swamped; but nothing of the sort occurs. It darts like an
arrow over the crest of the wave, disappears, reappears, now in the
eddies, now between the icebergs.

Man and boat are one; a marine entity; an artificial fish. But how
inferior is this artificial fish to the true one! He has not the
floating bladder, which enables the fish to make itself lighter or
heavier as the occasion may demand. Still more, the man has not the
vigorous motion, the lively contraction and expansion of the spine to
communicate such power to the strokes of the tail, nor has he the oil
which, being so much lighter than water, will always ride above the
waves. What the man best imitates is the fin, but even that only
imperfectly. The man's fins, his oars, are not attached to his body,
but, moved by his long arms, are weak compared to the fin, and,
moreover, soon fatigue the rower. What is it that makes amends for so
much of inferiority in the means of the man? His terrible energy, his
vivid reason which, from beneath that fixed and melancholy
countenance, flashes out from time to time, invents, resolves, and
finds an instant remedy for all the deficiences which, in this
floating skin, momentarily threaten him with death.

Frequently our rower is stopped by a mass of ice which peremptorily
refuses him a passage. Then comes a new expedient, the parts are
changed on the instant. Hitherto the canoe has carried the man; now
the man carries the canoe. He takes it on his shoulder and traverses
the icy portage till he comes again to open water, the ice crackling
beneath him as he crosses it. Occasionally icebergs, floating, and
terrible mountains, are so close that they leave between them only a
narrow passage which our man passes through at the risk of being in an
instant crushed, flattened between them. Those icy walls now widen,
now contract, the space between them; they may, at any moment, come
together with a force that would crush a seventy-four, to say nothing
about our poor Greenlander in his poor skin canoe. Such a fate did, in
fact, once occur to a tall ship; she was cut in two, flattened,
crushed; by the coming together of two icebergs.

These Greenlanders tell us that their ancestors were Whale fishers.
They were less wretched then, more ingenious, and better provided. No
doubt they had iron; procured probably from Norway or Iceland. Whales
have always been very numerous in the Greenland seas. A grand object
of desire to those to whom oil is a thing of the very first necessity!
The fish give it by drops, the Seal in waves--the Whale in mountains!
He was truly a man, and a bold one, who first, with his poor weapons,
with the sea howling at his feet, and the darkness closing around him,
dared to pursue the Whale! A bold man, he, who trusting to his
courage, the strength of his arm and the weight of his harpoon, first
believed that he could pierce that mighty mass of blubber and flesh
and convert it to his own profit!--the man who first imagined that he
could attack the Whale and not perish in the tempest that would be
raised by the plunges and terrific tail-blows of the astonished and
suffering monster! And, as if to crown his audacity, the man next
fastened a line to his harpoon, and braving still more closely the
frightful shock of the agonized and dying giant, never once feared
that that giant might plunge headlong into the deep, taking with him
harpoon, line, boat,--and man!

There is still another danger, and no less terrible. It is that
instead of meeting the common Whale, our man should fall in with the
Cachalot, that terror of the seas. He is not very large, perhaps not
more than from sixty to eighty feet. But his head alone measures
about a third; from twenty to twenty-five feet. In case of such a
meeting, woe to the fisher; he would become the chased instead of the
chaser, the victim instead of the tyrant. The Cachalot has horrible
jaws, and no fewer than forty-eight enormous teeth; he could with ease
devour all; both boat and man. And he seems always drunk with blood.
His blind rage so terrifies all the other Whales that they escape,
bellowing, throwing themselves on the shore, or striving to hide
themselves in the sand. Even when he is dead they still fear him and
will not approach his carcass. The fiercest species of the Cachalot is
the Ourque or Physetene of the ancients, which is so much dreaded by
the Icelanders, that when they are on the sea they will not so much as
name him lest he should come and attack them. They believe, on the
other hand, that a species of Whale, the Jubarte, loves and protects
them, and provokes the monster in order to save them from his fury.

Many think that the first who undertook so perilous a task as that of
Whale fishing must have been eccentric hot heads. According to those
who think so, that perilous chase could never have originated with the
prudent men of the North, but must have been initiated by the Basques,
those daring hunters and fishers who were so well accustomed to their
own capricious sea, the Gulf of Gascony, where they fished the Tunny.
Here they first saw the huge Whales at play and pursued them, frenzied
by the hope of such enormous prey, and pursued them still, onward and
onward, no matter whither; even to the confines of the pole.

Here the poor Colossus fancied it must needs be safe, for it could not
fancy any one would be desperate enough to follow it thither, and so
it went tranquilly to sleep. But our Basque mad-caps approached it
stealthily and silently. Tightening his red belt around his waist, the
boldest and most active of the Basque sailors leaped from the deck
right on to the back of the sleeping monster, and, fearlessly or
carelessly, drove the harpoon home to the very eye. Poor Whale!




