CHAPTER VIII.

THE STORM OF OCTOBER, 1859.


The storm, which of all storms, I had the best opportunity of
observing, was that which swept in fury over the west of France, from
the 24th of October 1859, to the 31st of the same month, the
implacable and indefatigable storm, which, with but few and very short
intervals, raged furiously for six days and six nights, and strewed
our whole western coasts with wrecks. Both before and after that
storm, the barometer indicated great disturbances, and the telegraphic
communications were cut off by the breaking of the wires, or the
magnetic falsifications. Very hot seasons had preceded this tempest,
but it brought us a succession of very different weather; rainy, and
cold. Even 1860, up to the very day on which I write these lines, is
marked by heavy rain storms, and cold winds from the west, and south,
which seem to bring us all the rains of the Atlantic, and of the great
South Sea.

I watched this tempest from a spot so smiling and peaceful that
tempest was the last thing that one would anticipate there. I speak of
the little port of Saint George, near Royan, just at the entrance of
the Gironde. I had passed an exceedingly quiet five months there,
meditating what I should say on the subject which I had treated upon
in 1859; that subject at once so serious and so delicate. The place
and the book are alike filled with memories very agreeable to me.
Could I have written that book in any other place? I know not; but one
thing is quite certain: the wild perfume of that country; its aspect,
at once staid and gentle, and the vivifying odors of its Brooms, that
pungent and agreeable shrub of the Landes, had much to do with that
book, and will ever be associated with it in my thought.

The people of the place are well matched with its aspect and its
nature. No vulgarity, no coarseness, among them. The farming
population are grave in manner, and moral in speech and conduct, and
the seagoing population, consists, for the most part, of pilots, a
little band of Protestants, escaped from persecution. All around, too,
there is an honesty so primitive that locks and bolts are absolutely
unknown there. Noise and violence are utterly out of the question
among people who are modest and reserved, as seamen seldom are, and
who have a quiet and retiring tact not always to be found among a far
more pretentious and highly placed people. Though well known to and
well respected by them, I yet enjoyed all the solitude which study and
labor demanded. I was all the more interested in these people and
their perils. Without speaking to them, I daily and hourly watched
them in their heroic labors, and heartily wished them both safety and
success. I was suspicious of the weather, and looking upon the
dangerous channel, I often asked myself whether the sea, so long
gentle and lovely, would not, sooner or later, show us quite another
countenance.

This really dangerous place has nothing sad or threatening in its
aspect. Every morning, from my window, I could watch the white sails,
slightly ruddied by the morning beams, of quite a fleet of small
coasters, that only waited for a wind to leave the little port. At
this port, the Gironde is fully nine miles wide. With some of the
solemnity of the great rivers of America, it combines the gaiety of
Bourdeaux. Royan is a pleasure place, a bathing town which is resorted
to by all Gascony. Its bay, and the adjoining one of St. George, are
gratuitously regaled with the wild pranks of the porpoises, that
boldly venture into the river, and into the very midst of the bathers,
leaping, at once heavily and gracefully, six feet, and more, above the
surface of the water. It would seem that they are profoundly convinced
of the fact, that no one thereabout is addicted to fishing; that at
that point of great daring and great labor, where from hour to hour
all hands may be called upon to succor some imperilled vessel, folks
will scarcely care to slay the poor Porpoise, for his oil.

To this gaiety of the waters, add the especially harmonious beauty of
the two shores, as the abounding vineyards of Medoc look across to the
varied culture of the fertile fields of Saintonge. The sky, here, has
not the fixed, and sometimes rather monotonous beauty of the
Mediterranean, but, on the contrary, is very changeable. From the
mingling waters of sea and river, rise variegated mists, which cast
back upon the watery mirror, strange gleamings of gorgeous coloring,
rod, blue, deepest orange, and most delicately pale green. Fantastic
shapes, "a moment seen, then gone for ever," "appearing only to
depart, and seen only to be regretted," adorn the entrance to the
Ocean with strange monuments of bold collonades, sublime bridges, and,
occasionally, triumphal arches.

The two crescent-shaped shores of Royan and Saint Georges, with their
fine sands afford to the most delicate feet a delightful promenade of
which one does not easily grow tired, tempted, and regaled as we are
by the perfume of the pines which so enliven the downs with their
young verdure. The fine promontories which overlook these shores, and
the sandy inland downs send near and far their healthful perfumes.
That which predominates on the downs has a something of medicinal, a
mingled odor, which seems to concentrate all the sun and the warmth of
the sands. The inland heaths furnish the more pungent odors which stir
the brain and cheer the heart; thyme, and wild thyme, and marjoram,
and sage which our fathers held sacred for its many virtues, and
peppermint, and, above all, the little wild violet, exhale a mingled
odor surpassing all the spicy odors of the far East.

It seems to me that on these heaths the birds sing more beautifully
than elsewhere. Never have I heard elsewhere such a lark as I listened
to in July on the promontory of Vallière, as she rose higher and
higher, her dark wings gilded and glinting in the rays of the fast
setting sun. Her notes coming from a height of probably a thousand
feet were as sweet as they must needs have been powerful. It was to
her humble nest, to her upward gazing and listening nestlings that she
evidently sang her "wood notes wild," her song at once so rustic and
so sublime, in which one might fancy that she translated into harmony
that glorious sunlight in which she hovered, and called to her
nestlings--"Come up hither my little ones, come!"

Out of all these, perfumes and song, soft air, and sea made mild by
the waters of the beautiful river, proceeded an infinitely agreeable,
though not very brilliant harmony. The moon shone with a softened
light, the stars were quite visible, but not very bright, and the
atmosphere so mild and pleasant, that it would have been voluptuous,
that whole scene and its accessories had there not mingled with all a
something, which made one reflect, and substituted active thought for
luxuriously idle reverie.

And why so? Do those shifting sands, those many colored and varying
hues of the downs, and that crumbling and fossiliferous limestone
remind you of the eternal change, that one only rule which here on
earth has no exception? Or, is it the silent but undying memory of the
persecuted Protestants? It is also, and in still greater power, the
solemnity of the roadstead, the frequency of wrecks, the near
neighborhood of the most terrible of seas, by which the interior
becomes so serious, so suggestive of great and solemn thought.

A great mystery is being enacted here, a treaty, a marriage infinitely
more important than any human and royal nuptials; a marriage of
interest between ill matched spouses. The lady of the waters of the
south-west, swelled and quickened by Tarn and Dordogne and by those
fierce brethren the torrents of the Pyrenees, hastens, that amiable
and sovereign Gironde, to present herself to her giant spouse, old
Ocean, here, more than elsewhere, stern and repulsive. The mud banks
of the Charente and the long line of sands which, for fifty leagues,
oppose him, put him in bad humor; and when he cannot hurtle fiercely
against Bayonne and Saint Jean de Luz, he pitilessly assaults the poor
Gironde. Her outlet is not like that of the Seine, between sheltering
shores; she falls at once into the presence of the open and limitless
ocean. Generally, he repels her; she recoils to the right and to the
left, and seeks shelter in the marshes of Saintonge, or among the
Medoc vineyards to whose vines she imparts the cool and sober
qualities of her own waters.

And now imagine the boldness of the men who throw themselves headlong
into the strife between two such spouses; who go in the frail boat to
the aid of the timorous craft who wait at the mouth of the pass afraid
to venture in. Such is the boldness of my pilots here; a boldness at
once so modest, so heroic, so glorious, could it but be fully
described.

It is easy to understand that the old monarch of shipwrecks, the
antique treasurer and guardian of so much submerged wealth bears no
great good will towards the bold ones who venture to dispute with him
his prey. If he sometimes allows them to succeed, sometimes also he
avenges himself upon them--more malignantly delighted to drown one
pilot than to wreck two ships.

But for sometime past no such accident had been spoken of. The
exceedingly hot summer of 1859, produced only one wreck in this
neighborhood; but I knew not what agitation even then foretold
greater disasters. September came, then October, and the brilliant
crowd of visitors, loving the sea only when it is calm and smiling,
already took its departure. I still remained, partly kept there by my
unfinished work, partly by the strange attraction which that season of
the year has for me.

In October we had strange eccentric winds, such as seldom blow there;
a burning storm-wind from the East, that quarter usually so peaceable.
The nights were occasionally very hot, even more so in October than in
August; sleepless, agitated, nervous nights; nights to quicken the
pulse to the fever pace, and without apparent cause to render one
excited and peevish.

One day as we sat among the pines, beaten by the wind though somewhat
sheltered by the downs, we heard a young voice, singularly clear,
piercing, resonant, and, so to speak, metallic. It was the voice of a
very young girl, small in figure, but austere in countenance. She was
walking with her mother and singing snatches of an old ballad. We
invited her to sit down and sing us the whole of it. This old ballad,
this rustic little poem admirably expressed the double spirit of the
country. Saintonge is, in the first place, essentially rustic and
home-loving, with none of the wild adventurous impulses of the
Basques. And yet in spite of her sedentary tastes Saintonge turns
sailor and goes forth into not unfrequent dangers. And why? The old
ballad explains:

The lovely daughter of a king while washing, like Nausica of the
Odyssey, loses her ring in the sea; a young lover dives in search of
it, and is drowned. She weeps his loss so bitterly that she is changed
into the rosemary of the shore, at once so bitter and so odorous. This
ballad, heard in that pine wood already shuddering and moaning at the
threatening storm, touched and delighted me, but at the same time
strengthened my secret presentiments.

Whenever I went to Royan, I might calculate upon being overtaken,
unsheltered, in a storm, before I could accomplish that short journey
of only a few hours. It pressed upon me in the vineyards of Saint
George and the heathy table land of the promontory which I first
ascended; and it pressed upon me more heavily still as I traversed the
great semi-circular shore of Royan. Even now, in October, the heath
exhaled all its perfumes of wild flowers and shrubs, and their
perfumes seemed to me more pungent now than ever. On the still unvexed
shore, the wind, warmly and gently fanned my cheek, and the no less
gentle sea in murmuring ripples strove to kiss my feet. But for both
caressing wind and gently murmuring wave, I was too well prepared, too
suspicious, to be deceived by them. By way of prelude to the great
change, after so many beautiful and almost effeminating evenings,
suddenly, in the very middle of the night, burst forth a frightful
gale of wind. Again and again this occurred, but especially on the
night of the 26th. On that night I felt sure that some great damage
must needs be done. Our pilots had gone out on their generous and
perilous errand. During those long fluctuations of the equinoctial
weather they had hesitated somewhat, delayed some little, then they
grew impatient of delay, duty and business called to them aloud, and
they resolved to put out, at the risk of some sudden and ruinous gust.
I felt that there would be some such; I whispered to myself, "some one
perishes now." And too truly was it so.

From a pilot boat, which, in face of the bad weather, put out to
rescue a vessel imperilled in the pass, an unfortunate man was swept
from the deck, and the boat, herself in utmost peril was unable to
lie-to for him. He left three young children and a pregnant wife. What
rendered this calamity especially to be regretted, was the fact that
this excellent young man, with the generous affection so common among
sailors, had married a poor girl rendered incapable of earning her
bread by an accident which had mutilated her hands. Alas! How much was
she to be pitied, helpless, pregnant, burdened with a young
family--and thus suddenly widowed!

A subscription was made for her, and I went to Royan, with my mite
towards it. A pilot whom I met there, spoke to me, with real grief and
emotion, of the sad accident. "Ah, Sir," said he, "such is our hard
profession; it is precisely when wind and sea are most angry, and most
threatening, that it is especially incumbent upon us to go forth." The
marine commissioner, who keeps the register of the living and the dead
of that little community, and who, better than any one else, knows the
history and the circumstances of every family there, appeared to me to
be exceedingly saddened and anxious. It was plain that he thought, as
I did, that this was only the beginning of calamity.

I resumed my journey along the shore, and in the course of it, I had
the opportunity to notice and study the dark zone of clouds which
hemmed me in on every side, to the extent of, I should judge, not less
than eight or ten leagues. On my left was Saintonge, expectant, dull,
passive; on my right, Medoc, from which I was separated by the river,
lay in a gloomy and misty stillness. Behind me, coming from the west
and brooding over the Ocean, was a whole world of cloud and mist, but
in my face, and opposing that world of cloud, blew the fresh
land-breeze. Sweeping down the course of the Gironde, it seemed that
the funereal pall that rose above the Ocean, might be repulsed and
dispelled. Still uncertain, I looked behind me to the shoal of
Cordovan, from which, pale, fantastic, weird, its tower rose like
some spectre that said--"Woe, woe, woe!"

I was not mistaken. I saw quite plainly that the land-breeze not only
would be conquered, but that it would be compelled to become the
help-mate of its seeming foe. That land-breeze blew quite low over the
Gironde, swept away from before it all dwarfish obstacles, but still
hovered beneath the high pitched and inky clouds that swept in from
the Ocean, and formed for those clouds, as it were, a slippery
inclined plane over which they would glide only the more easily and
the more swiftly. In a brief space all was still from the landward,
every breath died away beneath the thick grey mists; and, unopposed,
the upper winds swept the ominous storm-clouds shoreward.

When I reached the vineyards of Vallière, near St. George, hosts of
people were busily at work, striving to improve the brief time during
which they could hope to labor. The first heavy drops of rain came
down, solid and smiting as so much molten lead, and in another
instant, one was right glad to find a sheltering roof.

I had seen my full share of tempests. I had read my full share of
descriptions of them; and I was prepared to expect anything and
everything from their fury and from their power. But nothing that I
had either seen or read, had prepared me for the effects of _this_
tempest, so fierce, so long-enduring, so implacable in its unceasing
and uniform fury. When, from time to time, we have a pause, even the
slightest mitigation, even a change, however slight, in the Tempest's
moods and manifestations, our over-distended senses also relax,
recuperate, prepare themselves for the next assault. But in this case,
night after night, day after day, for six weary and wearying nights
and days, the storm-fiend never winked an eye or spared a blow.
Fierce, strong, angry, implacable; still the storm-fiend raged,
untiring, and unsparing. On mine honor, see ye! it was something to
daunt the boldest, to suggest despair to the most hopeful. No thunder,
no crashing combat of the positive and negative storm-clouds, no loud
and animating crash of the meeting and contending waves. All around
was one dark, leaden, sinister, ominous, and mysterious pall of cloud
and mist, all above us one black sky, terminated in the horizon by a
sickly and leaden line brooding over a slowly heaving and mighty mass
of leaden looking sea;--so slowly and monotonously heaving that one
almost wished for the coming storm-blast to rouse them into a fierce
fury, less terrible, less oppressive, than their horribly oppressive
monotony. No poetry of a great terror could oppress one like this most
prosaic and dark monotony. Still, still and ever, came from the deep
bosom of the coming storm the same terribly monotonous--"Woe, woe!
Alas, alas, alas!" Our abode was close upon the shore. We were no mere
spectators of that scene; we were in it, of it, sharers, actors,
thrilled actors in that sublime scene. Every now and then the wild sea
came within twenty feet of us; at every rush, she made our very hearth
stone quiver beneath our feet. Happily, the ever-rising and terrible
sou' west wind struck our windows only obliquely, or we should have
been drowned as we gazed, so vast was the torrent, nay the deluge,
which every blast bore upon its mighty bosom, alike from the clouds
above, and from the vexed and upheaving Ocean below. In haste, and
with no small difficulty, we fastened the shutters, and lighted lamps,
that we might at least look coming fate in the face. In those
apartments which looked out upon the landward, the noise and the
perturbation were no jot or tittle inferior. I wrote on, curious to
ascertain whether this wild outburst of nature could in reality
oppress and fetter a free intellect, and I thus kept my intellect
active, agile, cool, thoroughly in self-command. I wrote, I noted, I
compared, I drew mine own conclusions. At length, worn out solely by
fatigue, and abstinence, and the want of

    "Tired Nature's sweet restorer, balmy sleep,"

I felt myself deprived of that which I believe to be one of the most
important of the writer's powers, the quick, sure, delicate sense of
rhythm; I felt that my sentences became inharmonious. That sense of
rhythm was the first cord in my being to snap, broken, inharmonious,
over-strained,--ruined.

The mighty howling of the Tempest had but one variation, in the weird
and strange tones of the winds that pitilessly yet mournfully assailed
us. The house in which I was seated was directly in their path; and
they therefore assaulted it in utmost fury and apparently on every
side at once. Now it was the strong, stern blow of the master,
impatient to enter his own house; anon some strong hand tried to dash
open the shutters; and again came shrill shrieks down the wide
chimneys, wailing for the master's exclusion, fiercely threatening, if
we did not admit him, and, at length, furious and mighty attempts to
force an entry by dislodging the very roof from its rafters. And all
these sounds were occasionally dominated by the sad, deep, melancholy,
_Heu, heu! Alas, alas!_ Woe, woe, and Desolation. So immense, so
potent, so terrible was that _Heu, heu!_ of chorusing wind and sky,
that even the voice of the bold storm-blast seemed to us, in
comparison, secondary and mild. At length, the wind managed to clear a
way for the rain; our house--I had almost said our craft--began to
leak; the roof, opening its seams here and there, admitted the rain in
torrents.

Still worse, the fury of the Tempest, by a desperate effort, loosened
one of the hinges of a shutter, which still remained closed, but from
that moment shook, creaked, shrieked, in the most dismal fashion that
you can imagine. To make it fast I had to open the window, and that
moment that I did so, though sheltered by the shutter, I felt myself
in the very centre of the whirlwind, half-deafened by the frightful
force of a sound equal to that of a cannon fired close to one's ear.
Through the cracks of the shutter I perceived what gave me a clear
notion of the tremendous power that was raging landward, skyward,
seaward, horizontally, upward, and downward. The waves, meeting and
battling, smote each other so fiercely that they could not descend
again. Gust after gust from beneath them, carried them landward;
mighty and vast as they were, they were borne landward as though so
many feathers, by the upheaving force of those mighty blasts.

How would it have been, if, shutters and windows being driven in, our
poor room had _shipped_ one of those vast billows which the storm-wind
thus hurled upon the adjacent heaths? We were, in fact, exposed to the
strange chance of being shipwrecked on the land. Our house, so close
to the shore, might at any moment have its roof or even its upper
story carried right away by wind and wave. The villagers often told us
that that was, in fact, their nightly thought and their nightly
terror, and they advised us to seek a more inland shelter. But we
still comforted ourselves with the thought that the longer this
tempest had lasted, the sooner it must come to an end; and, to the
undoubtedly reasonable advice thus given to us, our reply was, still,
"To-morrow, to-morrow."

The overland news that came to us, told of nothing but wrecks, still
wrecks. Close by us, on the 30th of October, a vessel from the South
Sea, with a crew of thirty hands, foundered, with a loss of all hands
and her rich cargo--and this at the very entrance of the roadstead.
After having passed through so many storms and calms, after having
safely weathered so many rocks and shoals, she had arrived within
sight, within hail, almost within touch of a little beach of fine
sand, the fine-weather bathing place of delicate and timid women.
Well! That seemingly gentle little sandy beach, upheaved into a huge
and impassable sandbar--was the grave of the good ship, which ran upon
it with frightful force, and was crushed, shivered into small
pieces--converted from a "thing of life," into a mutilated corpse.
What became of the crew? Not a trace of them has ever been found; they
were probably swept, vainly struggling, from the deck, and swallowed
up by the sands.

This tragical event very naturally led us to suspect that many similar
ones had occurred, elsewhere, and nothing was thought of or talked of
but probable calamities. But the sea seemed by no means at the end of
her work. We on shore had had quite enough of it. Not so our enraged
sea. I saw our pilots, sheltering themselves behind a rocky wall from
south-west, keep an anxious look-out seaward, and shake their heads in
ominous doubt of what was even yet to come. Happily for them, no craft
made her appearance in the offing--or they were there to risk, most
probably to lose, their lives. And I, also, looked anxiously out upon
that sea, on which I looked no less in hate than in anxiety. True, I
was in no real danger, but for that very reason I was all the more
despairingly the victim of _ennui_. That sea had a look at once
hideous and terrible; her vagaries were as absurd as her strength was
irresistible. Nothing there reminded one of the fanciful descriptions
of the poets. By a strange contrast, the more I felt myself depressed,
and as it were, lifeless, the more vigorously and vehemently did she
seem to feel and manifest her life; as though, galvanized by her own
furious motion, she had become animated by some strange, fantastic
soul. In the general rage, each wave seemed animated by its own
special and sentient rage; in the whole uniformity, (paradoxical as it
may seem, it, yet, is quite true) there was, as it were some
diabolical swarming. Was all this attributable to my worn brain and
wearied eyes? Or were the reality and the impression alike true? Those
waves reminded me of some terrible _mob_, some horrid rabblement, not
of men, but of howling dogs, a myriad of howling and eager dogs,
wolves--maddened and furious dogs and wolves. Dogs and wolves, do I
say? Let me rather say, a dread concourse of nameless, and detestable,
and spectral beasts, eyeless and earless, but with hugely yawning
jaws, foaming and eager for blood, blood, still more blood!

Monsters! what more do ye require? Are ye not surfeited with wrecked
ships and slain men? Do we not from all sides hear of your horrid
triumphs? What more, I ask, do ye demand? And the horrid phantoms
answer--"Thy death, universal Death, the destruction of the Earth, a
return to black Night and ancient Chaos."




