CHAPTER III.

THE LAW OF STORMS.


It is but yesterday, as it were, that we have built ships fit for
southern navigation; for navigation in those seas where the long,
strong, _rollers_, pile themselves, each upon each, into absolutely
mountainous masses of storm-lashed waves. What, then, shall we say of
the early navigators who ventured into such seas with their clumsy
leewards, heavy, and yet scarcely sea-worthy cock-boats?

Especially for the polar seas, whether arctic or antarctic, we need
ships expressly built for such rude service. They were bold men, those
who, like a Cabot, a Brentz, a Willoughby, ventured in their clumsy,
ill-found, badly rigged, and scarcely sea-worthy tubs to navigate the
icy seas; to dare Spitzbergen, to make Greenland by that funereal cape
_Farewell_, and to coast the thousand giant icebergs in sight of
which, men in our own day, a hundred Whalers have gone to pieces.

What chiefly rendered those ancient heroes so sublime was their very
ignorance, their blind courage, their desperate resolution. They knew
but little of the sea, and of the Heavens they knew still less; the
compass, their only instructor and their only reliance, they dared the
most alarming phenomena without being able even to guess at their
causes. They had none of our instruments which speak to us so plainly
and so unmistakably. They went blindfolded towards, and fearlessly
into, the uttermost darkness. They, themselves, confess that they
feared, but also, they would not yield. The sea's tempests, the air's
whirlwinds and water spouts, the tragic dialogues of those two Oceans,
of air and water, the striking, and, not so long since, ominous
phenomena of the Aurora Borealis, all this strange and wild
phantasmagoria seemed to them the fury of irritated Nature, a
veritable strife of Demons against which man could _dare_ all--as they
did--but could _do_ what they also did--nothing.

During three centuries but little progress was made. Read Cook, read
Peron, and you will readily comprehend how difficult, uncertain, and
perilous was navigation, even up to an hour so near our own.

Cook, that man of immense courage, but also, of most lively
imagination, himself confesses, as his Journal testifies, that he knew
how uncertain and perilous was the profession of the seaman even so
lately as his day. In his Journal, we read; "The dangers are so
great, that I venture to say, that no one will dare to go farther than
I have gone."

Now it is precisely since then that voyages have become, at once, more
distant, more regular, and less dangerous.

A great age, a Titanic age, the 19th century, has coolly,
intelligently, and sternly noted all those phenomena which the old
navigators braved, but did not examine. In this century it is that we,
for the first time, have dared to look the Tempest squarely, and
fearlessly, and scrutinizingly, in the eyes. Its premonitory symptoms,
its characteristics, its results;--each and all have been calmly
watched, and carefully and systematically registered; and, then, from
that registration, necessarily come explanation and generalization,
and thence, the grand, bold--and, as our not very distant ancestors
would have said, impious system--the _Law of Storms_.

So! What we took, what we in the old, bold, but blind day, took for
matter of caprice, is really, after all, reducible to a system,
obedient to a Law! So! then, those terrible facts, that made the brain
swim, the boldest quail, because they _fought shadows_ and _walked in
the darkness_, so! then, those terrible facts have a certain
regularity of recurrence, and the seaman, resolute and strong, calmly
considers whether he cannot oppose to those regular attacks a defence
no less regular. In brief, if the Tempest has its _science_, can we
not create and use an _art_? An art not merely to survive the Tempest
but even to make it useful?

But our science and our art cannot be called into life and activity
until we shall have laid aside our old and ill founded notion that
Tempests are caused by "the caprice of the winds." Attentive
observation has taught us that the winds are _not_ capricious, that
they are the accident, sometimes, also, the agent of the Tempest, but
that, generally speaking, the Tempest is an _electrical phenomenon_,
and often occurs in the absence of gales.

Romme (brother of the Conventionalist, principal author of the
Calendar) laid the foundations of our very important science. English
seamen had remarked that in the tempests in the Indian Seas, they
sailed for days together, and yet made no headway. Romme collected and
systematized all their observations, and pointed out the important
fact that the same occurred in the tempests of China, Africa, and the
Antilles. He also first pointed out that rectilinear winds are of rare
occurrence, and that, usually, tempests have a circular
character,--are, literally, a _whirl_ wind. The great _whirling_
tempests of the United States in 1815, and that of 1821 (the year of
the great eruption of Hecla) when the winds blew from all points to a
common centre, aroused philosophical attention, both in America and
Europe. Brande, in Germany, and at the same time, Redfield in New
York, were the next after Romme in profiting by these facts to lay
down the law that, generally, the tempest is a _Whirl_-wind,
advancing, and at the same time _revolving on its own base_. In 1838,
the English engineer, Reid, being sent to Barbadoes after the too
celebrated tempest which killed fifteen hundred people, ascertained,
with mathematical precision, this double movement of advance and
rotation. But his still more important discovery was that _in our
northern hemisphere the tempest turns from right to left_, that is to
say from East to North, and round the compass, back to East; while in
_southern tempests it turns from left to right_. A most important fact
to regulate the seaman's course.

Reid very rightfully gave his book the bold title of--"On the Law of
Storms."

But it was the law of their _Motion_, not the explanation of their
_cause_; it told nothing, either, of what Storms do, or of what they
are.

Here France came to the rescue. In 1840, Peltier published his _Causes
of Whirlwinds_, and his ingenious and numerous experiments established
the fact that whirlwinds, whether at sea or on shore, were _electrical
phenomena_, in which the winds play only a secondary part. Beccaria, a
full century earlier, had suspected that fact, but it was reserved
for Peltier to establish the fact, by making miniature storms.

Electrical whirlwinds readily take their rise in the neighborhood of
volcanoes,--those ventilating pipes of the subterranean world, and
therefore they are more common in the subterranean world, than in
ours.

The Atlantic, open at both ends, and swept in all directions by the
winds, should necessarily, have more rectilinear, and fewer circular
tempests; but Piddington quotes a great number of the latter.

From 1840 to 1850, the immense compilations of Piddington and Maury
were made, at Calcutta and New York. Maury is rendered illustrious for
his charts, his _Directions_, and his _Geography of the Sea_.
Piddington, less artistical, but not less learned, in his _Seaman's
Guide_, that Encyclopedia of storms, gives the results of an infinite
experience, the minutest and most precise means of calculating the
distance of the whirlwind, its rate of speed, and the nature of its
various waves. He confirmed the ideas of Peltier, as to the electric
theory, and showed that those who had dwelt on the caprice of the
whirlwind, had, in truth, completely mistaken the effect for the
cause.

The old art of auguries, and science of presages, never contemptible,
was most happily revived by that excellent book.

The setting of the Sun, is by no means an indifferent augury. If he
set red, and if the sea retain the reflection of his blood-red rays,
rely upon it, a storm is brewing, in that other Ocean--the air; if
around him you see a lurid red within a white circle, and the stars
are flickering, and seeming to fall, be sure that the upper regions of
the atmosphere are threatening.

Still worse, it is, if, upon a dirty sky, you see small clouds
marshalling, like so many purple arrows, flying from all quarters to
one common point, and if, at the same time, the larger masses assume
the shape of strange buildings, ruined bridges, broken rainbows, and a
hundred other eccentricities; then rely upon it, the storm has already
commenced in the upper region. At present, all is calm, here below,
but, on the horizon, you may discern the faintly flashing, and silent
lightnings. Listen attentively, and, from time to time, you shall hear
the low mutterings of the distant thunder; and the waves, as they
break upon the beach, seem to sob. Look out! The sea tells you,
plaintively, of the coming storm. "What are those wild waves saying?"
They are warning you, I repeat, of the coming storm. The wild, free
birds have already taken warning, and hasten to their secure shelter
in the clefts of the rocks. If they are far from land when they see,
and feel, and hear, the first threatenings of the rising storm, they
settle down upon your masts, and yards, and shrouds. And first among
them comes that bird of evil omen, the "Mother Carey's Chicken," the
Stormy Petrel. Look out, my brothers; I assure you the tempest
approaches.

Does it thunder? Be very glad of that, brother seaman; the electric
discharge is taking place far above us, and we shall have the less of
the tempest. It is an old popular observation, but confirmed by the
science of Peltier and by the experience of Piddington and others.

If the electricity, accumulated on high, discharges itself here below,
it will create circular currents, and we shall have whirlwind, fierce
tempest, and, probably water spout.

This last sort of storm not uncommonly attacks you when you are
seemingly quite safe in harbor. In 1698, Captain Langford, in port and
well anchored, saw that he was about to be thus assailed, slipped his
cable, and found safety on the open sea. Other craft, whose commanders
had less freight or less daring, remained at anchor and were
destroyed.

At Madras and at Barbadoes, warning signals are given to the ships at
anchor. In Canada, the electric Telegraph, swifter than Nature's own
electricity, sends warning of the coming storm from port to port.

To the sailor when on the broad Ocean, the great friend and adviser is
the Barometer; its perfect sensitiveness gives you the most exact
information of the weight with which the storm-laden atmosphere
oppresses it. Usually, it tells you of nothing but fine weather; it
almost seems to sleep. But at the first and most distant note of the
rising storm, it suddenly awakens, is agitated, and its mercury
descends, ascends, redescends. The barometer has its own tempest.
Peron when at the Mauritius observed that flashes of pale light
escaped from the mercury, and filled the whole tube. During gales, the
sensitive instrument seems actually to breathe. "In its fluctuations,"
say Daniel and Barlow, "the water barometer breathed, blew, like some
wild animal."

But the Tempest advances and occasionally illuminates the horizon all
around with its electric lightnings. In 1772, during the great storm
in the West Indies, when the sea rose seventy feet above ordinary high
water mark, the dense darkness of the night was dissipated by balls of
lurid fires that lighted up every shore.

The approach of the storm may be more or less rapid. In the Indian
Ocean, thickly studded with islands and obstacles, the whirlwind and
the water-spout approach you only at the rate of some two miles an
hour; while when they come along the course of the warm current, that
comes to us from the Antilles, they travel at the rate of from forty
to fifty. Their speed would, in fact, be incalculably great but for
their oscillation, beaten as they are by the winds, both internally
and externally.

Slow or rapid, the fury of the tempest is the same. In 1789, in a
single instant and with a single rush, the tempest dashed to pieces
every vessel in the port of Ceringa; at a second rush the town was
flooded; at the third it was in ruins, and twenty thousand of its
inhabitants were dead. In 1822, off Bengal, a water spout was for
twenty-four hours sucking up air and water, and, when it burst, fifty
thousand people perished.

In different localities, different aspects of the Tempest. In Africa
you have the _upas_, the fierce compound of _simoom_ and _tornado_.
The atmosphere seems calm and clear, and yet you feel a strange
oppression of the lungs and a general anxiety as terrible as it is
strange. Then a black cloud, "no bigger than a man's hand," appears on
the horizon, approaches with lightning speed, lengthening, widening,
and deepening as it approaches (_vires acquirit eundo_) the storm
descends, and in a quarter of an hour all around is devastated,
utterly ruined, and ships have utterly disappeared. Nature takes no
heed of such small matters. About Sumatra and Bengal, you see in the
evening or night (never in the morning) a dark arched cloud in the
sky. It rapidly increases, and presently, from that dark cloud, come
down flashes and sheets of pale and ghastly lights. Woe to the
mariner who shall encounter the first wind that rushes from that
sinister cloud; he will pretty certainly go down.

But the ordinary form is that of a huge funnel. A sailor, who was
caught in one of these terrible storms, says: "I found myself, as it
were, at the bottom of an enormous crater of a volcano; all around was
darkness, above a glimmering of lurid lights." That light is what is
technically termed "_the eye of the Tempest_."

When the Water spout, the horrible Typhoon, empties itself, human
science and human daring are of no avail. Roaring, howling, shrieking,
hissing, the storm fiends are at work above, below, around the
luckless vessel. Suddenly there is a dead, a quite horrible silence,
and there comes forth, seemingly, from the very centre of the water
spout, a blinding flash, and a deafening report, and when you, at
length, recover power to look aloft, you find that mast and spars have
been shivered.

Seymour tells us that, sometimes, after being caught in one of those
horrible Typhoons the sailors, for a long time, have blackened nails
and weakened sight. Sometimes, too, this terrible Typhoon sucks up not
only air and water, but also the luckless ship, holds it suspended in
the air, and then dashes it rudely down into the watery abyss. From
this terrible action and pitiless power of the Typhoon, the Chinese
derived their notion of the terrible mother _Typhon_, who, hovering
in the sky, picks out her victims and is ever conceiving and bearing
the _Ken Woo_, whirlwinds of fire and iron. To that terrible _Typhon_
they have erected temples and altars, adoring her and praying to her
in the vain hope of humanising her.

The brave Piddington had no adoration to spare for her; on the
contrary, he gives her a marvellously ill name. He calls her an only
too strong corsair, a pirate so strong and so tricky that there is no
dishonor in getting out of her way.

That perfidious enemy sometimes sets a snare for you; tempts you with
_a good wind_. Avoid that same _good wind_, turn your back to it if
you possibly can. Give that dangerous companion the widest possible
berth. Steer very clear of the storm cloud or it will suddenly sink
you; ship, crew and cargo.

Such is the advice of the brave and skillful Piddington, and,
assuredly, one would gladly take such advice. But how? It would be
utterly useless if the storm cloud and the ship were brought together
within narrow and land locked waters. But, in general, this enormous
compound of whirlwind and water spout embraces a circle of ten,
twenty, or even thirty leagues, and this gives every ship, on which a
constant and intelligent look out is kept, a fair chance of keeping at
a respectful distance from so redoubtable a foe. The great point to
be ascertained is, _where is the centre_, the nucleus, the terrible
home, of this terrible _Typhon_. And then to ascertain its rate of
progression and its line of approach.

The sailor of the present day has two excellent lights to steer by;
his Maury and his Piddington. On the one hand, Maury teaches him the
general laws of the air and sea, and the art of selecting and using
the currents, directing him, as it were, along the streets and
highways of the Ocean. On the other hand, Piddington in his small, but
instructive volume, sums up for him, and places in his hands, the
_Experience of Tempests_; not only how to avoid them, when possible,
but sometimes when to make them useful.

And this it is that at once explains and justifies the fine sentence
of the Dutch Captain Jansen. "At sea," says he, "the first impression
is that of the power of nature, the profundity of the depths--and our
own nothingness. On board of the largest ship, we still feel that we
are constantly in danger. But when the mind's eye has penetrated the
depths and surveyed the expanse, man no longer fears the danger. He
rises to the true sense of the situation. Guided by Astronomy, shown
by Maury along the highways and byways of the Ocean, he steers his
course safely and _confidently_."

This is truly sublime. The Tempest is not abolished, it is true; but
ignorance, bewilderment, that terrible bewilderment which is born of
danger and darkness, are abolished. At least if the seaman of the
present day perish, he will know the why and wherefore. Great, oh,
very great is the safeguard of having the calm, clear presence of
mind, with our soul and intellect unruffled and resigned to whatever
may be the effect of the great divine laws of the world which, at the
expense of a few shipwrecks, produce Equilibrium and Safety.




