CHAPTER V.

MAN'S WAR UPON THE RACES OF THE SEA.


On reviewing the whole history of Voyages, we are impressed by two
quite contrary feelings:

1. We admire the courage and genius with which man has conquered the
seas, and dominated his whole planet.

2. We are astonished to find him so unskilful in all that concerns the
conciliation of the inhabitants of the various seas and lands, that he
has conquered. Every where, the voyager has gone, as the enemy of the
young populations, whether human or brute, whether terrestrial or
maritime, which, properly treated, would have been, each in its own
limited sphere, so servicable to him. Man, as to the globe on which he
has made such grand discoveries, is like a musical novice, before some
immense Organ, from which he can produce but a few notes. Emerging
from the middle ages, after so much of philosophy and theology, he
still remained barbarous; of the sacred instrument, he only knew how
to break the keys.

The gold seekers, as we have seen, sought only gold, nothing but that;
man they pitilessly crushed. Columbus, though the last of them, shows
this with a quite terrible plainness and simplicity, in his own
journal. His words make us shudder, anticipating, prophesying, as they
do, what would be done by his successors. No sooner has he landed in
Haiti, than he enquires, "where is the gold? Who has got gold?" The
natives smiled, in their innocent astonishment, at this fierce desire
for gold. They promised him that they would search for it for him, and
in the mean time, gave their rings and ornaments to satisfy the
earlier, that eager appetite.

He gives us a most touching description of that unfortunate race, so
interesting for its beauty, its kindness, and its tender confidence.
But the Geonese, touchingly as he described that people, had his own
mission of avarice, his hard, stern habits of thought. The Turkish
wars, the atrocious galleys, and their wretched slaves, piracy and
manstealing, were the common life of that day. The sight of that
young, unarmed community, those poor, naked children, and lovely and
innocent women, inspired him only with the horrible mercantile
thought, that they might be very easily enslaved.

He would not, however, consent to have them carried away from the
beautiful island; they and it, belonged, said he, to the King and
Queen, Ferdinand and Isabella. But he said these darkly and terribly
significant words--"They are timid and well fitted for obedience. They
will do whatever they are ordered to do; a thousand of them would
retreat before three or four of ours. If your Highnesses give me the
order to carry them off or to enslave them here, there is nothing to
hinder it; fifty men will suffice to do it." Thus wrote he in his
Journal, or Despatch, of 14 and 16, December.

Presently came from Europe the wholesale sentence of that whole poor
innocent people. They were ordered to be the slaves of gold--all
subjected to compulsory labor, some to seek gold, and others to feed
the goldseekers.

Columbus confesses that in twelve years, six sevenths of that once
happy population had perished; and Herrera adds that in twenty-five
years, that population had fallen from a million of souls to fourteen
thousand.

What followed, is only too well known. The gold seeker and the planter
exterminated the natives and incessantly replaced them at the expense
of the negroes. And what has been the consequence? That in the low,
hot, immensely fecund countries, the black race alone, are permanent.
America will belong to that race; Europe has achieved precisely the
opposite of that which it intended.

Every where, in all directions, the colonizing impotency of Europe
has displayed itself in America. The French adventurer has not
survived; he took thither no family, and did take thither all the
worst vices of his native land. As a natural consequence, instead of
civilizing the barbarians, he added their vices to his own, and sank
to their barbarous level. With the exception of two temperate
countries into which they went _en masse_, and in families, the
English have not been much more successful than the French in planting
their race permanently and healthily in transmarine colonies. In
another century, India will scarcely know that the Englishmen once
lived there. Have the Missionaries, whether Catholic or Protestant,
made any converts? Dumont, the thoroughly well-informed Dumont, tells
me--"_not one_!"

Between them and us, there are thirty centuries and thirty religions.
Try to force their intellect, and the result will be that which the
truly great Humboldt observed in those American villages which are to
this day called "_Missions_;" that, having lost their own native
energies and traditions, without acquiring ours, they will sink into a
sort of stupefaction, become merely so many children of a larger
growth, alive in body, but dead in mind,--all but idiots, useless
alike to themselves and to others.

Our voyages, upon which we moderns, and more especially the learned,
so plume ourselves, have they been really, or at all, servicable to
the savages? I really cannot see it. While, on the one hand, the
heroic races of North America have perished of hunger and
wretchedness, the soft, effeminate, gentle races of the South, perish,
too, to the great shame of our seamen, who, in that distant part of
the world, have thrown off even the very mask of decency. Population
at once kindly and weak, in whom Bourgainville discerned such excess
of complaisance, among whom the English Missionaries have gained much
profit, but not a single soul,--kindly and weak people, they are
perishing miserably beneath the double scourge of the worst vices and
the most loathsome diseases of the old world.

Formerly, the long coast of Siberia was well peopled. Under that
terribly hard climate, the nomadic natives hunted the richly, the
preciously, furred animals which at once fed and clothed them. The
Russian despotism, at once strong and senseless, compelled them to
adopt the settled life of agriculturists, in a climate, and upon a
soil, where agriculture is an absurdity, an impossibility. The
consequence is that these peoples have gradually died off. On the
other hand, the trading spirit, that greedy and insatiable devourer,
has refused to spare the brutes in their breeding seasons, and as a
necessary consequence, the brutes have disappeared with the men; and
now, for a thousand miles along that coast, you have a terrible
solitude, where man hunts not, and where the brutes are not. The
winds may whistle shrilly, the frost may be bitter and biting as ever,
but there is neither man nor beast to listen to the one or to shudder
beneath the other.

Had our voyagers to the North been truly wise, their very first care
should have been to form a good, firm friendship with the Esquimaux,
to mitigate their miseries, to adopt some of their children and have
them well instructed in Europe, and thus lay the foundation of a great
indigenous race of discoverers. We learn from Captain John Ross, and
from not a few others, that they are very intelligent, and very
readily acquire the knowledge and the arts of Europe. Marriages would
have been contracted between European sailors and the native women; a
mixed population would thus have sprung up, to which all that northern
portion of the American continent would have been "native and to the
manor born." And that would have been the, at once, safe and sure way
of discovering the much coveted North-western passage. Thirty years--a
single generation--would have done it effectually--and in three
hundred years it has been done only uselessly because you have
terrified those poor savages; because you have destroyed alike the man
of the soil and the _Genius Loci_. What is the use of merely seeing
that desert, when, in the very act of seeing it you make it either
depopulated or hostile?

We may be quite sure that if man, civilized man, has thus ill treated
his uncivilized brother man, he has been neither more friendly nor
more merciful for the brutes. He has converted the gentlest and the
most affectionate of them forever, irreclaimably, into savage and
merciless foes to man. And man, civilized man, has done this. All the
old authors concur in telling us that when these poor brutes first
(most unluckily for themselves!) made the acquaintance of man, they
exhibited nothing but the most confident and inquisitive sympathy. He
could walk past and through whole families of Sea Cows and Seals, and
they never fled from him. The Penguins, and their kindred species,
followed him, begged a share of his shelter, yea, even nestled at
night beneath his garments.

Our forefathers, quite justly, believed that, to a very great extent,
the animals feel and love, even as we do. Certain it is that they have
a singular and very decided taste for music. The very Shad, simple as
they seem, will follow you to the sound of bells; Valence tells us;
and Noël tells us that he has often seen the poor Whale, the Joubarde
roll and frolic around the bark, delighted with the music, and,
fearless of the _man_!

What the poor, dumb creatures most enjoy; what they most possess of
intelligent life; what they have most been deprived of by dint of
human and very cruel persecution;--is the right, the security, the
sanctity of marriage! Fugitive and isolated, they now only retain that
which we, most cruelly, have left to them; temporary concubinage, that
miserable temporary concubinage which makes sterile every creature
that is subjected to it.

Marriage, fixed, settled, faithful, is the very life of nature,--and
we find it in even the poorest living tribes on which man's tyranny
has not yet imposed unnatural laws. The Roebuck, the Pigeon, that
prettiest of the Parrot family, the "Love Bird," and hundreds of other
species, which we, in our profound ignorance and fancied learning,
despise, have this instinctive love of marriage. You may notice that,
even among the other and wilder birds and beasts, the matrimonial tie
is inseparable, at least, until the young family is old enough to take
care of itself.

The Hare, in its timid and ever anxious life, the Bat, that strange
prowler in the dark night hours, are very very tender of their
families. The Crustaceæ, even, nay, even the very Poulpes have their
marital affection; take the female and the male is sure to be there,
to combat vainly, and to be taken with her.

How much more, then, shall Love, the Family, _Marriage_, in the true
sense of that word, exist among our gentle, truly gentle, till
brutally persecuted, amphibious creatures! Slow, sedentary, attached
to home, how natural, how inevitable it is, that, the male should be
true to his mate,--and she to him! Among them the husband will die
for, or with, the wife, either for the young one. And, among them,
too, we find what we too often, only in vain look for among what we
presumptuously term the higher animals, the young one will boldly
leave its shelter and fight for the mother that has previously rescued
him.

Steller and Hartwig mention a strange, an almost human scene enacted
in the family of the Otarie, another amphibious creature. The female
had allowed her young to be stolen from her. The male, furious, beat
her severely, and she grovelled and wept.

The Whales, which have not the fixed abode of the amphibii, yet cross
the Ocean in couples. Duhamel and Lacepede say, that in 1723, two
Whales being attacked kept firmly side by side. One of them being
killed, the other, with terrible moanings of mingled despair and
grief, of sympathy and rage, threw itself upon the dead body of its
mate and died, rather than retreat. If there was in the world one
being which, even more than any other ought to have been spared, it
was the free Whale, that admirable creature so abounding in value;
that most inoffensive of all the creatures of the Ocean whose very
food is different from that of man. Excepting its terribly strong
tail, this creature has not even a weapon of defence. And, then, the
poor thing has such a host of enemies! Every one and everything seems
to be hostile to it. Its parasites establish themselves, not only on,
but in its vast gnawing, even its very tongue. The Narvel, with its
terrible tusks pierces it, the Dolphins gnaw it, and the bold, ever
hungry, swiftly swimming, Shark tears huge bleeding morsels from it.

And, then, there are two blinded and ferocious foes that, in most
dastardly fashion, thin that inoffensive race even anticipatively;
killing the pregnant mother. First, there is the horrible Cachalot,
whose head makes a full third of its entire frame. This horrid
creature, with its crushing jaws, armed with forty-eight teeth,
literally eats the unborn young one. Man, still more cruel, causes the
poor creature a more prolonged suffering. The cruel harpoon, plunged
again and again into that quivering and sensitive body inflicts
suffering, such as we cannot even think of, without blushing for that
human nature of which we so often and so unblushingly boast.

Dying slowly, and in the long agony of many wounds, and of many
convulsions, she writhes, shudders, lashes the sea into a mad foam
with her terrible tail, and, even as she dies, feels about with her
poor hand-fins, as though striving once more to embrace and caress her
little one. Something dreadfully human, as it seems to me, is that
death scene of the poor Whale!

At this day we can scarcely even imagine what were the scenes of
butchery some two hundred years ago; while the Whales swam in shoals
and every shore swarmed with the amphibii. The enormous massacres
polluted the ocean with blood to an extent such as our human battles,
from the earliest day, cannot even begin to compare with. In a single
day, from fifteen to twenty Whales were killed, and fifteen hundred
Sea Elephants! And this was mere killing for the sake of killing. For
what was to be done with so many of those huge creatures, each of
which had so much blood and so much oil? What was the meaning of all
this cruel slaughter? What the result? Just simply, to redden and
pollute so many miles of the pure Ocean! To have the cold and cruel
enjoyment of most brutal tyrants; to watch, with cruel eye, the
lingering agonies and the fierce, but impotent struggles, of one of
God's noblest and most inoffensive creatures! Peron relates, with a
disgust which does him honor, that he saw a brutal sailor thus slowly
and brutally butcher a female Seal. She groaned and writhed like
something human; and whenever she opened her poor, bleeding mouth, he
dashed the oar into it, breaking her poor teeth at every thrust.

Durville tells us that at the new Shetland isles, in the South Seas,
the English and Americans actually exterminated the Seals in four
years; killing, in their blind rage, alike the newly born and
parturient female, and often they killed only for the skin, losing
the vast and very precious amount of oil.

Such slaughter as that is really a disgrace to our common humanity;
such butchery reveals a terrible, a loathsome, instinct, that makes us
shudder as we look around upon even our best and kindliest, and
reflect how soon and upon what slight temptation they, too, may become
cruel! On a smiling shore and among a notably amiable people, we
remember one of these murderous massacres to have taken place. Some
five or six hundred Tunnies were driven into a lovely bay that they
might be ignominiously murdered in a single day. The drag nets, so
vast that the capstan and the bars had to be brought into requisition,
to _heave_, rather than draw them in, brought the poor creatures into
that beautiful bay, to them, a veritable _chamber of death_, and all
around were bronzed, hardy, and cruel men, armed with harpoons and
pikes. And from distances of even twenty leagues around, fair
women--shame to our nature!--yea, women sat or stood to witness that
truly brutal butchery. The signal is given and the dastardly butchers
strike, and the pierced and bleeding victims writhe, bound,
agonize--as though they were human, and pitiless woman applauds the
prowess--Godwot!--of pitiless man! The waters, agitated by the vain,
though mighty struggle of the victims, is polluted and discolored with
blood and foam, and woman--Woman looks on this horrid scene and, when
the last victim has given its last gasp, sighs deeply and departs,
wearied, but not satisfied, and whispers--Is that all? And yet we call
ourselves only, "a little lower than the angels!"




