CHAPTER V.

THE FIERY AND THE WATERY CIRCLE--THE CURRENTS OF THE SEA.


Scarcely has the earth cast one glance upon herself ere she not merely
compares herself to the Heavens above, but vaunts her own superiority.
Geology, the mere infant, hurls a Titanic cry against her elder
sister, Astronomy, that haughty and splendid queen of all the
sciences. "Our mountains," exclaims Geology, "are not _cast confusedly
hither and thither like those stars in the sky_; our mountains form
systems in which are found the elements of a general and orderly
arrangement of which the celestial constellations present no trace."
Such is the bold and impassioned phrase which is uttered by a man as
modest as he is illustrious,--M. Elias de Beaumont. Doubtless, we have
not yet developed the order, which, yet, we may not doubt is great,
which prevails in the seeming confusion of the Milky Way, but the more
obvious regularity of the surface of the globe, the result of the
revolutions in its unfathomed and unfathomable depths, preserve
still, and ever will preserve, for the most ingenious science, many
clouds and many mysteries. The forms of that great mountain, upheaved
from the mighty mass of waters, which we call the Earth, shows many
arrangements which, while they are sufficiently symmetrical, are still
not reducible to what would seem a perfect system. The dry and
elevated portions show themselves more or less as the waters leave
them bare. It is the limiting line of the sea which, in reality,
traces out the form of continent and of island; it is by the Sea that
we commence all true understanding of Geography.

Let us note another fact, which has been discovered only within a few
years past. The Earth presents us with some seemingly antagonistic
features. The New World, for instance, stretches from north to south,
the Old World from east to west; the sea, on the contrary, exhibits a
great harmony, an exact correspondence between the two hemispheres. It
is in the fluid portion of our world, that portion which we have
deemed to be so capricious, that the greatest regularity exists. That
which this globe of ours presents of the most rigidly regular, the
most symmetrical, is just that which appears to be most utterly free,
most entirely the mere sport of unrestricted motion. No doubt, the
vertebræ and the bones of that vast creature have peculiarities which
we, as yet, are not qualified to comprehend. But its living movements
which cause the ocean currents, convert salt water into fresh water,
which anon is converted to vapor to return again to the salt water,
that admirable mechanism is as perfect and systematic as the
sanguineous circulation of the superior animals; as perfect a
resemblance as possible to the constant transformation of your own
venous and arterial blood.

The world would wear quite another aspect, were we to class its
regions, not by _chains of mountains_ but by _maritime basins_.

Southern Spain, resembles Morocco, more than Navarre; Provence,
resembles Algeria, rather than Dauphiny; Senegambia, the Amazon,
rather than the Red Sea; and the great valley of the Amazon, is more
like to the moist regions of Africa than it is to its arid neighbors,
Peru, Chili, &c.

The symmetry of the Atlantic is still more striking in its
under-currents and the winds and breezes that sweep over it. Their
action potently helps to create these analogies, and to form what we
may call the _fraternity of the shores_.

The principle of Geographical unity, will be more and more sought for
in the _maritime basin_, where the waters and the winds, faithful
intermediaries, create the relation, the assimilation, of the opposite
shores. Far less can we ask this illustration of Geographical unity
from the mountains, where two slopes frequently present to you, under
the same latitude, both a Flora and a population absolutely different;
on the one slope, eternal summer, on the other, eternal winter,
according to the aspect of each. The mountain rarely gives unity of
country; far more frequently, duality, discordance, actual diversity.

This striking state of the case was first pointed out by Borg. de
Saint Vincent, and has since, in a thousand instances, been confirmed
by the discoveries of Maury.

In the immense valley of the sea, beneath the double mountain of the
two continents, there are, strictly speaking, only two basins:--

1. _The basin of the Atlantic_;

2. _The great basin of the Indian Ocean, and the Pacific._

We cannot give the name of basin to the indeterminate cincture of the
great Austral Ocean, which has no boundary save that on the north it
is touched by the Indian Ocean, the Coraline and the Pacific.

The Austral Ocean alone exceeds in extent all other seas together, and
covers almost one-half of the entire globe. Apparently, the depth of
that sea is in proportion to its extent. While recent soundings of the
Atlantic give a result of 10,000 to 12,000 feet, Ross and Denham found
in the Southern Ocean from 14,000 to 46,000 feet. Here, too, we may
note the mass of the Antarctic ice, infinitely more vast than the
Arctic. We shall not be very wide of the truth, if we say that the
southern hemisphere is the world of waters, the northern the world of
land.

He who sails from Europe to cross the Atlantic, having been fortunate
enough to get clear of our ports in which he too frequently is
imprisoned by the westerly wind, and having cleared the variable zone
of our capricious seas, speedily gets into the fine climate and
constant serenity which the N. E. breezes, the genial trade-winds,
spread over sea and sky. Above and around, everything favors him,
everything smiles upon him, but, as he approaches the Line, the
inspiring breezes cease to breathe balmily upon him, and the air is
almost suffocating. He enters the circle of those calms which prevail
under the Equator, and present unchangeably their barrier between our
northern trade-winds and those of the south. Heavy mists and clouds
are all above and around him, and the tropical rains descend in mighty
torrents. Bitterly the seaman complains of those gloomy and deluging
clouds, but only for their gloomy screen what scathing beams would
descend upon the poor dizzy heads, and be reflected in smiting power
from the bright, broad mirror of the Atlantic? _But_ for those
torrents which fall upon the other face of our globe, the Indian Ocean
and the sea of Coral, what would be their fermentation in the craters
of their antique volcanoes! That dark mass of blackest clouds, once
the terror of the navigator and the obstacle to navigation, that
sudden and dense night extended over those broad waters form precisely
the safeguard, the protecting facility which softens our passage and
enables us, sailing southward still, to meet again the bright sun, the
clear sky, and the balmy mildness of the regular winds.

Quite naturally, quite inevitably, the heats of the Line raise the
waters in masses of vapor, and form that dark band, so threatening in
appearance, but in reality so beneficent.

The observer who from some other planet could look upon our world
would see around her a ring of clouds not unlike the belt of Saturn.
Did he seek the purpose and the use of that ring, he might, in reply,
be told--"It is the regulator which, by turns absorbing and giving
forth, equalizes the evaporation and fall of the waters, distributes
the rains and dews, modifies the heat of each country, interchanges
the vapors of the two worlds, and borrows from the southern world the
rivers and streams of our northern world." Marvellous co-partnership
and mutual reaction! South America, from the respiration of its vast
forests, condensed into clouds, fraternally nourishes the flowers and
fruits of our Europe. The air which revives and inspirits us, is the
tribute paid by the hundred isles of Asia, exhaled by the great
vegetation of Java or Ceylon, and entrusted to the great
cloud-messenger that turns with the world and sheds life and freshness
upon it.

Place yourself in imagination upon one of the many islands of the
Pacific and look to the southward. Behind New Holland you will
perceive that the southern ocean touches with its circular wave the
two extreme points of the old and the new continents. No land in that
antarctic world; not one of those little islands or of those pretended
Polar lands which discoverers have marked only to behold their
disappearance, and which probably have been but so many icebergs.
Water, still water; water without end.

From the same post of observation on which I have, in imagination,
placed you, in contrast with the great circle of antarctic waters,
look eastward, towards the arctic hemisphere, and you may discern what
Ritter terms the circle of fire. To speak more precisely, it is an
opened ring, formed by the volcanoes commencing at the Cordilleras,
passing by the heights of Asia, to the innumerable basaltic isles of
the eastern ocean. The first volcanoes, those of America, present, for
a length of a thousand leagues a succession of sixty gigantic Beacons
whose constant eruptions command the abrupt coast and the distant
waters. The others, from New Zealand to the North of the Philippines,
number eighty still burning, and a countless host that are extinct.
Steering northward, from Japan to Kamschatka, fifty flaming craters
dispense their ruddy lights far away to the gloomy seas of the Arctic.
In the whole, there is a circle of three hundred active volcanoes
around the eastern world.

On the other front of the globe, our Atlantic Ocean presented a
similar appearance, prior to the revolutions which extinguished most
of the volcanoes of Europe and annihilated the continent of the
Atlantis. Humboldt believes that that great ruin, only too strongly
attested by tradition, was only too real. I may venture to add that
the existence of that continent was in logical concordance with the
general symmetry of the world, for that face of the globe was thus
harmonized with the other. There rose, with the volcano of Teneriffe,
which alone remains of them, and with our extinct volcanoes of
Auvergne, of the Rhine, &c., those which were to destroy Atlantis.
Altogether, they formed the counterpoise of the volcanoes of the
Antilles, and other American craters.

From these burning or extinct volcanoes of India and the Antilles, of
the Cuban and the Javanese seas proceed two enormous streams of hot
water, which are to warm the north, and which we may fitly term the
aortæ of the world. They are provided, beside or beneath, with their
two counter currents which, flowing from the north, bring cold water
to compensate the flow of hot water and preserve the balance. To the
two streams of hot water which are extremely salt, the cold currents
administer a mass of fresher water which returns to the equator, the
great electric furnace, where it is heated and made salt.

These streams of hot water, narrow at first, some twenty leagues in
breadth, long preserve their force and their identity, but by degrees
they grow weaker as they widen ultimately to about a thousand leagues.
Maury estimates that the hot water stream which flows from the
Antilles in a northernly course towards us displaces and modifies a
fourth part of the waters of the Atlantic. These great features in the
life of the seas, noticed only recently, were, however, as visible as
the continents themselves. Our great Atlantic and her sister, the
Indian artery, proclaim themselves by their color. In each case it is
a great blue torrent which traverses the green waters; so darkly blue
is this torrent, that the Japanese call theirs the _black river_. Ours
is very clearly seen, as it leaps boilingly from the Gulf of Mexico,
between Cuba and Florida, and flows west, salt, and distinguishable
between its two green walls. In vain does the Ocean press upon it, on
either side, it still flows on, unbroken. By I know not what intrinsic
density, or molecular attraction, these blue waters are so firmly held
together, that, rather than admit the green water, they rear their
centre into an arch, and they thus slope to the right and to the left,
so that anything thrown into them rolls off into the ocean. Rapid and
strong, this Gulf stream at first flows towards the north, along the
shores of the United States; but, on reaching the great bank of
Newfoundland, its right arm sweeps off to the eastward, while the left
arm, as an under current, hastens to create, towards the Pole, the
recently discovered open sea where all else around is fast frozen. The
right arm spreading out, and proportionately weakened, at length
reaches Europe, touches Ireland and England, which again divide the
waters previously divided at Newfoundland. Weaker and weaker, it yet
carries a little warmth to Norway, and carries American woods to that
poor Iceland which, but for them, would die frozen beneath the very
fires of her volcano.

The Indian and the American streams have this in common, that,
starting from the Line, from the electric centre of the globe, they
carry with them immense powers of creation and agitation. On the one
hand they seem the deep and teeming womb of a whole world of living
creatures; on the other hand, they are the centre and the vehicle of
tempests, whirlwinds, and water spouts. So much nursing gentleness and
so much destroying fury; have we not here a great contradiction? No,
it proves only that the fury disturbs only the exterior and not any
considerable depths. The weakest creatures, shelled atomies, the
microscopic medusæ, fluid creatures that a mere touch dissolves,
availing themselves of the same current, sail, in all safety, though
the tempest is loud and fierce right above them. Few of them reach our
shores; they are met at Newfoundland by the cold stream from the Pole,
which slays them by myriads. Newfoundland is the very bone-house of
these frost-stricken voyagers. The lightest remain in suspension, even
after death; but at length sink, like snowy showers to the depths,
where they deposit those banks of shells which extend from Ireland to
America.

Murray calls the Indian and American streams of hot water, _the two
Milky Ways of the sea_.

So similar in color, heat, direction, and describing precisely the
same curve, they yet have not the same destiny. The American, at the
very outset, enters an inclement sea, the Atlantic, which, open to the
North, bears down the floating army of icebergs from the Pole, and it
thus early parts with much of its heat. The Indian stream, on the
contrary, first circulating among the isles, reaches a closed sea well
protected from the North, and thus for a long time preserves its
original heat, electric and creative, and traces upon our globe an
enormous train of life.

Its centre is the apogee of terrestrial energy, in vegetable
treasures, in monsters, in spices, in poisons. From the secondary
currents which it gives off, and which flow towards the North,
results another world, that of the Sea of Coral. There, says Maury,
over a space as large as the four continents the polypes are
industriously building thousands of islands, shoals, and reefs, which
are gradually studding and dividing that sea; shoals which at present
are the annoyance and the dread of the mariner, but which will at
length rise to the surface, join together to form a continent, which,
some day--who knows? may be the refuge of the human race, when flood,
or fire, or earthquake, leave it no other shelter.

John Reynaud in his fine article in the _Encyclopedie_, remarks that
our world is not solitary. The infinitely complicated curve which it
describes represents the forces, the various influences, which act
upon her, and bear testimony to her connection and communication with
the great luminaries of the Heavens.

That connection and communication are especially visible with the Sun
and Moon; the latter, though the servant of earth, has none the less
power over her. As the flowers of the earth turn their heads sunward,
so does the flower-bearing earth aspire towards him. In her most
movable portion, her immense fluid mass, she raises herself and gives
visible token of feeling his attraction. She rises as far as she can
and swelling her bosom twice a day gives, at least, a sigh to the
friendly stars.

Does not our earth feel the attraction of yet other globes? Are her
tides ruled only by the sun and moon? All the learned world say it,
all seamen believe it; thence terrible errors resulting in shipwrecks.
At the dangerous shallows of Saint Malo the error amounted to eighteen
feet. It was in 1839 that Chazallan, who nearly lost his life through
these errors, began to discover and calculate the secondary, but
considerable undulations which, under various influences, modify the
general tide. Stars less dominant than the sun and moon have,
doubtless, their share in producing the alternate rise and fall of the
waters of our globe. But under what law do they produce this effect?
Chazallan tells us;--"the undulation of the tide in a port _follows
the law of vibrating chords_." A serious and suggestive sentence,
that, which leads us to comprehend that the mutual relations of the
stars are the mathematical relations of the celestial music, as
antiquity affirmed.

The earth, by great and secondary tides, speaks to the planets, her
sisters. Do they reply to her? We must think so. From their fluid
elements they also must rise, sensible to the rise of the waters of
the earth. The mutual attraction, the tendency of each star to emerge
from egotism, must cause sublime dialogues to be heard in the skies.
Unfortunately the human ear can hear but the least part of them. There
is another point to be considered. It is not at the very moment of
the passing of the influential planet that the sea yields to its
influence. She is in no such servile haste to obey; she must have time
to feel and obey the attraction. She has to call the idle waters to
herself, to vanquish their inert force, to attract, to draw to her
the most distant. The rotation of the world, too, so terribly
rapid, is incessantly displacing the points subjected to the
attractive power. To this we must add that the great army of waves
in its combined motion has to encounter all the opposition of natural
obstacles,--islands, capes, straits, the various curvings of shores,
and the no less potent obstacles of winds, currents, and the rapid
descent of mountain torrents, swelled by the melted snows;--these, and
a thousand other unforseen accidents occur, to alter the regular
movement into terrible strife. The ocean yields not. The display of
strength which is made by broad and swift rivers cannot intimidate
him. The waters, that the rivers pour down upon him, he heaps them up
into mountainous masses and drives them back so violently that he
seems bent on forcing them to the summits of the mountains from whence
they have descended.

Obstacles thus numerous and various cause apparent tidal
irregularities, which at once impress and confuse our minds. None of
those irregularities is more surprising than the difference of their
time between two quite closely neighboring ports. One Havre tide, for
instance, equals two of Dieppe,--as is mentioned by Chazallon, Baude,
&c. It is greatly to the honor of human genius to have subjected
phenomena so complex to even proximately accurate calculation and
positive laws.

But beneath these exterior movements, the sea has others within; those
under currents by which she is traversed in various directions and at
varying depths. Superposed at different depths, or flowing laterally
in opposite directions, hot currents in one direction, cold counter
currents in another, they, between them, keep up the circulation of
the sea, the exchange of salt and fresh waters, and the alternating
pulsation which is the result. The hot _pulse-beat_ is from the line
to the pole; the cold, from the pole to the line. Shall we be
warranted in saying, as it has sometimes been said, that these
currents so distinct and unmingling, may be strictly compared to the
vessels, veins and arteries, of the superior animals? Strictly
speaking, we cannot so compare them; but they have considerable
resemblance to the less determinate circulation which materialists
have lately discovered in some inferior creatures, as molluscs and
annelides. That _lacunary_ circulation supplies the want of, and at
the same time prepares, the _vascular_; the blood flows in currents
before it has precise channels.

Such is the sea. She resembles a vast animal that has stopped short at
the first degree of organization. Who has developed the currents,
those regular fluctuation of the abysses into which we never descend?
Who has taught us the geography of those dark waters? Those that live
within or float upon those waters;--animals and vegetables. We shall
see how the huge whale and the minute shelled atomies, how even the
woods of America, floating to bleak Iceland, have concurred in
revealing the flow of hot water from the Antilles to Europe, and the
counter current of cold meeting it at Newfoundland, passing it beside
or below, and thus getting its ices melted into immense fogs.

A vast cloud of red animalcules, carried by a tempest from Orinoco to
France, explained the great aërial current of the Southwest which
brings to our Europe the rains that have their birth place in the far
Cordilleras of South America.

But for the constant change of waters which is made by the currents in
the depths of the sea, she would, in parts, be filled up with salt,
sands, animal and vegetable remains and the like detritus. It would be
another case of the Dead Sea, which, for want of movement, has its
banks loaded with salt, its vegetation incrusted with salt, and the
very winds that cross its surface, burning, withering, breathing only
of famine and of death.

All the scattered observations upon currents of the air and of the
water, the seasons, the winds and the tempests, were long confined to
the memory of the fishermen and sailors, and too frequently died with
them. Meteorology, that guide of navigation, for want of being
systematized and centralized seemed vain, and was even denied rank and
usefulness as a science. The illustrious M. Biot, demanded a strict
account of the little that she had yet done. However, upon the two
opposite shores of Europe and America, persevering men founded that
neglected and denied science upon the basis of observation.

The latest and most celebrated of these observers, Maury the American,
courageously undertook what a whole administration had recoiled from,
viz., to extract from and arrange the contents of I know not what
multitude of log books, those often confused and ill-kept records of
the sea captains. These extracts, reduced into tables under regular
heads, gave, in the result, rules and generalities. A congress of
seamen assembled at Bruxelles decided that the observations,
henceforth to be logged with more care, shall be sent from all parts
to the observatory at Washington. A noble compliment, that, paid by
Europe to young America and her patient and ingenious Maury, the
learned poet of the sea. He has not only summed up and exemplified her
laws; he has done much more, for, by the force of heart and by the
love of nature as much as by positive results, he has carried the
whole world with him. His charts and his first work, of which a
hundred and fifty thousand copies were printed, are liberally
distributed to sailors of all nations by the United States government.
A number of eminent men in France and in Holland, Tricot, Jullien,
Margole, Zurcher, and others, have made themselves the interpreters,
the eloquent missionaries, of this apostle of the sea.

Why is it that in this matter America, so young, has outstripped
Europe, so old? It is precisely because she is young, and burning with
a desire to be in close connection with the whole globe. Upon her
superb continent and in the midst of so many states, she yet deems
herself solitary. So far from her European brother, she looks towards
that centre of civilization as the earth looks toward the sun, and
whatever seems to draw her into closer and more familiar connection
with the grand old world, thrills her in every nerve. We have abundant
proof of that from the joy, the intoxication, the perfect frenzy with
which she hailed the completion of the submarine telegraph which
joined the two distant shores, and promised that they should
communicate within the brief space of minutes, in such wise that the
two worlds should have but one thought.




