CHAPTER VII.

TEMPESTS.


There are occasional commotions of the sea, which Maury, in his
forcible way, calls "the Sea's _spasms_." He especially alludes to the
sudden movements which appear to proceed from below, and which in the
Asiatic seas are often equivalent to a genuine tempest. These sudden
outbursts are attributed to various causes, as: 1st, the violent
collision of two tides or currents; 2nd, the sudden superabundance of
rain water on the sea's surface; 3rd, the breaking up and sudden
melting of the icebergs, &c. To these causes, some authors add the
hypothesis of electric movements and volcanic submarine heavings.

It seems probable, however, that the depths of the great mass of the
waters are quite peaceable; were it otherwise, the sea would be
unfitted for her office of nursing-mother to her myriads upon myriads
of living beings. If these occasional commotions, so violent at the
surface, were equally so at the bottom of the sea, what could preserve
the nurslings of that great nursery where a whole world of delicate
creatures more fragile even than those of our earth, are cradled in
and nourished by its waters? The myriad-life of the Ocean assures us
that these violent commotions cannot be common in its depths.

Naturally, the great sea is of great general regularity; subject to
great periodical and uniform movements. Tempests are the occasional
and transient violences into which the sea is lashed by the winds, by
electric power, or by certain violent crises of evaporation. They are
the mere accidents which reveal themselves on the surface, but tell us
nothing about the real, the mysterious personality of the sea. It
would be sad reasoning were we to judge of a human temperament by the
ravings of a brain-fevered man; and by what better right do we judge
the sea on account of the momentary and merely superficial movements
which probably do not make themselves felt to the depth of a very few
hundred feet? Everywhere that the sea is very deep, we may fairly
assume that she is constantly calm, ever producing, ever nourishing,
her quite literally countless brood. She takes no note of those petty
accidents which occur only at the surface. The mighty hosts of her
children that live, as we cannot too often repeat, in the depths of
her peaceful night, and rise at the most only once a year within the
influence of light and storm must love their great, calm, prolific
mother as Harmony itself.

But these surface-disturbances of the great mother Ocean have too
serious a bearing upon the life of man, to allow of his sparing any
pains towards obtaining a thorough comprehension of them. And to
obtain that comprehension is no easy matter; in making the necessary
observations, the boldest of us is a little apt to lose his cool
presence of mind. Even the most serious descriptions give only vague
and general features, scarcely anything of the marked individuality
which makes every tempest a thing of originality, a thing _sui
generis_, the unforeseen result of a thousand unknown circumstances,
potent in their influence, but obscure far beyond our power of search.
He who safely gazes from his safe watch-tower on the shore, may, no
doubt, see more clearly, as he is not distracted by his own danger.
But for that very reason, he cannot so well appreciate the tempest in
its grand and terrible entirety, as he can who is in the very centre
of its rage and of its power, and looks in every direction upon that
terrible panorama!

We mere landsmen are indebted to the bold navigators for at least the
courtesy of giving what old Chaucer calls "faith and full credence" to
what they tell us about what they have actually seen and suffered. It
seems to me that there is exceedingly bad taste in that sceptical
levity which men of the study, those stay-at-home travellers
occasionally exhibit in their criticisms of what seamen tell us, for
instance, about the height of the waves. They laugh at the seaman who
tells us of waves a hundred feet in height. Engineers affect to be
able to measure the tempest, and to assure us that twenty feet is the
utmost height of a wave. On the other hand, an excellent observer
assures us, on the testimony of his own sight, that standing in safety
on the shore, observing calmly, and in absence of all distraction, he
has seen waves that would overtop the towers of Notre Dame, and the
heights of Montmartre. It is abundantly evident that these opposing
witnesses speak of two totally different things; and hence their flat
contradiction. If we speak of the lower bed of the tempest, of those
long bowling waves which even in their fury preserve a certain
regularity, probably the calculation of the engineers is pretty exact.
With their rounded crests alternating with depressed valleys, it is
likely enough that their utmost height does not greatly exceed twenty
or five-and-twenty feet. But your chopping sea, where cross wave
furiously hurls itself against cross wave, rises far higher. In their
fierce collision they hurl each other to a quite prodigious height,
and fall with a crushing weight, assailed by which the stoutest craft
would open her seams, and go bodily down into the dark depths of the
angry sea. Nothing so heavy as sea water, in those mighty shocks,
those enormous falls of which sailors truthfully speak, and of which
none but those who have witnessed them, can calculate the tremendous
greatness and power.

On a certain day, not of tempest but of emotion, when old Ocean
indulged only in wild and graceful gaieties, I was tranquilly seated
upon a beautiful headland of some eighty feet in height, and I enjoyed
myself in watching the waves as upon a line of a quarter of a league
they rushed in as if to assail my rocky seat, the green crest of each
wave rounding and rearing, wave urging wave as though in actual and
intelligent racing. Now and then a sea would strike so that my very
headland seemed to tremble, and burst as with a thunder clap at my
very feet. Advancing, retiring, returning, breaking, the wildly
sportive waves were for a long time quite admirably regular in their
movements. But on a sudden this regularity was at an end. Some wild
cross wave from the west suddenly struck my great regular and hitherto
well behaved wave from the south. Such was the crash that in an
instant the very sky above me was darkened by the blinding spray; and
on my lofty promontory I was covered, not with the many colored and
fleeting mist, but with a huge, dark, massive wave, which fell on me,
heavy, crushing, and thoroughly saturating. Ah! Just then I should
very much have liked the company of those very learned Academicians
and ultra positive Engineers, who are so well posted up in the combats
of the Ocean, and so very certain that the utmost height of a wave is
just twenty feet! No; tranquilly seated in our studies we should _not_
lightly question the veracity of so many bold, hardy, and resolved
men, who have looked Death in the face too often to be guilty of the
childish vanity of exaggerating the dangers which they have often
braved--and are ready to brave again. Nor should we ever oppose the
calm narratives of ordinary navigators on the great and well known
courses to the animated and often thrilling pictures occasionally
presented to us by the bold discoverers who seek the very reefs and
shoals which the common herd of sailors so carefully avoid. Cook,
Peron, Durville--discoverers such as these incurred very real dangers
in the then unfrequented Australian and Coraline seas, compelled as
they were to dare the continually shifting sand bank, and the
conflicting currents which raise such frightful commotions in the
narrow channels.

"Without tempest, with only rollers to deal with, and with a moderate
wind right abaft, a cross wave will give your craft such a shock, that
the ship's bell will strike, and if these big rollers with their
sweeping motion, continue for any time, your masts will go by the
board, your seams will open--you will be a wreck." So says the
experienced Durville--gallant sailor, if ever there was one. And he
tells us that he has himself seen waves from eighty to a hundred feet
high. "These waves," he says, "only boarded us with their mere crests,
or the craft must have been swamped. As it was she staggered, and then
for an instant stood still, as though too terrified to understand what
was the matter. The men upon the deck were for moments completely
submerged. For four long hours that night this horrible chaos endured;
and those hours seemed an eternity to turn one's hair grey. Such are
the southern tempests, so terrible that even ashore the natives have a
presentiment of their approach, and shelter themselves in caves."

However exact and interesting these descriptions may be, I do not care
to copy them; still less would I be bold enough to invent descriptions
of what I have not seen. I will only speak briefly about tempests
which I have seen, and which have, as I believe, taught me the
different characteristics of the Ocean and the Mediterranean.

During half a year that I passed at about two leagues from Genoa, on
the prettiest shore in the world, at Nervi, I had in that sheltered
spot but one little sudden tempest, but while it lasted it raged with
a quite wonderful fury. As I could not, quite so well as I wished,
watch it from my window, I went out and along the narrow lanes that
separate the palaces, I ventured down, not indeed, to the beach, for
in reality, there is none worthy the name, but to a ledge of black,
volcanic rock, which forms the shore, a narrow path, often not
exceeding three feet in width, and as often overhanging the sea at
varying heights of from thirty up to sixty feet. One could not see far
out; the spray continually raised by the whirlwind, drew the curtain
too closely too allow of one's seeing far, or seeing much, but all
that was to be seen was sufficiently frightful. The raggedness, the
salient and cutting angles, of this iron-bound coast, compelled the
tempest to make incredible efforts, to take tremendous leaps, as,
foaming and howling, it broke upon the pitiless rocks. The tumult was
absurd, mad; there was nothing connected, nothing regular; discordant
thunders were mingled or followed by sharp shrill shrieks, like those
of the steam engine; piercing shrieks, against which one only in vain
tried to stop his ears. Stunned by this wild scene, which assailed
sight and hearing at once, I steadied myself against a projecting wall
of rock, and thus comparatively sheltered, I was better able to study
the grandly furious strife. Short and chopping were the waves, and the
fiercest of the strife was on this side where the sea broke on the
ragged, yet sharply pointed rocks, as they rose boldly above, and ran
out far beneath the waves, in long, shelving, reefs. The eye, as well
as the ear was vexed, for a blinding snow was falling, its dazzling
whiteness heightened by contrast with the dark waves into which it
fell.

On the whole, I felt that the Sea had less to do than the land in
rendering the scene terrible; it is exactly the contrary on the
Ocean.




