CHAPTER III.

THE ATOM.


From the bottom of his nets a fisherman one day gave me three almost
dying creatures, a sea hedge-hog, a sea star, and another star, a
pretty ophiure, which still moved and soon lost its delicate arms. I
gave them some sea water, but forgot them for two days, and when I
again saw them, all were dead. On the surface of the water a thick
gelatinous film had formed. I took an atom of this on the point of a
needle; that atom, when placed under the microscope, showed me the
following scene. A whirling crowd of short, thick, strongly built
animals--_Kolpodes_--rushed to and fro as though intoxicated with
their sense of life, delighted, I may say, that they were born and
keeping their birthday with a perfectly bacchanalian joy, while
microscopic eels--_Vibrions_--swam less than vibrated to spring
forward.

Wearied with the contemplation of such movement, the eye, however,
soon remarked, that all was not in motion, there were some vibrions
yet stiff and still, and there were some intertwined in heaps which
had not yet detached themselves and which looked as though expecting
the moment of their deliverance.

In that living fermentation of still motionless creatures, the
disorderly Kolpodes rushed and raged, hither and thither, regaling and
fattening themselves at will.

And this grand spectacle was displayed within the compass of an atom
of film taken on the point of a needle! How many such scenes would be
enacted in the whole of the gelatinous film which had so promptly
formed on the surface of the water containing three dead creatures!
The time had been wonderfully put to profit. In two days the dead had
made a world; for three animals that I had lost I had gained millions,
abounding in youth, absorbed in a real fury of new life!

That infinite world of life which every where surrounds us was almost
unknown until lately. Swammerdam and others, who formerly recognized
it, were stopped at their first step; and it was as lately as the year
1830, that the magician Uhrenberg looked, revealed, and classified it.
He studied the figure of these invisibles, their organization, their
manners; he saw them absorb, digest, chase, and fiercely battle. Their
generation remained a mystery to him. What is the nature of their
amours? _Have_ they any amours? For creatures so elementary, would
nature go to the expense of a complicated generation? Or do they
spring up spontaneously, and, in vulgar phrase, "like mushrooms?"

A great question! at which more than one naturalist smiles and shakes
his head. One is so certain of having solved the great mystery of the
world and secured, laid down, once and forever, the true laws of life!
It is for Nature to obey! When, a hundred years ago, Réaumur was told
that the female silk worm could produce alone and without the male, he
denied it in the brief phrase--"Out of nothing, nothing comes." But
the fact, often denied but always proved, is now thoroughly
established and admitted, not only as to the silk worm, but as to the
bee, certain butterflies, and still other creatures.

In all times, in every nation, both the learned and unlearned have
said, "Out of death cometh life." It was especially supposed that the
imperceptible animalculæ immediately sprang up from the wrecks of
death. Even Harvey, who first laid down the law of generation, did not
venture to contradict that ancient belief, for though he said every
body comes from the egg, he immediately added--_or from the dissolved
body of a preceding life_.

It is precisely the theory which has been so brilliantly revived by
the experiments of M. Ponchet. He has established the fact that from
the remains of the infusoriæ and other creatures, there proceeds a
fecund jelly, the "prolific membrane" from which spring, not new
beings, indeed, but the germs, the eggs from which new creatures will
spring.

We live in an age of miracles. This is not to astonish us. Any one
would formerly have been laughed at who had ventured to say that some
animals, disobedient to the general laws of nature, take the liberty
to breathe through their paws. The noble labors of Milne Edwards have
brought this to light. And Cuvier and Blainville had observed, it is
said, that other creatures, destitute of the regular organs of
circulation, supply their place by the intestines, but those great
naturalists deemed the fact so enormous and so incredible, that they
did not venture to publish it. It is now perfectly established by
Milne Edwards, M. de Quatrefages, &c.

Whatever may be thought of their birth, our atoms, when once born,
present a world infinitely and admirably varied. All forms of life are
there honorably represented. If they know themselves, they must
consider that they compose among themselves a harmony so complete as
to leave but little to desire.

They are not dispersed species, created apart; they clearly form a
kingdom in which the various species have organized a great division
of the vital labor. They have collective beings like our polypus or
coral insect, engaged in the servitude of a common life; and they have
their minute molluscs which already display their minute and delicate
shells; they have their swiftly swimming fish and whirling insects,
proud crustaceæ, miniatures of the future crabs, armed, like them, to
the teeth; warrior, atoms that chase and devour inoffensive atoms.

And all this in an enormous and marvellous abundance, which shows the
comparative poverty of our visible world. Without speaking of those
Rhizopodes which have made their part of the Apennines and the
Cordilleras,--the Foramineferes, alone, that numerous tribe of shelled
atoms, amount, according to Charles d'Orbigny, to two thousand
species. They are contemporary with every age of the earth; they
present themselves at all the various depths of our thirty crises of
the globe; sometimes varying a little in form, but always existing as
species; identical witnesses of the life of the earth. In the present
day the cold current from the south pole which the point of America
cuts in two, sends forty species towards La Plata and forty towards
Chili. But the great scene of their creation and organization appears
to be the warm stream of the sea which flows from the Antilles. The
northern currents kill them. The great paternal torrent drifts
myriads of their dead to Newfoundland in our ocean, whose bottom is
paved with them.

When the illustrious godfather of the atoms, Ehrenberg, baptised them
and introduced them to the scientific world, he was accused of being
too favorable to them, and of exaggerating the character of those
little creatures. He declared them to be a complicated and elevated
organization. So liberally did he endow them, that he gave them a
hundred and twenty stomachs. The visible world became jealous of these
invisibles, and, by a violent reaction, Dujardin reduced them to the
lowest degree of simplicity. The asserted organs he treated as mere
appearances; but, as he could not deny their obvious and great powers
of absorption, he granted them the gift of being able to improvise
stomachs proportioned to what they had to swallow. M. Pouchet does not
coincide with this opinion, but rather inclines to that of Ehrenberg.

What is incontestable and admirable in these atoms is the vigor of
movement.

Many have all the appearance of a precocious individuality. They do
not long remain subject to the communistic life led by their immediate
superiors, the true Polypes. Very many of these invisibles are
individuals at the first leap; that is to say, that, at the first
moment of their existence, they can come and go alone and at their
own will; true citizens of the world whose movements depend only upon
themselves.

Whatever can be seen or imagined of various modes of locomotion in the
visible world, is equalled, even surpassed, among these invisibles.
The impetuous whirl of a potent star, of a sun which attracts around
him, as his planets, the weaker one which he meets, the more irregular
course of the eccentric comet, the graceful undulation of the slender
one in the water or upon the land, the rocking barque that veers right
round in an instant, the rush of the swift shark and the slow crawl of
the wretched sloth--all and every movement, clumsy or graceful, slow
or swift, is to be found in the various species of atoms. And with
what a marvellous simplicity of machinery! Here you see one, a mere
thread, advancing, twisting, a veritable elastic cork-screw; there you
see one that for oar and rudder has only an undulating tail or a pair
of little vibrating eye-lashes. The beautiful little polypus-worms,
like flowers in a vase, anchor together upon an isle--a little plant,
or a miniature crab, and then separate and cast off by detaching their
delicate peduncle.

What is even more surprising than the organs of motion, is what we may
term the expression, the attitudes, the original signs of character
and temper. You may recognize here the apathetic, there the vivacious
and fantastic, some all alert for war, and others, as it would seem,
fretful and agitated without any apparent cause. Again, you will
occasionally see a whole crowd of remarkably quiet and peaceable atoms
suddenly dispersed and knocked over by some scapegrace atom, conscious
of superior strength, and spoiling for a fight.

A prodigious comedy is that of our atoms! They seem to be satirically
rehearsing the various farces which are played in our own noble and
serious world, of atoms of larger growth!

At the head of the infusoriæ, we must make respectful mention of the
majestic giants, the highest type of motion and of strength, slow, but
terrible and great.

Take some moss from a roof, steep it for a few hours in water, then
place it under the microscopic inspection, and you behold a vast, a
mighty animal, the elephant or the whale of the invisibles, moving
with a youthful grace which those large animals do not always display.
Respect this king of all the atoms, this rotifer, so called because on
either side of his head he has a wheel; these wheels are his organs of
locomotion, like the paddle-wheels of a steamship, or perhaps they
also serve him as his arms of chase to catch his small game, the
inferior and peaceable atoms! All fly, all yield to the rotifer, save
one; one atom only fears nothing, yields nothing, but trusts to his
superior weapons. He is a monster, but he is provided with superior
senses. He has two great gleaming, purplish eyes. He is slow, but he
can see, and he is admirably armed. To his strong paws he adds strong,
sharp talons, which serve him to hold on with, and, at need, to serve
him in the fight.

Potent initial essays of Nature, that with such small expenditure of
matter, can create in such majestic fashion! Sublime first note of the
sublime overture. These,--of what consequence is mere size?--have a
colossal power of absorption and of movement, far beyond that which
will be given to the enormous animals that are classed so much higher
in the animal scale.

The oyster fixed upon its rock, the crawling slug, are to the rotifers
creatures as disproportioned as man to the Alps or Cordilleras--so
disproportioned that one cannot compare them by glance, hardly by
reflection and calculation. Yet among those animal mountains, where
will you find the vivacity, the ardor of vitality, displayed by the
rotifer? What a fall we have as we ascend! Our atoms are too
vivacious, dazzlingly agile, and these gigantic beasts are smitten
with paralysis. What if the rotifer could conceive, for instance, the
superb, the colossal starred sponge, which one may see in the Museum
at Paris? It is to the rotifer what this globe, with its twenty-seven
thousand miles of circumference is to man. Well! If the rotifer could
compare himself to the huge sponge, rely upon it that the rotifer
would move his wheels in utmost excitement, and exclaim--"I am great."

Ah! Rotifer, rotifer! we should despise no one, and nothing.

I am well convinced of your advantages and your superiority. But who
knows if the captive and slumbering life which you, for instance,
despise in the oyster or the snail, or the slug, be not in truth a
progress? Your wild vertiginous movement, and vivacity, by no means
secure a passage towards higher destinies; for that passage, nature
prefers a motion of less enchantment. She enters the dark sepulchre of
that melancholy communism in which element reckons but for little; she
teaches how to dominate individual anxieties and ambitions, and to
concentrate substances for the benefit of superior lives.

She sleeps there, for a time, like the _Sleeping Beauty in the Wood_.
But sleep, captivity, enchantment, be it what it may, it is not Death.
In the sponge, seemingly so dead, what life there is! It moves not,
breathes not, has no organs of circulation, or of sense,--and yet it
lives. How know we that, do you ask? Twice in every year the sponge
reproduces. She lives after her fashion, and even more richly than
many others. At the proper day, small spheres leave the mother sponge,
armed with minute fins, which enable them for a short time to float
about in full liberty, but soon coming to anchor, they remain there,
growing, reproducing, till the sponge-hunter carries them to the
habitations of man, to the service of the greater enslaver, man, the
civilized.

Thus, in the apparent absence of senses, and of all organization, in
that mysterious enigma, at the doubtful threshold of life, generation
opens up to us the visible world by which we are to ascend. As yet
there is nothing, and in the bosom of that nothingness maternity
already appears. As with the fabled gods of antique and mysterious
Egypt, as with that old Isis and Osiris, who begat before their birth,
here, also, Love exists before Being.




