
Transcriber's Note

Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

All oe ligatures were converted to oe.




THE SEA.




_UNIFORM WITH THIS VOLUME_,

And by the same Author.


    _LOVE_ (L'AMOUR.) (_Twenty-seventh edition._)  Price, $1,00
    _WOMAN_ (LA FEMME.) (_Thirteenth edition._)            1,00
    _THE CHILD_ (L'ENFANT.) (_In press._)
    _THE INSECT_ (L'INSÈCTE) Its Life, Loves and Labors. (_In press._)
    _THE BIRD_ (L'OISEAU.) Its Life, Loves, and Labors.   (_In press._)
    _WOMEN OF THE FRENCH REVOLUTION._   (_In press._)




THE SEA

(La Mer.)


From the French of

M. J. MICHELET,


_Of the Faculty of Letters, Author of "A History of France,"
"Love," "Woman," "The Child," "The Insect," "The Bird,"
"Women of the French Revolution," etc., etc., etc._


TRANSLATED FROM THE LATEST PARIS EDITION.


[Illustration]

NEW YORK:

RUDD & CARLETON, 180 GRAND STREET

PARIS: L. HACHETTE ET Cie.

MDCCCLXI.




    Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1861, by

    RUDD & CARLETON,

    In the Clerk's office of the District Court of the
    Southern District of New York.




EXTRACT FROM THE LONDON ATHENÆUM, Feb. 9. 1861.


'The Sea' is another of M. Michelet's dreamy volumes,--half science,
half fancy, with a blending in both of sensuous suggestion. M.
Michelet takes the seas of the world in his hands, manipulates them,
invokes their monsters, assembles all their finny droves, gossips with
the sirens, sails among the Hyperborean waters with Behemoth, and is
on intimate terms with Tennyson's little shell-king, who lives in a
palace with doors of diamond, and wears a rainbow frill, for the
admiration of the nations that dwell in his dim, sunken wildernesses.
* * * * * He discourses upon marine terrors and beauties, and tells
the reader, as a sublime Peter Parley might, that the salt of all the
seas, if piled upon America, would spread over the continent a solid,
cliff-edged mass, 4,500 feet high. There are chapters on Sands, Cliffs
and Beaches; on Waves; on the anatomy of the Sea itself, which
resembles "a gigantic animal arrested in the earliest stage of its
organization;" on Tempests; on the sympathy between Air and Water; on
the Fecundity of the Sea, which, were it not self-devouring, would
putrefy, according to M. Michelet into one solid mass of herring; on
Fish of every species, and especially on Pearls. The Queens of the
East, he says, dislike the gleams of the diamond. They will allow
nothing to touch their skins except pearls. A necklace and two
bracelets of pearls constitute the perfection of ornament. The pearls
silently say to the woman, "Love us! hush!" In the North, too, dainty
Countesses love their pearls,--wearing them beneath their clothes by
night and by day, concealing them, caressing them, only now and then
exposing them. So do the Odalisques of Asia prize the soft linen
vestment that just covers their limbs, never taking it off until worn
out, which says little for Oriental baths.

       *       *       *       *       *

The book is pleasant reading, like all else that M. Michelet writes.




CONTENTS.


                                                                    Page

Extract from The London Atheneum,                                      5


BOOK FIRST.

  A GLANCE UPON THE SEAS.

     I. The Sea as seen from the Shore,                               11
    II. The Beach, the Sands, and the Iron Bound Coast,               19
   III. The Same, (_Continued_)                                       24
    IV. The Same, (_Continued_)                                       81
     V. The Fiery and the Watery Circle. The Currents of the Sea,     40
    VI. Tempests,                                                     58
   VII. Tempests (_Continued_)                                        63
  VIII. The Storm of October, 1859,                                   72
    IX. The Beacons,                                                  91


BOOK SECOND.

  THE GENESIS OF THE SEA.

     I. Fecundity,                                                   105
    II. The Milky Sea,                                               114
   III. The Atom,                                                    128
    IV. Blood-Flower,                                                139
     V. The World Makers,                                            149
    VI. Daughter of the Seas,                                        160

   VII. The Stone Picker,                                            173
  VIII. Shells, Mother of Pearl, and Pearl,                          182
    IX. The Sea Rovers (Poulpe, &c.)                                 194
     X. Crustaceæ. Battle and Intrigue,                              202
    XI. The Fish,                                                    212
   XII. The Whale,                                                   225
  XIII. The Syrens,                                                  236


BOOK THIRD.

  CONQUEST OF THE SEA.

     I. The Harpoon,                                                 251
    II. Discovery of the Three Oceans,                               260
   III. The Law of Storms,                                           275
    IV. The Polar Seas,                                              289
     V. Man's War upon the Races of the Sea,                         306
    VI. The Law of the Ocean,                                        319


BOOK FOURTH.

  THE RESTORATION OF THE SEA.

     I. Origin of Sea Bathing,                                       329
    II. Choice of Coast,                                             340
   III. The House,                                                   349
    IV. First Aspiration of the Sea,                                 360
     V. Baths. Restoration of Beauty,                                369
    VI. The Restoration of Heart and Brotherhood,                    377
   VII. The New Life of the Nations,                                 388

Notes.                                                               401




BOOK FIRST.

  A GLANCE UPON THE SEAS.




CHAPTER I.

THE SEA AS SEEN FROM THE SHORE.


A gallant Dutch seaman, a cool and stern observer, who has passed his
whole life at sea, frankly tells us that his feeling on first seeing
the ocean was _fear_. For all terrestrial animals, water is the
non-respirable element, the ever heaving but inevitably asphyxiating
enemy; the fatal and eternal barrier between the two worlds. We need
not, all things being considered, be at all surprised, if that immense
mass of waters which we call the sea, dark and inscrutable in its
immense depths, ever and always impresses the human mind with a vague
and resistless awe.

The imaginative Orientals see it only and call it only, as, the _Night
of the Depths_. In all the antique tongues, from India to Ireland, the
synonymous or analogous name of the sea is either _Night_ or the
_Desert_.

Ah! With what a great and a hallowed and a hallowing, with what an at
once soothing and subduing melancholy it is that, evening after
evening, we see the Sun, that great world's joy, that brilliant,
life-quickening, and light-giving Sun of all that lives, fade, sink,
die--though so surely to rise and live again! Ah! as that glorious
light departs, how tenderly do we think of the human loves that have
died from us--of the hour when we, also, shall thus depart from human
ken, lost, for the time, to this world--to shine more gloriously in
that other world, now dark, distant, unknown, but certain.

Descend to even a slight depth in the sea, and the beauty and
brilliancy of the upper light are lost; you enter into a persistent
twilight, and misty and half-lurid haze; a little lower, and even that
sinister and eldritch twilight is lost, and all around you is Night,
showing nothing, but suggesting everything that darkness,--handmaiden
of terrible Fancy--can suggest. Above, below, beneath, all around,
darkness, utter darkness, save when, from time to time, the swift and
gracefully terrible motion of some passing monster of the deep makes
"darkness visible" for a brief moment--and, then, that passing gleam
leaves you in darkness more dense, more utter, more terrible, than
ever. Immense in its extent, enormous in its depth, that mass of
waters which covers the greater part of our globe seems, in truth, a
great world of shadows and of gloom. And it is that which, above all,
at once fascinates and intimidates us. Darkness and Fear! Twin
sisters, they! In the early day, the at once timid and unreasoning
Childhood of our race, men imagined that where no Light was, neither
could there be Life; that in the unfathomed depths, there was a black,
lifeless, soundless, Chaos; above, nought but water and
gloom,--beneath, sand, and shells, the bones of the wrecked mariner,
the rich wares of the far off, ruined, and vainly bewailing
merchant;--those sad treasures of "that ever-receiving and
never-restoring treasury--the Sea."

The waters of the sea afford us no encouragement by their
transparency. Look not there for the seductive, brightly sparkling,
and ever-smiling nymph of the fountain. Opaque, heavy, mighty,
merciless, your sea is a liquid Polyphemus, a blind giant that cares
not, reasons not, feels not--but hits a terribly hard blow. Trust
yourself upon that vast and ever-heaving bosom, bold swimmer, and
marvellously will you be upheld; the mighty thing that upholds you
dominates you, too; you are a mere weak child, upheld, indeed, for the
instant by a giant-hand--in another moment that giant-hand may smite
you with a giant's fatal force.

Her anchor once tripped, who can tell whither the good ship may be
urged by some sudden wind, or some unsuspected but irresistible
current? Thus it was that our northern fishermen, not only without
their intention, but even in spite of it, discovered polar America,
and supped full of the horrors of funereal Greenland. Not a nation
upon the earth but has its tales and traditions of the sea. Homer and
the _Arabian Nights_, have handed down to us a goodly number of those
frightful legends, of shoals and tempests and of calms no less
murderous than tempests,--those calms during which the hardiest sailor
agonizes, moans, loses all courage and all hope in the tortures of the
hours, days, haply even weeks, when, with cracked lip and
blood-shotten eye, he has around him, heaving upward and sinking
downward, but never progressing a cable's length,

    "Water, water, everywhere,
    But not a drop to drink."

Thrilling and saddening legends have all our old writers handed down
to us of the Anthropophagi, those loathsome man-eaters, and of the
Leviathan, the Kraken, the great sea-serpent, &c. The name given to
the great African desert--_The Abode of Terror_,--may very justly be
transferred to the sea. The boldest sailors, Phoenicians and
Carthaginians, the conquering Arabs who aspired to encircle and grasp
the whole world, seduced by what they heard of the Hesperides and the
land of gold, sailed out of the Mediterranean to the wide ocean, but
soon were glad to seek their port again. The gloomy line eternally
covered with clouds and mist which they found keeping their stern
watch before the equator, intimidated them. They lay to; they
hesitated; from man to man ran the murmur "_It is the Sea of
Darkness_--and, then, back went they to port and, there told to
wondering landsmen what wonders they had seen, and what horrors they
had imagined." Woe to him who shall persist in his sacrilegious
espionage of that dread region! On one of those weird and far isles
stands a sternly-threatening Colossus, whose sempiternal menace
is--"Thus far thou hast come--farther thou shalt not go!"

Childish as we may think those terrors of the long by-gone ages they
really were much the same as the emotions which we may any day see
evinced by an inland-born novice who for the first time looks upon the
sea. And not merely man, but all animals, experience the same
surprise, the same shock, when suddenly brought face to face with the
mighty water-world. Even at ebb tide, when the water so gently and so
lovingly caresses, as it leaves, that shore to which it shall so
boisterously return, your horse quite evidently likes it not; he
shudders, balks, snorts,--and very often bolts from it at the very top
of his speed. Your dog recoils, howls, and, after his own canine
fashion, returns insult for insult to the waves that annoy and terrify
him; he never concludes a real peace with the element which to him
seems less doubtful than positively hostile. A certain traveller tells
us that the Kamtschatkan dogs, accustomed as they are to the sight of
the sea, are nevertheless irritated and alarmed by it. During the long
nights immense troops of them howl back to the howling waves that
break, in their furious might, upon the iron-bound shores of the
northern ocean.

The natural introduction, the portico, the ante-room, of the Ocean,
which prepares us thoroughly to appreciate its vast and melancholy
extent, is to be found in the dreary course of the rivers of
north-western France, the vast sands of the South, or the sad and
rarely trodden _Landes_ of Brittany. All who approach the sea by any
of those routes are greatly impressed by that intermediate region. All
along the rivers, there is a seemingly infinite chaos of roots and
stumps, of willows and the like water-loving vegetation, and the
waters becoming more and more brackish, at length become absolutely
salt--the veritable sea-water. In the Landes, on the other hand, as we
approach the sea, we have a preliminary and preparatory sea of
low-growing and coarse shrubs, broom, and bushes. Proceed a league or
two, and you see sickly and drooping trees which seem, after their
manner, to tell you how much they suffer from the blighting breath of
their near neighbor, and great tyrant, the Sea. Evidently, if they
were not held there by their great strong roots they would fly to some
climate more genial and some soil more generous; they turn every
branch from the sea and towards the earth, as though they were a
routed host, disorganized, panic-stricken, and prepared to seek safety
in flight. Fixed to the soil, they bend themselves eastward,
twisting, writhing, mutely agonized at every new assault of the
storm-winds from the seaward. Still nearer to the Sea, the trunk of
the tree is slender, its stature dwarfish, and its few poor branches
spread themselves confusedly to the horizon. On the shore, on the very
margin and boundary line between land and Sea, where the crushed
shells rise in a fine and pungent dust, the trees are invaded,
covered, choked up with it; their pores are closed, they inhale no
air, they are stifled; still living as to form, they are mere
petrified trees, spectral trees, melancholy shadows which have not
even the privilege of departing,--sad prisoners--even in death! Long
before we are face to face with the Sea, we can hear and imagine that
grand and terrible entity. At first, we hear only a dull, uniform, and
distant moaning, which grows louder and louder still, until its
majestic roar silences, or covers, all meaner sounds. Very soon we
perceive that that roar is not monotonous, but has its alternating
notes; its full, rich, mellow tenor, and its round, deep, majestic
bass. The pendulum of the clock oscillates less regularly than that
alternating moan and roar of the Ocean in its grand unrest. And this
latter, let me repeat it, has _not_ the monotony of the pendulum, for
in "what those wild waves are saying," we feel, or fancy that we feel
the thrilling intonations of life. And in fact, at high flood, when
wave rears its crest upon wave, immense, electric, there mingles with
the tumultuous roaring of the fiercely rushing waters, the sound of
the shells and pebbles, and the thousand things animate as well as
inanimate that they carry with them in their shoreward rush. When the
ebb comes, a soft murmur tells us that, together with the sands, the
sea carries back into her depths all with which for a few brief hours
the shore had been adorned or enriched.

And how many other voices hath the mighty sea! Even when least
agitated, how her wailings and her deep sighs contrast with the dull
dead silence of the deserted shore, which seems to expect, in mute
terror, the threatening of that mighty mass which so recently laved it
with a gentle and caressing wavelet. And will she not speedily fulfil
her threat? I know not, and will not anticipate. I will not, just now,
at least, speak of those terrible concerts in which, haply, she ere
long will take the principal part; of her duets with the rocks, of the
basses, those muttered thunders which she utters in the deep caverns
of the rocky shore, or of those strange, wild, weird, shrieking tones
in which we seem to recognize the "_Help, spare, save me!_" of some
tortured or fearfully imperilled humanity. No; let us, for the
present, contemplate her in her calmer moods; when she is strong,
indeed, but not violent.




