CHAPTER XIII.

THE SYRENS.


Behold me once more on shore. I had enough, and to spare, of
shipwreck. I want durable races. The Cetaceæ must disappear. Let us
moderate our conceptions, and, of that gigantic faëry of the
first-born mammalia, of milk and warm blood, let us preserve all
except the giant.

Above all, let us preserve the gentleness, the love, and the love of
family. Let us preserve them completely in those humbler but kindly
races into which both elements infuse their spirits.

The benedictions of the Earth already begin to be felt. On quitting
the life of the fish, many things impossible to it, easily become
harmonized.

Thus the Whale, tender mother if ever there was one, could grasp her
nursling, but could not press it to her breast, the arms being too
high and short, and the breast, as we have already shown, being,
perforce, placed far back. In the new creatures, which swim, but
which also creep upon the land, such as seals, sea cows, &c., the
breast, lest it should be hurt by the ground, is placed upon the
chest, thus foreshadowing woman, and giving to the form and attitude,
a grace most illusive at a distance.

In reality, even closely examined, if it has less of charming
whiteness, the breast of the new creatures is a true feminine breast;
that globe which, swelling with love, and with the sweet necessity of
giving suck, exhibits, in its gentle heavings, all the sighs of the
heart beneath, and invites the child to nourishment and soft repose.
All this is denied to the mother that swims and floats, but is enjoyed
by her who rests. The fixity of the family, the constant tenderness,
let us at once say, Society, all these commence from the moment that
the child reposes on the maternal breast.

But how is organization to pass from creatures of the sea to creatures
of both sea and land? Let us try to divine that transition.

At the outset, the parentage of the amphibious race is evident. Many,
amphibious still, to their great inconvenience, have the heavy tail of
the Whale. And this latter, in one species, at least, conceals in its
tail the rude outlines and distinct commencements of the two hind feet
of the highest of the amphibious creatures.

In the seas studded with islands, continually interposing land, the
cetaceæ, so frequently interrupted in their passage, had to modify
their habits accordingly. Their less rapid motion, and confined life,
diminished their bulk, and from the Whale they were reduced to the sea
Elephant, and reserving the memory of the superb which had armed
certain of the cetaceæ, in their grand sea life, the sea Elephant
still has strong, but very harmless fore teeth. Even its masticating
teeth are not precisely either herbivorous or carnivorous. They are
but ill adapted to either diet, and must needs operate but slowly.

Two things tended to lighten the Whale; his mass of blubber, that vast
mass of concentrated oil, which floated him on the water, and that
powerful tail whose alternate strokes to right and left, urged him
onward. But all this was unfitted for the amphibious creature,
grovelling in shallow waters, or crawling on the rocks. The fish, so
agile, scorns a creature that cannot catch him, and he consequently
gets little other prey than the molluscs, as slow as himself. By
degrees, he learns to eat the abundant and gelatinous sea wrack, which
nourishes, and fattens, but without giving the strength of animal
food.

Such a one we may see in the Red Sea, the Malay isles, and those of
Australia. Crawling or sitting, that rare collossus, the Dugong,
displays its chests and breasts. He is sometimes called the Dagon of
the Tabernacles, an inert idol, which in spite of its imposing
aspect, cannot defend itself, and which will soon disappear, and enter
into that region of fable which already contains so many realities, at
which we as stupidly, as presumptuously, laugh. What has caused this
great change, created the terrestrial Dugong, and his brother the
Walrus? The plentiful alimentation of the generous and fertile earth,
truly pacific before the coming of man, and doubtless, also, Love, so
difficult to the Whale, so easy in the quiet and settled life of the
amphibious.

Love, to these latter, is no longer a thing of flight and danger; the
female is no longer the shy giant that must be followed to the end of
the world, but is content, on her bed of sea-weed, to obey the will of
her master, whose life she makes pleasant. Few mysteries here. The
amphibious live frankly and honestly in the face of day. The females
being very numerous, voluntarily form a seraglio. From wild, fierce
poetry, we descend to patriarchal manners and pleasures too facile.
The male, good patriarch, notable for his large head, his moustaches,
and his great front teeth, sits proudly between his Sarah and Agar,
Rebecca and Leah, and his little flock of young ones, to all of which
he is most kind. In his quiet life, the great strength of this
sanguineous creature, turns wholly to family tenderness; he embraces
all his family, and is willing to die, if need be, in their defence.
But, alas! his strength and his fury serve him but feebly for even
his own defence: his enormous mass delivers him over to the enemy. He
bellows, and crawls, and is willing to combat, but unable--gigantic
failure as he is; an abortion belonging to neither world, a poor
disarmed Caliban.

Weight, so fatal to the Whale, is still more so to these. Let us,
then, still farther reduce the bulk, make, the spine more supple, and
above all, either do away with that tail, or rather, let us fork it
into two fleshy appendages, which will be much more useful. This new
being, the Seal, lighter, a good fisher, getting his subsistence in
the sea, but living on the land, will employ his life in endeavoring
to return to it, to climb the rock to which his females and their
offspring await his return from fishing. Having no tusks, like those
with which the Walrus assists himself in climbing, he presses into the
service his front and back members, clings to the sea-weed, distending
his members continually, until they form into fingers.

What is finest in the Seal, what strikes you the moment you catch
sight of his round head, is the great capaciousness of brain. Boitard
assures us that, with the exception of man, no creature has so fine a
cerebral development as the Seal. We are strongly impressed by the
aspect of the Seal, far more so than by that of the ape tribe, whose
grimaces never fail to revolt us. I shall never forget the Seals in
the Zoological Garden at Amsterdam, admirable museum, so rich, so
beautiful, so well organized, decidedly one of the finest
establishments in the world. I was there on the twelfth of last July,
just after a great rain fall. The atmosphere was heavy and sultry, and
two Seals sought shelter and coolness, swimming and playing in their
pond. When they rested they looked up at me with their velvety eyes,
and there was a mixed intelligence and melancholy in their fixed gaze.
There was no language which we could mutually understand. Pity that,
between soul and soul, there should be that eternal barrier!

The earth is the world of their greatest affection. There they are
born, there they love; thither, when wounded, they retire to die.
Thither they take their pregnant females, form for them their beds of
sea-weed, and provide them with fish. They are very affectionate, good
neighbors, mutually defending each other; only at their season of
amours they are a little apt to fight. Each male has two or three
females that he finds a home for on some mossy rock of sufficient
extent. That is his estate, and he suffers no intrusion upon it. He
knows how to maintain his right of proprietorship. The females are
gentle and defenceless. If ill treated, they weep, are agitated and
cast despairing glances upon the assailant.

They are parturient during nine months, and nurse their young during
five or six months, teaching them to swim, fish, and select the best
food. No doubt they would keep them still longer, but the husband is
jealous of his own progeny, fearing that the too weak mother will give
him a rival.

No doubt this brevity of education has limited the progress which the
Seal would otherwise have made. Maternity is only complete when we
come to the Sea Cow, an excellent family in which the parents have not
the sad courage to drive away their young. The mothers nurse them for
a long time; even while suckling a second, the mother still keeps by
her the eldest, which, though it be a male, the father never ill
treats, but seems to regard him with a love only second to that of the
mother.

This extreme tenderness, peculiar to that species, is exemplified in
the physical progress made in the organization. In the Seal, a great
swimmer, and in the heavy and clumsy sea Elephant the arms still
continue to be fins; closely attached to the body are incapable of
extension. But at length the Sea Cow, the _Sea Mama_ as the negroes
call her, accomplishes the miracle. All extend and becomes pliant by a
continuous effort. Nature exerts all her ingenuity upon the fixed idea
of holding, pressing, caressing the young. The ligaments yield and
extend, the fore arm appears and by and by appears the hand.

And then the mother has the great, the supreme pleasure to press her
young one to her breast. Here, then, are two things which may enable
these amphibious creatures to make great progress. Already they have
the hand, that organ of industry, that essential instrument of future
toil. It must be supplied, must aid the work of the teeth as with the
Beaver, and the Ant, will commence, at the outset, with building a
home for the family.

On the other hand, education, also, has become possible. The young one
rests on the maternal bosom and, slowly drinking in her life, remains
there a long time, and to an age when he can learn every thing,--all
this depends on the kindness of the father who protects the innocent
rival. And it is that which allows of progress.

And, if we might give credence to certain traditions, progress did
marvellously continue. The developed amphibious creatures, according
to those traditions, approached nearer and nearer to the human form
and became Tritons and Syrens, men and women of the Sea. Only, in
contradiction to the fables of the melodious Syrens, these are dumb in
their utter impotency to find a language in which to address
themselves to man and obtain his pity. These races will have perished,
as has the unfortunate Beaver which cannot speak, but weeps.

It has been very lightly affirmed that these men and women of the Sea
were Seals. But how is it possible that such a mistake could be made?
Every species of the Seal has been known from very early times; even
as early as the seventh century the Seal was hunted, not only for his
skin, but also for his flesh, which was then eaten.

The men and women of the Sea which are spoken of in the writings of
the sixteenth century, were seen, not merely for an instant, and on
the water, but brought to land, shown, and kept in the great cities of
Antwerp and Amsterdam in the time of Charles V. and Philip II., and,
therefore, under the very eyes of Vesale and other learned men and
eminent naturalists. Mention is made of a marine woman who, for
several years, wore the dress of a nun and lived in a Convent where
any one might see her. She could not speak, but worked, and could
spin, knit, and sew. Only one peculiarity, they could not cure her
of,--her great love of the water, and her incessant efforts to return
to it.

But it will be asked--"If these creatures really existed, how is it
that we do not see them now?" Alas! We need not seek far for the
reply. They were so generally killed! It was considered a sin to let
them live, "for they were _monsters_." This we are expressly told by
the old writers.

Whatever had not the known form of animality, and, especially,
whatever approached to the form of man passed for a _monster_, and was
pitilessly dispatched. Even the human mother of a greatly deformed
child, could not protect it; the poor creature was smothered, as being
a child of the Devil, an invention of his malice to outrage the
creation and calumniate the Deity. On the other hand, those Syrens,
too analogous to humanity, were all the more taken and detested for a
diabolic mockery. In such horror and hate were they held in the eyes
of the middle ages that their appearance was considered a prodigy, an
omen that God permitted to terrify sinners. People scarcely dared to
name them, and made haste to get rid of them. Even the bold sixteenth
century still believed them to be men and women in shape, but Devils
in reality, and not even to be touched, excepting with the harpoon.
They had become very rare when miscreants made a profit of keeping and
exhibiting them.

But do there now exist any remains, any whole, or even partial,
skeletons of these creatures? We shall know that, when the Museums of
Europe shall throw open to our view the whole of their immense
collections. I am aware that room is wanting for that; and it is
always likely to be wanting, if we need a palace. But the most simple
building, if it only be sufficiently spacious and weather tight, would
serve to hold such collections, and needs not to be at all costly.
Hitherto, we have only seen mere specimens and selections.

Let us add that stuffed amphibious creatures, to give us a real idea
of them, should be so placed as to exhibit _these monsters_ in the
attitudes of their actual life. Let the maternal Seal, or the Sea Cow,
be seen on its rock, as a Syren, in the first use of her hand and
pressing her little one to her breast.

Is this to affirm that these creatures might have ascended to us? Or
that we have descended from them? Mallet supposed so, but I cannot see
the least probability in either.

The Sea, no doubt, commenced everything. But it is not from the
highest marine animals, that has proceeded the long parallel series of
terrestrials that is culminated and crowned in Man. They were already
too fixed, too special, to form the first rude sketch of a nature so
different. They had carried far, almost exhausted, the fecundity of
their species. In that case the elders perish; and it is very low down
in the obscure juniors of some parent class that the new series
commences that is to ascend so much higher. [See notes at the end of
the volume.]

Man was not their son, but their brother--a terribly tyrannical
brother.

See him at length arrive, the active, the ingenious, the cruel
monarch of the world! My book grows brighter, clearer. But what does
it now proceed to exhibit? Alas! What sad things must I now draw into
that broad, bright light! This creature, this tyrannical sovereign,
can create a second nature within Nature. But what has he done with
the first, with his mother, and his nurse? With the very teeth that
she has given him, he has cruelly gnawed her bosom!

How many animals that lived peaceably, were becoming civilized, began
even to practise some of the arts, are now hunted and terrified into
the condition of mere brutes? The Ape-kings of Ceylon, whose sagacity
was so well known in India, and that Brahmin of the creation, the
Elephant, have been chased, subdued into the state of mere beasts of
burthen.

The freest of beings, that formerly sported so joyously and harmlessly
in the sea, those affectionate Seals, those gentle Whales, the pacific
pride of the Ocean, have fled to the polar seas, the terrible world of
ice. But they cannot all support, for long, so hard a life; in a brief
time they will all have disappeared.

An unfortunate race, the Polish peasants, have learned to understand
the intelligence of the dumb exile which has taken refuge in the lakes
of Lithuania. The Poles say--"Woe to him who makes the Beaver weep."

That artist-animal has become a timid beast, which knows nothing and
can do nothing. The few that still survive in America, still retire
farther and farther from the vicinage of man. A traveller lately found
one, far, very far off, beyond the great lakes. It was timidly
resuming its traditional labors, and had commenced building a house
for its family. When it saw a man, it dropped the wood on which it was
working; it did not even dare to escape, but burst into tears.




BOOK THIRD.

  CONQUEST OF THE SEA.




