CHAPTER III.

THE HOUSE.


Permit an ignoramus who, yet, has paid a pretty high price for what he
_does_ know, to give you some quiet advice upon certain points upon
which books, hitherto, have told you little and Doctors nothing. That
this advice may come the more directly to both head and heart, I will
address them to an imaginary patient. Imaginary? Not so; I have met
such a patient many times.

You meet a young lady seriously ill, or manifestly about to be so, she
is very weak, and her young child is weaker still. The Winter has been
hard upon them, and the Spring still harder. Yet it is only
weakness;--lassitude, the _tedium vitæ_ which Byron truly calls "more
terrible than death itself." And she is sent to the sea-side for the
Summer.

A great expense, that, for a fortune below even mediocrity; painful
moving for the mistress of a family; hard separation, above all, for
husband and wife who truly love each other. They bargain, they would
fain shorten that separation. Would not one month be enough? But the
wise Physician knows better, and says it would _not_; he well knows
that a very short sojourn at the sea side is far more likely to injure
than to benefit. The sudden, the severe shock of the sea bath is
likely enough to injure even the strong; to the feeble it is simply
murderous. You should first breathe the sea air;--acclimatize
yourself. Do this during the month of June, then you shall have July,
August, September, and, in some seasons, even October for your baths,
and the bath and the great, strong, keen winds will harden your frame
against the fast approaching Winter.

Few men are free during the whole Summer; happy the husband who can be
away from the thronged city to pass a couple of the Summer months at
the sea side with his suffering wife. However much he may feel
inclined to sacrifice every secondary interest for her, it is for her
interest that he must remain in the counting house or the factory.
There are strong links in the chain of our daily life which we may
not, which we cannot, break. Therefore, the wife must go alone; and,
for the time, behold them loving, and yet divorced. Shall I give you
my opinion? _Let_ her go alone; better for her than if she went in the
train of some rich luxurious family.

That gregarious travel and gregarious abode have their pleasures, no
doubt; but, also, they have their evils. In such cases we are apt
either to become enemies, or, which is still worse in the case of
woman, to become too friendly. The style of life at a watering place
sometimes, and not seldom produces results which we regret through the
whole remainder of life. In my opinion the smallest inconvenience of
that gregarious watering-place life (smallest but very far from small)
is that the very people who alone would be both morally and physically
benefited by the sea, lose all that benefit by carrying to the solemn
shore the frivolity, the late hours, the false gaiety of the great
town.

Alone we think; in the crowd we gossip and scandalise. The great and
the rich lead the young and suffering female into their own
dissipations, and the consequence is that she has by the sea shore a
really more mischievous excitement than she would have had in Paris,
or London, Saint Petersburgh or New York, and will entirely lose the
end for which, loving husband, you sent her thither. Reflect upon it,
young woman, be courageous, but also be prudent. It is in an innocent
solitude that you may, if you will, enjoy with your child, that you
will most surely find the renewed health and strength that you so much
desire. In that infantine, pure, but noble and poetic life, I again
assure you, it is that you will find restoration. Believe me the
delicate and tender justice which makes you fear expense, while he at
home is toiling so hard, will well repay you. The old Ocean will love
you the better if you love only it, and will lavish upon you its great
treasures of health and youthfulness. Your child will flourish like a
young bay tree and you shall increase in grace and beauty; and you
will return to your far home youthful and dearly beloved.

She resolves, she departs, for a place, the waters of which are well
known by chemical analysis to have the qualities suited to her case.
But there are many local circumstances which cannot be known or even
guessed at from a distance. The Doctor who recommends particular
waters seldom knows the place, though he knows the waters.

For some of the more important watering places Guides have been
published which are not without merit, so far as they point out the
particular diseases for which particular waters are suited. But very
few give details which enable one to choose between a healthy and
unhealthy, a pleasant and an unpleasant, situation. They do not
venture upon such particulars as would enable one to choose between
places as well as between waters, but confine themselves to so general
a eulogy of the latter as to leave us in the dark as to the former.

What is the precise exposition? Look at the map and you perceive that
the coast slopes to the South, but even this tells you nothing; for
it may chance that a peculiar curve of the land may place your house
under a cold or damp influence, from a Northern or Western exposure.

Are there any marshes in the neighborhood? In most cases the answer
must be, yes. But the difference is very great whether the marshes be
salt and renewed, and made salubrious by the sea, or whether they be
stagnant marshes of fresh water which after droughts emit feverish
miasmata.

Is the sea very pure, or mixed? And in what proportion? A great
mystery. For nervous persons, however, for novices just commencing
with salt water bathing, the mildest are the best. A sea, somewhat
mixed, an air less salt and keen, and a less desolate shore, having
some of the charms of the country, are the best recommendations.

A grave point is the choice of a house; and who shall direct you as to
that? No one. You must see for yourself; you must observe all the
particulars on the spot. You will learn little from persons who have
visited or even lived there. They praise or condemn this or that place
not on account of its real merit, but according to the pleasure they
have enjoyed or the friends they have made there. They recommend you
to some of those friends who receive you admirably; at first you are
delighted, but in a short time you discover many inconveniences, and
sometimes the house is even dangerously unhealthy. Yet you do not like
to leave it, lest you should mortify both those who recommended you
and the kind and amiable family who so hospitably received you.

"Well, then," you say, "I will ask no recommendation, but on reaching
the place I will consult an honest and skilful doctor who will be able
to enlighten me." Honest! that is not enough, he must also be very
intrepid to tell you frankly any of the bad qualities of the place,
for he would be a ruined man, he would take leave of the whole place,
would live as solitary as a wolf; and, indeed, would be lucky if some
personal injury were not done to him.

I have a perfect horror of the absurdly flimsy houses which
speculators build in our variable climate. These pasteboard erections
are so many dangerous traps. In the full heats of Summer such bivouacs
are all well enough, but often one has to remain in September and
October amid the high winds and the torrents of rain.

For themselves the landlords build good substantial houses, but for
poor patients they build chalets of wood, ill closed, and not even
moss-covered, like the Swiss chalets. It really is treating us quite
too ill.

In those villas, apparently luxurious, but in reality wretched, no
provision is made for comfort. Drawing-rooms for show,--and commanding
a view of the sea, they have, but no provision is made to gratify
that feeling of home comfort, so dear to the sick, and more especially
so to woman. She feels unsheltered, as though constantly exposed to
half a gale of wind, and constantly passing from one temperature to
another.

On the other hand, the solidly built house of the Fisherman is often
low, damp, and inconveniently arranged in its interior. Often, it has
not even a double ceiling, but mere planks, which admit cold draughts
into the upper rooms, inflicting coughs, rheumatism, and a score of
other diseases.

Whatever may be your choice, Madame, between these two kinds of house,
do you know what I heartily wish for you? Laugh, if you please. What I
wish you to have, even in June, is a good fire-place, with a very
excellent chimney, well closed against the wind. In our beautiful
France, with its cold north-west and its rainy south-west, which
occasionally predominates for nine months, a good fire may be
necessary, even in June. On a damp evening, when your child returns
shivering from his promenade, a fire is necessary, to warm him, before
he goes to bed.

Two things ought to be especially looked after, wherever you lodge,
fire and good water, the latter a thing rarely to be found near the
sea. If it is altogether bad, endeavor, by the use of beer or tea, to
dispense with drinking the plain water, or if you must use it, let it
previously be boiled.

Why cannot I, with a single word, build you just such a villa as I
have in my mind? I do not speak of the show-house, the almost castle,
such as the wealthy build at the sea side, but of the humble house,
fitted for humble fortunes. It is an art which is yet to be created,
and one which no one seems to suspect, that of building a house, at
once small and substantial. The houses which are built for us,
especially at the sea side, are built in direct contradiction with our
needs in so changeable a climate. Those Kiosks, with their flimsy
ornaments, may do well enough for well-sheltered situations, but make
one fancy that the wind must needs blow them into the sea. The Swiss
chalets have immense overhanging roofs, which so well protect from the
snow, but also have the serious defect of excluding the light. The
sun, in our northern seas, should not be excluded, but most cordially
received. As to the imitations of chapels, gothic churches, and the
like toys, we need say nothing about them, they are really beneath
notice, so absurdly ill calculated as they are for comfortable homes.

The first necessity for a sea-side house, is great strength, a solid
thickness of walls, which will obviate that rocking which we always
feel in slight buildings. We want such a solidity of construction as
even in the greatest tempests will give courage to a timid woman, and
enable her to say with a smile of pleasure. "How very comfortable we
are in here, while such a storm rages without!"

The second point is that on the land side, the house should be so
perfectly sheltered that on that side we can sit and forget the sea,
and in the neighborhood of that great movement find the most complete
repose.

To meet those two needs, I prefer the form which affords least hold to
the wind, the crescent form, with the convex front to the sea, so that
every window will in turn receive the Sun.

The concave portion of this half circle would be sheltered by the
horns of the crescent, so as to enclose the pretty flower garden of
the mistress of the house. Stretching from this flower garden, the
progressive sloping of the soil would allow of a kitchen garden of a
certain extent, well sheltered from the wind.

We are told that "Flora shuns the sea;" what she really does shun, is
not the sea, but man's negligence, ignorance, or indolence. At
Eteretat, before a very heavy sea, on the high overlooking beach, and
exposed to heavy winds, there is a farm, with an orchard of superb
trees. What precautions have been taken? A simple hedge-crowned bank,
five feet high, and behind that a row of elms, which shelter all the
rest. Many places Brittany would furnish us with like instances. Who
does not know that Roscoff raises fruit and vegetables in such
profusion as to sell them cheaply, even in Normandy?

But to return to our building. I want it low-pitched; only a ground
floor, and over that the bed-chambers. Our house, therefore, will be
but small; but, on the other hand, it must be very thick, must have
two rows of chambers, an apartment looking out on the sea, and another
on the land.

The ground floor apartment, looking towards the land, would be
somewhat sheltered by the upper story, which would project about five
feet. This would make the interior crescent a sort of gallery for use
in bad weather. The lower rooms would be a dining room;--a small room
for our books (voyages and travels, and natural history) and a
bathroom. I do not mean an actual library or luxurious bath. The
necessary, and the very plain, the convenient, and nothing more.

On very rough days, when the beach is hardly the fit place for
delicate patients, I should wish to see the lady reading or working in
her pretty parterre. She would have some life there, flowers, an
aviary, and a little tank of sea water to receive the little creatures
which the fishermen would be sure to give her. Of course she would
also have an excellent compound microscope.

For the aviary, I should prefer the free one which I have advised
elsewhere, into which the birds come at night for protection and a
little food. It is closed upon them at night, to protect them from
birds of prey, but opened for them very early in the morning. They
return to this aviary very regularly. I believe, even, that if the
aviary were large enough, and the tree which they most affect were
enclosed, they would freely breed there, and confide their little ones
to your protection.

Delightful, and yet serious life, this, that we have planned for our
fair patient and her sole child. What charming solitude in this short
widowhood. How new the situation. No housekeeping, no business. With
her boy, she is even more alone than she would be without him. But for
him she would be intruded upon by reverie and vain fancies. But her
innocent guardian, her boy, keeps all such fancies away. He occupies
her, causes her to talk, and talks to her of home, and he thus
constantly reminds her of him who, in their far off home, is toiling
for them, and she counts the days to her return.

Flourish, pure and amiable woman. You are now even younger than ever,
you have become a girl again, free, sweetly free, under the
guardianship of your boy.




