CHAPTER V.

BATHS--RESTORATION OF BEAUTY.


If, as certain French physicians maintain, sea-water baths have only a
mechanical action, infuse no new principle into the blood and _are
merely a simple branch of hydropathy_, it must be confessed that of
all the forms of hydropathy they are the harshest and most hazardous.
Let it once be clearly shown that that sea-water, so rich in life,
bestows no more of vitality than fresh water and we must confess that
it is little less than madness to take sea-baths in the open air and
at all the risk of the wind, the sun, and the thousand possible
accidents.

Whoever has seen a poor creature come out of the water after taking
his first bath, whoever has seen him come out pale and shuddering,
must perceive how dangerous such experiments are to certain
constitutions. Be assured that none of us would submit to so much
suffering if health could be as readily secured without suffering and
without danger, in one's own house, and by common fresh water
hydropathy.

And, as though the impression of a first sea-bath were not
sufficiently strong, it is aggravated for a nervous woman by the
presence of the crowd of bathers. For her it is a cruel exhibition to
make before a critical crowd, before rivals, delighted to see her
ugly, for once; before silly and heartless men, who, with telescope in
hand, watch the sad hazards of the toilette of the poor humiliated
woman.

To brave all this the patient must have faith, great, surpassing
faith, in the Sea. She must believe that no other remedy will meet her
case, and must determine that, at whatever risks, she will be
permeated by the virtues of the sea water. "And why not be thus
_permeated_?" ask the German physicians. "If at first entering the
water you contract and close up your pores, reaction brings almost
immediately a warmth that reopens them, dilates the skin and renders
it very capable of _absorbing_ the life of the sea."

The two operations, the closing and the reopening of the pores, the
first chill and the succeeding glow, almost always take place in five
or six minutes. To stay in longer than the latter space of time, is
almost always injurious.

Moreover, we should not venture upon this violent emotion of the cold
bath without a preliminary course of warm bathing, to facilitate
absorption. Our skin which is entirely composed of the little mouths
which we call pores, and which, in its way, both absorbs and digests,
as the stomach does, wants time to get accustomed to such strong
nourishment as the _mucus_ of the sea, that salted milk with which the
sea makes and remakes such myriads of creatures. By a graduated course
of baths, hot, warm, lukewarm, and almost cold, the skin acquires this
habit, and, so to speak, this appetite; and "increase of appetite
grows by what it feeds on."

For the hard ceremony of the first cold sea-water baths, at least, the
odious gaze of a mob of people is to be avoided. Let them be taken in
private and with no one present but a perfectly reliable person who,
at need, will help the nervous patient, and rub her with hot cloths
and revive her with warm drinks containing a few drops of the potent
elixir.

"But," it may be said, "the presence of other bathers lessens the
danger; we are far different from Virginia, who, in an extreme danger,
preferred drowning herself to taking a bath." A great mistake; we are
more nervous now than ever we were. And the impression of which I
speak is at once so vivid and so revolting--I mean for nervous
people--that it is quite capable of killing, by aneurism or apoplexy.

I love the people, but I hate a mob; especially a noisy mob of fast
livers who come to sadden the great Sea with their noise, their
fashions, and their absurdities. What! Is not the land large enough?
Must such people come to the Sea to martyrize the sick and to
vulgarize the majesty of the Sea, that wild and true grandeur?

I once had the ill luck to run from Havre to Honfleur in a craft
loaded with such fools. Even in that short trip they found time to
grow weary of quiet, and to get up a ball. One of them--probably a
dancing master--had his Kit with him and played all sorts of dances in
the presence of that great Ocean. Happily one could not hear much of
that small music; scarcely now and then could a shrill note or two
rise above the solemn, the truly solemn bass of the Sea's roar. I can
easily imagine the sadness of the lady who, in July, suffers under the
invasion of a mob of these fops, fools, and gossips. All liberty is
then at an end. Even in the most retired spot the drowsy ear of night
is vexed by the boisterous echoes from saloon, and dancing room,
coffee-room and Casino. In the day the host of yellow gloves and
varnished boots crowds the shore. One lady is observed alone, with her
boy. Why is that? Impertinents wish to know, they approach, and,
gathering sea shells for the child, endeavor to force their
conversation on the mother. The lady is embarrassed, bored to death,
and has to confine herself to her lodging or venture out only in
early morning, while the empty pated revellers are still sleeping off
the effects of the last night's follies. Then, from her seclusion flow
a thousand ill natured comments. She becomes alarmed, for some of
these idlers have influence and may, possibly, injure her husband.

Nowhere more than at the sea side, are we inquisitive, and the poor
woman becomes agitated and sleepless during the long hot nights of
July and August, and if, towards morning, she at length sleeps, she is
not much more tranquil. The baths, far from cooling, add the saline
irritation to the fierce heat of the dog days. From her youth she
derives, not strength, but fever; and, weak and highly nervous, she is
all the more disturbed by that interior storm.

Interior, but yet not hidden. The Sea, the pitiless Sea, brings to the
skin the proofs of that excitement which the sufferer would fain keep
hidden. She betrays it by red blotches, slight efflorescences. All
these petty annoyances, which still more afflict the children, and
which in them the mother looks upon as signs of returning health, the
mothers feel as humiliations when seen on their own faces. They fear
that they will therefore be less loved. So little do they know of the
heart of man. They know not that the sharpest spur of love is not
beauty, but suffering.

"Oh! If he should find me ugly!" is the poor woman's morning thought,
as she looks in her glass. She at once fears and desires the coming of
her husband. And yet she feels so lonely, and fears, she knows not
what, amidst that noisy crowd. She dares not go out, she becomes
feverish, and at length is confined to her bed. In little more than
twenty-four hours, the beloved one is by her side.

Who has summoned him? She certainly has not. But, in his great
straggling handwriting, her boy has written to his father thus: "My
dear Papa, come quickly. Mamma is confined to bed, and the other day
she said 'oh if he were here!'" And accordingly he was there, and
immediately she felt herself recovering. And he, how happy he is!
Happy to see her restored, happy to be necessary to her, and happy to
see her looking so beautiful. She is somewhat sun burnt, but how young
she looks! What life in her glance, and in her flowing and silky hair!

Is this mere fiction, this so prompt restoration of life, beauty, and
tenderness; this delightful incident of finding in a wife, a young
mistress, so happy in being rejoined by a husband? Not at all. It is
an agreeable sight which right often may be witnessed. If rare among
the very rich, it is not so among the laborious families whose labor
makes them, during most of their lives, close prisoners. Their forced
separations are painful, and their reunion has a charm, a rapture,
which they do not even try to conceal.

When we consider the prodigious tension of modern life, for toiling
men, (that is to say, for every one but a few idlers) one cannot but
be glad to witness those scenes of joy, when a reunited family expand
their hearts. Those who have no hearts, call all this vulgar and
prosaic. But, the form matters little, where the substance is so
surpassingly good. The careworn merchant, who, from three months to
three months, has only with utmost difficulty saved the bark in which
the destiny of his wife and children is exposed to shipwreck; the
administration victim; the employé, worn well nigh to death by the
injustice and tyranny of the offices--these suffering captives, are
released, for a brief space, from their galling chains, and the tender
family, the mother and child, endeavor to make the husband and father
forget his cares.

And well able are wife and child to wile the worn man into that sweet
temporary oblivion. Their gaiety, their caresses, and the distractions
of the sea-side, soothe his wearied soul, and fill his mind with other
and happier thoughts. It is their triumph. They hurry off to visit
_their_ beach, to contemplate _their_ sea, and to enjoy his
admiration, which he, worthy man, just a little exaggerates, because
he wishes them to be pleased. Yes! it is _their_ sea; having bathed
in it, they have taken possession; and he, the toilworn husband and
father, must share with them in their vast possession. The young woman
no longer fears that crowd which formerly so much annoyed, and even
alarmed, her; now that he is beside her she is not merely safe, but
bold, daring; to say the truth, just a little presumptuous. She is
quite familiar with the sea; familiar enough to be determined to learn
to swim. At first she is supported by her active and bold boy.
Supported by him, she swims--but I fear if left to herself her native
timidity would return, and she would sink. Yet she is in love with the
sea; yea, jealous of the sea. For, in fact, the sea inspires no
moderate passions. There is I know not what of electric inspiration,
of all-absorbing passion for the Sea, in all who truly know it.




