CHAPTER VI.

TEMPESTS.


It is with a very real and masterly genius that Maury has demonstrated
the harmony that exists between air and water. As is the maritime
ocean, so is the aërial ocean. Their alternating movements and the
exchange of their elements are precisely analogous. The aërial ocean
distributes heat over the world and making dryness or humidity. The
latter, the air draws from the seas, from the infinity of the central
ocean, and especially at the tropics, the great boilers of the
universal cauldron. Dryness, on the contrary, the air acquires as it
sweeps over the arid deserts, the great continents, and the glaciers
(those true intermediate poles of the globe), which draw out its last
drop of moisture from it. The heating at the equator and the cooling
again at the pole, alternating the weight and lightness of the vapors,
cause them to cross each other in horizontal currents and counter
currents; while under the line the heat which lightens the vapors
creates perpendicular currents, ascending from sea to sky. Previous to
dispersing they hover in this misty region, forming, as it were, a
ring of clouds around the globe.

Here, then, we have pulsations both maritime and aërial, different
from the pulse of the tide. This latter was external, impressed by
other planets upon ours, but this pulse of various currents is
inherent in the earth, it is her own veritable life.

To my taste, one of the finest things in Maury's book, is what he says
of salt: "The most obvious agent in producing maritime circulation,
heat, would not alone suffice; there is another and a no less
important agent, nay, an even more important--it is salt."

So abundant is salt in the sea that if it could be cast on shore it
would form a mountain 4,500 feet thick.

Though the saltness of the sea does not vary very greatly, it yet, is
augmented or diminished somewhat, according to locality, currents and
proximity to the equator or to the poles. As it is more or less
salted, the sea is lighter or heavier, and more or less mobile. This
continued, with its variations, causes the water to run more or less
swiftly, that is to say, _causes currents_, so like the horizontal
currents in the bosom of the sea and the vertical currents from the
sea of water upward to the sea of air.

A French writer, M. Lartique, has ingeniously corrected some
deficiences and inexactitudes in M. Maury's great work "Maritime
Annals." But the American author had anticipated criticism by frankly
pointing out where and why he thought his work and his science
incomplete. On some points distinctly confining himself to hypothesis,
at times he shows himself uncertain, and anxious. His frank and candid
book quite plainly reveals the mental struggle which the author
undergoes between _biblical literalism_ and the modern sentiment the
_sympathy of nature_. The former makes the sea a thing, created by God
at once, a machine turning under his hand, while the latter sees in
the sea a living force, almost a person, in which the Loving Soul of
the World, is creating still, and ever will create.

It is curious to observe, how, by degrees, as it were by irresistible
proclivity, Maury approaches this latter view. As far as possible he
explains himself mechanically, by weight, heat, density, &c. But this
does not suffice, and for certain cases he adds a certain molecular
attraction or a certain magnetic action. But even this does not
suffice, and then he has recourse to the physiological laws which
govern life. He attributes to the sea a pulse, veins, arteries, and
even a heart. Are these mere forms of style, simple comparisons? Not
so; he has in him--and it is one source of his strength--an imperious,
an irresistible feeling of the personality of the sea. Before him the
sea was to most seamen a thing; to him it is a person, a violent and
terrible mistress whom we must adore, but must also subdue.

He loves, he deeply loves the sea; but on the other hand, he every
moment thinks it necessary to restrain his enthusiasm and to keep
within bounds. Like Levammerdam, Baunet and many other illustrious men
at once philosophical and religious, he seems to fear that in
explaining nature too completely by her own phenomena we show
disrespect to Nature's God. Surely, a very ill founded timidity. The
more we exhibit the universality of life,--the more we confess our
adoration of the great soul of the universe. Where would be the danger
were it proven that the sea in her constant aspiration towards
organized existence is the most energetic form of the Eternal Desire
which formerly evoked this globe and still creates in it?

This salt sea, like blood, which has its circulation, its pulse, and
its heart (for so Maury terms the equator) in which its two bloods are
exchanged, is it quite sure that an entity that has all these is a
mere thing, an inorganic element?

Look at a great clock, or a steam engine which imitates almost exactly
the movement of the vital forces. Is that a freak of nature? Should we
not far rather imagine that in these masses there is a mixture of
animality?

One immense fact that he exhibits, but only secondarily, and as it
were in a mere side view, is that the infinite life of the ocean, the
myriads upon myriads of beings which it at every moment makes and
destroys, absorb its various salts to form their flesh, their shells,
&c., &c. They thus, by depriving the water of its salt, render it
lighter, and, by so much, aid in producing currents. In the potent
laboratories of animal organization, as those of the Indian ocean and
the Coraline, that force, elsewhere less remarkable, appears as what
it really is--immense.

"Each of these imperceptibles," says Maury, "changes the equilibrium
of the ocean, they harmonize and compensate it." But is this saying
enough? Should they not be the grand moving powers which have created
the currents of the sea, put the immense machine into motion?

Who knows whether this vital _circulus_ of the marine animality is not
the starting point of all physical _circulus_? If animalized sea does
not give the eternal impulse to the animalizable sea--not organized,
indeed, as yet, but aspiring to be so, and already fermenting with
approaching life?




