CHAPTER III.

THE BEACH, THE SANDS, AND THE IRON-BOUND COAST, CONTINUED.


Look upon the Ocean where and when you may, you everywhere and alway
shall find her the same grand and terrible teacher of that hardest of
all the lessons man has to learn,--man's insignificance. Take your
stand upon some bold headland, from which with earnest and well
trained eye, you can sweep the entire horizon; or, wander, with
shortened ken, in the sandy desert;--go whithersoever you will, where
old Ocean shall lash the shore, and everywhere and alway, I repeat,
you shall find Ocean the same--mighty and terrible. True it is, that
our finite and dim gaze cannot discern the, humanly speaking,
_Infinity_ of the Ocean; but we feel, we instinctively comprehend,
that Infinity, and the impression made by that instructive
comprehension is even deeper than could be made by Ocean visibly to
our material eye, tangibly to our poor human hand.

Such, so deep, so permanent, was the impression made upon me by that
wild tumultuous scene on the scourged-shore where Granville--dear old
Granville!--keeps neutral watch between Normandy and Brittany. The
wealthy, kindly and hearty, though bluff, and somewhat vulgar Normandy
with its vast outspread of orchard and meadow suddenly disappears,
and, by Granville and by the frowning Saint Michel we pass all at once
into quite another world. For Granville, though Norman as to race, is
thoroughly Breton as to aspect. Sternly, solidly, invincibly, the
great Rock rears his defiant front, and looks down in a quite insolent
contempt upon the wild surges that incessantly assault, but never
harm, that passionless and mutely mocking Titan. Let the wild winds,
unpent from their northern caverns, sweep the rugged coast; borne on
the cross-currents from the angry West, let the wind sweep all things
else clear from its path and this stern unconquerable rock ever and
alway saith "thus far shalt thou come, but no farther. Strengthened
though you are by your mad trans-Atlantic leap of a thousand leagues,
against me your fury shall be spent in vain."

I loved that odd and somewhat dull little town, which owes its support
to the distant and most perilous fishery. Every family there, feels
that it is supported by a dread game in which human life is at stake;
and this feeling produces a certain harmonious gravity in the aspect
and tone of the dwellers hereabout, and of all their surroundings. A
touching and a hallowing melancholy, that, of which I have often felt
the influence, when, walking on the already darkening shore or gazing
from the upper town that crowns the great rock, I have seen the sun
sink below the far and misty horizon, harshly streaked by alternate
rays of luridness and gloom, and not pausing to tint the sky with
those glowing and fantastic brilliances which in other climes delight
us. Here it is already autumn in August, and twilight scarcely exists.
Scarcely has the sun set, when the shrewd winds freshen, and the dark
green waves sweep on with added force; below, you see a few spectral
forms hurrying along in their dark cloaks, and from afar you hear the
melancholy bleatings of the sheep already benighted on their scanty
pasturage.

The very small upper town rears its northern front sharply and boldly
above the very edge of a cold dark abyss, facing the great sea, and
swept by an eternal blast. This part of the place consists of only
poor houses, and in one of them I found my quarters with a poor man, a
maker of those pretty shell pictures for which the place is famous.
Ascending by a ladder, rather than a staircase, into a dark little
room, I looked out upon the strange wild scene, as strange and tragic,
as wild and impressive, as that which had presented itself, when, also
from a window, I had caught my first view of the great glacier of the
Swiss Grindelwald. The glacier had shown an enormous monster of
peaked icebergs which seemed crashing down upon me; and this vexed sea
of Granville seemed an army of monstrous waves all rushing together to
the attack.

My host here, though far from old, was feeble and suffering, and, as I
examined his shell work and talked with him, I perceived that his mind
was somewhat shaken. Poor fellow; upon that shore his only brother had
perished, and from that moment the sea appeared to him an intelligent
and persistent enemy. In the winter it beat his windows with snow or
with icy winds, and kept him sleepless and peaceless during the long
and dreary nights, and in the summer it brought him the vivid
lightnings and the far resounding thunders. At the high tides it was
still worse; the spray then beat upon his very windows, and he felt
doubtful if some day he would not be drowned even on his own hearth.
But he had not the means of finding a more secure shelter, and perhaps
he was unconsciously retained there by we know not what strange
fascination. He had not resolution to break altogether with that
terrible foe, for which he had a certain respect, as well as a great
awe. He seldom spoke of it by name; like the Icelander who, when at
sea, does not name the Ourque, lest she should hear, and appear. I
fancy that even now I can see his pale face, as, pointing to the
wave-beaten beach, he said--"That terrifies me!"

Was he a lunatic? Not at all. He spoke quite sensibly, and was in
reality interesting and even distinguished. A nervous being, too
delicately organized for such a scene as that in which he was placed.

But the sea can madden, and often does. Livingstone brought from
Africa a bold and intelligent man who had hunted and killed Lions, but
had never seen the Sea. When taken on board ship, the novel sight was
too much for his brain, he became frantic, and threw himself headlong
into the heaving deep, which at once terrified and fascinated him. On
the other hand, so attached do some men become to the sea, that they
can never quit it. I have seen old pilots, compelled by infirmity to
abandon their office, fret themselves into imbecility.

On the very summit of Saint Michael you are shown what they call
_Maniac's Shelf_; and I know no place better fitted to make one mad
than that giddy height. All around a vast stretch of white sand,
solitary ever, and ever treacherous. It is neither land nor water; it
is neither sea water nor fresh, though streams are constantly flowing
beneath. Rarely, and but for brief moments, a boat can cross there,
and if you cross when the water is out you risk being swallowed in. I
can state that with full authority, for I nearly lost my life there. A
very light vehicle in which I ventured there, and the horse that drew
it, disappeared in too, and only by a perfect miracle I escaped on
foot, feeling myself sinking at every step. At length, however, I
reached the Rock, that gigantic Abbey, Fortress and Prison, that
frowning sublimity, so well worthy of the scene which it so sternly
dominates. This is no place for a detailed description of such a
monument. On a huge block of granite, that Titanic pile rises and
rises still, rock upon rock, age upon age, and still dungeon above
dungeon. At the foot, the _in pace_ of the Monks; higher up, the iron
cage made by Louis XI.; higher still, that of Louis XIV.; higher
still, the prison of our own day. And all this in a whirlwind, a
perpetual tempest; a Sepulchre without the Sepulchre's peace.

Is it the fault of the sea, if this beach is treacherous? Not at all.
There, as elsewhere, the Sea arrives strong and loud, indeed, but in
all frankness and loyalty. The real fault is in the land, apparently
solid, but undermined by numberless streams of fresh water which
converts that seemingly solid beach into a treacherous and devouring
quagmire. And especially is the fault in the ignorance and negligence
of man. In the long dark ages when man invented the legend and the
pilgrimage of the Archangel who vanquished the Devil, the Devil took
possession of that deserted plain. The sea is quite innocent in the
matter. Far, indeed, from doing harm, the sea upon its madly bounding
waves brings in a nourishing and fecundating salt more precious than
the fat slime of the Nile, enriching the once hideous marshes of Dol
into the lovely gardens of our own day. The Sea is a somewhat violent
mother, no doubt;--but a mother still. Abounding in fish, she lavishes
upon the opposite Cancale, and upon many another bank, millions,
thousands of millions, of oysters, whose crushed shells give beauty,
and verdure, and flowers, and fruit. We must enter into a right
understanding with the Sea, and not be led away by the false notions
which its barren beach or its own more violent phenomena--often only
the disguises of very real and very great benefits--may suggest to
us.




