CHAPTER VI.

THE LAW OF THE OCEAN.


A great and deservedly popular writer, Eugene Noël, who throws a
bright, broad light upon every subject which he touches, most truly
says, in his important work on Pisciculture, the following words: "We
might make the Ocean an immense food-factory, more productive than
even our earth itself, fertilizing and supporting everything, seas,
rivers, lakes, and Lands. Hitherto we have cultivated only the
lands--let us now cultivate the waters. Nations! Attention!"

More productive than the land? Eh! How is that to be?

M. Baude explains the matter very clearly, in his recently published
and very important work on Fishery. He shows very clearly that, of all
creatures, the fish consumes the least, and produces the most. Merely
to keep that creature alive, nothing, or next to nothing, is required.
Rondelet kept a carp three years in a bottle of water, and gave it
nothing save what it could extract from that water; yet, in that
time, it so increased in bulk that he could not get it out of the
bottle! The Salmon, during its stay, of two months, in fresh water,
scarcely feeds at all, and yet in that time scarcely loses flesh. Its
stay in salt water, during the same space of time, gives it the
enormous increase of six pounds in weight. How little that resembles
the slow growth of our land animals! If we were to pile up into one
heap all that it takes to fatten an Ox or a Pig, we should actually be
astounded at the amount of food required for the like increase of
weight.

And, accordingly, those people whose demand most urgently presses upon
their power of supply, the Chinese, with their three hundred millions
of ever craving appetites, have directly applied themselves to the art
of promoting that great power of reproduction, that richest
manufacture of nourishing food. On all the great rivers of China,
prodigious multitudes find in the waters, the food which they would
but vainly ask from the land. Agriculture is always more or less
precarious; a blighting wind, a frost, the slightest accident, can
sentence a whole nation to all the horrors of Famine. But, on the
contrary, the living and teeming, the exulting and abounding, harvest
beneath the waters, nourishes innumerable families, and makes those
families almost as prolific and abounding as itself.

In May, on the great central river of the Empire, a vast trade is
done in Fish _fry_, which is bought, sold, and resold, for the purpose
of stocking the fish-ponds of private persons, who feed their fish
from the mere offal of the household.

The Romans,--so long ago!--had the same wise system;--only they,
sometimes, were barbarous enough to feed their fish with slaves! Bad
enough, that, and to spare; but at least they left us the precious
legacy of these words--"The spawn of the sea fish _can_ become fish in
fresh water." In the last century, a German, by the name of Jacobi,
discovered, or rather, revived, the art of _artificial fecundation_;
and, in our own century, and with still more productive effect,
France, copying from England, has done the same thing. A fisherman of
Bresse, Remy, has practised, since 1840, the art which has now become
European.

Taken in hand by such men as Coste, Pouchet, &c., this art has ceased
to be merely empirical--it has become _a Science_. Among other things,
it has become known that there are certain regular connections between
the salt and the fresh water; the fish from the former, coming, at
certain seasons, to spawn in the latter. The Eel, wherever bred, as
soon as it has the thickness of a needle, hastens to ascend the river,
and in such numbers that it actually whitens the whole stream. This
treasure, which, if properly taken care of, would give many thousands
of pounds of the most nutritious food is unworthily, shamefully,
destroyed; sold as so much mere manure. The Salmon is no less
faithful; invariably it comes from the sea back to the river in which
it had its birth. Mark hundreds of them, and not one of them shall be
missing. Their love of their native river is such that they will even,
(see the _Salmon Leaps_ of Scotland, Ireland, and Northern England)
_leap_, springing from the tail, over seemingly insurmountable
obstacles! Such are the Fish!

Upon land, we take care of our _Horses_; why not PRESERVE THE SEA? Why
not _protect the breeding Season of the Ocean_? The young and the
pregnant females, should be held sacred, more especially as to those
species which are not superabundantly productive, such as the Cetacæ,
and the Amphibii. To kill, is a necessity of our nature, our teeth and
stomach sufficiently testify to that; but that very necessity obliges
us to preserve life.

On the land, we feed and protect our flocks and herds. But for the
food and protection which we give to them, most of them would not
exist at all, or would have been devoured by wild beasts. We have a
right, or at least, a plausible excuse, for killing them, but we take
care to spare the young and the pregnant.

In the seas there are still more young lives annihilated when we
depart from this law of _preserving_ that we may the more plentifully
kill. We may, if we prudently as well as mercifully so will it, make
the generation of the inferior animals, an element almost infinitely
productive. In our seas and rivers, chiefly, it is, that Man appears
the Magician. High time it surely is, that he should unite to his
power both kindness and wisdom. He is in reality, the opponent of
death; for, though appetite compels him to kill, his skill and care
can create torrents of teeming life.

As regards those precious species which, foolishly, as well as
cruelly, we have almost annihilated, and especially for that greatest
and most precious life of all, the Whale, there should be an absolute
peace, for at least half a century. That great, that really
magnificent species, will then repair its losses. Being no longer
persecuted, it will return to the temperate zone, which is its natural
climate, where it will find its natural food in the abounding
animalculæ of the comparatively warm waters. Being thus restored to
its natural climate and its natural food, it will regain its old
gigantic proportions. Let the old rendezvous of their Love be held
sacred, and again we shall see the Leviathan, the whale of two or
three hundred feet long. Let this magnificent creature's haunts be
respected, especially in its breeding season, and in half a century it
would be as plentiful as of old. Formerly it abounded in a bay of
California. Why not make that bay sacred to it? Then it would not seek
shelter among the horrid glaciers of the pole. Let us respect their
reason of Love, and enormous will be the benefit to ourselves.

Peace! I say again; peace for the Whale, the Sea-Cow, the
Sea-Elephant; peace for all those precious species which man's
inhumanity has so nearly crushed out of existence. A long, a sacred
peace should be granted to them; like that which the Swiss so wisely
granted to the Chamois, which, when almost extinct, was thus rendered
numerous as ever. For all, whether Fish or Amphibii there is needed a
season of perfect rest, like the _Truce of God_, which in the olden
day prevented the chivalry of Europe from butchering each other.

These creatures themselves instinctively comprehend what we either
know not or neglect; for, at their season of maternity, they lose
their timidity, and venture to our shores, as though certain that at
such a season, they will be held sacred. At that season, they are in
their greatest beauty a id their greatest strength. Their brilliant
color and their flashing phosphorence indicate the utmost vigor of
their existence, and in every species that is not menacingly
superabundant, that season of reproduction should be respected. Kill
them afterwards? By all means--but pray do not anticipatively kill in
the one fish a whole shoal of fishes.

Every unoffending creature has a right to the moment of happiness, to
that moment when the individual, however lowly placed, goes beyond
the narrow limits of his individual _Self_, and from his dark
individuality, glances into and feels the Infinite Future.

And let us aid Nature; then shall we be blessed, from the lowest
depths to the starry heights; then shall we receive the blessing
glance of that God who hath made both great and small, and who has
commanded us to imitate Him.




BOOK FOURTH.

  THE RESTORATION OF THE SEA.




