CHAPTER VII.

THE NEW LIFE OF THE NATIONS.


Just as I was finishing this book, in December, 1860, resuscitated
Italy, that great and glorious mother of the modern nations, sent me
tidings, in the shape of a small book, a mere pamphlet. It was my "New
Year's gift for 1861."

And from that Italy how often have we had great and beautiful tidings?
In 1300 news from Dante; in 1500 news from Americus Vespucius; in 1600
from Galileo. And what are our present tidings from Florence?

Apparently, but small. But who knows? Perhaps the results will be
immense! It is a discourse of but a few pages, a medical pamphlet, and
its very title is more likely to repel than to attract. And, yet, in
those few pages there is matter which, duly acted upon, may change the
whole destiny of our great, but weak, our often wise, but still more
often mistaken Humanity.

Opposite to the Title I find two portraits, one a deceased boy, and
another dying. The author of the pamphlet is a Doctor, who, very
unusual thing! has been so terribly impressed by the fate of his poor
unknown and, but for him, uncared for children, that he has been led
to write for our instruction, his pain and his regret.

The elder of these children, of a fine and high nature, in the
bitterness, as it would seem, of a great destiny cut short, has a
bouquet upon his pillow. His mother,--poor, poor, mother! has given it
to him this morning, having nothing else to give, and the nurses,
seeing the quite religious love with which he cared for the poor gift
of that poor mother, have allowed him to keep it.

The second, still younger, in all the tender grace of his four or five
years, is evidently dying; his eyes are fast veiling beneath the death
film. Each of these poor boys had shown sympathy for the other. When
they could no longer speak their sympathy, they _looked_ it in their
tender glances, and the good kind Doctor, (blessings on him for the
kindly thought!) had them placed opposite to each other, and his
engraving shows them to us (touching sight), just as, dying, they
exchanged their sympathizing glances!

The whole is truly, and nobly, Italian. In any other country a man
would fear to be laughed at in showing himself thus truly tender. Not
so in Italy. The Doctor wrote to his Italian public, just as he might
soliloquise in the privacy of his own study; and he unreservedly pours
out all his feelings with an intensity, with a perfectly feminine
sensibility, which will make the worldly man laugh, and the kindly man
weep. And it must be confessed that his native language has much to do
with his power over our feelings; it is the language of women and
children, at once so tender and so striking, beautiful even in its
terrible accent of grief and suffering. It is a shower of mingled
tears and roses.

And then he suddenly stops himself. and apologizes. He would not have
written thus, but for sufficient cause, and that cause is that "Those
poor children would not have died if they could have been sent to the
sea-side." And, the inference? That at the sea-side we must have
Hospitals for children. Now here, if you please, is a really skilful,
as well as greatly humane, man. He touches the heart; and the rest
necessarily follows. Men listen attentively and are touched; women
burst into an agony of tears. They beg, they pray, they insist--and
who is to resist them? Without waiting for government action, or
government aid, a voluntary society has founded a "_Children's
Sea-Bathing Hospital_" at Viareggio.

All who have been there admire the crescent-like sweep, made by the
Mediterranean, when it quits Genoa passes the magnificent road of
Spezzia and reaches the Virgilian Olive Groves of Tuscany. About half
way from Leghorn a cape, stolen from the Sea, is the site, henceforth
the sacred site, of this truly admirable foundation.

Florence, by the way, has preceded all Europe in the way of charitable
foundations; she had hospitals before the close of the tenth century,
and in the year 1287, when Beatrice inspired and maddened Dante, her
father, the cruel persecutor of the greater, far greater Dante,
founded the hospital of _St. Maria Nuova_. Even Luther, though in his
travels he saw little to admire in Italy, _did_ admire, and very
heartily, its Hospitals and the beautiful Italian women, who, veiled,
stood by the bedsides of the sick sinner and the dying pauper.

This new foundation, of which we have spoken, will, we trust, be a
model for Europe. We owe that much to children; for upon them it is
that fall the worst effects of our murderous toils and our still more
murderous excesses in every kind of bad life.

It is impossible not to perceive the visible and terrible
deterioration of our Western races. The causes of it are numerous and
very various. The chief of them all is the immensity and the constant
and rapid increase of our hours of labor. For the most part, it is
compulsory; compelled by trade regulations and trade necessities. But
even where no such compulsion exists, there the same ardor of long
hours and hard toil exists. I know not what demoniac fire exists in
our modern temperament. Compared to ourselves, all former centuries
have been positively idle. Our results, no doubt, are immense. From
our prolific brain and iron hand, proceeds such a marvellous flood of
art, science, inventions, productions, and ideas, that we are actually
glutting the markets, not only of the present, but also of the future.
But at what cost are we doing all this? At the price of an awful
expenditure of strength, and of nervous energy; we are enervating
ourselves, our works are prodigious, and _our children_ are miserable.
We condemn them to disease, suffering, and premature death even before
they are born. _Our spendthrift waste of energy entails feebleness and
early death upon them!_ And let it be remembered that this immense
amount of production is the work of only a comparatively small number.
America does little of it, Asia next to nothing, and even in Europe
all, or nearly all, is done by a few millions in the extreme West. The
others laugh to see the really working peoples thus wear themselves
out. Poor Barbarians! Do you fancy, then, that this Russian or that
Backwoodsman, can replace, at need, a mechanic of London or an
optician of Paris? No; we have become such by the education and the
practice of long centuries. A whole and a very long tradition is in
us. What would become of you if we should die? None of you are ready
to succeed us.

But this same murderous toil, this absolutely suicidal production, if
we be willing to accept it for ourselves, it is our duty _not_ to
accept it for our children; we have no right thus to _add murder to
suicide_. And, yet, that is what we really are doing. They are born
already, with our fatigue, our cerebral exhaustion. With a perfectly
frightful precocity, they _know_, they _can_, they _will_, and they
_do_. But how long? The grave opens for them _so_ early!

The human infant, like the young plant, needs rest, air, and a sweet
liberty. Do we give our children any of these? No; our very virtues,
as well as our vices, deny them all. Everything seems to combine to
kill them early. Do we love them? No doubt; and yet our worst malice
could not do more than we do to kill them early or to cause them to
live miserably, pitifully, sufferingly, effeminate. Such a society as
ours, so overworked, so over excited, so constantly agitated, is,
(whether society will confess it or not) a real, and a murderous war
upon our children.

Especially there are times and seasons in the course of the child's
growth when his life quite literally hangs upon a thread. Life, at
those times, seems to borrow human voice, and to ask,--"Can I possibly
last?" At those critical times, see you, the contact of so many, the
close, sedentary, and imprisoned life of cities, is just simply Death
to those delicate and fading creatures. Or, even worse than Death, it
is the commencement of a long career of suffering and helplessness far
worse than Death itself. In this latter case you leave a poor creature
who, now sick, now well, drags on a wretched existence, a misery to
himself and a burthen upon public charity.

All this must be cut short. We must have foresight combined with
humanity. We must snatch the child from these murderous surroundings;
we must take him from man and give him to the grand nursing of the
fecund Nature--of the Sea. And, then, the child will live and become
Man. Your very foundlings, if you thus treat them may some day become
your Nelsons and your Napiers, and your community, instead of having
to support an habitual patient of your hospitals, will have the bold
seaman or the strong laborer.

And, for the matter of that, why need we depend upon the State to do
this great thing? Florence hath taught us that the royal heart is
fully equal to any other royalty; woman in her mercy, _is_ a royalty;
she commands, entreats, and man obeys. Woman! Have mercy upon the
children!

If I were a young and lovely woman, I well know what _I_ should say,
and what _I_ should do. I should have all around me my magnificence
and my luxury, and when on some fine day, my lover in his love should
be eager, passionate, ready to give great gifts, I would say to him:--

"Please offer me none of your Cachemires, designed in England and
woven in India; for Diamonds I really care nothing; Berthollet who
knows so well how to imitate Nature can make Diamonds, if he so
please. But if you really wish to make me a present which I shall
love, and for which I shall love you, be so good as to get me a nice
well sheltered, yet beautifully sunny home, in which I can lodge some
three score, or so, of poor children. They will want no fine
furniture; not much of any kind. Once established in that sunny,
quiet, and kindly home, they will be well fed, and well cared for;
and, my word for it, not a woman will go to the sea-side for her own
health who will not give her mite towards the support of those poor
children. If Beatrice of Florence could influence her father to found
such a home, such a saving refuge, cannot we women of France do as
much? Is it that we are less beautiful, or are you less truly in
Love?"

"If the Sea, as you every morning tell me, has beautified and improved
me so much; surely, your best gift would be my keepsake for the beach.
And if you really love me, you will share with me in this work, this
great work of bringing to the bosom of the great Ocean-mother a whole
family of these perishing children. Let her take our pledges of a
durable tenderness and purest love! Let her bear witness that, in the
presence of the Infinite, we _were_, in very truth, united in one holy
thought!"

One woman has thus commenced and another will continue, the common
mother, France. No Institution more useful, no money better expended.
And, in fact, not much needs to be expended. The chief thing necessary
will be to transfer some of our charitable institutions from the
interior. For many of those institutions expend their funds in mere
waste; in fact, some of them might be quite truly termed Pauper
Manufactories.

The Romans had the good sense never to grudge expense for anything
that concerned the public health. Just look at their splendid
aqueducts, just consider their public baths where quite gratuitously,
or, at the utmost, at the charge of a half cent, the meanest could
bathe, and you will at once understand their public spirit, their
really large and grand patriotism. Fresh water baths, salt water
baths, everything was provided for that lazy and non-producing
plebeianism! Perhaps, in fact, in the politico-economical sense, the
Patricians of Rome did too much for that, at once indolent and
seditious _Plebs_. And shall we, WE, WE hesitate to do far less to
save our own race, that one creative and laborious race that creates
all that is really progressive on our globe?

I speak not here merely, or even principally, of the children; but of
all. Every town, at this very instant, has a town within a town, a
town of horrible sufferers; of the poor, and the afflicted; they are
going to be Paupers not only now, but for the whole remainder of their
lives. Again, and again, and again they will come; cured to-day, and
returning to-morrow worse and more helpless than ever. They must be
enormously expensive; and who pays the cost? Why their hardier fellow
workmen who, in the ultimate result, pay all our expenses! And the
laborer dies young, and leaves his young ones a burthen on the public
purse.

_Prevention is better than cure._ You can do far more for the man who
is in danger of being sick than for him who is already worn out. Ten
days or a fortnight of rest and good living at the sea-side, will
restore him to you, a good, sound, solid laborer. His carriage, and
the cheap shelter, for so few days! by that recuperating sea-side, I
tell you again, will restore him to you, a good sound, honest, and
independent laborer. And the man will be saved, and his young family;
and such a man as, if you once lose him, you cannot easily replace.
No! You cannot replace him, for, as I have already said, every really
working man is the slow product, of a long tradition of thought and of
labor, and he himself is a work of art; of that so much misunderstood
human art in which _Humanity itself becomes a creative Power_.

Who shall give me to see that crowd of inventive people, that creating
and manufacturing people, who in the world's service are hourly
wearing themselves out; who, I ask, will give me to see that People,
that true People, enabled to repair their shattered frames at the
magnificent sea-side? Let this ability be provided for them, and all
classes and conditions will equally share the benefit. And let it not
be forgotten that all classes and conditions _owe_ thus much to the
worn toilers, for by their toil, their excessive toil, all classes are
benefited. It is by their very blood, by their very marrow, that all
classes receive their enjoyments, their elegance, and their
enlightenment. Let society, then, give to them the repose, the saline
air, the restoring waters of the great restoring Sea. In doing thus
much, society will benefit itself; while doing the simplest justice to
its worn toilers.

Have pity upon yourselves, all ye poor men of the West. Consult upon,
and act for, the common weal. Earth entreats you to live and offers
you that which is her best, the SEA, to repair your own strength and
thus secure your children against your weakness. Earth would be ruined
if you persist in ruining yourselves, for you are her Genius, her
inventive and working Soul. She lives by your life, and if you die
she also will die. In the name, then, of Humanity and of Nature, too,
Nations! Attention! Mercy for yourselves; Earth supplies you with the
means of laboring and living; THE SEA offers you the still better
means of living WELL.




NOTES.


"That vast animal the Earth, which for heart has a magnet, has at its
surface a doubtful being, electric and phosphorescent, more sensitive,
and infinitely more prolific, than the Earth itself.

"That being which we call the Sea,--is it a parasite of the vast
animal which we call the Earth? No. It has not a distinct and hostile
personality. It vivifies and fecundates the Earth with its vapors; it
even appears to be the Earth itself in that which it has of the most
productive; in other words, its principal organ of fecundity."

German Dreams! But are they, in feet, entirely Dreams? More than one
great mind, without going quite so far, seem to admit for both Earth
and Sea a kind of obscure personality. Ritter and Lyell say: "The
Earth labors herself; can she be impotent to organise herself? How are
we to imagine that the creative power which we observe in every being
on the globe can be denied to the globe itself?" But how does the
globe act? How at the present time does it obtain accretion? From the
Sea and its living denizens.

The full solution of these great questions would require a more
profound study of Physiology than we as yet have made. Nevertheless,
during the last twenty years every thing tends this way: 1. We have
studied the irregular and exterior phase of the movements of the Sea,
we have inquired into the _Law of Storms_. 2. We have studied the
movements proper to the Sea, its _currents_, the play of its arteries
and veins, of which the first propel the salt water from the Equator
to the Poles, while the second return it, freshened, to the Equator:
3. The third and more difficult question on which modern chemistry
will throw light, is that as to the real nature of the marine _mucus_,
of that unctuous gelatine which is every where found in Sea water, and
which appears to be a living liquid.

It is quite recently that the sounding of Brooke, and more especially
the soundings for the submarine telegraph from Europe to America, have
begun to reveal the secrets of the bottom of the Sea. Are its lowest
depths peopled? Formerly, that was denied, but Forbes and James Ross
found life throughout them.

Previous to those splendid discoveries, which were made less than
twenty years ago, the book of the Sea could not be written. The first
attempt at writing it was made by M. Hartwig. For my own part, I was
still far from the idea of writing it when, in 1845, in preparing my
book of "The People," I commenced, in Normandy, my study of the
population of the Coasts. In the fifteen subsequent years, this vast
and difficult subject has been continually growing upon me, and has
followed me from shore to shore.

The first book of this Volume--_A glance at the Seas_, is, as the
title indicates, merely a preliminary promenade. All the important
matters therein are discussed in the following three books. I except
two, however, _Tides_ and _Beacons_. Here my principal guide has been
M. Chazallon's important _Annual_, already numbering twenty volumes,
the first having appeared in 1839. If the Civic Crown was bestowed
upon the man who saved one human life, how many such crowns has not M.
Chazallon deserved! Anterior to his labors, the errors, as to the
tides, were enormous. By immense labor he has corrected the
observations for nearly five hundred ports from the Adour to the Elbe.
His _Annual_ gives the most exact information upon the Beacons.
Similarly valuable is the clear and agreeably written exposition in
the _Souvenirs_ of M. de Quatrefages on the Lighthouse system of
Fresnel and Arago. The admirable system of revolving lighthouses, in
which the lights flash and disappear, at short and regular intervals,
is due to Lemoine, Mayor of Calais.

For the various names of the Sea refer to Ad. Pictet-_Origines
Indo-Europeennes_. On the water, consult the Introduction to Deville's
_Annual of the Waters of France_; Aime's _Annale's de Chimie_ II., V.,
XII., XIII., and XV. Morren, the same, I, and Acad de Bruxelles, XIV.,
&c. On the saltness of the Sea Chapman quoted by Tricaut _Ann. de
Hydrographie_ XIII., 1857, and Thomassy's _Bulletin de la Société
Geographique_, 4 June, 1860.

I did not thoroughly comprehend the Shore of _Saint Michel en Greve_
and the questions concerning it, until I read in the _Revue des Deux
Mondes_ the two very fine articles of M. Baude, full alike of facts
and ideas. I speak elsewhere of his excellent views on the Fisheries.

In speaking (Chap. III.) of Brittany, I must acknowledge my obligation
to the book of Cambry which formerly gave me my first ideas upon that
subject. It should be read in the edition which Émile Souvestre
enriched, and we may say doubled, with his excellent notes and notices
which thenceforth made us thoroughly acquainted with the _Derniers
Bretons_. In several admirable little tales of graphic and striking
truthfulness, Souvestre has given the best existing pictures of our
western coasts, especially of Finisterre and the neighboring shores of
the Loire. I should be glad to quote something from a writer so
agreeable, and a friend so sincerely lamented, but the limits of this
little book prevent me from quoting any literary matter.

The remarkable observation made by Elie de Beaumont, quoted by me in
Chapter 4 of Book I., stands at the head of his article--which, in
itself, is a great book--_Terrains_ in the Dictionary of M. d'Orbigny.

What I have said about St. George's, in Chapter 7, is much better said
in Pelletan's books on _Royan_ and in his _Pasteur du Desert_. That
Pastor, as is generally known, was the grandfather of Pelletan, the
reverend minister Jarousseau, so admirably heroic in saving his
enemies. His small house, still standing, is a veritable Temple of
Humanity.

Notes to Book 2. Chapter I, _Fecundity_. On the Herring, see Vol. I of
De Reste's translation of an anonymous Dutch work; Noël de la
Moriniere in his excellent works printed and unpublished;
Valenciences' _Poissons_, &c.

