CHAPTER II.

THE BEACH, THE SANDS, AND THE IRON-BOUND COAST.


We need not be at all surprised if childhood and ignorance are
astounded, _astonied_, when they first find themselves face to face
with that vast and mysterious Sphinx of the Great Master's sculpture,
the Ocean. Why, in fact, should we be astonished by their gaze of
mingled awe, admiration and bewilderment, when we ourselves, despite
our early culture and life-long experience, see so much in the great
Riddle of that great Sphinx which we cannot even hope to explain?

What is the real extent of the ocean? That it is greater than that of
the earth is about as much as, conscientiously, we can at all
positively affirm. On the entire surface of our globe, water is the
Generality--land the Exception. But what is their relative proportion?
That, water covers four-fifths of the globe is probable, though, some
say a third or a fourth. It is difficult, not to say impossible, to
answer the question precisely. A bold explorer discovers a polar land,
lays it down, latitude and longitude, with scientific precision; in
the very next year an equally bold and no less scientific adventurer
seeks it in vain; and in all latitudes immense shoals and lovely Coral
islands form in the dark depths, rise to the surface, and disappear,
just as suddenly and unaccountably as they arose.

The real depth of the sea is still less known to us than its extent;
we are only at the mere commencement of our early, few, and imperfect
soundings.

The daring little liberties which we take with the surface of the
invincible element, and the confidence with which we go hither and
thither upon its unsounded depths, have really nothing to say against
the grand and well-founded pride of the Ocean, impenetrable as she is
as to her secrets, ever moving yet unchangeable, a reality, yet, in
all but a few of her phenomena, as unreal to us as the spectres of our
actual dreaming. That those mighty depths contain a whole world, a
marvellously great and diversified world, of life, love, war, and
reproduction of all sorts and sizes, we must imagine and may already
with confidence affirm; but we have only, and barely, touched upon the
threshold of that world. We are in such a hurry to leave that strange
and hostile element! If we need the Ocean, see ye, my brothers, the
Ocean in no wise needs us. Nature, fresh from the hand of Deity,
scorns the too prying gaze and the too shallow judgment of finite but
presumptuous man.

That very element which we term fluid, shifting, capricious, suffers,
in reality, no change; on the contrary it is a very perfect model of
regularity. The really and constantly changing creature is Man. His
body of this year will have evaporated by this time next year, for,
according to Berzolius, four-fifths of our frame are water, which at
every instant we yield to the ever craving atmosphere. Fragile and
fleeting creature as Man is, he has indeed good reason for reflection
and for humility when he finds himself in presence of the great
unchanging, and, humanly speaking, unchangeable, powers of nature,
just, and grand, glorious, as is his hope, his belief, his _certainty_
of a spiritual immortality. Despite that delightful hope, that
confident belief, that sustaining certainty, Man yet is necessarily
and terribly saddened by the smiting and strange suddenness with which
he hourly sees the thread of man's life forever broken. The Sea seems
to exult over our fleeting tenure of a life of which we cannot
anticipate, far less command, one added moment. Whenever we approach
her, she seems to murmur from her dark, inscrutable depths,
unchangeable as His will who made them--"Mortal! to-morrow you shall
pass away, but I, _I_ am, and ever shall be, unchanged, unchangeable,
mighty and mysterious. The earth will not only receive your bones but
will soon convert them into kindred and indistinguishable earth, but
I, ever and always, shall remain, main, the same majestic and
indifferent entity, the great perfectly balanced Life, daily
harmonising myself with the harmonious and majestic life of the bright
far worlds that shine above and around you." A stern and a scorning
rebuke that is which is given to our poor human pride when, twice in
our every mortal day the sea tears from our vexed shores the stony
spoils which twice in every day she scornfully and terribly hurls back
again. To any imagination but that of the trained and veteran seaman,
the fierce rush of the rising tide infallibly suggests the likeness of
a fierce and deadly combat; but when the child, or the Savage,
observes that the fury of the sea has its inevitable limits, the
terror of the child or Savage is turned--true coward-fashion--into an
unreasoning compound of hate and rage, and he as fiercely, as
impotently, pelts the terrible waves with the very pebbles which
without effort, without consciousness, she has cast, heaps upon heaps,
by ship loads, at every vast beat of her semi-diurnal pulse! Foaming,
roaring, threatening, the waves rush shoreward; the boy observes that
though they may kiss, they cannot, at his safe stand-point, submerge
his delicate little feet, returns laughter for their roarings, petty
pebbles for their impotent threats.

I saw a battle of this sort at Havre, in July, 1831. A little boy whom
I took thither felt his young courage aroused and his young pride
stung, by the loud challenges and fierce threats of the incoming
tide, and he returned scorn for threat, feebly-thrown pebble for
surging and mighty wave. Greatly, aye, laughably unequal was the
strife between that small, white, delicate and feeble hand of the
young mortal, and the vast and terrible force which cared not about
it, feared it not, felt it not, knew it not. _Laughably_, said I? Ah!
no inclination towards laughter remains with us when we reflect upon
the fleeting existence, the ephemeral and impotent fragility of our
best beloved, our fellows, our Maker's favored, erring, vain-glorious,
and, in the last issue, utterly helpless Humanity, when in presence of
that tireless and inscrutable Eternity to which we may at any moment
be recalled! Such was one of my earliest glances at the Ocean; such
the gloomy meditations, only too truly and too sternly realized, that
were suggested to me by that combat between the fierce Sea upon which
I look so often, and the glad and laughing, and buoyant child upon
whom, alas! I shall look, lovingly and anxiously, no more.




