CHAPTER I.

FECUNDITY.


Five minutes after midnight of St. John's--24th to 25th of June,
commences the great Herring Fishery, in the North Seas. Phosphoric
lights gleam and flash upon the waters, and from deck to deck is heard
the hearty hail, "Look out, there! The _Herring lightning_!" And a
real, and a vast lightning that is, as from the depths that vast mass
of life springs upward in eager quest of heat, light, and dalliance.
The soft, pale, silvery light of the Moon is well pleasing to that
timorous host; a beacon to guide them to their great banquet of Love.
Upward they spring, one and all; not one idler or straggler remains
behind. Gregariousness is the fixed rule, the indefeasible law of that
race; you never see them but in shoals. In shoals they lie buried in
the vast dark depths, and in shoals they come to the surface to take
their summer part in the universal joy, to see the light, to
revel--and to die. Packed, squeezed, crushed, layer on layer, it
seems that they never can be close enough, they swim in such compact
masses that the Dutch fishermen compare them to their own
Dykes--afloat! Between Scotland, Holland and Norway, one might fancy
that an immense island had suddenly risen, and that a whole continent
was about to arise. One division detaches itself eastward, and chokes
up the Baltic sound. In some of the narrower straits you actually
cannot row, so dense and solid is the mass of fish. Millions, tens of
millions, tens of thousands of millions;--who can even guess at the
number of those hosts upon hosts? It is on record that on one
occasion, near Havre, one fisherman, on one morning, found in his nets
no fewer than eight hundred thousand; and in Scotland, the mighty mass
of eleven thousand barrels was taken in a single night!

They come as a blinded and doomed prey; no amount of destruction can
discourage them. Constantly preyed upon alike by fish and by men, they
still come on in myriad shoals. And no marvel either; for they love
and multiply, even as they move. Kill them as fast as we may, they
just as fast reproduce; their vast, deep columns, even as they float
along, give themselves wholly up to the great work of reproduction.
The wave of the sea and the electric wave impel that whole vast mass
at every instant. No weariness, no satiety, no weakness, not even a
pause, take one where you will and it either has just propagated, is
propagating, or is about to propagate. In that vast polygamous host,
pleasure is an adventure and love a navigation. Over every league of
its passage it pours out its torrents of fecundity.

At some two or three fathoms deep the water is completely discolored
by the incredible abundance of the Herring-spawn; and at sunrise, far
as the eye can reach, you may see the water whitened with the
marvellous abundance of the thick, fat, viscuous billows in which life
is fermenting into new life. Over hundreds of square leagues it seems
as though a volcano of teeming and fecund milk had burst forth and
overwhelmed the sea.

Full of life as it is at the surface, the Sea would be actually choked
up with it but for the fierce and eager union of all sorts of
destructions. Let us remember that each Herring has forty, fifty, or
even seventy thousand eggs. But for the thinning process, each of them
giving the average increase of fifty thousand, and as each of these in
its turn giving the same average increase, a very few generations
would suffice to solidify the Ocean into a stagnant and putrid mass,
and make our whole globe a desert. Here we see the imperative
necessity to Life, of life's twin sister, Death; in their immense
strife there is harmony; destruction is the handmaiden of
preservation.

In the universal war carried on against the doomed race, it is the
fierce giants of the deep that prevent the mass from dispersing, and
drive it in dense shoals to our shores. The whale, and the other
cetaceæ, plunge into the living mass, swallow down whole tons, and
drive shoreward the still vast, the seemingly undiminished, host. And
at the shore commences quite another and more vast destruction. In the
first place, the smallest of fish devour the spawn of the Herring,
swallowing, like any human spendthrift, the great future for the small
present. And for the present, for the full-grown Herring, nature has
provided a very efficiently gluttonous foe, dull-eyed, huge appetited,
eager, insatiable,--the whole tribe of fish-devouring fish, Cod,
Whiting, &c. The Whiting gloats, devours, crams itself so with Herring
that it becomes one luscious mass of fat. The Cod similarly stuffs
itself with Whitings, and becomes fat, fecund, overflowing with
fecundity--with a really threatening superabundance of fecundity. Just
consider! What we have seen of the fecundity of the Herring is a mere
nothing when compared to the fecundity of the Cod, which not seldom
has nine millions of eggs! A cod weighing fifty pounds has fourteen
pounds of eggs; and its breeding season is nine months of every year.
This is the creature that, unchecked, would soon solidify the Ocean
and destroy the world. And accordingly we cry "Help! To arms! Launch
ships and away, to check this too vigorous fecundity." England alone
sends some twenty or thirty thousand seamen to the Cod Fisheries. And
how many are sent from America, from France, from Holland--from
everywhere? The Cod alone has caused the foundation of whole towns--of
whole colonies! The catching and curing of the Cod form an art, and
that art has its own idiom--the _patois_ of the Cod fishery.

But what could man do against the enormous fecundity of the cod?
Nature knows well that our petty efforts of fleets and fisheries would
be insufficient and that the Cod would conquer us; and nature evokes
another and a more efficient destroyer of the superfluous life that
would produce universal death. Down from its spawning bed in the
river, thin, famishing, eager, fierce with hunger, comes the Sturgeon,
that great devourer. Real rapture it is to the famishing glutton to
find, on his return to the sea, ready fattened for him, the succulent
and unctuous Cod, the concentrated substance of whole shoals of
Herrings! This great devourer of the cod, though less fecund than its
prey, _is_ fecund, producing fifteen hundred thousand eggs. The danger
reappears. The Herring threatened with its terrible fecundity, the Cod
threatened, the sturgeon threatens still. Nature, therefore, produced
a creature superb in destroying, almost powerless to reproduce, a
monster at once terrible and serviceable that could cut through this
otherwise invincible and ruinous fecundity, an omnivorous monster,
huge of jaw and constant in appetite, ready for all prey, living or
dead, the great, the perfectionated, the matchless devourer--the
Shark.

But these furious devourers are anticipatively kept down; mighty in
destroying, they are very slow in reproducing. The Sturgeon, as we
have seen is less prolific than the Cod, and the Shark is actually
sterile, if compared to any other fish. Not like them does it
overspread and discolor the sea. Viviparous, it sends forth its rare
youngling, fierce, fully armed, savage and terrible.

In her dark and teeming depths, the Sea can smile in scorn at the
destroyers to which she gives birth, well knowing, as the great proud
fertile Sea does, that no might of destruction can surpass her might
of reproduction. Her chief wealth, her most vast and countless
produce, defies all the fury of the devourers, is inaccessible to
their attacks. I speak of the infinite world of living atoms, of the
microscopic atomies that live and love, enjoy, struggle, suffer and
die from the surface to the utmost depths of the sea. It has been
affirmed that, in the absence of solar light, life, also, must be
absent; yet the darkest depths of the sea are studded with sea stars,
living, moving, microscopic infusoriæ and molluscs. The dark crab, the
phosphorescent seaworm, and a thousand strange and nameless creatures
swarm in those uttermost depths and rise only now and then, describing
long lines of variegated light upon the heaving surface. In its
semi-transparent density, the sea has its own lucidity, its own
glowing gleam, like that which fish, living or dead, reflect. The Sea!
glorious Sea, hath her own lights, her own Sun, Moon, and Stars.

Gaze inquisitively and intelligently on a mere salt well and you at
once perceive how prolific the ocean depths must be; that seeming
deposit of dead and inert matter hath its real life; it is a mass of
infusoriæ, microscopic, but organized and sentient. All voyagers on
the wide Ocean concur in telling us that in their far wanderings they
still and ever traverse living waters. Freynel saw millions of square
yards covered by a crimson glow--that glow, consisting of living
animalculæ so minute that a myriad is packed into every square inch.
In the bay of Bengal, in 1854, Captain Kingman sailed for thirty miles
through one vast white blotch which made the sea look like a great
snow field. Not a cloud above, but one unbroken leaden grey, in
strange contrast with the brilliant whiteness beneath. Look closely
and you see that that seeming snow is gelatinous; bring your
microscope into play and you see that that seeming jelly is a mass of
living, moving, phosphoric animalculæ, flashing forth strange and
marvellous lights.

Peron, too, tells us that for thirty leagues his good ship ploughed
her way through what seemed a sort of greyish dust; examined with the
microscope, this seeming dust was seen to be the eggs of some unknown
species, covering and concealing the waters over all that immense
space.

Even along the desolate shores of Greenland, where we vainly fancy
that prolific nature must needs expire, the sea is enormously
populous. Through waves two hundred miles by fifteen you sail through
deep brown waters, colored by microscopic medusæ, of which, de
Schleiden tells us, more than a hundred and ten thousand live and
love, battle, and die in every cubic foot. These productive and
nourishing waters are supersaturated with all sorts of fatty atoms
adapted to the delicate nature of the fish which lazily drink in the
nourishment provided for them by the fertile and generous common
mother. Do they know what they thus swallow? Scarcely. Its minute but
abounding nurture, its nourishing mother's-milk, comes to it without
its care, and is received without its gratitude. Our great fatality,
our sad calamity, fierce and terrible hunger, is known only on the
land. Exertion and want of food are unknown in the great world of
waters. There, life must glide away like a glad dream. What can the
creature there do with his strength? All use of it is superfluous,
impossible;--all save only one; all strength, all energy, are reserved
for the great work of love.

The one great law, the one great work of the seas, is to increase and
multiply. Love fills up the whole of its fecund depths, and is
wealthiest in reproduction among those which are so small that to our
unassisted eye they are invisible, unknown as though they were
non-existent. We have spoken of mere atomies; but are there, in
reality, any such? When we imagine that we have got the lowest, the
utterly indivisible, we have but to examine with more earnest and
penetrating gaze and we see that this seemingly frail atomy still
loves, still reproduces itself in miniature. At the very lowest stages
of life you find all the forms of life and reproduction.

Such is the Sea, such the great _Female of the Globe_, whose ceaseless
yearning, whose permanent conception, whose production and
reproduction, never end.




