CHAPTER IV.

THE BEACH, THE SANDS, AND THE IRON-BOUND COAST, CONTINUED.


The headlands, the sandy beaches, the bold capes and the low shores,
command various, but ever useful, views of the great sea, stern and
wild at the first glance, but divine and friendly, as we come to know
it better. The advantage of the headlands is that at the foot of one
of those giant rock-walls we more entirely than elsewhere appreciate
the breathing and bounding pulse of the sea. Insensible,
imperceptible, on the Mediterranean, that pulse is very distinct on
the ocean. The Ocean breathes and pulsates, even as you and I do; it
compels me to calculate my days and hours, and to look up to Heaven.
It reminds me alike of myself and of the world. Let me seat myself
upon some such shore, that, for instance, of Antifer, whence I may
look out upon that vast expanse. The sea which, but a moment agone,
seemed dead, has suddenly shuddered and become tremulous--first
symptom of the great approaching movement. The tide has heaved past
Cherbourg and Barfleur, and turned sharply and violently round the
lighthouse; its divided waters lave Calvados, rush upon Havre and come
to me at Étretat, at Fécamp, at Dieppe, to hurl themselves into the
canal despite the strong Northern currents. It is for me to watch its
hour. Its height, almost indifferent to the sandhills, is here, at the
foot of the headland, alike worthy of your attention and powerful to
command it. This long rock-wall of thirty leagues has but few
stairways. Its narrow inlets, which form our smaller havens, occur at
rare and great distances. And at low water we can with inquiring gaze
inspect and question the strata above strata, gigantically and
regularly superposed, which, as so many Titanic registers, tell us the
history of accumulated ages of growth and decay, of life and death.
From that great open book of time every year tears away a page. We
have before us a piece of an hourly perishing, hourly renewing, world,
which the sea from beneath is hourly devouring, and the torrents and
the tempests, the frosts and the thaws from above, are hourly, and
still more destructively, attacking. Wearing, crushing, beating,
pulverising, wave, and wind, and storm and Time, that great _Edax
rerum_, that unsparing and untiring Moth of the Universe, are, even as
we gaze, converting the one vast rocky mass into the rounded and petty
pebble. It is this rough work which makes this coast, so richly
fertile on the land side, a real maritime desert on the seaward. A
few, very few, sea plants survive the eternal crushing and grinding of
the ever crushed and ever crushing pebbles driven hither and thither
by every wave that every wind scourges into motion. The molluscæ, and
even the very fish shun this vexed shore. Great contrast that between
an inland country so genial, and such a stern, rugged, threatening and
inhospitable coast.

It is only to be seen thoroughly when looked down upon from the bold
headland. Below, the hard necessity of toiling over the beach, the
sand yielding, and the pebbles round, hard, and rolling, makes the
task of traversing this narrow beach a real and violent gymnastic
exercise. No; let us keep to the heights where splendid villas, noble
woods, the waving harvests, the delicious gardens which even to the
very edge of the great rocky wall, look down upon that magnificent
channel which separates the two shores of the two great empires of the
world.

The land and the sea! What more! Both, here, have a great charm;
nevertheless, he who loves the sea for her own sake, he who is her
friend, her lover, will rather seek her in some less varied scene. To
be really intimate with her, the great sandy beaches, provided,
always, that they be not too soft, are far more convenient. They allow
of such infinite strolls! They suffer us so well to build up our air
castles, and to meditate upon so many things; they allow us to hold
such familiar and deep conference with that never silent sea! Never do
I complain of those vast and free arenas in which others find
themselves so ill at ease. When there, I am never less lonely than
when alone. I come, I go, I feel that ever present sea. It is there,
ever there, the sublime companion; and if haply that companion be in
gentle mood, I venture to speak, and the great companion does not
disdain to speak to me again. How many things have we not said to each
other in those quiet wastes, when the crowd is away, on the limitless
sands of Scheveningen, Ostend, Royan, and Saint Georges. There it is
that in long interviews we can establish some intimacy with the Sea,
acquire some familiarity with its great speech.

When from the towers of Amsterdam the Zuyderzee looks muddy, and when
at the dykes of Scheveningen the leaden waves seem ready to overleap
the earthy mound, the Sea wears its least pleasing aspect; yet I
confess that this combat between land and water attracts me
forcibly--this great invention, this mighty effort, this triumph of
man's skill and man's labor, over the fiercest force of inanimate
nature.

And this sea also pleases me by the treasures of fecund life which I
know to abound in its dark depths. It is one of the most populous in
the world. On the night of St. John, when the fishery opens, you may
see another sea arise from the depths--the Sea of Herrings. You will
imagine that the boundless plain of waters will prove too limited for
this great living upburst, this triumphant revelation of the boundless
fecundity of Nature. Such was my first impression of this sea, and
when I saw the pictures in which genius has so well marked its
profound character, Ruysdaël's gloomy _Estacade_ beyond any other
painting in the Louvre has always irresistibly attracted me. Why? In
the ruddy tints of those phosphorescent waters, I feel not the cold of
the North Sea, but the fermentation, the stream, the rushing energy of
life.

Nevertheless, were I asked what coast the most grandly and powerfully
impresses me, I should answer, that of Brittany, especially those wild
and sublime headlands of granite which terminate the old world at that
bold point which dominates the Atlantic and defies the western storm
winds. Nowhere have I better felt than there, those lofty and
ennobling melancholies which are the best impressions of the sea.

But I must explain, here. There are different melancholies; there is a
melancholy of the weak, and a melancholy of the strong,--the
melancholy of the too sensitive souls who weep only for themselves,
and that of the disinterested hearts, which cheerfully accept their
own lot, and find nature ever blessing and blessed, but feel the
evils of society, and in melancholy itself find strength for action,
means for creating good or mitigating evil. Ah! what need we have, we
of the working brain, often to strengthen our souls in that mood which
we may call _heroic melancholy_.

When, some thirty years since, I paid a visit to this country, I could
not account for the potent attraction that it had for me. At the
foundation of this attractive potency of Brittany, is its great
harmony. Elsewhere, we feel, though we cannot explain it to ourselves,
a certain discordance between the race and the soil. The very
beautiful Norman race, in those districts in which it is most unmixed,
and where it retains the peculiar, ruddy complexion of the true
Scandinavian, has not the slightest apparent affinity with the
territory upon which it has intruded itself. In Brittany, on the
contrary, on the most ancient geological formation on our globe, on
that soil of granite and of flint, lives a race solid as that granite,
sharp as that flint, a sturdy and antique race. Just as much as
Normandy progresses, Brittany retrogrades. Witty, lively, and too
imaginative, the impossible, the utterly absurd, are ever welcome to
her. But, if wrong on many points, she is great upon a most important
one; she has character; often you may think her erroneous, but never
can you deem her common-place.

If we would for a time emerge from that wretched common-place, that
deadly liveliness, that horrible waking dream "of stupid starers and
of loud huzzas," let us seat ourselves on one of the impending and
commanding peaks that overlook the bay of Douarnenez,--the stern, bold
headland, for instance, of Penmark. Or, if the wind blow too strongly
there for our frame, effeminated by the late hours, the bad
atmosphere, and the hateful habits, and still more hateful passions,
of the thronged city, let us take a quiet sail among the lower isles
of the Morbihan, where the soft warm tide is lazy, and all but
soundless. Where Brittany is mild, Brittany is surpassingly mild.
Sailing among her islands and on her gentler tides, you might fancy
yourself on Lethe; but, on the other hand, when Brittany is aroused,
Brittany, take my word for it, is terribly strong and terribly in
earnest!

In 1831 I felt only the sadness of that coast, not its more than
compensating inspiration; I was yet to learn the real character of
that sea. It is in the most solitary little creeks, pierced in between
the wildest and most rugged looking rocks, that you will find her
truly gay, joyous, buoyant, abounding in glad and vigorous life. Those
rocks seem to you to be covered by you know not what greyish ashy
asperities--look a little more closely and you perceive that that
layer of seeming dust is a little world of living creatures, left
there high and dry by the ebb of the sea, to be revived and fed again
next tide. There, too, you see our little stone workers, hosts upon
hosts of those sea hedge-hogs or urchins, which M. Cailland has so
intelligently watched and so admirably described. All this swarming
though minute world chooses and feels just contrariwise to our choice
and our feeling. Beautiful Normandy terrifies them; the hard pebbles
of the beach would crush them, and they love not, either, the
crumbling limestone that overhangs the more smiling shore, for they
care not to build where at any moment building and foundation may sink
into the depths forever. They love and affect only the solid rocks of
Brittany. Let us take a lesson from them, and trust only to truth and
not to mere appearance. The marine life shuns precisely those
enchanting shores whose vegetable life is the most abounding and the
most brilliant. They are rich, but rich only in fossils; very curious
are they to the geologist, but they yield to him only the bones of the
dead. The stern granite, on the contrary, looks down upon the sea
swarming with its piscine life, and supports upon its massive breast
the humble, but none the less interesting little molluscæ whose
laborious life makes the serious charm, the great moral of the sea.

And yet amidst all that teeming life there is a deep silence; that
infinite population is ever and inevitably silent. Its life is
self-concentrated, its labors unmarked, uncheered, by a sound; it has
no connection with you or me--to us, that life is only another aspect
of Death. A great and a dead solitude, says some feminine heart; it
alarms, it saddens me.

Wrong! All here is lovable and friendly. These little creatures speak
not to the world, but they all the time are hard at work for it. They
yield themselves up to the sublime voice of their sublime parent, the
Ocean, that speaks for them; by his great utterance, they speak,
confidingly, and by proxy.

Between the silent earth and the mute tribes of the sea, a great,
strong, grave, and sympathetic dialogue is constantly carried on--the
harmonious agreement with the _Great I AM_, with himself and his great
work--that great eternal conflict which, everywhere and always, is
Love.




