CHAPTER II.

CHOICE OF COAST.


Earth is her own doctor; every climate has its own remedy. More and
more will Medicine lie in Emigration. But it must be an Emigration of
foresight, not one of those mad-cap, rapid, and most mischievous
journeys in which the patient rushes from one extreme of climate to
another, but prudently calculated to the obtaining of those vivifying
aids which nature every where holds in store for those who know how to
profit by them. The youth, that is yet to be born, depends upon these
two things--the _Science of Emigration_ and the _Art of
Acclimatization_. Hitherto, man has remained a prisoner like an oyster
on its rock. If he occasionally emigrates to some small distance from
his temperate zone, he, for the most part, goes to die. He will only
become free, really brave, when the science and art of Emigration and
Climatization shall make him free of the whole globe.

Few diseases are cured in the place and under the circumstances which
have given rise to them; they hold to certain habits which the
localities perpetuate and render unconquerable. There is no Reform,
physical or moral, for those who persist in the originating vice.

Medicine, guided by the auxiliary sciences, directs us in the new road
to the desired end. Our emigrations must be made prudently and
gradually. Can we, safely, without preparation, without alteration of
diet and of habits, be suddenly removed from an inland to a maritime
abode? Can we prudently take to the sea-bath until the sea breeze
shall have trained our physical frame? Can we suddenly and without
preparation encounter the severe shock, the horripilation of the
really tremendous shock of the cold water bath in the cold open air?
These questions we are glad to say are more and more being put and
answered by our physicians.

The extreme rapidity of our railroad journeys is very mischievous even
to the strong;--in many cases fatal to the ailing. To pass, as so many
do, from Paris to the Mediterranean in twenty-four hours, passing at
every hour into a different climate, is as perilous a thing as a
nervous person can do. You arrive agitated, giddy. When Madame de
Sevigné took a whole month to travel from Brittany to Provence, she
proceeded by slow and calculated degrees from one climate to another,
and its opposite. She proceeded, by slow degrees, from the maritime
climate of the West into the inland climate of Burgundy. Then,
travelling slowly by the upper Rhone into Dauphiny, she, with the
greater safety and comfort, braved the free winds of Valence and of
Avignon; then, halting awhile, and resting at Aix, in the interior of
Provence, far from the Rhone and from its shores, she made herself
Provençal in lungs.

France has the enviable advantage of being between two seas, and
thence the facility of alternating, as the disease may require,
between the saline tonicity of the Mediterranean and the moister
and--except in case of tempest--the far milder air of the Ocean.

On each of the two coasts there is a graduated scale of stations, more
or less mild, more or less strengthening. It is very interesting to
observe, and very useful to follow, this double scale,--proceeding, as
a general thing, from weaker to stronger.

The climate of the Ocean parting from the strong, rough, ever-heaving
waters of the channel, becomes extremely mild at the South of
Brittany, milder still in the Gironde, and mildest of all in the
land-locked basin of Arcachon.

The air of the Mediterranean, which we may call circular, has its
highest note in the dry, though keen, climate of Provence and Genoa,
becomes more mild as you approach Pisa, milder and less variable in
Sicily, and at Algiers attains a wonderful mildness and regularity.
And on your return be sure of a balmy air at Majorca and the little
ports of the Rousillon, so well sheltered from the harsh north wind.

The Mediterranean commands our admiration by two characteristics; the
beauty of its shores and the brilliant purity of its sky and
atmosphere. Very salt, very bitter is that sea; but what a glorious
blue sky is above it! It gives out by evaporation about thrice as much
water as it receives from all its tributary rivers. It would become
all salt, like that terrible Dead Sea, but for the lower currents, the
under-tow, like that from Gibraltar, for instance, were not constantly
tempering it with the waters of the Ocean.

All that I have seen of its shores are beautiful, though somewhat
stern. Nothing common-place about those shores. The volcanic, the
lurid bale fires of the lower earth, have everywhere made their mark
upon the upper earth; those dark Plutonic rocks are never tiresome
like the marshy sands of other shores. If the famous Orange woods
sometimes seem somewhat monotonous, they compensate you when here and
there, a sheltered spot, you find the true African vegetation, the
Aloe and the Cactus, the hedge of Myrtle and Jessamine, and the wild
and perfumed landes. Above, it is true, bald and frowning mountains
loom, and their long offshoots run even into the very sea.

"It seemed to me," said a traveller, "that I was between two
atmospheres; the air above, and the air below." He describes the
varied world of plants and animals which were reflected by the crystal
mirror of that deep blue sea of Sicily. I was less fortunate off
Genoa, where, gazing into the depths, I saw nothing but a desert. The
dry and sterile rocks, the volcanic framing of the shores, dark as
midnight, or of a still sadder and more ghastly and ghostlike white,
showed me nothing but antique sarcophagi--reversed churches, reminding
one, at times, of the cathedrals of Florence, or the leaning tower of
Pisa. Sometimes, also, I seemed to see "strange monsters of the deep."
Whales? Elephants? I do not know; but of real life not a trace.

Such, however, as that beautiful sea is, it admirably nerves and
hardens the dwellers on its shores, and the sailors on its bosom; it
makes at once the most fiery and the most solid of races. Our giants
of the North, are, perhaps, stronger, but certainly are not more
enduring, and, as certainly, they do not so readily, or so safely
acclimatise, as the seamen of Genoa, of Calabria, or of Greece,
bronzed as they are, not by an accident of the skin, but by the
permeation, the imbibation of the Sun's rays. A friend of mine, a
learned physician, sends his pale patients from Paris or Lyons to take
their Sun-baths in the South, and himself lies nude on the rocks, for
hours together. He has only his head covered; as to all the rest of
his person, he is bronzed as an African.

The really sick will go to Sicily, to Algiers, to Madeira, in search
of health. But the restorative of the pale, worn populations of our
great cities, is best to be found in the more varied and more
strengthening climates of the country which has given to Earth its
most iron humanity, its heroes by sea and by land, and in the council
chamber--that truly iron race of the Columbuses, the Dorias, the
Massenas,--and the Garibaldis.

Our extreme Northern ports, Dunkirk, Boulogne and Dieppe, where the
winds and waters of the Channel meet, are also a great nursery of
renewed life, and restored strength. That great breeze and that great
sea, might recall one from the grave. You may see there perfectly
incredible recoveries. Go there without any real and vital wound, and
you recover on the instant. The whole human machine acts strongly;
digests well, breathes freely. You need not even strive for health
when there, for nature says to you, as Tully said to Atticus, _Jubeo
valere_,--_I command you to be well_. The sturdy vegetation that
flourishes upon the very margin of the sea, seems to rebuke our
weakness. Each of the little ports which pierce our Norman coast, is
swept by the nor' westerly wind, which strengthens and revives us;
but grows less violent, though not less salubrious, at the mouth of
the Seine, beneath the fruitful orchards of Honfleur and Trouville.
The good river, sweeping away to the left, carries with it a softer
and gentler air. Higher up, you meet the strong, the sometimes really
terrible, sea of Granville, Saint-Maloes, and Cancale, about the best
of naval schools for young folks, a school which will make the strong
still stronger.

But if, on the contrary, we have to deal with some weakling, some
young child, born to weakness, or some young mother, made weak by too
frequent parturition, we must select some milder shelter. And such a
warm and always calm shelter, you will find, without going further
South, among the sleepy little isles and peninsulæ of Morbihan. These
isles form a labyrinth more perplexed than that in which the English
king sheltered his fair Rosamond. Entrust your own treasure to that
shelter, and none shall know of her save the Druidic rocks and the
handful of fishermen who inhabit those at once wild and gentle shores.
Does some gentle patient ask us on what people live, in those marine
solitudes? We reply, upon Fish, Fish--still Fish! It is not far from
St. Gildas, where the Bretons assure you that Heloise sought her
Abelard. They contrive to live there as cheaply and as well as
Robinson Crusoe and his man Friday.

Places more civilized and attractive are to be found farther South,
such as Pornice, Royan, Saint George, Arcachon, &c.

I spoke elsewhere of Saint George's, bordered by many a bitter and
precious plant; and Arcachon, too, is as attractive, with its resinous
and wholesomely pleasant odor of its pine woods. But for the worldly
rush from that great and Wealthy Bordeaux, but for that flood of
health seekers, which pours into it at certain seasons, it is at
Arcachon that we would shelter the dearly beloved patient, that dear
and delicate creature for whom we fear the rush and crush of the hard
working day world. That place, as long as we contemplate it only
within the inner basin, offers the contrast of an absolute and very
deep calm with a terribly rough sea close by. Beyond the lighthouse is
the terrible Gascon sea, within the bay a lazy tide, so lazy that you
cannot hear its murmurs, as low, as light, as the quiet tread of
lady's gentle footstep on the sea-weed carpet of that strand.

In an intermediate climate which is neither North nor South, neither
Brittany nor Vendëe, I have visited again and again, and always with
pleasure, the pretty and staid shelter of Ponice, with its frank
seamen and its pretty girls, with their conical hats. It is a pretty
quiet little place, which, protected as it is by the island (rather
the peninsula) of Noirmantiers, receives only a slanting and
exceedingly well behaved sea; that enters silken in its softness. And
in that bay of several leagues, these creeks, with sloping shores,
made, as it would seem, on purpose for baths for women and children,
they are so sheltered and so safe. Those nice sandy beaches, parted by
such sheltering rocks, conceal so much, and yet reveal so much of the
sea life, the plain, blunt, yet ever kindly and courteous life of the
seaman! But if those sheltering rocks do much good, they also do no
little injury. The sheltered creek and safe haven, keeps out the
Tempest;--but, it also keeps out the fishes. By little and little, but
very regularly, the grand rush and the grand murmur of the sea are
kept out, and yet, that half silence has a very great charm. No where
else have I so much welcomed, or so richly enjoyed, that great luxury
of the undisturbed Day-dreaming.




