
OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.

=Secular.=

'The book is a distinctly readable one.'--_Glasgow Herald_,
September 18, 1902.

'Really excellent little work.'--_Daily News_, September 26, 1902.

'We cannot commend it too highly.'--_Western Morning News_, January
2, 1903.

'Carefully thought-out little work ... written with frank and
tolerant impartiality.'--_Standard_, May 26, 1905.

'The arguments are admirably marshalled; difficulties are not
evaded, but met fairly.'--_Westminster Review_, August, 1905.

'We welcome a new edition.... The appeal of the book is evidently
one to common sense, and the success it has met is fully deserved.
There is a healthy lay atmosphere about Colonel Turton's arguments
which renders them, we fancy, peculiarly effective.'--_Pall Mall
Gazette_, March 11, 1907.

'It is difficult to know whether to admire most the logical
precision with which he marshals his facts, and enforces his
conclusions, or the charming candour, and freshness of style, which
make his book so readable.'--_Liverpool Daily Post_, March 14, 1907.

'This is a new edition, thoroughly revised, of LIEUTENANT-COLONEL
TURTON'S famous book.... We are specially struck with the detached
manner in which he examines the case; he holds the scales evenly,
and is not rhetorical. Anyone who has any power of reasoning at all
can follow him clearly from start to finish.'--_Bristol Times and
Mirror_, February 18, 1907.

'It is a book for the hour, and needs to be circulated by thousands
... straightforward, manly, and convincing.'--_Schoolmaster_, March
27, 1909.


=Church of England.=

'The book is of considerable value to everyone who is concerned with
the controversy on Christian Evidences; it presents a perfect
storehouse of facts and the conclusions which may be legitimately
drawn from them.'--_Church Times_, November 2, 1900.

'We have already expressed our high opinion of this work--the
author of which, it may be mentioned, is serving in South
Africa.'--_Guardian_, October 17, 1900.

'This thoughtful and convincing treatise.... We are glad to be able
to give our good word for the book, which should be found in the
catalogue of every public library in the kingdom. It is a volume
admirably suited for a gift-book to young men. It furnishes an
armoury of invincible weapons against the scepticism and
semi-scepticism which are rampant among us.'--_English Churchman_,
November 1, 1900.

'This very excellent volume.... We strongly recommend this book to
the clergy for their own use and for lending to thoughtful and
painstaking readers.'--_Church Union Gazette_, January, 1901.

'It is one of the best books of its class, readable, candid,
convincing, and thorough. It would be cheering news to hear that it
had been widely read. The book will continue to make its way; and
all Christians will rejoice that it should do so.'--_Church
Intelligencer_, October, 1905.

'We give a hearty welcome to this revised edition. It is admirably
suited for general use.'--_Churchman_, February, 1909.

'This is a textbook on Christian Evidence we would readily place in
the hands of the lay worker as an essential part of his
equipment.'--_Lay Reader_, December, 1912.

'There is no padding, and no unnecessary rhetoric. All the available
space is filled with good solid reasoning, put in simple language
which an intelligent artisan can follow as easily as an educated
person.'--_Church Family Newspaper_, October 3, 1902.

'Throughout the book the reader will be delighted with the sanity
and level-headedness of the writer, whose frequent appeals to common
sense are remarkably telling and effective.'--_Birmingham Diocesan
Magazine_, October, 1907.

'The brilliancy of the author does not consist in his rhetoric or
appeal, but in the really brilliant fairness which he displays
towards the other side, in the accuracy with which he analyses each
situation, and in the clear and simple arguments which he
adduces.'--_Church Standard_, January, 1906.

'Personally, we have never met with any book which can be more
confidently recommended.'--_Church Army Review_, December, 1912.

'This is the kind of book which strengthens believers and makes
converts. It is one which should be placed within the reach of every
lad at that period of his life when he begins to think for
himself.'--_The_ (Church Lads') _Brigade_, October, 1905.


=Roman Catholic.=

'We most heartily wish that a copy of it could be found
in the library of every Catholic family, school, and
institution.'--_Catholic Times_, January, 1909 (sixth notice).

'This excellent book, ... well written, attractive in its style,
clearly thought out, and convincing.'--_Tablet_, August 29, 1903.

'This is a work of uncommon merit.... The style is clear and makes
for pleasant reading. We wish many of our Catholic young men would
try and analyse a chapter in COLONEL TURTON'S helpful defence of
Christianity.'--_Universe_, July 21, 1905.

'Having read and thoroughly approved every page of the book, we can
well believe that many clergy and teachers are finding it a useful
compendium of replies to all the chief arguments advanced against
Christianity. Though written by a non-Catholic, we can most strongly
recommend it as a book of the highest merit.'--_Catholic Herald_,
February 19, 1909.

'A capital book already much used by priests in this country, and to
be found upon the shelves of very many of our clerical libraries.
But we wish that the Catholic paterfamilias would procure it too,
and recommend it to his boys ... There is a masculine ring about it,
and no shuffling over difficulties.'--_Catholic Fireside_, March 23,
1907.


=Presbyterian.=

'One does not know what to admire most in the book--the accurate
knowledge gathered from so many fields, the clear reasoning,
the sound judgment, or the fine spirit which animates the
whole.'--_Christian Leader_, June 15, 1905.

'Admirably arranged and clearly expressed.'--_Weekly Leader_,
October 6, 1902.

'One of the best books of its kind.'--_St. Andrew_, June 1, 1905.

'This is an admirable summary. It is clear, simple, and
well arranged ... The style also makes it extremely
readable.'--_Presbyterian_, March, 1906.


=Nonconformist.=

'He is eminently fair to opponents, clear in statement, and
convincing in argument for his own case, and his standpoint, is
unmistakably evangelical. His style suits his work, being calm,
lucid, and simple.'--_Methodist Times_, August 22, 1901.

'Is a tried favourite, and has served the Kingdom in many lands.
There is no book of the class known to us so complete and
conclusive.'--_Methodist Recorder_, February 28, 1907.

'It deserves all the good that has been said of it.'--_United
Methodist_, November 19, 1908.

'One characteristic may be singled out for notice--the writer's
extraordinary alertness in the use of the most recent material. He
seems to be continually on the watch for discoveries and
suggestions, and to be able to utilise them promptly and
skilfully.'--_Baptist_, January 21, 1909.

'On the whole, it is the best popular summary that we have met. It
excels in definiteness of purpose, in clearness of statement, in
moderation, and in conciseness.'--_Baptist Times_, October 24, 1902.

'The book is one that every young man would do well to read. Its
absolute fairness, convincing logic, and withal extreme simplicity
are such as cannot fail to establish the faith of multitudes.'
_Y.M.C.A. Review_, December, 1912.

'The author's line of argument is irresistible in its rugged force.
... A fascinating book.'--_Social Gazette_ (Salvation Army), April
27, 1907.


=Agnostic.=

'Again, as in 1902, we commend LIEUTENANT-COLONEL TURTON'S book as a
handy epitome of nearly all conceivable arguments in support of
Christianity. The twenty-four chapters champion twenty-four
propositions, and the whole thing is worked out as systematically as
a problem in a successful student's honours paper. ...However, it is
of no avail to argue such points with our well-meaning and
unimaginative Lieutenant-Colonel; and we will merely remark that he
is quite a gentleman, and uses no disdainful language towards the
poor Agnostic.'--_Literary Guide and Rationalistic Review_, March,
1907.

'This remarkable volume contains over 500 pages, with scarcely a
dull one among them. The author's easy flow of unlaboured thought,
his facility of expression, and his fine gift of exposition, carry
the reader on in spite of himself.... Differ as we may from much
that is in the gallant Colonel's volume, we gladly pay him the
respect due to frankness, cleverness, and transparency of mind and
motive, and thank him for putting his own side of a great
subject so simply and interestingly, and without prejudice or
bitterness.'--_New Age_, August 3, 1905.




THE TRUTH OF CHRISTIANITY




    THE

    TRUTH OF CHRISTIANITY

    BEING AN

    Examination of the More Important Arguments
    For and Against Believing in that Religion

    COMPILED FROM VARIOUS SOURCES BY

    LT.-COL. W. H. TURTON, D.S.O.
    LATE ROYAL ENGINEERS

    NINTH EDITION  FORTIETH THOUSAND

    (_Carefully revised throughout_)

    LONDON
    WELLS GARDNER, DARTON & CO., LTD.
    3 AND 4, PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS, E.C.
    AND 44, VICTORIA STREET, S.W.
    1919




    _First Edition             published Oct.,   1895.   }1,000 copies._
    _Cheap   "                      "    Oct.,   1897._  }
    _Third   " carefully revised    "    Sept.,  1900._   1,000    "
    _Fourth  "     "        "       "    Mar.,   1902._   2,000    "
    _Fifth   "     "        "       "    Mar.,   1905._   3,000    "
    _Sixth   "     "        "       "    Jan.,   1907._   5,000    "
    _Seventh "     "        "       "    Nov.,   1908._   8,000    "
    _Eighth  "     "        "       "    Nov.,   1912._  10,000    "
    _Ninth   "     "        "       "    Oct.,   1919._  10,000    "


    TRANSLATIONS:

    _Japanese Edition      published     Dec.,   1910.      500 copies._
    _Italian    "             "          Oct.,   1915._   1,000   "
    _Chinese    "  shortened  "         June,    1919._   1,000   "
    _Arabic     "             "          Oct.,   1919._   1,000   "




PREFACE TO NINTH EDITION.


I have again carefully revised the whole book. Some additions have
been made here and there, especially in Chapter XIX.; but as a rule
the alterations have been merely to shorten and condense the
arguments where this could be done without spoiling them, and to
simplify the language as much as possible. The book is thus shorter,
and I hope simpler than any previous edition. Another slight
improvement, which will commend itself to most purchasers, is
reducing the price to 2s. net. The work, as before stated, lays no
claim to originality, and I have not hesitated to borrow arguments
and illustrations from any source. The references to the Bible are
all to the Revised Version.

    W. H. T.

    29, CALEDONIA PLACE,
    CLIFTON, BRISTOL,
    _October 1, 1919_.




CONTENTS


  PART I.


  _NATURAL RELIGION._

  CHAPTER                                                          PAGE

  I. THAT THE UNIVERSE HAD A CREATOR                                  3

  II. THAT THE CREATOR DESIGNED THE UNIVERSE                         10

  III. THAT THE EXISTENCE OF GOD IS EXTREMELY PROBABLE               30

  IV. THAT MAN IS A FREE AND RESPONSIBLE BEING                       38

  V. THAT GOD TAKES AN INTEREST IN MAN'S WELFARE                     57

  VI. THAT GOD MIGHT MAKE SOME REVELATION TO MAN                     82

  VII. THAT A MIRACULOUS REVELATION IS CREDIBLE                      98


  PART II.

  _THE JEWISH RELIGION._

  VIII. THAT THE ACCOUNT OF THE CREATION WAS DIVINELY REVEALED      117

  IX. THAT ITS ORIGIN WAS CONFIRMED BY MIRACLES                     137

  X. THAT ITS HISTORY WAS CONFIRMED BY MIRACLES                     167

  XI. THAT ITS HISTORY WAS CONFIRMED BY PROPHECIES                  186

  XII. THAT THE JEWISH RELIGION IS PROBABLY TRUE                    201


  PART III.

  _THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION._

  XIII. THAT THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION IS CREDIBLE                     221

  XIV. THAT THE FOUR GOSPELS ARE GENUINE FROM EXTERNAL TESTIMONY    252

  XV. THAT THE GOSPELS ARE GENUINE FROM INTERNAL EVIDENCE           265

  XVI. THAT THE GOSPELS ARE GENUINE FROM THE EVIDENCE OF THE ACTS   287

  XVII. THAT THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST IS PROBABLY TRUE            301

  XVIII. THAT THE FAILURE OF OTHER EXPLANATIONS INCREASES THIS
        PROBABILITY                                                 324

  XIX. THAT THE OTHER NEW TESTAMENT MIRACLES ARE PROBABLY TRUE      349

  XX. THAT THE JEWISH PROPHECIES CONFIRM THE TRUTH OF
        CHRISTIANITY                                                374

  XXI. THAT THE CHARACTER OF CHRIST CONFIRMS THE TRUTH OF
        CHRISTIANITY                                                396

  XXII. THAT THE HISTORY OF CHRISTIANITY CONFIRMS ITS TRUTH         415

  XXIII. THAT ON THE WHOLE THE OTHER EVIDENCE SUPPORTS THIS
        CONCLUSION                                                  436

  XXIV. THAT THE THREE CREEDS ARE DEDUCIBLE FROM THE NEW
        TESTAMENT                                                   458

  XXV. THAT THE TRUTH OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION IS EXTREMELY
        PROBABLE                                                    483

  INDEX OF TEXTS                                                    495

  INDEX OF SUBJECTS                                                 502




PART I.

_NATURAL RELIGION._

  CHAP.     I.  THAT THE UNIVERSE HAD A CREATOR.
    "      II.  THAT THE CREATOR DESIGNED THE UNIVERSE.
    "     III.  THAT THE EXISTENCE OF GOD IS EXTREMELY PROBABLE.
    "      IV.  THAT MAN IS A FREE AND RESPONSIBLE BEING.
    "       V.  THAT GOD TAKES AN INTEREST IN MAN'S WELFARE.
    "      VI.  THAT GOD MIGHT MAKE SOME REVELATION TO MAN.
    "     VII.  THAT A MIRACULOUS REVELATION IS CREDIBLE.




CHAPTER I.

THAT THE UNIVERSE HAD A CREATOR

     (_A._) THE ORIGIN OF THE UNIVERSE.

     Explanation of the universe, its origin, a Free Force.

     (1.) The Philosophical Argument. If the universe had
           not an origin, all events must have occurred before,
           and this seems incredible.
     (2.) The Scientific Argument. From the process of evolution
           and the degradation of energy.

     (_B._) THE CREATOR OF THE UNIVERSE.

     The Single Supernatural Cause, which originated it.


It is proposed in this Essay to consider the reasons for and against
believing in the truth of Christianity, meaning by that term, as
will be explained later on (Chapter XIII.), the doctrines contained
in the Three Creeds. For convenience the subject has been divided
into three Parts, Natural Religion, the Jewish Religion, and the
Christian Religion; but the second of these may be omitted by anyone
not specially interested in that subject. At present we are
considering _Natural Religion_ only, which deals with the great
questions of the Existence of God, and the probability, or
otherwise, of His making some Revelation to man. And we will
commence at the very beginning, though the first chapter will
unfortunately have to be rather technical.


(_A._) THE ORIGIN OF THE UNIVERSE.

Now by the universe is meant the _material_ universe, which includes
everything that exists (earth, sun, stars, and all they contain),
with the exception of immaterial or spiritual beings, if there are
any such. And by this universe having had an _origin_ is meant that
it was at some time acted on by a _Free_ Force, that is to say, by a
force which does not always act the same under the same
circumstances, but which can act or not as it pleases. No doubt such
a force would be totally different from all the known forces of
nature; but there is no difficulty in understanding what is meant by
the term, since man himself _seems_ to possess such a force in his
own free will. He _seems_ for instance to be able to raise his hand,
or not, as he likes. We are not, of course, assuming that man's will
is really free, but merely that the idea of a free force, able to
act or not as it pleases, is well known and generally understood.

Hence the statement that the universe had an origin means that at
some time or other it was acted on by such a Free Force; in other
words, it has not existed for ever under the fixed and invariable
forces of nature, and without any external interference. We have now
to consider the two arguments in favour of this, which may be called
the Philosophical and the Scientific argument.

(1.) _The Philosophical Argument._

By this is meant that, when we reflect on the subject, it seems
inevitable that if the universe had not an origin, all present
events must have occurred before. The reason for thinking this is,
that if all free force is excluded, it is plain that matter must be
eternal, since its coming into existence at any time could not have
been a necessity, and must therefore have been due to some free
force. It is equally plain that what we call the forces of nature
and the properties of matter must also be eternal, since any
alteration in them at any time would also have required a free
force. And from this it follows that no _new_ event can happen
_now_. For every event which the forces of nature could possibly
bring about of themselves would, since they have been acting from
eternity, have been brought about long ago. Therefore present events
are not new, but must have occurred before.

This is no doubt a possible theory. For example, if we assume that
the universe will in process of time work itself back into precisely
the same condition in which it was long ago as a _nebula_ or
anything else, when it will begin again precisely the same changes
as before; then, and only then, is it possible that it has been
going on doing so from all eternity. But this theory, though
possible, is certainly not credible. For it requires that all
events, past, present, and future, down to the minutest detail, have
occurred, and will occur, over and over again. They must, in fact,
form a _recurring series_. And when applied to a single example, say
the history of the human race, this is seen to be quite incredible.

We must hence conclude that the universe has not existed for ever
under the fixed forces of nature, and without any external
interference; in other words, that it had an origin. No doubt there
are difficulties in regard to this theory also, but they are mostly
due to our ignorance. We may not know, for instance, whether matter
itself is eternal. Nor may we know why, if a free force once acted
on the universe, it never apparently does so at present, and still
less can we picture to ourselves what such a force would be like;
though the difficulty here is no greater than that of picturing a
force which is not free, say gravity.

But our ignorance about all this is no reason for doubting what we
do know. And it appears to the writer that we do know that, unless
present events have occurred before, which seems incredible, the
universe cannot have existed for ever without some _Free Force_
having acted on it at some time. In short, it seems less difficult
to believe that the universe had an origin than to believe that it
had not.

(2.) _The Scientific Argument._

And this conclusion is greatly strengthened by two scientific
theories now generally accepted--that of the process of evolution
and the degradation of energy; both of which seem to show that the
universe had a beginning.

The first subject, that of _Evolution_, will be discussed more fully
in the next chapter. All that need be said here is, that the atoms
of the universe, with their evolving properties, cannot have existed
eternally; for then the course of evolution would have commenced in
the eternal past, and would therefore have been finished now. But
this is certainly not the case, and evolution is still in progress,
or at all events was so a few thousand years ago; and a state of
progress cannot be _eternal_. It thus differs from a mere state of
_change_ which as we have seen, might be eternal, if the changes
were recurring. But a state of _progress_, in which the changes are
not recurring, but all tend in one direction, can never be eternal.
It must have had a commencement. And this commencement cannot have
been a necessity, so it must have been due to some Free Force. In
short, evolution requires a previous _Evolver_; since it cannot have
been going on for ever, and it cannot have started itself.

The other theory, that of the _Degradation of Energy_, is that all
energy (motion, etc.) tends to _heat_; the simplest instance being
that of two bodies hitting each other when a certain amount of
motion is lost, and a corresponding amount of heat is produced. And
heat tends to be equally distributed. The heat, for instance, which
is now stored up in the sun will in process of time be distributed
throughout space, and the same applies to the whole universe; so
that everything will eventually have the same temperature. And
though this may take millions of years, they are yet nothing to
eternity. Therefore, if the universe with all its present forces has
existed from eternity, and without any external interference, it
must have been reduced to this state long ago. So if this theory is
correct (and the only reason for doubting it, is the curious
behaviour of _radium_), it seems not only probable, but certain,
that the universe had an origin.

But an objection has now to be considered. It may be said that the
above reasoning is merely another form of the old argument,
'Everything must have a cause, and therefore there must have been a
First Cause;' the obvious answer to which is, that then this First
Cause must also have had a cause, and so on indefinitely. But this
is not the case; for the alleged First Cause is of a different
_kind_ from all the others. It is a _Free_ Cause, whereas natural
causes are not free, but are themselves effects of other natural
causes; and these, again, of previous ones. What we want is a cause
which is _not_ also an effect, in other words, a cause which is not
moved by anything else, but is moved by itself, or _Free_. When once
we get to such a cause as this, there is no need for a previous one.

This objection, then, cannot be maintained, and we therefore decide
that the universe had an origin. And all we know at present about
the Force which originated it, is that it was a Free Force. And the
conclusion at which we have arrived may be concisely expressed by
saying, that before all natural causes which acted necessarily,
there was a _First Cause_ which acted voluntarily.


(_B._) THE CREATOR OF THE UNIVERSE.

We have next to consider what else we can ascertain in regard to
this First Cause. To begin with it can scarcely be disputed at the
present day that it was a _Single_ Cause, as modern science has
completely established the unity which pervades the universe. We
know for instance that the same materials are used everywhere, many
of the elements which exist on this earth being also found in the
sun and stars. Then there is the force of gravity, which is
all-embracing, and applies equally to the most distant stars, and
to the most minute objects on this earth; and many other examples
might be given. But it is scarcely necessary, as everyone now admits
that the universe (as the word implies) is one whole, and this
plainly points to a _Single_ First Cause.

Nor can it be disputed that this First Cause was _Supernatural_,
which merely means that it differs from natural forces in being
_free_; for this is exactly what we have shown. It was thus no kind
of gravitation, or electricity, or anything of that sort. All these
and all similar forces would always act the same under the same
conditions; while the Force we are considering was of a different
kind. It was a _Free_ Force, a Force which voluntarily chose to
originate the universe at a certain time. And such a Force must
clearly have been Supernatural.

In conclusion we will call this _Single Supernatural Cause_, which
originated the universe, its _Creator_. And if it be objected that
the universe may have had no _origin_, owing to some Free Force
having been always acting on it, such a Force must also be Single
and Supernatural, and may equally well be called its Creator.




