CHAPTER VII

It was only at moments like these I had any time to reflect on my
circumstances or that giddy chance which had shot me into space in this
fashion, and, frankly, the opportunities, when they did come, brought
such an extraordinary depressing train of thought, I by no means
invited them.  Even with the time available the occasion was always
awry for such reflection.  These dainty triflers made sulking as
impossible amongst them as philosophy in a ballroom.  When I stalked
out like that from the library in fine mood to moralise and
apostrophise heaven in a way that would no doubt have looked fine upon
these pages, one sprightly damsel, just as the gloomy rhetoric was
bursting from my lips, thrust a flower under my nose whose scent
brought on a violent attack of sneezing, her companions joining hands
and dancing round me while they imitated my agony.  Then, when I burst
away from them and rushed down a narrow arcade of crumbling mansions,
another stopped me in mid-career, and taking the honey-stick she was
sucking from her lips, put it to mine, like a pretty, playful child.
Another asked me to dance, another to drink pink oblivion with her, and
so on.  How could one lament amongst all this irritating cheerfulness?

An might have helped me, for poor An was intelligent for a Martian, but
she had disappeared, and the terrible vacuity of life in the planet was
forced upon me when I realised that possessing no cognomen, no fixed
address, or rating, it would be the merest chance if I ever came across
her again.

Looking for my friendly guide and getting more and more at sea amongst
a maze of comely but similar faces, I made chance acquaintance with
another of her kind who cheerfully drank my health at the Government's
expense, and chatted on things Martian.  She took me to see a funeral
by way of amusement, and I found these people floated their dead off on
flower-decked rafts instead of burying them, the send-offs all taking
place upon a certain swift-flowing stream, which carried the dead away
into the vast region of northern ice, but more exactly whither my
informant seemed to have no idea.  The voyager on this occasion was
old, and this brought to my mind the curious fact that I had observed
few children in the city, and no elders, all, except perhaps Hath,
being in a state of sleek youthfulness.  My new friend explained the
peculiarity by declaring Martians ripened with extraordinary rapidity
from infancy to the equivalent of about twenty-five years of age, with
us, and then remained at that period however long they might live; Only
when they died did their accumulated seasons come upon them; the girl
turning pale, and wringing her pretty hands in sympathetic concern when
I told her there was a land where decrepitude was not so happily
postponed.  The Martians, she said, arranged their calendar by the
varying colours of the seasons, and loved blue as an antidote to the
generally red and rusty character of their soil.

Discussing such things as these we lightly squandered the day away, and
I know of nothing more to note until the evening was come again: that
wonderful purple evening which creeps over the outer worlds at sunset,
a seductive darkness gemmed with ten thousand stars riding so low in
the heaven they seem scarcely more than mast high.  When that hour was
come my friend tiptoed again to my cheek, and then, pointing to the
palace and laughingly hoping fate would send me a bride "as soft as
catkin and as sweet as honey," slipped away into the darkness.

Then I remembered all on a sudden this was the connubial evening of my
sprightly friends--the occasion when, as An had told me, the Government
constituted itself into a gigantic matrimonial agency, and, with the
cheerful carelessness of the place, shuffled the matrimonial pack anew,
and dealt a fresh hand to all the players.  Now I had no wish to avail
myself of a sailor's privilege of a bride in every port, but surely
this game would be interesting enough to see, even if I were but a
disinterested spectator.  As a matter of fact I was something more than
that, and had been thinking a good deal of Heru during the day.  I do
not know whether I actually aspired to her hand--that were a large
order, even if there had been no suspicion in my mind she was already
bespoke in some vague way by the invisible Hath, most abortive of
princes.  But she was undeniably a lovely girl; the more one thought of
her the more she grew upon the fancy, and then the preference she had
shown myself was very gratifying.  Yes, I would certainly see this
quaint ceremonial, even if I took no leading part in it.

The great centre hall of the palace was full of a radiant light
bringing up its ruined columns and intruding creepers to the best
effect when I entered.  Dinner also was just being served, as they
would say in another, and alas! very distant place, and the whole
building thronged with folk. Down the centre low tables with room for
four hundred people were ranged, but they looked quaint enough since
but two hundred were sitting there, all brand-new bachelors about to be
turned into brand new Benedicts, and taking it mightily calmly it
seemed.  Across the hall-top was a raised table similarly arranged and
ornamented; and entering into the spirit of the thing, and little
guessing how stern a reality was to come from the evening, I sat down
in a vacant place near to the dais, and only a few paces from where the
pale, ghost-eyed Hath was already seated.

Almost immediately afterwards music began to buzz all about the
hall--music of the kind the people loved which always seemed to me as
though it were exuding from the tables and benches, so disembodied and
difficult it was to locate; all the sleepy gallants raised their
flower-encircled heads at the same time, seizing their wine-cups,
already filled to the brim, and the door at the bottom of the hall
opening, the ladies, preceded by one carrying a mysterious vase covered
with a glittering cloth, came in.

Now, being somewhat thirsty, I had already drunk half the wine in my
beaker, and whether it was that draught, drugged as all Martian wines
are, or the sheer loveliness of the maids themselves, I cannot say, but
as the procession entered, and, dividing, circled round under the
colonnades of the hall, a sensation of extraordinary felicity came over
me--an emotion of divine contentment purged of all grossness--and I
stared and stared at the circling loveliness, gossamer-clad,
flower-girdled, tripping by me with vapid delight.  Either the wine was
budding in my head, or there was little to choose from amongst them,
for had any of those ladies sat down in the vacant place beside me, I
should certainly have accepted her as a gift from heaven, without
question or cavil.  But one after another they slipped by, modestly
taking their places in the shadows until at last came Princess Heru,
and at the sight of her my soul was stirred.

She came undulating over the white marble, the loveliness of her fairy
person dimmed but scarcely hidden by a robe of softest lawn in colour
like rose-petals, her eyes aglitter with excitement and a charming
blush upon her face.

She came straight up to me, and, resting a dainty hand upon my
shoulder, whispered, "Are you come as a spectator only, dear Mr. Jones,
or do you join in our custom tonight?"

"I came only as a bystander, lady, but the fascination of the
opportunity is deadly--"

"And have you any preference?"--this in the softest little voice from
somewhere in the nape of my neck.  "Strangers sometimes say there are
fair women in Seth."

"None--till you came; and now, as was said a long time ago, 'All is
dross that is not Helen.'  Dearest lady," I ran on, detaining her by
the fingertips and gazing up into those shy and star-like eyes, "must I
indeed put all the hopes your kindness has roused in me these last few
days to a shuffle in yonder urn, taking my chance with all these lazy
fellows?  In that land whereof I was, we would not have had it so, we
loaded our dice in these matters, a strong man there might have a
willing maid though all heaven were set against him!  But give me
leave, sweet lady, and I will ruffle with these fellows; give me a
glance and I will barter my life for your billet when it is drawn, but
to stand idly by and see you won by a cold chance, I cannot do it."

That lady laughed a little and said, "Men make laws, dear Jones, for
women to keep.  It is the rule, and we must not break it."  Then,
gently tugging at her imprisoned fingers and gathering up her skirts to
go, she added, "But it might happen that wit here were better than
sword." Then she hesitated, and freeing herself at last slipped from my
side, yet before she was quite gone half turned again and whispered so
low that no one but I could hear it, "A golden pool, and a silver fish,
and a line no thicker than a hair!" and before I could beg a meaning of
her, had passed down the hall and taken a place with the other
expectant damsels.

"A golden pool," I said to myself, "a silver fish, and a line of hair."
What could she mean?  Yet that she meant something, and something
clearly of importance, I could not doubt.  "A golden pool, and a silver
fish--" I buried my chin in my chest and thought deeply but without
effect while the preparations were made and the fateful urn, each maid
having slipped her name tablet within, was brought down to us, covered
in a beautiful web of rose-coloured tissue, and commenced its round,
passing slowly from hand to hand as each of those handsome, impassive,
fawn-eyed gallants lifted a corner of the web in turn and helped
themselves to fate.

"A golden pool," I muttered, "and a silver fish"--so absorbed in my own
thoughts I hardly noticed the great cup begin its journey, but when it
had gone three or four places the glitter of the lights upon it caught
my eye. It was of pure gold, round-brimmed, and circled about with a
string of the blue convolvulus, which implies delight to these people.
Ay! and each man was plunging his hand into the dark and taking in his
turn a small notch-edged mother-of-pearl billet from it that flashed
soft and silvery as he turned it in his hand to read the name engraved
in unknown characters thereon.  "Why," I said, with a start, "surely
THIS might be the golden pool and these the silver fish--but the
hair-fine line?" And again I meditated deeply, with all my senses on
the watch.

Slowly the urn crept round, and as each man took a ticket from it, and
passed it, smiling, to the seneschal behind him, that official read out
the name upon it, and a blushing damsel slipped from the crowd above,
crossing over to the side of the man with whom chance had thus lightly
linked her for the brief Martian year, and putting her hands in his
they kissed before all the company, and sat down to their places at the
table as calmly as country folk might choose partners at a village fair
in hay-time.

But not so with me.  Each time a name was called I started and stared
at the drawer in a way which should have filled him with alarm had
alarm been possible to the peace-soaked triflers, then turned to glance
to where, amongst the women, my tender little princess was leaning
against a pillar, with drooping head, slowly pulling a convolvulus bud
to pieces.  None drew, though all were thinking of her, as I could tell
in my fingertips.  Keener and keener grew the suspense as name after
name was told and each slim white damsel skipped to the place allotted
her. And all the time I kept muttering to myself about that "golden
pool," wondering and wondering until the urn had passed half round the
tables and was only some three men up from me--and then an idea flashed
across my mind.  I dipped my fingers in the scented water-basin on the
table, drying them carefully on a napkin, and waiting, outwardly as
calm as any, yet inwardly wrung by those tremors which beset all male
creation in such circumstances.

And now at last it was my turn.  The great urn, blazing golden, through
its rosy covering, was in front, and all eyes on me.  I clapped a
sunburnt hand upon its top as though I would take all remaining in it
to myself and stared round at that company--only her herself I durst
not look at!  Then, with a beating heart, I lifted a corner of the web
and slipped my hand into the dark inside, muttering to myself as I did
so, "A golden pool, and a silver fish, and a line no thicker than a
hair." I touched in turn twenty perplexing tablets and was no whit the
wiser, and felt about the sides yet came to nothing, groping here and
there with a rising despair, until as my fingers, still damp and fine
of touch, went round the sides a second time, yes! there was something,
something in the hollow of the fluting, a thought, a thread, and yet
enough.  I took it unseen, lifting it with infinite forbearance, and
the end was weighted, the other tablets slipped and rattled as from
their midst, hanging to that one fine virgin hair, up came a pearly
billet.  I doubted no longer, but snapped the thread, and showed the
tablet, heard Heru's name, read from it amongst the soft applause of
that luxurious company with all the unconcern I could muster.

There she was in a moment, lip to lip with me, before them all, her
eyes more than ever like planets from her native skies, and only the
quick heave of her bosom, slowly subsiding like a ground swell after a
storm, remaining to tell that even Martian blood could sometimes beat
quicker than usual!  She sat down in her place by me in the simplest
way, and soon everything was as merry as could be.  The main meal came
on now, and as far as I could see those Martian gallants had extremely
good appetites, though they drank at first but little, wisely
remembering the strength of their wines.  As for me, I ate of fishes
that never swam in earthly seas, and of strange fowl that never flapped
a way through thick terrestrial air, ate and drank as happy as a king,
and falling each moment more and more in love with the wonderfully
beautiful girl at my side who was a real woman of flesh and blood I
knew, yet somehow so dainty, so pink and white, so unlike other girls
in the smoothness of her outlines, in the subtle grace of each
unthinking attitude, that again and again I looked at her over the rim
of my tankard half fearing she might dissolve into nothing, being the
half-fairy which she was.

Presently she asked, "Did that deed of mine, the hair in the urn,
offend you, stranger?"

"Offend me, lady!" I laughed.  "Why, had it been the blackest crime
that ever came out of a perverse imagination it would have brought its
own pardon with it; I, least of all in this room, have least cause to
be offended."

"I risked much for you and broke our rules."

"Why, no doubt that was so, but 'tis the privilege of your kind to have
some say in this little matter of giving and taking in marriage. I only
marvel that your countrywomen submit so tamely to the quaintest game of
chance I ever played at.

"Ay, and it is women's nature no doubt to keep the laws which others
make, as you have said yourself.  Yet this rule, lady, is one broken
with more credit than kept, and if you have offended no one more than
me, your penance is easily done."

"But I have offended some one," she said, laying her hand on mine with
gentle nervousness in its touch, "one who has the power to hurt, and
enough energy to resent.  Hath, up there at the cross-table, have I
offended deeply tonight, for he hoped to have me, and would have
compelled any other man to barter me for the maid chance assigned to
him; but of you, somehow, he is afraid--I have seen him staring at you,
and changing colour as though he knew something no one else knows--"

"Briefly, charming girl," I said, for the wine was beginning to sing in
my head, and my eyes were blinking stupidly--"briefly, Hath hath thee
not, and there's an end of it.  I would spit a score of Haths, as these
figs are spit on this golden skewer, before I would relinquish a hair
of your head to him, or to any man," and as everything about the great
hall began to look gauzy and unreal through the gathering fumes of my
confusion, I smiled on that gracious lady, and began to whisper I know
not what to her, and whisper and doze, and doze--

I know not how long afterwards it was, whether a minute or an hour, but
when I lifted my head suddenly from the lady's shoulder all the place
was in confusion, every one upon their feet, the talk and the drinking
ceased, and all eyes turned to the far doorway where the curtains were
just dropping again as I looked, while in front of them were standing
three men.

These newcomers were utterly unlike any others--a frightful vision of
ugly strength amidst the lolling loveliness all about.  Low of stature,
broad of shoulder, hairy, deep-chested, with sharp, twinkling eyes, set
far back under bushy eyebrows, retreating foreheads, and flat noses in
faces tanned to a dusky copper hue by exposure to every kind of weather
that racks the extreme Martian climate they were so opposite to all
about me, so quaint and grim amongst those mild, fair-skinned folk,
that at first I thought they were but a disordered creation of my fancy.

I rubbed my eyes and stared and blinked, but no! they were real men, of
flesh and blood, and now they had come down with as much stateliness as
their bandy legs would admit of, into the full glare of the lights to
the centre table where Hath sat.  I saw their splendid apparel, the
great strings of rudely polished gems hung round their hairy necks and
wrists, the cunningly dyed skins of soft-furred animals, green and red
and black, wherewith their limbs were swathed, and then I heard some
one by me whisper in a frightened tone, "The envoys from over seas."

"Oh," I thought sleepily to myself, "so these are the ape-men of the
western woods, are they?  Those who long ago vanquished my
white-skinned friends and yearly come to claim their tribute.  Jove,
what hay they must have made of them!  How those peach-skinned girls
must have screamed and the downy striplings by them felt their dimpled
knees knock together, as the mad flood of barbarians came pouring over
from the forest, and long ago stormed their citadels like a stream of
red lava, as deadly, as irresistible, as remorseless!"  And I lay
asprawl upon my arms on the table watching them with the stupid
indifference I thought I could so well afford.

Meanwhile Hath was on foot, pale and obsequious like others in the
presence of those dread ambassadors, but more collected, I thought.
With the deepest bows he welcomed them, handing them drink in a golden
State cup, and when they had drunk (I heard the liquor running down
their great throats, in the frightened hush, like water in a runnel on
a wet day), they wiped their fierce lips upon their furry sleeves, and
the leader began reciting the tribute for the year.  So much corn, so
much wine--and very much it was--so many thousands ells of cloth and
webbing, and so much hammered gold, and sinah and lar, precious metal
of which I knew nothing as yet; and ever as he went growling through
the list in his harsh animal voice, he refreshed his memory with a
coloured stick whereon a notch was made for every item, the woodmen not
having come as yet, apparently, to the gentler art of written signs and
symbols. Longer and longer that caravan of unearned wealth stretched
out before my fancy, but at last it was done, or all but done, and the
head envoy, passing the painted stick to a man behind, folded his bare,
sinewy arms, upon which the red fell bristles as it does upon a
gorilla's, across his ample chest, and, including us all in one general
scowl, turned to Hath as he said--

"All this for Ar-hap, the wood-king, my master and yours; all this, and
the most beautiful woman here tonight at your tables!"

"An item," I smiled stupidly to myself, for indeed I was very sleepy
and had no nice perception of things, "which shows his majesty with the
two-pronged name is a jolly fellow after all, and knows wealth is
incomplete without the crown and priming of all riches.  I wonder how
the Martian boys will like this postscript," and chin on hand, and eyes
that would hardly stay open, I watched to see what would happen next.
There was a little conversation between the prince and the ape-man;
then I saw Hath the traitor point in my direction and say--

"Since you ask and will be advised, then, mighty sir, there can be no
doubt of it, the most beautiful woman here tonight is undoubtedly she
who sits yonder by him in blue."

"A very pretty compliment!" I thought, too dull to see what was coming
quickly, "and handsome of Hath, all things considered."

And so I dozed and dozed, and then started, and stared!  Was I in my
senses?  Was I mad, or dreaming?  The drunkenness dropped from me like
a mantle; with a single, smothered cry I came to myself and saw that it
was all too true.  The savage envoy had come down the hall at Hath's
vindictive prompting, had lifted my fair girl to her feet, and there,
even as I looked, had drawn her, white as death, into the red circle of
his arm, and with one hand under her chin had raised her sweet face to
within an inch of his, and was staring at her with small, ugly eyes.

"Yes," said the enjoy, more interestedly than he had spoken yet, "it
will do; the tribute is accepted--for Ar-hap, my master!"  And taking
shrinking Heru by the wrist, and laying a heavy hand upon her shoulder,
he was about to lead her up the hall.

I was sober enough then.  I was on foot in an instant, and before all
the glittering company, before those simpering girls and pale Martian
youths, who sat mumbling their fingers, too frightened to lift their
eyes from off their half-finished dinners, I sprang at the envoy.  I
struck him with my clenched fist on the side of his bullet head, and he
let go of Heru, who slipped insensible from his hairy chest like a
white cloud slipping down the slopes of a hill at sunrise, and turned
on me with a snort of rage. We stared at each other for a minute, and
then I felt the wine fumes roaring in my head; I rushed at him and
closed.  It was like embracing a mountain bull, and he responded with a
hug that made my ribs crackle. For a minute we were locked together
like that, swinging here and there, and then getting a hand loose, I
belaboured him so unmercifully that he put his head down, and that was
what I wanted.  I got a new hold of him as we staggered and plunged,
roaring the while like the wild beasts we were, the teeth chattering in
the Martian heads as they watched us, and then, exerting all my
strength, lifted him fairly from his feet and with supreme effort swung
him up, shoulder high, and with a mighty heave hurled him across the
tables, flung that ambassador, whom no Martian dared look upon,
crashing and sprawling through the gold and silver of the feast,
whirled him round with such a splendid send that bench and trestle,
tankards and flagons, chairs and cloths and candelabras all went down
into thundering chaos with him, and the envoy only stayed when his
sacred person came to harbour amongst the westral odds and ends, the
soiled linen, and dirty platters of our wedding feast.

I remember seeing him there on hands and knees, and then the liquor I
had had would not be denied.  In vain I drew my hands across my
drooping eyelids, in vain I tried to master my knees that knocked
together. The spell of the love-drink that Heru, blushing, had held to
my lips was on me.  Its soft, overwhelming influence rose like a
prismatic fog between me and my enemy, everything again became hazy and
dreamlike, and feebly calling on Heru, my chin dropped upon my chest,
my limbs relaxed, and I slipped down in drowsy oblivion before my rival.



