CHAPTER V

When I woke, feeling as refreshed as though I had been dreaming through
a long night, An, seeing me open-eyed, helped me to my feet, and when I
had recovered my senses a little, asked if we should go on.  I was
myself again by this time, so willingly took her hand, and soon came
out of the tangle into the open spaces.  I must have been under the
spell of the Martian wines longer than it seemed, for already it was
late in the afternoon, the shadows of trees were lying deep and
far-reaching over the motley crowds of people.  Out here as the day
waned they had developed some sort of method in their sports.  In front
of us was a broad, grassy course marked off with garlanded
finger-posts, and in this space rallies of workfolk were taking part in
all manner of games under the eyes of a great concourse of spectators,
doing the Martians' pleasures for them as they did their labours.  An
led me gently on, leaning on my arm heavier, I thought, than she had
done in the morning, and ever and anon turning her gazelle-like eyes
upon me with a look I could not understand.  As we sauntered forward I
noticed all about lesser circles where the yellow-girted ones were
drawing delighted laughter from good-tempered crowds by tricks of
sleight-of-hand, and posturing, or tossing gilded cups and balls as
though they were catering, as indeed they were, for outgrown children.
Others fluted or sang songs in chorus to the slow clapping of hands,
while others were doing I knew not what, sitting silent amongst silent
spectators who every now and then burst out laughing for no cause that
I could see.  But An would not let me stop, and so we pushed on through
the crowd till we came to the main enclosures where a dozen slaves had
run a race for the amusement of those too lazy to race themselves, and
were sitting panting on the grass.

To give them time to get their breath, perhaps, a man stepped out of
the crowd dressed in a dark blue tunic, a strange vacuous-looking
fellow, and throwing down a sheaf of javelins marched off a dozen
paces, then, facing round, called out loudly he would give sixteen
suits of "summer cloth" to any one who could prick him with a javelin
from the heap.

"Why," I said in amazement, "this is the best of fools--no one could
miss from such a distance."

"Ay but," replied my guide, "he is a gifted one, versed in mystics."

I was just going to say a good javelin, shod with iron, was a stronger
argument than any mystic I had ever heard of could stand, when out of
the crowd stepped a youth, and amid the derisive cheers of his friends
chose a reed from the bundle.  He poised it in his hand a minute to get
the middle, then turned on the living target.  Whatever else they might
be, these Martians were certainly beautiful as the daytime.  Never had
I seen such a perfect embodiment of grace and elegance as that boy as
he stood there for a moment poised to the throw; the afternoon sunshine
warm and strong on his bunched brown hair, a girlish flush of shyness
on his handsome face, and the sleek perfection of his limbs, clear cut
against the dusky background beyond.  And now the javelin was going.
Surely the mystic would think better of it at the last moment!  No! the
initiate held his ground with tight-shut lips and retrospective eyes,
and even as I looked the weapon flew upon its errand.

"There goes the soul of a fool!" I exclaimed, and as the words were
uttered the spear struck, or seemed to, between the neck and shoulder,
but instead of piercing rose high into the air, quivering and flashing,
and presently turning over, fell back, and plunged deep into the turf,
while a low murmur of indifferent pleasure went round amongst the
onlookers.

Thereat An, yawning gently, looked to me and said, "A strong-willed
fellow, isn't he, friend?"

I hesitated a minute and then asked, "Was it WILL which turned that
shaft?"

She answered with simplicity, "Why, of course--what else?"

By this time another boy had stepped out, and having chosen a javelin,
tested it with hand and foot, then retiring a pace or two rushed up to
the throwing mark and flung it straight and true into the bared bosom
of the man.  And as though it had struck a wall of brass, the shaft
leapt back falling quivering at the thrower's feet.  Another and
another tried unsuccessfully, until at last, vexed at their futility, I
said, "I have a somewhat scanty wardrobe that would be all the better
for that fellow's summer suiting, by your leave I will venture a throw
against him."

"It is useless," answered An; "none but one who knows more magic than
he, or is especially befriended by the Fates can touch him through the
envelope he has put on."

"Still, I think I will try."

"It is hopeless, I would not willingly see you fail," whispered the
girl, with a sudden show of friendship.

"And what," I said, bending down, "would you give me if I succeeded?"
Whereat An laughed a little uneasily, and, withdrawing her hand from
mine, half turned away.  So I pushed through the spectators and stepped
into the ring.  I went straight up to the pile of weapons, and having
chosen one went over to the mystic.  "Good fellow," I cried out
ostentatiously, trying the sharpness of the javelin-point with my
finger, "where are all of those sixteen summer suits of yours lying
hid?"

"It matters nothing," said the man, as if he were asleep.

"Ay, but by the stars it does, for it will vex the quiet repose of your
soul tomorrow if your heirs should swear they could not find them."

"It matters nothing," muttered the will-wrapped visionary.

"It will matter something if I take you at your word.  Come, friend
Purple-jerkin, will you take the council with your legs and run while
there is yet time, or stand up to be thrown at?"

"I stand here immoveable in the confidence of my initiation."

"Then, by thunder, I will initiate you into the mysteries of a
javelin-end, and your blood be on your head."

The Martians were all craning their necks in hushed eagerness as I
turned to the casting-place, and, poising the javelin, faced the
magician. Would he run at the last moment?  I half hoped so; for a
minute I gave him the chance, then, as he showed no sign of wavering, I
drew my hand back, shook the javelin back till it bent like a reed, and
hurled it at him.

The Martians' heads turned as though all on one pivot as the spear sped
through the air, expecting no doubt to see it recoil as others had
done. But it took him full in the centre of his chest, and with a wild
wave of arms and a flutter of purple raiment sent him backwards, and
down, and over and over in a shapeless heap of limbs and flying
raiment, while a low murmur of awed surprise rose from the spectators.
They crowded round him in a dense ring, as An came flitting to me with
a startled face.

"Oh, stranger," she burst out, "you have surely killed him!" but more
astounded I had broken down his guard than grieved at his injury.

"No," I answered smilingly; "a sore chest he may have tomorrow, but
dead he is not, for I turned the lance-point back as I spun it, and it
was the butt-end I threw at him!"

"It was none the less wonderful; I thought you were a common man, a
prince mayhap, come but from over the hills, but now something tells me
you are more than that," and she lapsed into thoughtful silence for a
time.

Neither of us were wishful to go back amongst those who were raising
the bruised magician to his legs, but wandered away instead through the
deepening twilight towards the city over meadows whose damp, soft
fragrance loaded the air with sleepy pleasure, neither of us saying a
word till the dusk deepened and the quick night descended, while we
came amongst the gardened houses, the thousand lights of an unreal city
rising like a jewelled bank before us, and there An said she would
leave me for a time, meeting me again in the palace square later on,
"To see Princess Heru read the destinies of the year."

"What!" I exclaimed, "more magic?  I have been brought up on more
substantial mental stuff than this."

"Nevertheless, I would advise you to come to the square," persisted my
companion.  "It affects us all, and--who knows?--may affect you more
than any."

Therein poor An was unconsciously wearing the cloak of prophesy
herself, and, shrugging my shoulders good-humouredly, I kissed her
chin, little realising, as I let her fingers slip from mine, that I
should see her no more.

Turning back alone, through the city, through ways twinkling with
myriad lights as little lamps began to blink out amongst garlands and
flower-decked booths on every hand, I walked on, lost in varying
thoughts, until, fairly tired and hungry, I found myself outside a
stall where many Martians stood eating and drinking to their hearts'
content. I was known to none of them, and, forgetting past experience,
was looking on rather enviously, when there came a touch upon my arm,
and--

"Are you hungry, sir?" asked a bystander.

"Ay," I said, "hungry, good friend, and with all the zest which an
empty purse lends to that condition."

"Then here is what you need, sir, even from here the wine smells good,
and the fried fruit would make a mouse's eye twinkle.  Why do you wait?"

"Why wait?  Why, because though the rich man's dinner goes in at his
mouth, the poor man must often be content to dine through his nose. I
tell you I have nothing to get me a meal with."

The stranger seemed to speculate on this for a time, and then he said,
"I cannot fathom your meaning, sir.  Buying and selling, gold and
money, all these have no meaning to me.  Surely the twin blessings of
an appetite and food abundant ready and free before you are enough."

"What! free is it--free like the breakfast served out this morning?"

"Why, of course," said the youth, with mild depreciation; "everything
here is free.  Everything is his who will take it, without exception.
What else is the good of a coherent society and a Government if it
cannot provide you with so rudimentary a thing as a meal?"

Whereat joyfully I undid my belt, and, without nicely examining the
argument, marched into the booth, and there put Martian hospitality to
the test, eating and drinking, but this time with growing wisdom, till
I was a new man, and then, paying my leaving with a wave of the hand to
the yellow-girted one who dispensed the common provender, I sauntered
on again, caring little or nothing which way the road went, and soon
across the current of my meditations a peal of laughter broke,
accompanied by the piping of a flute somewhere close at hand, and the
next minute I found myself amid a ring of light-hearted roisterers who
were linking hands for a dance to the music a curly-headed fellow was
making close by.

They made me join them!  One rosey-faced damsel at the hither end of
the chain drew up to me, and, without a word, slipped her soft, baby
fingers into my hand; on the other side another came with melting eyes,
breath like a bed of violets, and banked-up fun puckering her dainty
mouth.  What could I do but give her a hand as well?  The flute began
to gurgle anew, like a drinking spout in spring-time, and away we went,
faster and faster each minute, the boys and girls swinging themselves
in time to the tune, and capering presently till their tender feet were
twinkling over the ground in gay confusion.  Faster and faster till, as
the infection of the dance spread even to the outside groups, I capered
too.  My word! if they could have seen me that night from the deck of
the old Carolina, how they would have laughed--sword swinging,
coat-tails flying--faster and faster, round and round we went, till
limbs could stand no more; the gasping piper blew himself quite out,
and the dance ended as abruptly as it commenced, the dancers melting
away to join others or casting themselves panting on the turf.

Certainly these Martian girls were blessed with an ingratiating
simplicity.  My new friend of the violet-scented breath hung back a
little, then after looking at me demurely for a minute or two, like a
child that chooses a new playmate, came softly up, and, standing on
tiptoe, kissed me on the cheek.  It was not unpleasant, so I turned the
other, whereon, guessing my meaning, without the smallest hesitation,
she reached up again, and pressed her pretty mouth to my bronzed skin a
second time.  Then, with a little sigh of satisfaction, she ran an arm
through mine, saying, "Comrade, from what country have you come? I
never saw one quite like you before."

"From what country had I come?"  Again the frown dropped down upon my
forehead.  Was I dreaming--was I mad?  Where indeed had I come from? I
stared back over my shoulder, and there, as if in answer to my
thought--there, where the black tracery of flowering shrubs waved in
the soft night wind, over a gap in the crumbling ivory ramparts, the
sky was brightening.  As I looked into the centre of that glow, a
planet, magnified by the wonderful air, came swinging up, pale but
splendid, and mapped by soft colours--green, violet, and red.  I knew
it on the minute, Heaven only knows how, but I knew it, and a desperate
thrill of loneliness swept over me, a spasm of comprehension of the
horrible void dividing us. Never did yearning babe stretch arms more
wistfully to an unattainable mother than I at that moment to my mother
earth.  All her meanness and prosaicness was forgotten, all her
imperfections and shortcomings; it was home, the one tangible thing in
the glittering emptiness of the spheres. All my soul went into my eyes,
and then I sneezed violently, and turning round, found that sweet
damsel whose silky head nestled so friendly on my shoulder was tickling
my nose with a feather she had picked up.

Womanlike, she had forgotten all about her first question, and now
asked another, "Will you come to supper with me, stranger?  'Tis nearly
ready, I think."

"To be able to say no to such an invitation, lady, is the first thing a
young man should learn," I answered lightly; but then, seeing there was
nothing save the most innocent friendliness in those hazel eyes, I went
on, "but that stern rule may admit of variance.  Only, as it chances, I
have just supped at the public expense.  If, instead, you would be a
sailor's sweetheart for an hour, and take me to this show of
yours--your princess's benefit, or whatever it is--I shall be obliged;
my previous guide is hull down over the horizon, and I am clean out of
my reckoning in this crowd."

By way of reply, the little lady, light as an elf, took me by the
fingertips, and, gleefully skipping forward, piloted me through the
mazes of her city until we came out into the great square fronting on
the palace, which rose beyond it like a white chalk cliff in the dull
light. Not a taper showed anywhere round its circumference, but a
mysterious kind of radiance like sea phosphorescence beamed from the
palace porch. All was in such deathlike silence that the nails in my
"ammunition" boots made an unpleasant clanking as they struck on the
marble pavement; yet, by the uncertain starlight, I saw, to my
surprise, the whole square was thronged with Martians, all facing
towards the porch, as still, graven images, and as voiceless, for once,
as though they had indeed been marble. It was strange to see them
sitting there in the twilight, waiting for I knew not what, and my
friend's voice at my elbow almost startled me as she said, in a
whisper, "The princess knows you are in the crowd, and desires you to
go up upon the steps near where she will be."

"Who brought her message?" I asked, gazing vaguely round, for none had
spoken to us for an hour or more.

"No one," said my companion, gently pushing me up an open way towards
the palace steps left clear by the sitting Martians.  "It came direct
from her to me this minute."

"But how?" I persisted.

"Nay," said the girl, "if we stop to talk like this we shall not be
placed before she comes, and thus throw a whole year's knowledge out."

So, bottling my speculations, I allowed myself to be led up the first
flight of worn, white steps to where, on the terrace between them and
the next flight leading directly to the palace portico, was a flat,
having a circle about twenty feet across, inlaid upon the marble with
darker coloured blocks.  Inside that circle, as I sat down close by it
in the twilight, showed another circle, and then a final one in whose
inmost middle stood a tall iron tripod and something atop of it covered
by a cloth.  And all round the outer circle were magic symbols--I
started as I recognised the meaning of some of them--within these again
the inner circle held what looked like the representations of planets,
ending, as I have said, in that dished hollow made by countless
dancers' feet, and its solitary tripod.  Back again, I glanced towards
the square where the great concourse--ten thousand of them,
perhaps--were sitting mute and silent in the deepening shadows, then
back to the magic circles, till the silence and expectancy of a strange
scene began to possess me.

Shadow down below, star-dusted heaven above, and not a figure moving;
when suddenly something like a long-drawn sigh came from the lips of
the expectant multitude, and I was aware every eye had suddenly turned
back to the palace porch, where, as we looked, a figure, wrapped in
pale blue robes, appeared and stood for a minute, then stole down the
steps with an eagerness in every movement holding us spellbound.  I
have seen many splendid pageants and many sights, each of which might
be the talk of a lifetime, but somehow nothing ever so engrossing, so
thrilling, as that ghostly figure in flowing robes stealing across the
piazza in starlight and silence--the princess of a broken kingdom, the
priestess of a forgotten faith coming to her station to perform a
jugglery of which she knew not even the meaning.  It was my versatile
friend Heru, and with quick, incisive steps, her whole frame ambent for
the time with the fervour of her mission, she came swiftly down to
within a dozen yards of where I stood.  Heru, indeed, but not the same
princess as in the morning; an inspired priestess rather, her slim body
wrapped in blue and quivering with emotion, her face ashine with
Delphic fire, her hair loose, her feet bare, until at last when, as she
stood within the limit of the magic circle, her white hands upon her
breast, her eyes flashing like planets themselves in the starshine she
looked so ghostly and unreal I felt for a minute I was dreaming.

Then began a strange, weird dance amongst the imagery of the rings,
over which my earth planet was beginning to throw a haze of light. At
first it was hardly more than a walk, a slow procession round the twin
circumferences of the centred tripod.  But soon it increased to an
extraordinary graceful measure, a cadenced step without music or sound
that riveted my eyes to the dancer.  Presently I saw those mystic,
twinkling feet of hers--as the dance became swifter--were performing a
measured round amongst the planet signs--spelling out something, I knew
not what, with quick, light touch amongst the zodiac figures, dancing
out a soundless invocation of some kind as a dumb man might spell a
message by touching letters.  Quicker and quicker, for minute after
minute, grew the dance, swifter and swifter the swing of the light blue
drapery as the priestess, with eager face and staring eyes, swung
panting round upon her orbit, and redder and redder over the city tops
rose the circumference of the earth.  It seemed to me all the silent
multitude were breathing heavily as we watched that giddy dance, and
whatever THEY felt, all my own senses seemed to be winding up upon that
revolving figure as thread winds on a spindle.

"When will she stop?" I whispered to my friend under my breath.

"When the earth-star rests in the roof-niche of the temple it is
climbing," she answered back.

"And then?"

"On the tripod is a globe of water.  In it she will see the destiny of
the year, and will tell us.  The whiter the water stays, the better for
us; it never varies from white.  But we must not talk; see! she is
stopping."

And as I looked back, the dance was certainly ebbing now with such
smoothly decreasing undulations, that every heart began to beat calmer
in response.  There was a minute or two of such slow cessation, and
then to say she stopped were too gross a description.  Motion rather
died away from her, and the priestess grounded as smoothly as a ship
grounds in fine weather on a sandy bank.  There she was at last,
crouched behind the tripod, one corner of the cloth covering it grasped
in her hand, and her eyes fixed on the shining round just poised upon
the distant run.

Keenly the girl watched it slide into zenith, then the cloth was
snatched from the tripod-top.  As it fell it uncovered a beautiful and
perfect globe of clear white glass, a foot or so in diameter, and
obviously filled with the thinnest, most limpid water imaginable.  At
first it seemed to me, who stood near to the priestess of Mars, with
that beaming sphere directly between us, and the newly risen world,
that its smooth and flawless face was absolutely devoid of sign or
colouring.  Then, as the distant planet became stronger in the
magnifying Martian air, or my eyes better accustomed to that sudden
nucleus of brilliancy, a delicate and infinitely lovely network of
colours came upon it. They were like the radiant prisms that sometimes
flush the surface of a bubble more than aught else for a time.  But as
I watched that mosaic of yellow and purple creep softly to and fro upon
the globe it seemed they slowly took form and meaning.  Another minute
or two and they had certainly congealed into a settled plan, and then,
as I stared and wondered, it burst upon me in a minute that I was
looking upon a picture, faithful in every detail, of the world I stood
on; all its ruddy forests, its sapphire sea, both broad and narrow
ones, its white peaked mountains, and unnumbered islands being mapped
out with startling clearness for a spell upon that beaming orb.

Then a strange thing happened.  Heru, who had been crouching in a
tremulous heap by the tripod, rose stealthily and passed her hands a
few times across the sphere.  Colour and picture vanished at her touch
like breath from a mirror.  Again all was clear and pellucid.

"Now," said my companion, "now listen!  For Heru reads the destiny; the
whiter the globe stays the better for us--" and then I felt her hand
tighten on mine with a startled grasp as the words died away upon her
lips.

Even as the girl spoke, the sphere, which had been beaming in the
centre of the silent square like a mighty white jewel, began to flush
with angry red.  Redder and redder grew the gleam--a fiery glow which
seemed curdling in the interior of the round as though it were filled
with flame; redder and redder, until the princess, staring into it,
seemed turned against the jet-black night behind, into a form of molten
metal. A spasm of terror passed across her as she stared; her limbs
stiffened; her frightened hands were clutched in front, and she stood
cowering under that great crimson nucleus like one bereft of power and
life, and lost to every sense but that of agony.  Not a syllable came
from her lips, not a movement stirred her body, only that dumb, stupid
stare of horror, at the something she saw in the globe.  What could I
do?  I could not sit and see her soul come out at her frightened eyes,
and not a Martian moved a finger to her rescue; the red shine gleamed
on empty faces, tier above tier, and flung its broad flush over the
endless rank of open-mouthed spectators, then back I looked to
Heru--that winsome little lady for whom, you will remember, I had
already more than a passing fancy--and saw with a thrill of emotion
that while she still kept her eyes on the flaming globe like one in a
horrible dream her hands were slowly, very slowly, rising in
supplication to ME! It was not vanity. There was no mistaking the
direction of that silent, imploring appeal.

Not a man of her countrymen moved, not even black Hath!  There was not
a sound in the world, it seemed, but the noisy clatter of my own
shoenails on the marble flags.  In the great red eye of that unholy
globe the Martians glimmered like a picture multitude under the red
cliff of their ruined palace.  I glared round at them with contempt for
a minute, then sprang forward and snatched the princess up.  It was
like pulling a flower up by the roots.  She was stiff and stark when I
lay hold of her, but when I tore her from the magic ground she suddenly
gave a piercing shriek, and fainted in my arms.

Then as I turned upon my heels with her upon my breast my foot caught
upon the cloths still wound about the tripod of the sphere.  Over went
that implement of a thousand years of sorcery, and out went the red
fire. But little I cared--the princess was safe!  And up the palace
steps, amidst a low, wailing hum of consternation from the recovering
Martians, I bore that bundle of limp and senseless loveliness up into
the pale shine of her own porch, and there, laying her down upon a
couch, watched her recover presently amongst her women with a varied
assortment of emotions tingling in my veins.



