CHAPTER XVII

The evening of the second day had already come, when Ar-hap arrived
home after weekending amongst a tribe of rebellious subjects.  But any
imposing State entry which might have been intended was rendered
impossible by the heat and the threat of that baleful world in the
western sky.

It was a lurid but disordered spectacle which I witnessed from my room
in the gate-house just after nightfall.  The returning army had
apparently fallen away exhausted on its march through the town; only
some three hundred of the bodyguard straggled up the hill, limp and
sweating, behind a group of pennons, in the midst of which rode a
horseman whose commanding presence and splendid war harness impressed
me, though I could not make out his features; a wild, impressionist
scene of black outlines, tossing headgear, and spears glittering and
vanishing in front of the red glare in the sky, but nothing more.  Even
the dry throats of the suitors in the courtyard hardly mustered a husky
cry of welcome as the cavalcade trooped into the enclosure, and then
the shadows enfolded them up in silence, and, too hot and listless to
care much what the morrow brought forth, I threw myself on the bare
floor, tossing and turning in a vain endeavour to sleep until dawn came
once more.

A thin mist which fell with daybreak drew a veil over the horrible
glare in the west for an hour or two, and taking advantage of the
slight alleviation of heat, I rose and went into the gardens to enjoy a
dip in a pool, making, with its surrounding jungle of flowers, one of
the pleasantest things about the wood-king's forest citadel.  The very
earth seemed scorched and baking underfoot--and the pool was gone!  It
had run as dry as a limekiln; nothing remained of the pretty fall which
had fed it but a miserable trickle of drops from the cascade above.
Down beyond the town shone a gleam of water where the bitter canal
steamed and simmered in the first grey of the morning, but up here six
months of scorching drought could not have worked more havoc.  The very
leaves were dropping from the trees, and the luxuriant growths of the
day before looked as though a simoon had played upon them.

I staggered back in disgust, and found some show of official activity
about the palace.  It was the king's custom, it appeared, to hear
petitions and redress wrongs as soon after his return as possible, but
today the ceremony was to be cut short as his majesty was going out
with all his court to a neighbouring mountain to "pray away the comet,"
which by this time was causing dire alarm all through the city.

"Heaven's own particular blessing on his prayers, my friend," I said to
the man who told me this.  "Unless his majesty's orisons are fruitful,
we shall all be cooked like baked potatoes before nightfall, and though
I have faced many kinds of death, that is not the one I would choose by
preference.  Is there a chance of myself being heard at the throne?
Your peculiar climate tempts me to hurry up with my business and begone
if I may."

"Not only may you be heard, sir, but you are summoned.  The king has
heard of you somehow, and sent me to find and bring you into his
presence at once."

"So be it," I said, too hot to care what happened.  "I have no levee
dress with me.  I lost my luggage check some time ago, but if you will
wait outside I will be with you in a moment."

Hastily tidying myself up, and giving my hair a comb, as though just
off to see Mr. Secretary for the Navy, or on the way to get a senator
to push a new patent medicine for me, I rejoined my guide outside, and
together we crossed the wide courtyard, entered the great log-built
portals of Ar-hap's house, and immediately afterwards found ourselves
in a vast hall dimly lit by rays coming in through square spaces under
the eaves, and crowded on both sides with guards, courtiers, and
supplicants. The heat was tremendous, the odour of Thither men and the
ill-dressed hides they wore almost overpowering.  Yet little I recked
for either, for there at the top of the room, seated on a dais made of
rough-hewn wood inlet with gold and covered with splendid furs, was
Ar-hap himself.

A fine fellow, swarthy, huge, and hairy, at any other time or place I
could have given him due admiration as an admirable example of the
savage on the borderland of grace and culture, but now I only glanced
at him, and then to where at his side a girl was crouching, a gem of
human loveliness against that dusky setting.  It was Heru, my ravished
princess, and, still clad in her diaphanous Hither robes, her face
white with anxiety, her eyes bright as stars, the embodiment of
helpless, flowery beauty, my heart turned over at sight of her.

Poor girl!  When she saw me stride into the hall she rose swiftly from
Ar-hap's side, clasped her pretty hands, and giving a cry of joy would
have rushed towards me, but the king laid a mighty paw upon her, under
which she subsided with a shiver as though the touch had blanched all
the life within.

"Good morning, your majesty," I said, walking boldly up to the lower
step of the dais.

"Good morning, most singular-looking vagrant from the Unknown,"
answered the monarch.  "In what way can I be of service to you?''

"I have come about that girl," I said, nodding to where Heru lay
blossoming in the hot gloom like some night-flowering bud.  "I do not
know whether your majesty is aware how she came here, but it is a
highly discreditable incident in what is doubtless your otherwise
blameless reign.  Some rough scullions intrusted with the duty of
collecting your majesty's customs asked Prince Hath of the Hither
people to point out the most attractive young person at his wedding
feast, and the prince indicated that lady there at your side.  It was a
dirty trick, and all the worse because it was inspired by malice, which
is the meanest of all weaknesses.  I had the pleasure of knocking down
some of your majesty's representatives, but they stole the girl away
while I slept, and, briefly, I have come to fetch her back."

The monarch had followed my speech, the longest ever made in my life,
with fierce, blinking eyes, and when it stopped looked at poor
shrinking Heru as though for explanation, then round the circle of his
awestruck courtiers, and reading dismay at my boldness in their faces,
burst into a guttural laugh.

"I suppose you have the great and puissant Hither nation behind you in
this request, Mr. Spirit?"

"No, I came alone, hoping to find justice here, and, if not, then
prepared to do all I could to make your majesty curse the day your
servants maltreated my friends."

"Tall words, stranger!  May I ask what you propose to do if Ar-hap, in
his own palace, amongst his people and soldiers, refuses to disgorge a
pretty prize at the bidding of one shabby interloper--muddy and
friendless?"

"What should I do?"

"Yes," said the king, with a haughty frown.  "What would you do?"

I do not know what prompted the reply.  For a moment I was completely
at a loss what to say to this very obvious question, and then all on a
sudden, remembering they held me to be some kind of disembodied spirit,
by a happy inspiration, fixing my eyes grimly on the king, I answered,

"What would I do?  Why, I WOULD HAUNT YOU!"

It may not seem a great stroke of genius here, but the effect on the
Martian was instantaneous.  He sat straight up, his hands tightened,
his eyes dilated, and then fidgeting uneasily, after a minute he
beckoned to an over-dressed individual, whom Heru afterwards told me
was the Court necromancer, and began whispering in his ear.

After a minute's consultation he turned again, a rather frightened
civility struggling in his face with anger, and said, "We have no wish,
of course, stranger, to offend you or those who had the honour of your
patronage.  Perhaps the princess here was a little roughly handled,
and, I confess, if she were altogether as reluctant as she seems, a
lesser maid would have done as well.  I could have wooed this one in
Seth, where I may shortly come, and our espousals would possibly have
lent, in the eyes of your friends, quite a cheerful aspect to my
arrival.  But my ambassadors have had no great schooling in diplomacy;
they have brought Princess Heru here, and how can I hand her over to
one I know nothing of? How do I know you are a ghost, after all?  How
do I know you have anything but a rusty sword and much impertinence to
back your astounding claim?"

"Oh, let it be just as you like," I said, calmly shelling and eating a
nut I had picked up.  "Only if you do not give the maid back, why,
then--" And I stopped as though the sequel were too painful to put into
words.

Again that superstitious monarch of a land thronged with malicious
spirits called up his magician, and, after they had consulted a moment,
turned more cheerfully to me.

"Look here, Mister-from-Nowhere, if you are really a spirit, and have
the power to hurt as you say, you will have the power also to go and
come between the living and the dead, between the present and the past.
Now I will set you an errand, and give you five minutes to do it in."

"Five minutes!" I exclaimed in incautious alarm.

"Five minutes," said the monarch savagely.  "And if in that time the
errand is not done, I shall hold you to be an impostor, an impudent
thief from some scoundrel tribe of this world of mine, and will make of
you an example which shall keep men's ears tingling for a century or
two."

Poor Heru dropped in a limp and lovely heap at that dire threat, while
I am bound to say I felt somewhat uncomfortable, not unnaturally when
all the circumstances are considered, but contented myself with
remarking, with as much bravado as could be managed,

"And now to the errand, Ar-hap.  What can I do for your majesty?"

The king consulted with the rogue at his elbow, and then nodding and
chuckling in expectancy of his triumph, addressed me.

"Listen," he cried, smiting a huge hairy hand upon his knee, "listen,
and do or die.  My magician tells me it is recorded in his books that
once, some five thousand years ago, when this land belonged to the
Hither people, there lived here a king.  It is a pity he died, for he
seems to have been a jovial old fellow; but he did die, and, according
to their custom, they floated him down the stream that flows to the
regions of eternal ice, where doubtless he is at this present moment,
caked up with ten million of his subjects.  Now just go and find that
sovereign for me, oh you bold-tongued dweller in other worlds!"

"And if I go how am I to know your ancient king, as you say, amongst
ten million others?"

"That is easy enough," quoth Ar-hap lightly.  "You have only to pass to
and fro through the ice mountains, opening the mouths of the dead men
and women you meet, and when you come to a middle-sized man with a
fillet on his head and a jaw mended with gold, that will be he whom you
look for. Bring me that fillet here within five minutes and the maid is
yours."

I started, and stared hard in amazement.  Was this a dream?  Was the
royal savage in front playing with me?  By what incredible chance had
he hit upon the very errand I could answer to best, the very trophy I
had brought away from the grim valley of ice and death, and had still
in my shoulder-bag?  No, he was not playing; he was staring hard in
turn, joying in my apparent confusion, and clearly thinking he had
cornered me beyond hope of redemption.

"Surely your mightiness is not daunted by so simple a task," scowled
the sovereign, playing with the hilt of his huge hunting-knife, "and
all amongst your friends' kindred too.  On a hot day like this it ought
to be a pleasant saunter for a spirit such as yourself."

"Not daunted," I answered coldly, turning on my heels towards the door,
"only marvelling that your majesty's skull and your necromancer's could
not between them have devised a harder task."

Out into the courtyard I went, with my heart beating finely in spite of
my assumed indifference; got the bag from a peg in my sleeping-room,
and was back before the log throne ere four minutes were gone.

"The old Hither king's compliments to your majesty," I said, bowing,
while a deathly hush fell on all the assembly, "and he says though your
ancestors little liked to hear his voice while alive, he says he has no
objection to giving you some jaw now he is dead," and I threw down on
the floor the golden circlet of the frozen king.

Ar-hap's eyes almost started from his head as, with his courtiers, he
glared in silent amazement at that shining thing while the great drops
of fear and perspiration trickled down his forehead.  As for poor Heru,
she rose like a spirit behind them, gazed at the jaw-bone of her
mythical ancestor, and then suddenly realising my errand was done and
she apparently free, held out her hands, and, with a tremulous cry,
would have come to me.

But Ar-hap was too quick for her.  All the black savage blood swelled
into his veins as he swept her away with one great arm, and then with
his foot gave the luckless jaw a kick that sent it glittering and
spinning through the far doorway out into the sunshine.

"Sit down," he roared, "you brazen wench, who are so eager to leave a
king's side for a nameless vagrant's care!  And you, sir," turning to
me, and fairly trembling with rage and dread, "I will not gainsay that
you have done the errand set you, but it might this once be chance that
got you that cursed token, some one happy turn of luck.  I will not
yield my prize on one throw of the dice.  Another task you must do.
Once might be chance, but such chance comes not twice."

"You swore to give me the maid this time."

"And why should I keep my word to a half-proved spirit such as you?"

"There are some particularly good reasons why you should," I said,
striking an attitude which I had once seen a music-hall dramatist take
when he was going to blast somebody's future--a stick with a star on
top of it in his hand and forty lines of blank verse in his mouth.

The king writhed, and begged me with a sign to desist.

"We have no wish to anger you.  Do us this other task and none will
doubt that you are a potent spirit, and even I, Ar-hap, will listen to
you."

"Well, then," I answered sulkily, "what is it to be this time?"

After a minute's consultation, and speaking slowly as though conscious
of how much hung on his words, the king said,

"Listen!  My soothsayer tells me that somewhere there is a city lost in
a forest, and a temple lost in the city, and a tomb lost in the temple;
a city of ghosts and djins given over to bad spirits, wherefore all
human men shun it by day and night.  And on the tomb is she who was
once queen there, and by her lies her crown.  Quick! oh you to whom all
distances are nothing, and who see, by your finer essence, into all
times and places. Away to that city!  Jostle the memories of the
unclean things that hide in its shadows; ask which amongst them knows
where dead Queen Yang still lies in dusty state.  Get guides amongst
your comrade ghosts.  Find Queen Yang, and bring me here in five
minutes the bloody circlet from her hair."

Then, and then for the first time, I believed the planet was haunted
indeed, and I myself unknowingly under some strange and watchful
influence.  Spirits, demons!  Oh! what but some incomprehensible power,
some unseen influence shaping my efforts to its ends, could have moved
that hairy barbarian to play a second time into my hands like this, to
choose from the endless records of his world the second of the two
incidents I had touched in hasty travel through it?  I was almost
overcome for a minute; then, pulling myself together, strode forward
fiercely, and, speaking so that all could hear me, cried, "Base king,
who neither knows the capacities of a spirit nor has learned as yet to
dread its anger, see! your commission is executed in a thought, just as
your punishment might be.  Heru, come here."  And when the girl,
speechless with amazement, had risen and slipped over to me, I
straightened her pretty hair from her forehead, and then, in a way
which would make my fortune if I could repeat it at a conjuror's table,
whipped poor Yang's gemmy crown from my pocket, flashed its baleful
splendour in the eyes of the courtiers, and placed it on the tresses of
the first royal lady who had worn it since its rightful owner died a
hundred years before.

A heavy silence fell on the hall as I finished, and nothing was heard
for a time save Heru sobbing on my breast and a thirsty baby somewhere
outside calling to its mother for the water that was not to be had. But
presently on those sounds came the fall of anxious feet, and a
messenger, entering the doorway, approached the throne, laid himself
out flat twice, after which obeisance he proceeded to remind the king
of the morning's ceremonial on a distant hill to "pray away the comet,"
telling his majesty that all was ready and the procession anxiously
awaiting him.

Whereon Ar-hap, obviously very well content to change the subject,
rose, and, coming down from the dais, gave me his hand.  He was a fine
fellow, as I have said, strong and bold, and had not behaved badly for
an autocrat, so that I gripped his mighty fist with great pleasure.

"I cannot deny, stranger," he said, "that you have done all that has
been asked of you, and the maid is fairly yours.  Yet before you take
away the prize I must have some assurance of what you yourself will do
with her. Therefore, for the moment, until this horrible thing in the
sky which threatens my people with destruction has gone, let it be
truce between us--you to your lodgings, and the princess back,
unharmed, amongst my women till we meet again."

"But--"

"No, no," said the king, waving his hand.  "Be content with your
advantage.  And now to business more important than ten thousand silly
wenches," and gathering up his robes over his splendid war-gear the
wood king stalked haughtily from the hall.



