CHAPTER XVIII.

WHAT IS TO FOLLOW RELIGION?


Books on the future of religion are numerous, and to one blessed with a
sense of humour, full of entertainment. They are also not without
instruction of a psychological kind. Reliable information as to what the
future will be like they certainly do not give, but they do unlock the
innermost desires of the writers thereof. They express what the writers
of the prophecies would like the future to be. And they create the
future state on earth exactly as devout believers have built up the
character of their heaven beyond the clouds. Every form of faith which
they disagree with is rejected as not possessing the element of
vitality, with the result that there is only their own form left. And
that, they triumphantly proclaim, is the religion of the future.

But the future has an old-fashioned and disconcerting habit of
disappointing expectations. The factors that govern human nature are so
many and so complex, their transmutations and combinations are so
numerous, that it is as well to tread cautiously, and to a very
considerable extent leave the future to take care of itself. At the
utmost all that we can do with safety is to detect tendencies, and to
hasten or retard their development as we think them good or bad. The
factors that make up a science of human nature are not to-day so
well-known and so well understood that we can depict the state of
society a century hence with the same certainty that we can foretell the
position of the planet Venus in the year 2000.

My aim in this chapter is, therefore, not to describe precisely what
will be the state of society when religious belief has ceased to exist.
It is rather to offer a general reply to those gloomy individuals who
declare that when the aims of the Freethinker are fully realized we
shall find that in destroying religion we have destroyed pretty much all
that makes human life worth living. We have managed to empty the baby
out with the bath.

The most general form of this fear is expressed in calling Freethought a
creed of negation, or a policy of destruction, and assuring the world
that mankind can never rest content with such things. That may be quite
true, but we fail to see in what way it touches Freethought. A
Freethought that is wholly destructive, that is a mere negation, is a
creation of the pulpit, and belongs to the same class of imaginative
efforts as the pietistic outbursts of famous unbelievers on their
death-beds. That such things could have obtained so wide a currency, and
be looked upon as quite natural occurrences, offers demonstrative
evidence of the paralyzing power of Christian belief on the human mind.

As a matter of fact, neither reformers in general nor Freethinkers in
particular deserve the charge of being mere destructionists. They are
both far more interested in building up than they are in pulling down,
and it is sheer lack of understanding that fixes the eyes of so many on
one aspect of the reformer's task and so steadily ignores the other one.
Of course, the phenomenon is not an unusual one. In a revolution it is
the noise, the street fighting, the breaking of old rules and the
shattering of established institutions that attract the most attention.
The deeper aims of the revolutionists, the hidden social forces of which
the revolution is the expression, the work of reconstruction that is
attempted, escape notice. The old order shrieks its loudest at the
threat of dissolution, the new can hardly make its voice heard.
Carlyle's division of the people into the shrieking thousands and the
dumb millions is eternally true. And even the millions are impressed
with the importance of the thousands because of the noise they are able
to make.

Actually the charge to which reformers in general are open is that of a
too great zeal for reconstruction, a belittling of the difficulties that
stand in the way of a radical change. They are apt to make too small an
allowance for the occurrence of the unexpected and the incalculable,
both of which are likely to interfere with the fruition of the most
logical of schemes. And they are so obsessed with reconstruction that
destruction seems no more than an incident by the way. A little less
eagerness for reconstruction might easily result in a greater concern
for what is being pulled down. The two greatest "destructive" movements
of modern times--the French revolution of 1789 and the Russian
revolution--both illustrate this point. In both movements the leading
figures were men who were obsessed with the idea of building a new
world. They saw this new world so clearly that the old one was almost
ignored. And this is equally true of the literature that precedes and is
the mouthpiece of such movements. The leading appeal is always to what
is to be, what existed is only used as a means of enforcing the
desirability of the new order. It is, in short, the mania for
reconstruction that is chiefly responsible for the destruction which so
horrifies those whose vision can never see anything but the world to
which they have become accustomed.

In parenthesis it may be remarked that it is a tactical blunder to make
one's attack upon an existing institution or idea depend upon the
attractiveness of the ideal state depicted. It enables critics to fix
attention on the precise value of the proposed remedy instead of
discussing whether the suggested reform is necessary. The attacker is
thus placed in the position of the defender and the point at issue
obscured. This is, that a certain institution or idea has outgrown its
usefulness and its removal is necessary to healthy growth. And it may
well be that its removal is all that is required to enable the social
organism to function naturally and healthily. The outworn institution is
often the grit in the machine that prevents it running smoothly.

This by the way. The fact remains that some of our best teachers have
shown themselves apt to stumble in the matter. Without belief in
religion they have too often assumed that its removal would leave a
serious gap in life, and so would necessitate the creation of a number
of substitutes to "take the place of religion." Thus, no less profound a
thinker than Herbert Spencer remarks in the preface to his _Data of
Ethics_:--

     Few things can happen more disastrous than the death and decay of a
     regulative system no longer fit, before another and a better
     regulative system has grown up to replace it. Most of those who
     reject the current creed appear to assume that the controlling
     agency furnished by it may safely be thrown aside, and the vacancy
     left unfilled by any other controlling agency.

Had Spencer first of all set himself to answer the question, "What is it
that the Freethinker sets himself to remove?" or even the question,
"What is the actual control exerted by religion?" one imagines that the
passage above given would either never have been written or would have
been differently worded. And when a man such as Spencer permits himself
to put the matter in this form one need not be surprised at the ordinary
believer assuming that he has put an unanswerable question to the
Freethinker when he asks what it is that we propose to put in the place
of religion, with the assumption that the question is on all fours with
the enquiry as to what substitutes we have for soap and coal if we
destroy all stocks of these articles.

The question assumes more than any scientific Freethinker would ever
grant. It takes for granted the statement that religion does at present
perform some useful function in the State. And that is the very
statement that is challenged. Nor does the Freethinker deny that some
"controlling agency" is desirable. What he does say is that in the
modern State, at least, religion exerts no control for good, that its
activities make for stagnation or retrogression, that its removal will
make for the healthier operation of other agencies, and that to these
other and non-religious agencies belongs the credit which is at present
given to religion.

Moreover, Spencer should not have needed reminding that systems of
thought while they have any vital relation to life will successfully
defy all attempts at eradication. The main cause of the decay of
religion is not the attack made upon it by the forces of reasoned
unbelief. That attack is largely the conscious expression of a revolt
against a system that has long lost all touch with reality, and so has
ceased to derive support from current life and thought. From this point
of view the reformer is what he is because he is alive to the drift of
events, susceptible to those social influences which affect all more or
less, and his strength is derived from the thousand and one subtle
influences that extend from generation to generation and express
themselves in what we are pleased to call the story of civilization.

But the quotation given does represent a fairly common point of view,
and it is put in a form that is most favourable to religious
pretensions. For it assumes that religion does really in our modern
lives perform a function so useful that it would be the height of folly
to remove it before we had something equally useful to take its place.
But something in the place of religion is a thing that no scientific
Freethinker desires. It is not a new religion, or another religion that
the world needs, but the removal of religion from the control of life,
and a restatement of those social qualities that have hitherto been
expressed in a religious form so that their real nature will be apparent
to all. Then we shall at last begin to make progress with small chance
of getting a serious set-back.

This does not, of course, deny that there are many things associated
with religion for the absence of which society would have cause for
regret. It is part of the Freethought case that this is so. And it may
also be admitted that large numbers of people honestly believe that
their religious beliefs serve as motives to the expression of their
better qualities. That, again, is part of the delusion we are fighting.
We cannot agree that religion, as such, contains anything that is
essentially useful to the race. It has maintained its power chiefly
because of its association with serviceable social qualities, and it is
part of the work of Freethought to distinguish between what properly
belongs to religion and what has become associated with it during its
long history. At present the confusion exists and the fact need cause no
surprise. At best the instincts of man are deep-laid, the motives to
conduct are mostly of an obscure kind, and it would be cause for
surprise if, seeing how closely religion is associated with every phase
of primitive life, and how persistent are primitive modes of thinking,
there were not this confusion between the actual part played by religion
in life and the part assigned it by tradition.

At any rate, it is idle to argue as though human conduct was governed by
a single idea--that of religion. At the most religious beliefs represent
no more than a part of the vast mass of influences that determine human
effort. And when we see how largely religious beliefs are dependent upon
constant stimulation and protection for their existence, it seems
extremely unlikely that they can hold a very vital relation to life. The
impotency of religion in matters of conduct is, too, decisively shown in
the fact that it is quite impossible to arrange men and women in a scale
of values that shall correspond with the kind or the fervency of their
religious beliefs. A religious person may be a useful member of society
or he may be a quite useless one. A profound religious conviction may be
accompanied by the loftiest of ideals or by the meanest of aims. The
unbeliever may be, and often is, a better man than the believer. No
business man would ever think of making a man's religion the condition
of taking one into his service, or if he did the general opinion would
be that it indicated bigotry and not shrewdness. We find it quite
impossible to determine the nature of religious belief by watching the
way people behave. In no stage of social life does religion provide us
with anything in the nature of a differentiating factor.

It was argued by the late Sir James Fitzjames Stephen, himself a
Freethinker, that as men have for a long time been in the habit of
associating moral feelings with the belief in God, a severance of the
two may entail moral disaster. It is, of course, hard to say what may
not happen in certain cases, but it is quite certain that such a
consequence could not follow on any general scale. One has only to bring
a statement of this kind down from the region of mere theory to that of
definite fact to see how idle the fear is. If, instead of asserting in a
vague way that the moral life is in some way bound up with religious
beliefs we ask what moral action or moral disposition is so connected,
we realize the absurdity of the statement. Professor Leuba well says:--

     Our alleged essential dependence upon transcendental beliefs is
     belied by the most common experiences of daily life. Who does not
     feel the absurdity of the opinion that the lavish care for a sick
     child by a mother is given because of a belief in God and
     immortality? Are love of father and mother on the part of children,
     affection and serviceableness between brothers and sisters,
     straightforwardness and truthfulness between business men
     essentially dependent upon these beliefs? What sort of person would
     be the father who would announce divine punishment or reward in
     order to obtain the love and respect of his children? And if there
     are business men preserved from unrighteousness by the fear of
     future punishment, they are far more numerous who are deterred by
     the threat of human law. Most of them would take their chances with
     heaven a hundred times before they would once with society, or
     perchance with the imperative voice of humanity heard in the
     conscience (_The Belief in God and Immortality_, p. 323).

And in whatever degree the fear may be justified in special cases, it
applies to any attempt whatever that may be made to disturb existing
conventions. Luther complained that some of his own converts were
behaving worse as Protestants than they behaved as Catholics, and even
in the New Testament we have the same unfavourable comparison made of
many of Christ's followers when compared with the Pagans around them. A
transference of allegiance may easily result in certain ill-balanced
minds kicking over the traces, but in the long run, and with the mass,
the deeper social needs are paramount. There was the same fear expressed
concerning man's political and social duties when the relations of
Church and State were first challenged. Yet the connection between the
two has been quite severed in some countries, and very much weakened in
many more, without society in the least suffering from the change. On
the contrary, one may say that man's duties towards the State have been
more intelligently perceived and more efficiently discharged in
proportion as those religious considerations that once ruled have been
set on one side.

The reply of the Freethinker to the question of "What is to follow
religion?" may, therefore, easily be seen. In effect it is, "Nothing at
all." In any study of social evolution the properly equipped student
commences his task with the full conviction that whatever the future may
be like its germs are already with us. If nature does not "abhor a
vacuum" it has at least an intense dislike to absolute beginnings. The
future will be an elaboration of the present as the present is an
elaboration of the past. For good or evil that principle remains
unimpeachable.

The essential question is not, What is to follow religion? but rather
what will the disappearance of religion affect that is of real value to
the world. The moment the question is raised in this unambiguous manner
the answer suggests itself. For assume that by some strange and
unexpected happening there set in a raging epidemic of common sense.
Assume that as a consequence of this the world was to awake with its
mind completely cleared of all belief in religion. What would be the
effect of the transformation? It is quite clear that it would not affect
any of the fundamental processes of life. The tragi-comedy of life would
still be performed, it would run through the same number of acts, and it
would end in the same happy or unhappy manner. Human beings would still
get born, they would grow up, they would fall in love, they would marry,
they would beget their kind, and they would in turn pass away to make
room for another generation. Birth and death, with all their
accompanying feelings, would remain. Human society would continue, all
the glories of art, the greatness of science, all the marvels and
wonders of the universe would be there whether we believed in a God or
not. The only difference would be that we should no longer associate
these things with the existence of a God. And in that respect we should
be following the same course of development that has been followed in
many other departments of life. We do not nowadays associate the
existence of spirits with a good or a bad harvest, the anger of God with
an epidemic, or the good-will of deity with a spell of fine weather. Yet
in each case there was once the same assumed association between these
things, and the same fears of what would happen if that association was
discarded. We are only carrying the process a step further; all that is
required is a little courage to take the step. In short, there is not a
single useful or worthy quality, intellectual or moral, that can
possibly suffer from the disappearance of religion.

On this point we may again quote from Professor Leuba:--

     The heroism of religious martyrs is often flaunted as marvellous
     instances of the unique sustaining strength derived from the belief
     in a personal God and the anticipation of heaven. And yet for
     every martyr of this sort there has been one or more heroes who has
     risked his life for a noble cause, without the comfort which
     transcendental beliefs may bring. The very present offers almost
     countless instances of martyrs to the cause of humanity, who are
     strangers to the idea of God and immortality. How many men and
     women in the past decade gladly offered and not infrequently lost
     their lives in the cause of freedom, or justice, or science? In the
     monstrous war we are now witnessing, is there a less heroic defence
     of home and nation, and less conscious self-renunciation among the
     non-believers than among the professed Christians? Have modern
     nations shown a more intense or a purer patriotism than ancient
     Greece and Rome, where men did not pretend to derive inspiration
     for their deeds of devotion in the thoughts of their gods.... The
     fruitful deeds of heroism are at bottom inspired not by the thought
     of God or a future life, but by innate tendencies or promptings
     that have reference to humanity. Self sacrifice, generosity, is
     rooted in nothing less superficial and accidental than social
     instincts older than the human race, for they are already present
     in a rudimentary form in the higher animals.

These are quite familiar statements to all Freethinkers, but to a great
many Christians they may come with all the force of a new revelation.

In the earlier pages of this work I have given what I conceive solid
reasons for believing that every one of the social and individual
virtues is born of human intercourse and can never be seriously deranged
for any length of time, so long as human society endures. The scale of
values may well undergo a change with the decay of religion, but that is
something which is taking place all the time, provided society is not in
a state of absolute stagnation. There is not any change that takes
place in society that does not affect our view of the relative value of
particular qualities. The value we place upon personal loyalty to a king
is not what it once was. At one stage a man is ready to place the whole
of his fortune at the disposal of a monarch merely because he happens to
be his "anointed" king. To-day, the man who had no better reason for
doing that would be looked upon as an idiot. Unquestioning obedience to
established authority, which once played so high a part in the education
of children, is now ranked very low by all who understand what genuine
education means. From generation to generation we go on revising our
estimate of the value of particular qualities, and the world is the
better for the revision. And that is what we may assume will occur with
the decay of religious belief. We shall place a higher value upon
certain qualities than we do at present and a lower value upon others.
But there will be no discarding the old qualities and creation of new
ones. Human nature will be the same then as now, as it has been for
thousands of years. The nature of human qualities will be more directly
conceived and more intelligently applied, and that will be an
undesirable development only for those who live by exploiting the
ignorance and the folly of mankind.

Thus, if one may venture upon a prophecy with regard to the
non-religious society of the future it may be said with confidence that
what are known as the ascetic qualities are not likely to increase in
value. The cant of Christianity has always placed an excessive value
upon what is called self-sacrifice. But there is no value in
self-sacrifice, as such. At best it is only of value in exceptional
circumstances, as an end it is worse than useless, and it may easily
degenerate from a virtue to a vice. It assumed high rank with Christian
teachers for various reasons. First, it was an expression of that
asceticism which lies at the root of Christianity, second, because
Christianity pictured this world as no more than a preparation for
another, and taught that the deprivations and sufferings of the present
life would be placed to a credit account in the next one, and third,
because it helped men and women to tolerate injustice in this world and
so helped the political game that governments and the Christian Church
have together played. A really enlightened society would rank
comparatively low the virtue of asceticism. Its principle would be not
self-sacrifice but self-development.

What must result from this is an enlargement of our conception of
justice and also of social reform. Both of these things occupy a very
low place in the Christian scale of virtues. Social reform it has never
bothered seriously about, and in its earlier years simply ignored. A
people who were looking for the end of the world, whose teaching was
that it was for man's spiritual good to suffer, and who looked for all
help to supernatural intervention, could never have had seriously in
their minds what we understand by social reform. And so with the
conception of Justice. There is much of this in pre-Christian
literature, and its entrance into the life and thought of modern Europe
can be traced directly back to Greek and Roman sources. But the work of
the Christian, while it may have been to heal wounds, was not to prevent
their infliction. It was to minister to poverty, not to remove those
conditions that made poverty inevitable.

A Spanish writer has put this point so well that I cannot do better than
quote him. He says:--

     The notion of justice is as entirely foreign to the spirit of
     Christianity as is that of intellectual honesty. It lies wholly
     outside the field of its ethical vision. Christianity--I am not
     referring to interpretations disclaimed as corruptions or
     applications which may be set down to frailty and error, but to the
     most idealized conceptions of its substance and the most exalted
     manifestations of its spirit--Christianity has offered consolation
     and comfort to men who suffered under injustice, but of that
     injustice itself it has remained absolutely incognizant. It has
     called upon the weary and heavy laden, upon the suffering and the
     afflicted, it has proclaimed to them the law of love, the duty of
     mercy and forgiveness, the Fatherhood of God; but in that torment
     of religious and ethical emotion which has impressed men as the
     summit of the sublime, and been held to transcend all other ethical
     ideals, common justice, common honesty have no place. The ideal
     Christian is seen in the saint who is seen descending like an angel
     from heaven amid the welter of human misery, among the victims of
     ruthless oppression and injustice ... but the cause of that misery
     lies wholly outside the range of his consciousness; no glimmer of
     right or wrong enters into his view of it. It is the established
     order of things, the divinely appointed government of the world,
     the trial laid upon sinners by divine ordinance. St. Vincent de
     Paul visits the hell of the French galleys; he proclaims the
     message of love and calls sinners to repentance; but to the
     iniquity which creates and maintains that hell he remains
     absolutely indifferent. He is appointed Grand Almoner to his Most
     Christian Majesty. The world might groan in misery under the
     despotism of oppressors, men's lives and men's minds might be
     enslaved, crushed and blighted; the spirit of Christianity would go
     forth and _comfort_ them, but it would never occur to it to redress
     a single one of those wrongs. It has remained unconscious of them.
     To those wrongs, to men's right to be delivered from them, it was
     by nature completely blind. In respect to justice, to right and
     wrong, the spirit of Christianity is not so much immoral as amoral.
     The notion was as alien to it as the notion of truth. Included in
     its code was, it might be controversially alleged, an old formula,
     "the golden rule," a commonplace of most literature, which was
     popular in the East from China to Asia Minor; but that isolated
     precept was never interpreted in the sense of justice. It meant
     forgiveness, forbearing, kindness, but never mere justice, common
     equity; those virtues were far too unemotional in aspect to appeal
     to the religious enthusiast. The renunciation of life and all its
     vanities, the casting overboard of all sordid cares for its
     maintenance, the suppression of desire, prodigal almsgiving, the
     consecration of a life, the value of which had disappeared in his
     eyes, to charity and love, non-resistance, passive obedience, the
     turning of the other cheek to an enemy, the whole riot of these
     hyperbolic ethical emotions could fire the Christian consciousness,
     while it remained utterly unmoved by every form of wrong, iniquity
     and injustice (Dr. Falta de Gracia. Cited by Dr. R. Briffault, _The
     Making of Humanity_, pp. 334-5.)

That, we may assume, will be one of the most striking consequences of
the displacement of Christianity in the social economy. There will be
less time wasted on what is called philanthropic work--which is often
the most harmful of all social labours--and more attention to the
removal of those conditions that have made the display of philanthropy
necessary. There will not be less feeling for the distressed or the
unfortunate, but it will be emotion under the guidance of the intellect,
and the dominant feeling will be that of indignation against the
conditions that make human suffering and degradation inevitable, rather
than a mere gratification of purely egoistic feeling which leaves the
source of the evil untouched.

That will mean a rise in the scale of values of what one may call the
intellectual virtues--the duty of truthseeking and truth speaking.
Hitherto the type of character held up for admiration by Christianity
has been that of the blind believer who allowed nothing to stand in the
way of his belief, who required no proofs of its truth and allowed no
disproofs to enter his mind. A society in which religion does not hold a
controlling place is not likely to place a very high value upon such
precepts as "Blessed are those who have not seen and yet have believed,"
or "Though he slay me yet will I trust him." But a very high value will
be placed upon the duty of investigation and the right of criticism. And
one cannot easily over-estimate the consequences of a generation or two
brought up in an atmosphere where such teachings obtain. It would mean a
receptiveness to new ideas, a readiness to overhaul old institutions, a
toleration of criticism such as would rapidly transform the whole mental
atmosphere and with it enormously accentuate the capacity for, and the
rapidity of, social progress.

There is also to be borne in mind the effect of the liberation of the
enormous amount of energy at present expended in the service of
religion. Stupid religious controversialists often assume that it is
part of the Freethinker's case that religion enlists in its service bad
men, and much time is spent in proving that religious people are mostly
worthy ones. That could hardly be otherwise in a society where the
overwhelming majority of men and women profess a religion of some sort.
But that is, indeed, not the Freethinker's case at all, and if the
badness of some religious people is cited it is only in answer to the
foolish argument that religionists are better than others. The real
complaint against religion is of a different kind altogether. Just as
the worst thing that one can say about a clergyman intellectually is,
not that he does not believe in what he preaches, but that he does, so
the most serious indictment of current religion is not that it enlists
in its service bad characters, but that it dissipates the energy of
good men and women in a perfectly useless manner. The dissipation of
Christian belief means the liberating of a store of energy for service
that is at present being expended on ends that are without the least
social value. A world without religion would thus be a world in which
the sole ends of endeavour would be those of human betterment or human
enlightenment, and probably in the end the two are one. For there is no
real betterment without enlightenment, even though there may come for a
time enlightenment without betterment. It would leave the world with all
the means of intellectual and aesthetic and social enjoyment that exist
now, and one may reasonably hope that it will lead to their cultivation
and diffusion over the whole of society.


  _Printed and Published by_
  THE PIONEER PRESS
  (G. W. FOOTE & CO., LTD.),
  _61 Farringdon Street, London, E.C. 4_.




ANNOUNCEMENTS.


THE SECULAR SOCIETY, Limited.

_Registered Office_: 62 Farringdon Street, London, E.C. 4.

_Secretary_: Miss E. M. VANCE.

The Memorandum of Association sets forth that the Society's Objects
are:--To promote the principle that human conduct should be based upon
natural knowledge, and not upon supernatural belief, and that human
welfare in this world is the proper end of all thought and action. To
promote freedom of inquiry. To promote universal Secular Education. To
promote the complete secularization of the State, etc. And to do all
such lawful things as are conducive to such objects. Also to have, hold,
receive, and retain any sums of money paid, given, devised, or
bequeathed by any person, and to employ the same for any of the purposes
of the Society.

Members pay an entrance fee of ten shillings, and a subsequent yearly
subscription of five shillings. The liability of members is limited to
L1, in case the Society should ever be wound up.

The Society's affairs are managed by an elected Board of Directors,
one-third of whom retire (by ballot), each year, but are eligible for
re-election.

Friends desiring to benefit the Society are invited to make donations,
or to insert a bequest in the Society's favour in their wills. The now
historic decision of the House of Lords in _re_ Bowman and Others _v._
the Secular Society, Limited, in 1917, a verbatim report of which may be
obtained from its publishers, the Pioneer Press, or from the Secretary,
makes it quite impossible to set aside such bequests.

_A Form of Bequest._--The following is a sufficient form of bequest for
insertion in the wills of testators:--

     I give and bequeath to the Secular Society, Limited, the sum of
     L---- free from Legacy Duty, and I direct that a receipt signed by
     two members of the Board of the said Society and the Secretary
     thereof shall be a good discharge to my Executors for the said
     Legacy.

It is advisable, but not necessary, that the Secretary should be
formally notified of such bequests, as wills sometimes get lost or
mislaid. A form of membership, with full particulars, will be sent on
application to the Secretary, 62 Farringdon Street, London, E.C. 4.


NATIONAL SECULAR SOCIETY.

_President_: CHAPMAN COHEN.

_Secretary_: MISS E. M. VANCE. 62 FARRINGDON STREET, LONDON, E.C. 4.

PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTS.

Secularism teaches that conduct should be based on reason and knowledge.
It knows nothing of divine guidance or interference; it excludes
supernatural hopes and fears; it regards happiness as man's proper aim,
and utility as his moral guide.

Secularism affirms that Progress is only possible through Liberty, which
is at once a right and a duty, and therefore seeks to remove every
barrier to the fullest equal freedom of thought, action, and speech.

Secularism declares that theology is condemned by reason as
superstitious, and by experience as mischievous, and assails it as the
historic enemy of Progress.

Secularism accordingly seeks to dispel superstition; to spread
education; to disestablish religion; to rationalize morality; to promote
peace; to dignify labour; to extend material well-being; and to realize
the self-government of the people.

_P.S._--Beyond a minimum of Two Shillings per year, every member is left
to fix his own subscription according to his means and interest in the
cause.

_All applications for Membership to be made to the Secretary as
above._


PIONEER PRESS PUBLICATIONS

By CHAPMAN COHEN.

  THEISM OR ATHEISM? The Great Alternative. Bound in Full Cloth, Gilt
     Lettered. Price 5s., postage 3d.

    CONTENTS: PART I.--AN EXAMINATION OF THEISM.--Chapter I.--What is
    God? Chapter II.--The Origin of the Idea of God. Chapter III.--Have
    we a Religious Sense? Chapter IV.--The Argument from Existence.
    Chapter V.--The Argument from Causation. Chapter VI.--The Argument
    from Design. Chapter VII.--The Disharmonies of Nature. Chapter
    VIII.--God and Evolution. Chapter IX.--The Problem of Pain. PART
    II.--SUBSTITUTES FOR ATHEISM.--Chapter X.--A Question of Prejudice.
    Chapter XI.--What is Atheism? Chapter XII.--Spencer and the
    Unknowable. Chapter XIII.--Agnosticism. Chapter XIV.--Atheism and
    Morals. Chapter XV.--Atheism Inevitable.

  RELIGION AND SEX. Studies in the Pathology of Religious Development.
     Price 6s., postage 9d.

    A Systematic and Comprehensive Survey of the relations between the
    sexual instinct and morbid and abnormal mental states and the sense
    of religious exaltation and illumination. The ground covered ranges
    from the primitive culture stage to present-day revivalism and
    mysticism. It is a work that should be in the hands of all
    interested in Sociology, Religion or Psychology.

  CREED AND CHARACTER. The Influence of Religion on Racial Life. Price
     7d., postage 1-1/2d.

    CONTENTS: Chapter I.--Religion and Race Survival. Chapter
    II.--Christianity and Social Life. Chapter III.--The Case of the
    Jew. Chapter IV.--A Lesson from Spain.

  DETERMINISM OR FREE-WILL? In Paper Cover, 1s. 9d., postage 2d.
     Half-Cloth, 2s. 6d., postage 3d.

    CONTENTS: Chapter I.--The Question Stated. Chapter II.--"Freedom"
    and "Will." Chapter III.--Consciousness, Deliberation, and Choice.
    Chapter IV.--Some Alleged Consequences of Determinism. Chapter
    V.--Professor James on the "Dilemma of Determinism." Chapter
    VI.--The Nature and Implication of Responsibility. Chapter
    VII.--Determinism and Character. Chapter VIII.--A Problem in
    Determinism. Chapter IX.--Environment.

  CHRISTIANITY AND SLAVERY. With a Chapter on the Relation of
     Christianity to the Labour Movement. Fully Documented with Two
     Plates and Portrait. Price 1s., postage 1-1/2d.

    CONTENTS: Chapter I.--Slavery and the Bible. Chapter II.--Paganism
    and Slavery. Chapter III.--Slavery in the Christian Ages. Chapter
    IV.--The English Slave Trade. Chapter V.--American Slavery. Chapter
    VI.--Christianity and Labour. Chapter VII.--Black and White.

  WOMAN AND CHRISTIANITY. The Subjection and Exploitation of a Sex. An
     Anthropological and Historical Inquiry. Fully Documented. Price
     1s., postage 1-1/2d.

    CONTENTS: Chapter I.--Christianity and Morality. Chapter II.--Woman
    and Primitive Religious Beliefs. Chapter III.--Woman in
    Pre-Christian Civilization. Chapter IV.--Woman and the Bible.
    Chapter V.--Woman Under Christianity. Chapter VI.--Christianity and
    the Home. Chapter VII.--Madonna-Worship and Chivalry. Chapter
    VIII.--Religion and Woman.

  DOES MAN SURVIVE DEATH? Is the Belief Reasonable? Verbatim Report of
     a Discussion between Horace Leaf and Chapman Cohen. Price 7d.,
     postage 1d.

  DEITY AND DESIGN. Price 1d., postage 1/2d.

  THE PARSON AND THE ATHEIST. A Friendly Discussion on Religion and Life
     between Rev. the Hon. Edward Lyttelton, D.D., and Chapman Cohen.
     Price 1s. 6d., postage 2d.

  GOD AND MAN. An Essay in Common Sense and Natural Morality. Price 3d.,
     postage 1d.

  WAR AND CIVILIZATION. Price 1d., postage 1/2d.

  SOCIALISM AND THE CHURCHES. Price 3d., postage 3d.

  RELIGION AND THE CHILD. A Plea for Fair Play to the Child. Price 1d.,
     postage 1/2d.

  MODERN MATERIALISM. A Candid Examination. By WALTER MANN. Paper
     Cover, 2s.; Cloth 3s. 6d., postage 2d.

    CONTENTS: Chapter I.--Modern Materialism. Chapter II.--Darwinian
    Evolution. Chapter III.--Auguste Comte and Positivism. Chapter
    IV.--Herbert Spencer and the Synthetic Philosophy. Chapter V.--The
    Contribution of Kant. Chapter VI.--Huxley, Tyndall, and Clifford
    open the Campaign. Chapter VII.--Buechner's "Force and Matter."
    Chapter VIII.--Atoms and the Ether. Chapter IX.--The Origin of Life.
    Chapter X.--Atheism and Agnosticism. Chapter XI.--The French
    Revolution and the Great War. Chapter XII.--The Advance of
    Materialism.

    A careful and exhaustive examination of the meaning of Materialism
    and its present standing, together with its bearing on various
    aspects of life. A much needed work.

  GOD-EATING. A Study in Christianity and Cannibalism. By J. T. LLOYD.
     In Coloured Wrapper. Price 6d., postage 1-1/2d.

  THE RUINS. A Survey of the Revolutions of Empires. To which is added
     THE LAW OF NATURE. By C. F. VOLNEY. A New Edition, being a Revised
     Translation with Introduction by GEORGE UNDERWOOD, Portrait,
     Astronomical Charts, and Artistic Cover Design by H. CUTNER. Price
     5s., postage 3d.

  THE LIFE-WORSHIP OF RICHARD JEFFERIES. With Fine Portrait of
     Jefferies. By ARTHUR F. THORN. Price 1s., postage 1-1/2d.

  THE BIBLE HANDBOOK. For Freethinkers and Inquiring Christians. By G.
     W. FOOTE and W. P. BALL. New Edition. Cloth Bound. Price 2s. 6d.,
     postage 3d.

    CONTENTS: Part I.--Bible Contradictions. Part II.--Bible
    Absurdities. Part III.--Bible Atrocities. Part IV.--Bible
    Immoralities, Indecencies, Obscenities, Broken Promises, and
    Unfulfilled Prophecies.

    (_Issued by the Secular Society, Limited._)

  JESUS CHRIST: Man, God, or Myth? With a Chapter on "Was Jesus a
     Socialist?" By GEORGE WHITEHEAD. Paper Cover, 2s., postage 2d.;
     Cloth, 3s. 6d., postage 3d.

  THE HISTORICAL JESUS AND MYTHICAL CHRIST. By GERALD MASSEY. A
     Demonstration of the Egyptian Origin of the Christian Myth. Should
     be in the hands of every Freethinker. With Introduction by CHAPMAN
     COHEN. Price 6d., postage 1-1/2d.

  THE PHILOSOPHY OF SECULARISM. By G. W. FOOTE. Price 2d., postage 1/2d.

  HERESY IN ART. The Religious Opinions of Famous Artists and Musicians.
     By H. G. FARMER. Price 3d., postage 1/2d.

  PRAYER: Its Origin, History, and Futility. By J. T. LLOYD. Price 2d.,
     postage 1d.

  PAGAN AND CHRISTIAN MORALITY. By WALTER MANN. Price 2d., postage 1/2d.

  SCIENCE AND THE SOUL. With a Chapter on Infidel Death-Beds. By WALTER
     MANN. Price 7d., postage 1-1/2d.

  SOCIETY AND SUPERSTITION. By ROBERT ARCH. Price 6d., postage 1d.

  FREETHOUGHT AND LITERATURE. By MIMNERMUS. Price 1d., postage 1/2d.

  THE ROBES OF PAN. And other Prose Fantasies. By A. MILLAR. Price 1s.,
     postage 1-1/2d.

  THE MOURNER: A Play of the Imagination. By G. H. MURPHY. Price 1s.,
     postage 1d.

  MISTAKES OF MOSES. By COLONEL INGERSOLL. Price 2d., postage 1/2d.

  IS SUICIDE A SIN? AND LAST WORDS ON SUICIDE. By COLONEL INGERSOLL.
     Price 2d., postage 1/2d.

  ESSAY ON SUICIDE. By D. HUME. Price 1d., postage 1/2d.

  A FIGHT FOR RIGHT. A Verbatim Report of the Decision in the House of
     Lords _in re_ Bowman and others _v._ The Secular Society, Limited.
     With Introduction by CHAPMAN COHEN. Price 1s., postage 1-1/2d.

    (_Issued by the Secular Society, Limited._)

  ROBERT G. INGERSOLL. By C. T. GORHAM. A Biographical Sketch of
     America's Greatest Freethought Advocate. With Four Plates. In
     Paper Covers, 2s., postage 2d. Cloth Bound, 3s. 6d., postage 2-1/2d.

  CHARLES BRADLAUGH. By The Right Hon. J. M. ROBERTSON. An Authoritative
     Life of one of the greatest Reformers of the Nineteenth Century,
     and the only one now obtainable. With Four Portraits. In Paper
     Covers, 2s., postage 2d. Cloth Bound, 3s. 6d., postage 2-1/2d.

  THE JEWISH LIFE OF CHRIST. Being the Sepher Toldoth Jeshu, or Book of
     the Generation of Jesus. With an Historical Preface and Voluminous
     Notes. By G. W. FOOTE and J. M. WHEELER. Price 6d., postage 1d.

  VOLTAIRE'S PHILOSOPHICAL DICTIONARY. Vol. I., 128 pp., with Fine Cover
     Portrait, and Preface by CHAPMAN COHEN. Price 1s. 3d., postage
     1-1/2d.

  THE MARTYRDOM OF HYPATIA; The Rise of Christianity on the Ruins of
     Ancient Civilization. By M. M. MANGASARIAN. Price 1d., postage 1/2d.

  WHO WAS THE FATHER OF JESUS? By G. W. FOOTE. Price 1d., postage 1/2d.

  MAN AND HIS GODS. By GEORGE WHITEHEAD. Price 2d., postage 1d.

  THE SUPERMAN; Essays in Social Idealism. By GEORGE WHITEHEAD. Price
     2d., postage 1d.

  THE SOCIALIST SUNDAY-SCHOOL MOVEMENT. By GEORGE WHITEHEAD. Price 2d.,
     postage 1d.


PIONEER LEAFLETS.

  WHAT WILL YOU PUT IN ITS PLACE? By CHAPMAN COHEN. Price 1s. 6d. per
     100, postage 3d.

  DYING FREETHINKERS. By CHAPMAN COHEN. Price 1s. 6d. per 100, postage
     3d.

  THE BELIEFS OF UNBELIEVERS. By CHAPMAN COHEN. Price 1s. 6d. per 100,
     postage 3d.

  ARE CHRISTIANS INFERIOR TO FREETHINKERS? By CHAPMAN COHEN. Price 1s.
     6d., per 100, postage 3d.

  DOES MAN DESIRE GOD? By CHAPMAN COHEN. Price 1s. 6d. per 100, postage
     3d.

THE PIONEER PRESS, 61 Farringdon Street, E.C. 4.


  READ

  THE FREETHINKER

  EDITED BY
  CHAPMAN COHEN.

  Brilliant Articles by Capable Writers on
  Religion, Literature, and Life.

  One of the Liveliest and Most Outspoken
  Journals in Great Britain.

  _PUBLISHED EVERY THURSDAY._

  PRICE THREEPENCE.

  Of all Newsagents, or direct from the Publishing Office,
  61 FARRINGDON STREET, LONDON, E.C. 4.

  _SPECIMEN COPY POST FREE._




Transcriber's Note:


Minor punctuation errors and letters printed upside down have been
corrected without note. Inconsistent hyphenation (e.g. common-place vs.
commonplace) has been retained. Variant and unusual spellings used
consistently (e.g. indispensible) have also been kept.

The following corrections and changes were made to the text:

p. 65: knowlelge to knowledge (accumulation of knowledge)

p. 98: upder to under (under the old Greek)

p. 102: extra "to" removed (owe their belief to the philosophical)

p. 114: sterotyped to stereotyped (stereotyped phraseology)

p. 132: developes to develops (organ or an organism develops)

p. 157: it to is (After this lame conclusion it is difficult)

p. 186: percieves to perceives (provided a man perceives)

p. 190: Zeigler to Ziegler (Professor Ziegler)

p. 215: mayority to majority (majority of Christians)

p. 216: precariout to precarious (precarious existence at best)

Advertisements: entrace to entrance (an entrance fee of ten shillings)





End of Project Gutenberg's A Grammar of Freethought, by Chapman Cohen



