letter I gave you this morning.”

I opened the letter.

“Read the name, Mr. Blake, that I have written inside.”

I read the name that he had written. It was—_Godfrey Ablewhite_.

“Now,” said the Sergeant, “come with me, and look at the man on the
bed.”

I went with him, and looked at the man on the bed.

GODFREY ABLEWHITE!


SIXTH NARRATIVE.

_Contributed by Sergeant Cuff._

I

Dorking, Surrey, July 30th, 1849. To Franklin Blake, Esq. Sir,—I beg to
apologise for the delay that has occurred in the production of the
Report, with which I engaged to furnish you. I have waited to make it a
complete Report; and I have been met, here and there, by obstacles
which it was only possible to remove by some little expenditure of
patience and time.

The object which I proposed to myself has now, I hope, been attained.
You will find, in these pages, answers to the greater part—if not
all—of the questions, concerning the late Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite, which
occurred to your mind when I last had the honour of seeing you.

I propose to tell you—in the first place—what is known of the manner in
which your cousin met his death; appending to the statement such
inferences and conclusions as we are justified (according to my
opinion) in drawing from the facts.

I shall then endeavour—in the second place—to put you in possession of
such discoveries as I have made, respecting the proceedings of Mr.
Godfrey Ablewhite, before, during and after the time, when you and he
met as guests at the late Lady Verinder’s country house.


II

As to your cousin’s death, then, first.

It appears to be established, beyond any reasonable doubt, that he was
killed (while he was asleep, or immediately on his waking) by being
smothered with a pillow from his bed—that the persons guilty of
murdering him are the three Indians—and that the object contemplated
(and achieved) by the crime, was to obtain possession of the diamond,
called the Moonstone.

The facts from which this conclusion is drawn, are derived partly from
an examination of the room at the tavern; and partly from the evidence
obtained at the Coroner’s Inquest.

On forcing the door of the room, the deceased gentleman was discovered,
dead, with the pillow of the bed over his face. The medical man who
examined him, being informed of this circumstance, considered the
post-mortem appearances as being perfectly compatible with murder by
smothering—that is to say, with murder committed by some person, or
persons, pressing the pillow over the nose and mouth of the deceased,
until death resulted from congestion of the lungs.

Next, as to the motive for the crime.

A small box, with a sealed paper torn off from it (the paper containing
an inscription) was found open, and empty, on a table in the room. Mr.
Luker has himself personally identified the box, the seal, and the
inscription. He has declared that the box did actually contain the
diamond, called the Moonstone; and he has admitted having given the box
(thus sealed up) to Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite (then concealed under a
disguise), on the afternoon of the twenty-sixth of June last. The fair
inference from all this is, that the stealing of the Moonstone was the
motive of the crime.

Next, as to the manner in which the crime was committed.

On examination of the room (which is only seven feet high), a trap-door
in the ceiling, leading out on to the roof of the house, was discovered
open. The short ladder, used for obtaining access to the trap-door (and
kept under the bed), was found placed at the opening, so as to enable
any person or persons, in the room, to leave it again easily. In the
trap-door itself was found a square aperture cut in the wood,
apparently with some exceedingly sharp instrument, just behind the bolt
which fastened the door on the inner side. In this way, any person from
the outside could have drawn back the bolt, and opened the door, and
have dropped (or have been noiselessly lowered by an accomplice) into
the room—its height, as already observed, being only seven feet. That
some person, or persons, must have got admission in this way, appears
evident from the fact of the aperture being there. As to the manner in
which he (or they) obtained access to the roof of the tavern, it is to
be remarked that the third house, lower down in the street, was empty,
and under repair—that a long ladder was left by the workmen, leading
from the pavement to the top of the house—and that, on returning to
their work, on the morning of the 27th, the men found the plank which
they had tied to the ladder, to prevent anyone from using it in their
absence, removed, and lying on the ground. As to the possibility of
ascending by this ladder, passing over the roofs of the houses, passing
back, and descending again, unobserved—it is discovered, on the
evidence of the night policeman, that he only passes through Shore Lane
twice in an hour, when out on his beat. The testimony of the
inhabitants also declares, that Shore Lane, after midnight, is one of
the quietest and loneliest streets in London. Here again, therefore, it
seems fair to infer that—with ordinary caution, and presence of
mind—any man, or men, might have ascended by the ladder, and might have
descended again, unobserved. Once on the roof of the tavern, it has
been proved, by experiment, that a man might cut through the trap-door,
while lying down on it, and that in such a position, the parapet in
front of the house would conceal him from the view of anyone passing in
the street.

Lastly, as to the person, or persons, by whom the crime was committed.

It is known (1) that the Indians had an interest in possessing
themselves of the Diamond. (2) It is at least probable that the man
looking like an Indian, whom Octavius Guy saw at the window of the cab,
speaking to the man dressed like a mechanic, was one of the three
Hindoo conspirators. (3) It is certain that this same man dressed like
a mechanic, was seen keeping Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite in view, all through
the evening of the 26th, and was found in the bedroom (before Mr.
Ablewhite was shown into it) under circumstances which lead to the
suspicion that he was examining the room. (4) A morsel of torn gold
thread was picked up in the bedroom, which persons expert in such
matters, declare to be of Indian manufacture, and to be a species of
gold thread not known in England. (5) On the morning of the 27th, three
men, answering to the description of the three Indians, were observed
in Lower Thames Street, were traced to the Tower Wharf, and were seen
to leave London by the steamer bound for Rotterdam.

There is here, moral, if not legal, evidence, that the murder was
committed by the Indians.

Whether the man personating a mechanic was, or was not, an accomplice
in the crime, it is impossible to say. That he could have committed the
murder alone, seems beyond the limits of probability. Acting by
himself, he could hardly have smothered Mr. Ablewhite—who was the
taller and stronger man of the two—without a struggle taking place, or
a cry being heard. A servant girl, sleeping in the next room, heard
nothing. The landlord, sleeping in the room below, heard nothing. The
whole evidence points to the inference that more than one man was
concerned in this crime—and the circumstances, I repeat, morally
justify the conclusion that the Indians committed it.

I have only to add, that the verdict at the Coroner’s Inquest was
Wilful Murder against some person, or persons, unknown. Mr. Ablewhite’s
family have offered a reward, and no effort has been left untried to
discover the guilty persons. The man dressed like a mechanic has eluded
all inquiries. The Indians have been traced. As to the prospect of
ultimately capturing these last, I shall have a word to say to you on
that head, when I reach the end of the present Report.

In the meanwhile, having now written all that is needful on the subject
of Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite’s death, I may pass next to the narrative of
his proceedings before, during, and after the time, when you and he met
at the late Lady Verinder’s house.


III

With regard to the subject now in hand, I may state, at the outset,
that Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite’s life had two sides to it.

The side turned up to the public view, presented the spectacle of a
gentleman, possessed of considerable reputation as a speaker at
charitable meetings, and endowed with administrative abilities, which
he placed at the disposal of various Benevolent Societies, mostly of
the female sort. The side kept hidden from the general notice,
exhibited this same gentleman in the totally different character of a
man of pleasure, with a villa in the suburbs which was not taken in his
own name, and with a lady in the villa, who was not taken in his own
name, either.

My investigations in the villa have shown me several fine pictures and
statues; furniture tastefully selected, and admirably made; and a
conservatory of the rarest flowers, the match of which it would not be
easy to find in all London. My investigation of the lady has resulted
in the discovery of jewels which are worthy to take rank with the
flowers, and of carriages and horses which have (deservedly) produced a
sensation in the Park, among persons well qualified to judge of the
build of the one, and the breed of the others.

All this is, so far, common enough. The villa and the lady are such
familiar objects in London life, that I ought to apologise for
introducing them to notice. But what is not common and not familiar (in
my experience), is that all these fine things were not only ordered,
but paid for. The pictures, the statues, the flowers, the jewels, the
carriages, and the horses—inquiry proved, to my indescribable
astonishment, that not a sixpence of debt was owing on any of them. As
to the villa, it had been bought, out and out, and settled on the lady.

I might have tried to find the right reading of this riddle, and tried
in vain—but for Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite’s death, which caused an inquiry
to be made into the state of his affairs.

The inquiry elicited these facts:—

That Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite was entrusted with the care of a sum of
twenty thousand pounds—as one of two Trustees for a young gentleman,
who was still a minor in the year eighteen hundred and forty-eight.
That the Trust was to lapse, and that the young gentleman was to
receive the twenty thousand pounds on the day when he came of age, in
the month of February, eighteen hundred and fifty. That, pending the
arrival of this period, an income of six hundred pounds was to be paid
to him by his two Trustees, half-yearly—at Christmas and Midsummer Day.
That this income was regularly paid by the active Trustee, Mr. Godfrey
Ablewhite. That the twenty thousand pounds (from which the income was
supposed to be derived) had every farthing of it been sold out of the
Funds, at different periods, ending with the end of the year eighteen
hundred and forty-seven. That the power of attorney, authorising the
bankers to sell out the stock, and the various written orders telling
them what amounts to sell out, were formally signed by both the
Trustees. That the signature of the second Trustee (a retired army
officer, living in the country) was a signature forged, in every case,
by the active Trustee—otherwise Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite.

In these facts lies the explanation of Mr. Godfrey’s honourable
conduct, in paying the debts incurred for the lady and the villa—and
(as you will presently see) of more besides.

We may now advance to the date of Miss Verinder’s birthday (in the year
eighteen hundred and forty-eight)—the twenty-first of June.

On the day before, Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite arrived at his father’s house,
and asked (as I know from Mr. Ablewhite, senior, himself) for a loan of
three hundred pounds. Mark the sum; and remember at the same time, that
the half-yearly payment to the young gentleman was due on the
twenty-fourth of the month. Also, that the whole of the young
gentleman’s fortune had been spent by his Trustee, by the end of the
year ’forty-seven.

Mr. Ablewhite, senior, refused to lend his son a farthing.

The next day Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite rode over, with you, to Lady
Verinder’s house. A few hours afterwards, Mr. Godfrey (as you yourself
have told me) made a proposal of marriage to Miss Verinder. Here, he
saw his way no doubt—if accepted—to the end of all his money anxieties,
present and future. But, as events actually turned out, what happened?
Miss Verinder refused him.

On the night of the birthday, therefore, Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite’s
pecuniary position was this. He had three hundred pounds to find on the
twenty-fourth of the month, and twenty thousand pounds to find in
February eighteen hundred and fifty. Failing to raise these sums, at
these times, he was a ruined man.

Under those circumstances, what takes place next?

You exasperate Mr. Candy, the doctor, on the sore subject of his
profession; and he plays you a practical joke, in return, with a dose
of laudanum. He trusts the administration of the dose, prepared in a
little phial, to Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite—who has himself confessed the
share he had in the matter, under circumstances which shall presently
be related to you. Mr. Godfrey is all the readier to enter into the
conspiracy, having himself suffered from your sharp tongue in the
course of the evening. He joins Betteredge in persuading you to drink a
little brandy and water before you go to bed. He privately drops the
dose of laudanum into your cold grog. And you drink the mixture.

Let us now shift the scene, if you please to Mr. Luker’s house at
Lambeth. And allow me to remark, by way of preface, that Mr. Bruff and
I, together, have found a means of forcing the money-lender to make a
clean breast of it. We have carefully sifted the statement he has
addressed to us; and here it is at your service.


IV

Late on the evening of Friday, the twenty-third of June (’forty-eight),
Mr. Luker was surprised by a visit from Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite. He was
more than surprised, when Mr. Godfrey produced the Moonstone. No such
Diamond (according to Mr. Luker’s experience) was in the possession of
any private person in Europe.

Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite had two modest proposals to make, in relation to
this magnificent gem. First, Would Mr. Luker be so good as to buy it?
Secondly, Would Mr. Luker (in default of seeing his way to the
purchase) undertake to sell it on commission, and to pay a sum down, on
the anticipated result?

Mr. Luker tested the Diamond, weighed the Diamond and estimated the
value of the Diamond, before he answered a word. _His_ estimate
(allowing for the flaw in the stone) was thirty thousand pounds.

Having reached that result, Mr. Luker opened his lips, and put a
question: “How did you come by this?” Only six words! But what volumes
of meaning in them!

Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite began a story. Mr. Luker opened his lips again,
and only said three words, this time. “That won’t do!”

Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite began another story. Mr. Luker wasted no more
words on him. He got up, and rang the bell for the servant to show the
gentleman out.

Upon this compulsion, Mr. Godfrey made an effort, and came out with a
new and amended version of the affair, to the following effect.

After privately slipping the laudanum into your brandy and water, he
wished you good-night, and went into his own room. It was the next room
to yours; and the two had a door of communication between them. On
entering his own room Mr. Godfrey (as he supposed) closed his door. His
money troubles kept him awake. He sat, in his dressing-gown and
slippers, for nearly an hour, thinking over his position. Just as he
was preparing to get into bed, he heard you, talking to yourself, in
your own room, and going to the door of communication, found that he
had not shut it as he supposed.

He looked into your room to see what was the matter. He discovered you
with the candle in your hand, just leaving your bedchamber. He heard
you say to yourself, in a voice quite unlike your own voice, “How do I
know? The Indians may be hidden in the house.”

Up to that time, he had simply supposed himself (in giving you the
laudanum) to be helping to make you the victim of a harmless practical
joke. It now occurred to him, that the laudanum had taken some effect
on you, which had not been foreseen by the doctor, any more than by
himself. In the fear of an accident happening he followed you softly to
see what you would do.

He followed you to Miss Verinder’s sitting-room, and saw you go in. You
left the door open. He looked through the crevice thus produced,
between the door and the post, before he ventured into the room
himself.

In that position, he not only detected you in taking the Diamond out of
the drawer—he also detected Miss Verinder, silently watching you from
her bedroom, through her open door. His own eyes satisfied him that
_she_ saw you take the Diamond, too.

Before you left the sitting-room again, you hesitated a little. Mr.
Godfrey took advantage of this hesitation to get back again to his
bedroom before you came out, and discovered him. He had barely got
back, before you got back too. You saw him (as he supposes) just as he
was passing through the door of communication. At any rate, you called
to him in a strange, drowsy voice.

He came back to you. You looked at him in a dull sleepy way. You put
the Diamond into his hand. You said to him, “Take it back, Godfrey, to
your father’s bank. It’s safe there—it’s not safe here.” You turned
away unsteadily, and put on your dressing-gown. You sat down in the
large arm-chair in your room. You said, “_I_ can’t take it back to the
bank. My head’s like lead—and I can’t feel my feet under me.” Your head
sank on the back of the chair—you heaved a heavy sigh—and you fell
asleep.

Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite went back, with the Diamond, into his own room.
His statement is, that he came to no conclusion, at that time—except
that he would wait, and see what happened in the morning.

When the morning came, your language and conduct showed that you were
absolutely ignorant of what you had said and done overnight. At the
same time, Miss Verinder’s language and conduct showed that she was
resolved to say nothing (in mercy to you) on her side. If Mr. Godfrey
Ablewhite chose to keep the Diamond, he might do so with perfect
impunity. The Moonstone stood between him and ruin. He put the
Moonstone into his pocket.


V

This was the story told by your cousin (under pressure of necessity) to
Mr. Luker.

Mr. Luker believed the story to be, as to all main essentials, true—on
this ground, that Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite was too great a fool to have
invented it. Mr. Bruff and I agree with Mr. Luker, in considering this
test of the truth of the story to be a perfectly reliable one.

The next question, was the question of what Mr. Luker would do in the
matter of the Moonstone. He proposed the following terms, as the only
terms on which he would consent to mix himself up with, what was (even
in _his_ line of business) a doubtful and dangerous transaction.

Mr. Luker would consent to lend Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite the sum of two
thousand pounds, on condition that the Moonstone was to be deposited
with him as a pledge. If, at the expiration of one year from that date,
Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite paid three thousand pounds to Mr. Luker, he was
to receive back the Diamond, as a pledge redeemed. If he failed to
produce the money at the expiration of the year, the pledge (otherwise
the Moonstone) was to be considered as forfeited to Mr. Luker—who
would, in this latter case, generously make Mr. Godfrey a present of
certain promissory notes of his (relating to former dealings) which
were then in the money-lender’s possession.

It is needless to say, that Mr. Godfrey indignantly refused to listen
to these monstrous terms. Mr. Luker thereupon, handed him back the
Diamond, and wished him good-night.

Your cousin went to the door, and came back again. How was he to be
sure that the conversation of that evening would be kept strictly
secret between his friend and himself?

Mr. Luker didn’t profess to know how. If Mr. Godfrey had accepted his
terms, Mr. Godfrey would have made him an accomplice, and might have
counted on his silence as on a certainty. As things were, Mr. Luker
must be guided by his own interests. If awkward inquiries were made,
how could he be expected to compromise himself, for the sake of a man
who had declined to deal with him?

Receiving this reply, Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite did, what all animals
(human and otherwise) do, when they find themselves caught in a trap.
He looked about him in a state of helpless despair. The day of the
month, recorded on a neat little card in a box on the money-lender’s
chimney-piece, happened to attract his eye. It was the twenty-third of
June. On the twenty-fourth he had three hundred pounds to pay to the
young gentleman for whom he was trustee, and no chance of raising the
money, except the chance that Mr. Luker had offered to him. But for
this miserable obstacle, he might have taken the Diamond to Amsterdam,
and have made a marketable commodity of it, by having it cut up into
separate stones. As matters stood, he had no choice but to accept Mr.
Luker’s terms. After all, he had a year at his disposal, in which to
raise the three thousand pounds—and a year is a long time.

Mr. Luker drew out the necessary documents on the spot. When they were
signed, he gave Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite two cheques. One, dated June
23rd, for three hundred pounds. Another, dated a week on, for the
remaining balance—seventeen hundred pounds.

How the Moonstone was trusted to the keeping of Mr. Luker’s bankers, and
how the Indians treated Mr. Luker and Mr. Godfrey (after that had been
done) you know already.

The next event in your cousin’s life refers again to Miss Verinder. He
proposed marriage to her for the second time—and (after having being
accepted) he consented, at her request, to consider the marriage as
broken off. One of his reasons for making this concession has been
penetrated by Mr. Bruff. Miss Verinder had only a life interest in her
mother’s property—and there was no raising the twenty thousand pounds
on _that_.

But you will say, he might have saved the three thousand pounds, to
redeem the pledged Diamond, if he had married. He might have done so
certainly—supposing neither his wife, nor her guardians and trustees,
objected to his anticipating more than half of the income at his
disposal, for some unknown purpose, in the first year of his marriage.
But even if he got over this obstacle, there was another waiting for
him in the background. The lady at the Villa, had heard of his
contemplated marriage. A superb woman, Mr. Blake, of the sort that are
not to be trifled with—the sort with the light complexion and the Roman
nose. She felt the utmost contempt for Mr. Godfrey Ablewhite. It would
be silent contempt, if he made a handsome provision for her. Otherwise,
it would be contempt with a tongue to it. Miss Verinder’s life interest
allowed him no more hope of raising the “provision” than of raising the
twenty thousand pounds. He couldn’t marry—he really couldn’t marry,
under all the circumstances.

How he tried his luck again with another lady, and how _that_ marriage
also broke down on the question of money, you know already. You also
know of the legacy of five thousand pounds, left to him shortly
afterwards, by one of those many admirers among the soft sex whose good
graces this fascinating man had contrived to win. That legacy (as the
event has proved) led him to his death.

I have ascertained that when he went abroad, on getting his five
thousand pounds, he went to Amsterdam. There he made all the necessary
arrangements for having the Diamond cut into separate stones. He came
back (in disguise), and redeemed the Moonstone, on the appointed day. A
few days were allowed to elapse (as a precaution agreed to by both
parties) before the jewel was actually taken out of the bank. If he had
got safe with it to Amsterdam, there would have been just time between
July ’forty-nine, and February ’fifty (when the young gentleman came of
age) to cut the Diamond, and to make a marketable commodity (polished
or unpolished) of the separate stones. Judge from this, what motives he
had to run the risk which he actually ran. It was “neck or nothing”
with him—if ever it was “neck or nothing” with a man yet.

I have only to remind you, before closing this Report, that there is a
chance of laying hands on the Indians, and of recovering the Moonstone
yet. They are now (there is every reason to believe) on their passage
to Bombay, in an East Indiaman. The ship (barring accidents) will touch
at no other port on her way out; and the authorities at Bombay (already
communicated with by letter, overland) will be prepared to board the
vessel, the moment she enters the harbour.

I have the honour to remain, dear sir, your obedient servant, RICHARD
CUFF (late sergeant in the Detective Force, Scotland Yard, London).*

* NOTE.—Wherever the Report touches on the events of the birthday, or
of the three days that followed it, compare with Betteredge’s
Narrative, chapters viii. to xiii.

SEVENTH NARRATIVE.

_In a Letter from Mr. Candy._


Frizinghall, Wednesday, September 26th, 1849.—Dear Mr. Franklin Blake,
you will anticipate the sad news I have to tell you, on finding your
letter to Ezra Jennings returned to you, unopened, in this enclosure.
He died in my arms, at sunrise, on Wednesday last.

I am not to blame for having failed to warn you that his end was at
hand. He expressly forbade me to write to you. “I am indebted to Mr.
Franklin Blake,” he said, “for having seen some happy days. Don’t
distress him, Mr. Candy—don’t distress him.”

His sufferings, up to the last six hours of his life, were terrible to
see. In the intervals of remission, when his mind was clear, I
entreated him to tell me of any relatives of his to whom I might write.
He asked to be forgiven for refusing anything to _me_. And then he
said—not bitterly—that he would die as he had lived, forgotten and
unknown. He maintained that resolution to the last. There is no hope
now of making any discoveries concerning him. His story is a blank.

The day before he died, he told me where to find all his papers. I
brought them to him on his bed. There was a little bundle of old
letters which he put aside. There was his unfinished book. There was
his Diary—in many locked volumes. He opened the volume for this year,
and tore out, one by one, the pages relating to the time when you and
he were together. “Give those,” he said, “to Mr. Franklin Blake. In
years to come, he may feel an interest in looking back at what is
written there.” Then he clasped his hands, and prayed God fervently to
bless you, and those dear to you. He said he should like to see you
again. But the next moment he altered his mind. “No,” he answered when
I offered to write. “I won’t distress him! I won’t distress him!”

At his request I next collected the other papers—that is to say, the
bundle of letters, the unfinished book and the volumes of the Diary—and
enclosed them all in one wrapper, sealed with my own seal. “Promise,”
he said, “that you will put this into my coffin with your own hand; and
that you will see that no other hand touches it afterwards.”

I gave him my promise. And the promise has been performed.

He asked me to do one other thing for him—which it cost me a hard
struggle to comply with. He said, “Let my grave be forgotten. Give me
your word of honour that you will allow no monument of any sort—not
even the commonest tombstone—to mark the place of my burial. Let me
sleep, nameless. Let me rest, unknown.” When I tried to plead with him
to alter his resolution, he became for the first, and only time,
violently agitated. I could not bear to see it; and I gave way. Nothing
but a little grass mound marks the place of his rest. In time, the
tombstones will rise round it. And the people who come after us will
look and wonder at the nameless grave.

As I have told you, for six hours before his death his sufferings
ceased. He dozed a little. I think he dreamed. Once or twice he smiled.
A woman’s name, as I suppose—the name of “Ella”—was often on his lips
at this time. A few minutes before the end he asked me to lift him on
his pillow, to see the sun rise through the window. He was very weak.
His head fell on my shoulder. He whispered, “It’s coming!” Then he
said, “Kiss me!” I kissed his forehead. On a sudden he lifted his head.
The sunlight touched his face. A beautiful expression, an angelic
expression, came over it. He cried out three times, “Peace! peace!
peace!” His head sank back again on my shoulder, and the long trouble
of his life was at an end.

So he has gone from us. This was, as I think, a great man—though the
world never knew him. He had the sweetest temper I have ever met with.
The loss of him makes me feel very lonely. Perhaps I have never been
quite myself since my illness. Sometimes, I think of giving up my
practice, and going away, and trying what some of the foreign baths and
waters will do for me.

It is reported here, that you and Miss Verinder are to be married next
month. Please to accept my best congratulations.

The pages of my poor friend’s Journal are waiting for you at my
house—sealed up, with your name on the wrapper. I was afraid to trust
them to the post.

My best respects and good wishes attend Miss Verinder. I remain, dear
Mr. Franklin Blake, truly yours,

THOMAS CANDY.


EIGHTH NARRATIVE.

_Contributed by Gabriel Betteredge._


I am the person (as you remember no doubt) who led the way in these
pages, and opened the story. I am also the person who is left behind,
as it were, to close the story up.

Let nobody suppose that I have any last words to say here concerning
the Indian Diamond. I hold that unlucky jewel in abhorrence—and I refer
you to other authority than mine, for such news of the Moonstone as you
may, at the present time, be expected to receive. My purpose, in this
place, is to state a fact in the history of the family, which has been
passed over by everybody, and which I won’t allow to be disrespectfully
smothered up in that way. The fact to which I allude is—the marriage of
Miss Rachel and Mr. Franklin Blake. This interesting event took place
at our house in Yorkshire, on Tuesday, October ninth, eighteen hundred
and forty-nine. I had a new suit of clothes on the occasion. And the
married couple went to spend the honeymoon in Scotland.

Family festivals having been rare enough at our house, since my poor
mistress’s death, I own—on this occasion of the wedding—to having
(towards the latter part of the day) taken a drop too much on the
strength of it.

If you have ever done the same sort of thing yourself you will
understand and feel for me. If you have not, you will very likely say,
“Disgusting old man! why does he tell us this?” The reason why is now
to come.

Having, then, taken my drop (bless you! you have got your favourite
vice, too; only your vice isn’t mine, and mine isn’t yours), I next
applied the one infallible remedy—that remedy being, as you know,
_Robinson Crusoe_. Where I opened that unrivalled book, I can’t say.
Where the lines of print at last left off running into each other, I
know, however, perfectly well. It was at page three hundred and
eighteen—a domestic bit concerning Robinson Crusoe’s marriage, as
follows:

“With those Thoughts, I considered my new Engagement, that I had a
Wife”—(Observe! so had Mr. Franklin!)—“one Child born”—(Observe again!
that might yet be Mr. Franklin’s case, too!)—“and my Wife then”—What
Robinson Crusoe’s wife did, or did not do, “then,” I felt no desire to
discover. I scored the bit about the Child with my pencil, and put a
morsel of paper for a mark to keep the place; “Lie you there,” I said,
“till the marriage of Mr. Franklin and Miss Rachel is some months
older—and then we’ll see!”

The months passed (more than I had bargained for), and no occasion
presented itself for disturbing that mark in the book. It was not till
this present month of November, eighteen hundred and fifty, that Mr.
Franklin came into my room, in high good spirits, and said,
“Betteredge! I have got some news for you! Something is going to happen
in the house, before we are many months older.”

“Does it concern the family, sir?” I asked.

“It decidedly concerns the family,” says Mr. Franklin.

“Has your good lady anything to do with it, if you please, sir?”

“She has a great deal to do with it,” says Mr. Franklin, beginning to
look a little surprised.

“You needn’t say a word more, sir,” I answered. “God bless you both!
I’m heartily glad to hear it.”

Mr. Franklin stared like a person thunderstruck. “May I venture to
inquire where you got your information?” he asked. “I only got mine
(imparted in the strictest secrecy) five minutes since.”

Here was an opportunity of producing _Robinson Crusoe_! Here was a
chance of reading that domestic bit about the child which I had marked
on the day of Mr. Franklin’s marriage! I read those miraculous words
with an emphasis which did them justice, and then I looked him severely
in the face. “_Now_, sir, do you believe in _Robinson Crusoe_?” I
asked, with a solemnity suitable to the occasion.

“Betteredge!” says Mr. Franklin, with equal solemnity, “I’m convinced
at last.” He shook hands with me—and I felt that I had converted him.

With the relation of this extraordinary circumstance, my reappearance
in these pages comes to an end. Let nobody laugh at the unique anecdote
here related. You are welcome to be as merry as you please over
everything else I have written. But when I write of _Robinson Crusoe_,
by the Lord it’s serious—and I request you to take it accordingly!

When this is said, all is said. Ladies and gentlemen, I make my bow,
and shut up the story.


EPILOGUE.


 THE FINDING OF THE DIAMOND.


