CHAPTER XXXV.
BEYOND THE VEIL


Rita Irvin’s awakening was no awakening in the usually accepted sense
of the word; it did not even represent a lifting of the veil which cut
her off from the world, but no more than a momentary perception of the
existence of such a veil and of the existence of something behind it.
Upon the veil, in grey smoke, the name “Kazmah” was written in moving
characters. Beyond the veil, dimly divined, was life.

As of old the victims of the Inquisition, waking or dreaming, beheld
ever before them the instrument of their torture, so before this
woman’s racked and half-numbed mind panoramically passed, an endless
pageant, the incidents of the night which had cut her off from living
men and women. She tottered on the border-line which divides sanity
from madness. She was learning what Sir Lucien had meant when, once,
long long ago, in some remote time when she was young and happy and had
belonged to a living world, he had said “a day is sure to come.” It had
come, that “day.” It had dawned when she had torn the veil before
Kazmah—and that veil had enveloped her ever since. All that had
preceded the fatal act was blotted out, blurred and indistinct; all
that had succeeded it lived eternally, passing, an endless pageant,
before her tortured mind.

The horror of the moment when she had touched the hands of the man
seated in the big ebony chair was of such kind that no subsequent
terrors had supplanted it. For those long, slim hands of the color of
old ivory were cold, rigid, lifeless—the hands of a corpse! Thus the
pageant began, and it continued as hereafter, memory and delusion
taking the stage in turn.


Complete darkness came.

Rita uttered a wild cry of horror and loathing, shrinking back from the
thing which sat in the ebony chair. She felt that consciousness was
slipping from her; felt herself falling, and shrieked to know herself
helpless and alone with Kazmah. She groped for support, but found none;
and, moaning, she sank down, and was unconscious of her fall.

A voice awakened her. Someone knelt beside her in the darkness,
supporting her; someone who spoke wildly, despairingly, but with a
strange, emotional reverence curbing the passion in his voice.

“Rita—my Rita! What have they done to you? Speak to me.... Oh God!
Spare her to me.... Let her hate me for ever, but spare her—spare her.
Rita, speak to me! I tried, heaven hear me, to save you little girl. I
only want you to be happy!”

She felt herself being lifted gently, tenderly. And as though the man’s
passionate entreaty had called her back from the dead, she reentered
into life and strove to realize what had happened.

Sir Lucien was supporting her, and she found it hard to credit the fact
that it was he, the hard, nonchalant man of the world she knew, who had
spoken. She clutched his arm with both hands.

“Oh, Lucy!” she whispered. “I am so frightened—and so ill.”

“Thank God,” he said huskily, “she is alive. Lean against me and try to
stand up. We must get away from here.”

Rita managed to stand upright, clinging wildly to Sir Lucien. A square,
vaguely luminous opening became visible to her. Against it,
silhouetted, she could discern part of the outline of Kazmah’s chair.
She drew back, uttering a low, sobbing cry. Sir Lucien supported her,
and:

“Don’t be afraid, dear,” he said reassuringly. “Nothing shall hurt
you.”

He pushed open a door, and through it shone the same vague light which
she had seen in the opening behind the chair. Sir Lucien spoke rapidly
in a language which sounded like Spanish. He was answered by a perfect
torrent of words in the same tongue.

Fiercely he cried something back at the hidden speaker.

A shriek of rage, of frenzy, came out of the darkness. Rita felt that
consciousness was about to leave her again. She swayed forward dizzily,
and a figure which seemed to belong to delirium—a lithe shadow out of
which gleamed a pair of wild eyes—leapt upon her. A knife glittered....

In order to have repelled the attack, Sir Lucien would have had to
release Rita, who was clinging to him, weak and terror-stricken.
Instead he threw himself before her.... She saw the knife enter his
shoulder....

Through absolute darkness she sank down into a land of chaotic
nightmare horrors. Great bells clanged maddeningly. Impish hands
plucked at her garments, dragged her hair. She was hurried this way and
that, bruised, torn, and tossed helpless upon a sea of liquid brass.
Through vast avenues lined with yellow, immobile Chinese faces she was
borne upon a bier. Oblique eyes looked into hers. Knives which
glittered greenly in the light of lamps globular and suspended in
immeasurable space, were hurled at her in showers....

Sir Lucien stood before her, supporting her; and all the knives buried
themselves in his body. She tried to cry out, but no sound could she
utter. Darkness fell again....

A Chinaman was bending over her. His hands were tucked in his loose
sleeves. He smiled, and his smile was hideous but friendly. He was
strangely like Sin Sin Wa, save that he did not lack an eye.

Rita found herself lying in an untidy bed in a room laden with opium
fumes and dimly lighted. On a table beside her were the remains of a
meal. She strove to recall having partaken of food, but was
unsuccessful....

There came a blank—then a sharp, stabbing pain in her right arm. She
thought it was the knife, and shrieked wildly again and again....

Years seemingly elapsed, years of agony spent amid oblique eyes which
floated in space unattached to any visible body, amid reeking fumes and
sounds of ceaseless conflict. Once she heard the cry of some bird, and
thought it must be the parakeet which eternally sat on a branch of a
lonely palm in the heart of the Great Sahara.... Then, one night, when
she lay shrinking from the plucking yellow hands which reached out of
the darkness:

“Tell me your dream,” boomed a deep, mocking voice; “and I will read
its portent!”

She opened her eyes. She lay in the untidy bed in the room which was
laden with the fumes of _chandu_. She stared upward at the low, dirty
ceiling.

“Why do you come to _me_ with your stories of desperation?” continued
the mocking voice. “You have insisted upon seeing me. I am here.”

Rita managed to move her head so that she could see more of the room.

On a divan at the other end of the place, propped up by a number of
garish cushions, Rita beheld Mrs. Sin. The long bamboo pipe had fallen
from her listless fingers. Her face wore an expression of mystic
rapture, like that characterizing the features of some Chinese
Buddhas....

In the other corner of the divan, contemplating her from under heavy
brows, sat _Kazmah_....




