CHAPTER IV.
THE CLOSED DOOR


Rather less than five minutes later a taxicab drew up in old Bond
Street, and from it Quentin Gray leapt out impetuously and ran in at
the doorway leading to Kazmah’s stairs. So hurried was his progress
that he collided violently with a little man who, carrying himself with
a pronounced stoop, was slinking furtively out.

The little man reeled at the impact and almost fell, but:

“Hang it all!” cried Gray irritably. “Why the devil don’t you look
where you’re going!”

He glared angrily into the face of the other. It was a peculiar and
rememberable face, notable because of a long, sharp, hooked nose and
very little, foxy, brown eyes; a sly face to which a small, fair
moustache only added insignificance. It was crowned by a wide-brimmed
bowler hat which the man wore pressed down upon his ears like a Jew
pedlar.

“Why!” cried Gray, “this is the second time tonight you have jostled
me!”

He thought he had recognized the man for the same who had been
following himself, Mrs. Irvin and Sir Lucien Pyne along old Bond
Street.

A smile, intended to be propitiatory, appeared upon the pale face.

“No, sir, excuse me, sir—”

“Don’t deny it!” said Gray angrily. “If I had the time I should give
you in charge as a suspicious loiterer.”

Calling to the cabman to wait, he ran up the stairs to the second floor
landing. Before the painted door bearing the name of Kazmah he halted,
and as the door did not open, stamped impatiently, but with no better
result.

At that, since there was neither bell nor knocker, he raised his fist
and banged loudly.

No one responded to the summons.

“Hi, there!” he shouted. “Open the door! Pyne! Rita!”

Again he banged—and yet again. Then he paused, listening, his ear
pressed to the panel.

He could detect no sound of movement within. Fists clenched, he stood
staring at the closed door, and his fresh color slowly deserted him and
left him pale.

“Damn him!” he muttered savagely. “Damn him! he has fooled me!”

Passionate and self-willed, he was shaken by a storm of murderous
anger. That Pyne had planned this trick, with Rita Irvin’s consent, he
did not doubt, and his passive dislike of the man became active hatred
of the woman he dared not think. He had for long looked upon Sir Lucien
in the light of a rival, and the irregularity of his own infatuation
for another’s wife in no degree lessened his resentment.

Again he pressed his ear to the door, and listened intently. Perhaps
they were hiding within. Perhaps this charlatan, Kazmah, was an
accomplice in the pay of Sir Lucien. Perhaps this was a secret place of
rendezvous.

To the manifest absurdity of such a conjecture he was blind in his
anger. But that he was helpless, befooled, he recognized; and with a
final muttered imprecation he turned and slowly descended the stair. A
lingering hope was dispelled when, looking right and left along Bond
Street, he failed to perceive the missing pair.

The cabman glanced at him interrogatively. “I shall not require you,”
said Gray, and gave the man half-a-crown.

Busy with his poisonous conjectures, he remained all unaware of the
presence of a furtive, stooping figure which lurked behind the railings
of the arcade at this point linking old Bond Street to Albemarle
Street. Nor had the stooping stranger any wish to attract Gray’s
attention. Most of the shops in the narrow lane were already closed,
although the florist’s at the corner remained open, but of the shadow
which lay along the greater part of the arcade this alert watcher took
every advantage. From the recess formed by a shop door he peered out at
Gray, where the light of a street lamp fell upon him, studying his
face, his movements, with unrelaxing vigilance.

Gray, following some moments of indecision, strode off towards
Piccadilly. The little man came out cautiously from his hiding-place
and looked after him. Out of a dark porch, ten paces along Bond Street,
appeared a burly figure to fall into step a few yards behind Gray. The
little man licked his lips appreciatively and returned to the doorway
below the premises of Kazmah.

Reaching Piccadilly, Gray stood for a time on the corner, indifferent
to the jostling of passers-by. Finally he crossed, walked along to the
Prince’s Restaurant, and entered the lobby. He glanced at his
wrist-watch. It registered the hour of seven-twenty-five.

He cancelled his order for a table and was standing staring moodily
towards the entrance when the doors swung open and a man entered who
stepped straight up to him, hand extended, and:

“Glad to see you, Gray,” he said. “What’s the trouble?”

Quentin Gray stared as if incredulous at the speaker, and it was with
an unmistakable note of welcome in his voice that he replied:

“Seton! Seton Pasha!”

The frown disappeared from Gray’s forehead, and he gripped the other’s
hand in hearty greeting. But:

“Stick to plain Seton!” said the new-comer, glancing rapidly about him.
“Ottoman titles are not fashionable.”

The speaker was a man of arresting personality. Above medium height,
well but leanly built, the face of Seton “Pasha” was burned to a deeper
shade than England’s wintry sun is capable of producing. He wore a
close-trimmed beard and moustache, and the bronze on his cheeks
enhanced the brightness of his grey eyes and rendered very noticeable a
slight frosting of the dark hair above his temples. He had the
indescribable air of a “sure” man, a sound man to have beside one in a
tight place; and looking into the rather grim face, Quentin Gray felt
suddenly ashamed of himself. From Seton Pasha he knew that he could
keep nothing back. He knew that presently he should find himself
telling this quiet, brown-skinned man the whole story of his
humiliation—and he knew that Seton would not spare his feelings.

“My dear fellow,” he said, “you must pardon me if I sometimes fail to
respect your wishes in this matter. When I left the East the name of
Seton Pasha was on everybody’s tongue. But are you alone?”

“I am. I only arrived in London tonight and in England this morning.”

“Were you thinking of dining here?”

“No; I saw you through the doorway as I was passing. But this will do
as well as another place. I gather that you are disengaged. Perhaps you
will dine with me?”

“Splendid!” cried Gray. “Wait a moment. Perhaps my table hasn’t gone!”

He ran off in his boyish, impetuous fashion, and Seton watched him,
smiling quietly.

The table proved to be available, and ere long the two were discussing
an excellent dinner. Gray lost much of his irritability and began to
talk coherently upon topics of general interest. Presently, following
an interval during which he had been covertly watching his companion:

“Do you know, Seton,” he said, “you are the one man in London whose
company I could have tolerated tonight.”

“My arrival was peculiarly opportune.”

“Your arrivals are always peculiarly opportune.” Gray stared at Seton
with an expression of puzzled admiration. “I don’t think I shall ever
understand your turning up immediately before the Senussi raid in
Egypt. Do you remember? I was with the armored cars.”

“I remember perfectly.”

“Then you vanished in the same mysterious fashion, and the C. O. was a
sphinx on the subject. I next saw you strolling out of the gate at
Baghdad. How the devil you’d got to Baghdad, considering that you
didn’t come with us and that you weren’t with the cavalry, heaven only
knows!”

“No,” said Seton judicially, gazing through his uplifted wine-glass;
“when one comes to consider the matter without prejudice it is
certainly odd. But do I know the lady to whose non-appearance I owe the
pleasure of your company tonight?”

Quentin Gray stared at him blankly.

“Really, Seton, you amaze me. Did I say that I had an appointment with
a lady?”

“My dear Gray, when I see a man standing biting his nails and glaring
out into Piccadilly from a restaurant entrance I ask myself a question.
When I learn that he has just cancelled an order for a table for two I
answer it.”

Gray laughed. “You always make me feel so infernally young, Seton.”

“Good!”

“Yes, it’s good to feel young, but bad to feel a young fool; and that’s
what I feel—and what I am. Listen!”

Leaning across the table so that the light of the shaded lamp fell
fully upon his flushed, eager face, Gray, not without embarrassment,
told his companion of the “dirty trick”—so he phrased it—which Sir
Lucien Pyne had played upon him. In conclusion:

“What would you do, Seton?” he asked.

Seton sat regarding him in silence with a cool, calculating stare which
some men had termed insolent, absently tapping his teeth with the gold
rim of a monocle which he carried but apparently never used for any
other purpose; and it was at about this time that a long low car passed
near the door of the restaurant, crossing the traffic stream of
Piccadilly to draw up at the corner of old Bond Street.

From the car Monte Irvin alighted and, telling the man to wait, set out
on foot. Ten paces along Bond Street he encountered a small, stooping
figure which became detached from the shadows of a shop door. The light
of a street lamp shone down upon the sharp, hooked nose and into the
cunning little brown eyes of Brisley, of Spinker’s Detective Agency.
Monte Irvin started.

“Ah, Brisley!” he said, “I was looking for you. Are they still there?”

“Probably, sir.” Brisley licked his lips. “My colleague, Gunn, reports
no one came out whilst I was away ’phoning.”

“But the whole thing seems preposterous. Are there no other offices in
the block where they might be?”

“I personally saw Mr. Gray, Sir Lucien Pyne and the lady go into
Kazmah’s. At that time—roughly, ten to seven—all the other offices had
been closed, approximately, one hour.”

“There is absolutely no possibility that they might have come out
unseen by you?”

“None, sir. I should not have troubled a client if in doubt. Here’s
Gunn.”

Old Bond Street now was darkened and deserted; the yellow mist had
turned to fine rain, and Gunn, his hands thrust in his pockets, was
sheltering under the porch of the arcade. Gunn possessed a purple
complexion which attained to full vigor of coloring in the nasal
region. His moustache of dirty grey was stained brown in the centre as
if by frequent potations of stout, and his bulky figure was
artificially enlarged by the presence of two overcoats, the outer of
which was a waterproof and the inner a blue garment appreciably longer
both in sleeve and skirt than the former. The effect produced was one
of great novelty. Gunn touched the brim of his soft felt hat, which he
wore turned down all round apparently in imitation of a flower-pot.

“All snug, sir,” he said, hoarsely and confidentially, bending forward
and breathing the words into Irvin’s ear. “Snug as a bee in a hive.
You’re as good as a bachelor again.”

Monte Irvin mentally recoiled.

“Lead the way to the door of this place,” he said tersely.

“Yes, sir, this way, sir. Be careful of the step there. You may remark
that the outer door is not yet closed. I am informed upon reliable
authority as the last to go locks the door. Hence we perceive that the
last has not yet gone. It is likewise opened by the first to come of a
mornin’. Here we are, sir; door on the right.”

The landing was in darkness, but as Gunn spoke he directed the ray of a
pocket lamp upon a bronze plate bearing the name “Kazmah.” He rested
one hand upon his hip.

“All snug,” he repeated; “as snug as a eel in mud. The _decree nisi_ is
yours, sir. As an alderman of the City of London and a Justice of the
Peace you are entitled to call a police officer—”

“Hold your tongue!” rapped Irvin. “You’ve been drinking: and I place no
reliance whatever in your evidence. I do not believe that my wife or
any one else but ourselves is upon these premises.”

The watery eyes of the insulted man protruded unnaturally. “Drinkin’!”
he whispered, “drink—”

But indignation now deprived Gunn of speech and:

“Excuse me, sir,” interrupted the nasal voice of Brisley, “but I can
absolutely answer for Gunn. Reputation of the Agency at stake. Worked
with us for three years. Parties undoubtedly on the premises as
reported.”

“Drink—” whispered Gunn.

“I shall be glad,” said Monte Irvin, and his voice shook emotionally,
“if you will lend me your pocket lamp. I am naturally upset. Will you
kindly both go downstairs. I will call if I want you.”

The two men obeyed, Gunn muttering hoarsely to Brisley; and Monte Irvin
was left standing on the landing, the lamp in his hand. He waited until
he knew from the sound of their footsteps that the pair had regained
the street, then, resting his arm against the closed door, and pressing
his forehead to the damp sleeve of his coat, he stood awhile, the lamp,
which he held limply, shining down upon the floor.

His lips moved, and almost inaudibly he murmured his wife’s name.




