The Project Gutenberg EBook of A System Of Logic, Ratiocinative And
Inductive (Vol. 1 of 2) by John Stuart Mill



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license



Title: A System Of Logic, Ratiocinative And Inductive (Vol. 1 of 2)

Author: John Stuart Mill

Release Date: August 31, 2008 [Ebook #26495]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A SYSTEM OF LOGIC, RATIOCINATIVE AND INDUCTIVE (VOL. 1 OF 2)***





                            A SYSTEM OF LOGIC,

                       RATIOCINATIVE AND INDUCTIVE,

                      BEING A CONNECTED VIEW OF THE

                         PRINCIPLES OF EVIDENCE,

                                 AND THE

                   METHODS OF SCIENTIFIC INVESTIGATION.

                                    by

                            JOHN STUART MILL.

                             In Two Volumes.

                                 Vol. I.

                              Third Edition.

                                 London:

                        John Parker, West Strand.

                                M DCCC LI.





CONTENTS


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.
PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION.
INTRODUCTION.
BOOK I. OF NAMES AND PROPOSITIONS.
   CHAPTER I. OF THE NECESSITY OF COMMENCING WITH AN ANALYSIS OF LANGUAGE.
   CHAPTER II. OF NAMES.
   CHAPTER III. OF THE THINGS DENOTED BY NAMES.
      I. Feelings, or States of Consciousness.
      II. Substances.
      III. Attributes: and, first, Qualities.
      IV. Relations.
      V. Quantity.
      VI. Attributes Concluded.
      VII. General Results.
   CHAPTER IV. OF PROPOSITIONS.
   CHAPTER V. OF THE IMPORT OF PROPOSITIONS.
   CHAPTER VI. OF PROPOSITIONS MERELY VERBAL.
   CHAPTER VII. OF THE NATURE OF CLASSIFICATION, AND THE FIVE PREDICABLES.
   CHAPTER VIII. OF DEFINITION.
BOOK II. OF REASONING.
   CHAPTER I. OF INFERENCE, OR REASONING, IN GENERAL.
   CHAPTER II. OF RATIOCINATION, OR SYLLOGISM.
   CHAPTER III. OF THE FUNCTIONS, AND LOGICAL VALUE, OF THE SYLLOGISM.
   CHAPTER IV. OF TRAINS OF REASONING, AND DEDUCTIVE SCIENCES.
   CHAPTER V. OF DEMONSTRATION, AND NECESSARY TRUTHS.
   CHAPTER VI. THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED.
BOOK III. OF INDUCTION.
   CHAPTER I. PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS ON INDUCTION IN GENERAL.
   CHAPTER II. OF INDUCTIONS IMPROPERLY SO CALLED.
   CHAPTER III. OF THE GROUND OF INDUCTION.
   CHAPTER IV. OF LAWS OF NATURE.
   CHAPTER V. OF THE LAW OF UNIVERSAL CAUSATION.
   CHAPTER VI. OF THE COMPOSITION OF CAUSES.
   CHAPTER VII. OF OBSERVATION AND EXPERIMENT.
   CHAPTER VIII. OF THE FOUR METHODS OF EXPERIMENTAL INQUIRY.
   CHAPTER IX. MISCELLANEOUS EXAMPLES OF THE FOUR METHODS.
   CHAPTER X. OF PLURALITY OF CAUSES; AND OF THE INTERMIXTURE OF EFFECTS.
   CHAPTER XI. OF THE DEDUCTIVE METHOD.
   CHAPTER XII. OF THE EXPLANATION OF LAWS OF NATURE.
   CHAPTER XIII. MISCELLANEOUS EXAMPLES OF THE EXPLANATION OF LAWS OF
   NATURE.
Footnotes






PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.


This book makes no pretence of giving to the world a new theory of the
intellectual operations. Its claim to attention, if it possess any, is
grounded on the fact that it is an attempt not to supersede, but to embody
and systematize, the best ideas which have been either promulgated on its
subject by speculative writers, or conformed to by accurate thinkers in
their scientific inquiries.

To cement together the detached fragments of a subject, never yet treated
as a whole; to harmonize the true portions of discordant theories, by
supplying the links of thought necessary to connect them, and by
disentangling them from the errors with which they are always more or less
interwoven; must necessarily require a considerable amount of original
speculation. To other originality than this, the present work lays no
claim. In the existing state of the cultivation of the sciences, there
would be a very strong presumption against any one who should imagine that
he had effected a revolution in the theory of the investigation of truth,
or added any fundamentally new process to the practice of it. The
improvement which remains to be effected in the methods of philosophizing
(and the author believes that they have much need of improvement) can only
consist in performing, more systematically and accurately, operations with
which, at least in their elementary form, the human intellect in some one
or other of its employments is already familiar.

In the portion of the work which treats of Ratiocination, the author has
not deemed it necessary to enter into technical details which may be
obtained in so perfect a shape from the existing treatises on what is
termed the Logic of the Schools. In the contempt entertained by many
modern philosophers for the syllogistic art, it will be seen that he by no
means participates; although the scientific theory on which its defence is
usually rested appears to him erroneous: and the view which he has
suggested of the nature and functions of the Syllogism may, perhaps,
afford the means of conciliating the principles of the art with as much as
is well grounded in the doctrines and objections of its assailants.

The same abstinence from details could not be observed in the First Book,
on Names and Propositions; because many useful principles and distinctions
which were contained in the old Logic, have been gradually omitted from
the writings of its later teachers; and it appeared desirable both to
revive these, and to reform and rationalize the philosophical foundation
on which they stood. The earlier chapters of this preliminary Book will
consequently appear, to some readers, needlessly elementary and
scholastic. But those who know in what darkness the nature of our
knowledge, and of the processes by which it is obtained, is often involved
by a confused apprehension of the import of the different classes of Words
and Assertions, will not regard these discussions as either frivolous, or
irrelevant to the topics considered in the later Books.

On the subject of Induction, the task to be performed was that of
generalizing the modes of investigating truth and estimating evidence, by
which so many important and recondite laws of nature have, in the various
sciences, been aggregated to the stock of human knowledge. That this is
not a task free from difficulty may be presumed from the fact, that even
at a very recent period, eminent writers (among whom it is sufficient to
name Archbishop Whately, and the author of a celebrated article on Bacon
in the _Edinburgh Review_) have not scrupled to pronounce it
impossible.(1) The author has endeavoured to combat their theory in the
manner in which Diogenes confuted the sceptical reasonings against the
possibility of motion; remembering that Diogenes’ argument would have been
equally conclusive, though his individual perambulations might not have
extended beyond the circuit of his own tub.

Whatever may be the value of what the author has succeeded in effecting on
this branch of his subject, it is a duty to acknowledge that for much of
it he has been indebted to several important treatises, partly historical
and partly philosophical, on the generalities and processes of physical
science, which have been published within the last few years. To these
treatises, and to their authors, he has endeavoured to do justice in the
body of the work. But as with one of these writers, Dr. Whewell, he has
occasion frequently to express differences of opinion, it is more
particularly incumbent on him in this place to declare, that without the
aid derived from the facts and ideas contained in that gentleman’s
_History of the Inductive Sciences_, the corresponding portion of this
work would probably not have been written.

The concluding Book is an attempt to contribute towards the solution of a
question, which the decay of old opinions, and the agitation that disturbs
European society to its inmost depths, render as important in the present
day to the practical interests of human life, as it must at all times be
to the completeness of our speculative knowledge: viz. Whether moral and
social phenomena are really exceptions to the general certainty and
uniformity of the course of nature; and how far the methods, by which so
many of the laws of the physical world have been numbered among truths
irrevocably acquired and universally assented to, can be made instrumental
to the formation of a similar body of received doctrine in moral and
political science.





PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION.


Several criticisms, of a more or less controversial character, on this
work, have appeared since the publication of the second edition; and Dr.
Whewell has lately published a reply to those parts of it in which some of
his opinions were controverted.

I have carefully reconsidered all the points on which my conclusions have
been assailed. But I have not to announce a change of opinion on any
matter of importance. Such minor oversights as have been detected, either
by myself or by my critics, I have, in general silently, corrected: but it
is not to be inferred that I agree with the objections which have been
made to a passage, in every instance in which I have altered or cancelled
it. I have often done so, merely that it might not remain a
stumbling-block, when the amount of discussion necessary to place the
matter in its true light would have exceeded what was suitable to the
occasion.

To several of the arguments which have been urged against me, I have
thought it useful to reply with some degree of minuteness; not from any
taste for controversy, but because the opportunity was favourable for
placing my own conclusions, and the grounds of them, more clearly and
completely before the reader. Truth, on these subjects, is militant, and
can only establish itself by means of conflict. The most opposite opinions
can make a plausible show of evidence while each has the statement of its
own case; and it is only possible to ascertain which of them is in the
right, after hearing and comparing what each can say against the other,
and what the other can urge in its defence.

Even the criticisms from which I most dissent have been of great service
to me, by showing in what places the exposition most needed to be
improved, or the arguments strengthened. And I should have been well
pleased if the book had undergone a much greater amount of attack; as in
that case I should probably have been enabled to improve it still more
than I believe I have now done.





INTRODUCTION.


§ 1. There is as great diversity among authors in the modes which they
have adopted of defining logic, as in their treatment of the details of
it. This is what might naturally be expected on any subject on which
writers have availed themselves of the same language as a means of
delivering different ideas. Ethics and jurisprudence are liable to the
remark in common with logic. Almost every writer having taken a different
view of some of the particulars which these branches of knowledge are
usually understood to include; each has so framed his definition as to
indicate beforehand his own peculiar tenets, and sometimes to beg the
question in their favour.

This diversity is not so much an evil to be complained of, as an
inevitable and in some degree a proper result of the imperfect state of
those sciences. It is not to be expected that there should be agreement
about the definition of a thing, until there is agreement about the thing
itself. To define a thing, is to select from among the whole of its
properties those which shall be understood to be designated and declared
by its name; and the properties must be well known to us before we can be
competent to determine which of them are fittest to be chosen for this
purpose. Accordingly, in the case of so complex an aggregation of
particulars as are comprehended in anything which can be called a science,
the definition we set out with is seldom that which a more extensive
knowledge of the subject shows to be the most appropriate. Until we know
the particulars themselves, we cannot fix upon the most correct and
compact mode of circumscribing them by a general description. It was not
till after an extensive and accurate acquaintance with the details of
chemical phenomena, that it was found possible to frame a rational
definition of chemistry; and the definition of the science of life and
organization is still a matter of dispute. So long as the sciences are
imperfect, the definitions must partake of their imperfections; and if the
former are progressive, the latter ought to be so too. As much, therefore,
as is to be expected from a definition placed at the commencement of a
subject, is that it should define the scope of our inquiries: and the
definition which I am about to offer of the science of logic, pretends to
nothing more, than to be a statement of the question which I have put to
myself, and which this book is an attempt to resolve. The reader is at
liberty to object to it as a definition of logic; but it is at all events
a correct definition of the subject of these volumes.

§ 2. Logic has often been called the Art of Reasoning. A writer(2) who has
done more than any other living person to restore this study to the rank
from which it had fallen in the estimation of the cultivated class in our
own country, has adopted the above definition with an amendment; he has
defined Logic to be the Science, as well as the Art, of reasoning; meaning
by the former term, the analysis of the mental process which takes place
whenever we reason, and by the latter, the rules, grounded on that
analysis, for conducting the process correctly. There can be no doubt as
to the propriety of the emendation. A right understanding of the mental
process itself, of the conditions it depends on, and the steps of which it
consists, is the only basis on which a system of rules, fitted for the
direction of the process, can possibly be founded. Art necessarily
presupposes knowledge; art, in any but its infant state, presupposes
scientific knowledge: and if every art does not bear the name of the
science on which it rests, it is only because several sciences are often
necessary to form the groundwork of a single art. Such is the complication
of human affairs, that to enable one thing to be _done_, it is often
requisite to _know_ the nature and properties of many things.

Logic, then, comprises the science of reasoning, as well as an art,
founded on that science. But the word Reasoning, again, like most other
scientific terms in popular use, abounds in ambiguities. In one of its
acceptations, it means syllogizing; or the mode of inference which may be
called (with sufficient accuracy for the present purpose) concluding from
generals to particulars. In another of its senses, to reason, is simply to
infer any assertion, from assertions already admitted: and in this sense
induction is as much entitled to be called reasoning as the demonstrations
of geometry.

Writers on logic have generally preferred the former acceptation of the
term; the latter, and more extensive signification is that in which I mean
to use it. I do this by virtue of the right I claim for every author, to
give whatever provisional definition he pleases of his own subject. But
sufficient reasons will, I believe, unfold themselves as we advance, why
this should be not only the provisional but the final definition. It
involves, at all events, no arbitrary change in the meaning of the word;
for, with the general usage of the English language, the wider
signification, I believe, accords better than the more restricted one.

§ 3. But Reasoning, even in the widest sense of which the word is
susceptible, does not seem to comprehend all that is included, either in
the best, or even in the most current, conception of the scope and
province of our science. The employment of the word Logic to denote the
theory of argumentation, is derived from the Aristotelian, or, as they are
commonly termed, the scholastic logicians. Yet even with them, in their
systematic treatises, argumentation was the subject only of the third
part: the two former treated of Terms, and of Propositions; under one or
other of which heads were also included Definition and Division.
Professedly, indeed, these previous topics were introduced only on account
of their connexion with reasoning, and as a preparation for the doctrine
and rules of the syllogism. Yet they were treated with greater minuteness,
and dwelt on at greater length, than was required for that purpose alone.
More recent writers on logic have generally understood the term as it was
employed by the able author of the Port Royal Logic; viz. as equivalent to
the Art of Thinking. Nor is this acceptation confined to books, and
scientific inquirers. Even in ordinary conversation, the ideas connected
with the word Logic, include at least precision of language, and accuracy
of classification: and we perhaps oftener hear persons speak of a logical
arrangement, or of expressions logically defined, than of conclusions
logically deduced from premisses. Again, a man is often called a great
logician, or a man of powerful logic, not for the accuracy of his
deductions, but for the extent of his command over premisses; because the
general propositions required for explaining a difficulty or refuting a
sophism, copiously and promptly occur to him: because, in short, his
knowledge, besides being ample, is well under his command for
argumentative use. Whether, therefore, we conform to the practice of those
who have made the subject their particular study, or to that of popular
writers and common discourse, the province of logic will include several
operations of the intellect not usually considered to fall within the
meaning of the terms Reasoning and Argumentation.

These various operations might be brought within the compass of the
science, and the additional advantage be obtained of a very simple
definition, if, by an extension of the term, sanctioned by high
authorities, we were to define logic as the science which treats of the
operations of the human understanding in the pursuit of truth. For to this
ultimate end, naming, classification, definition, and all other operations
over which logic has ever claimed jurisdiction, are essentially
subsidiary. They may all be regarded as contrivances for enabling a person
to know the truths which are needful to him, and to know them at the
precise moment at which they are needful. Other purposes, indeed, are also
served by these operations; for instance, that of imparting our knowledge
to others. But, viewed with regard to this purpose, they have never been
considered as within the province of the logician. The sole object of
Logic is the guidance of one’s own thoughts; the communication of those
thoughts to others falls under the consideration of Rhetoric, in the large
sense in which that art was conceived by the ancients; or of the still
more extensive art of Education. Logic takes cognizance of our
intellectual operations, only as they conduce to our own knowledge, and to
our command over that knowledge for our own uses. If there were but one
rational being in the universe, that being might be a perfect logician;
and the science and art of logic would be the same for that one person as
for the whole human race.

§ 4. But, if the definition which we formerly examined included too
little, that which is now suggested has the opposite fault of including
too much.

Truths are known to us in two ways: some are known directly, and of
themselves; some through the medium of other truths. The former are the
subject of Intuition, or Consciousness; the latter, of Inference. The
truths known by intuition are the original premisses from which all others
are inferred. Our assent to the conclusion being grounded on the truth of
the premisses, we never could arrive at any knowledge by reasoning, unless
something could be known antecedently to all reasoning.

Examples of truths known to us by immediate consciousness, are our own
bodily sensations and mental feelings. I know directly, and of my own
knowledge, that I was vexed yesterday, or that I am hungry to-day.
Examples of truths which we know only by way of inference, are occurrences
which took place while we were absent, the events recorded in history, or
the theorems of mathematics. The two former we infer from the testimony
adduced, or from the traces of those past occurrences which still exist;
the latter, from the premisses laid down in books of geometry, under the
title of definitions and axioms. Whatever we are capable of knowing must
belong to the one class or to the other; must be in the number of the
primitive data, or of the conclusions which can be drawn from these.

With the original data, or ultimate premisses of our knowledge; with their
number or nature, the mode in which they are obtained, or the tests by
which they may be distinguished; logic, in a direct way at least, has, in
the sense in which I conceive the science, nothing to do. These questions
are partly not a subject of science at all, partly that of a very
different science.

Whatever is known to us by consciousness, is known beyond possibility of
question. What one sees or feels, whether bodily or mentally, one cannot
but be sure that one sees or feels. No science is required for the purpose
of establishing such truths; no rules of art can render our knowledge of
them more certain than it is in itself. There is no logic for this portion
of our knowledge.

But we may fancy that we see or feel what we in reality infer. Newton saw
the truth of many propositions of geometry without reading the
demonstrations, but not, we may be sure, without their flashing through
his mind. A truth, or supposed truth, which is really the result of a very
rapid inference, may seem to be apprehended intuitively. It has long been
agreed by thinkers of the most opposite schools, that this mistake is
actually made in so familiar an instance as that of the eyesight. There is
nothing of which we appear to ourselves to be more directly conscious,
than the distance of an object from us. Yet it has long been ascertained,
that what is perceived by the eye, is at most nothing more than a
variously coloured surface; that when we fancy we see distance, all we
really see is certain variations of apparent size, and degrees of
faintness of colour; and that our estimate of the object’s distance from
us is the result of a comparison (made with so much rapidity that we are
unconscious of making it) between the size and colour of the object as
they appear at the time, and the size and colour of the same or of similar
objects as they appeared when close at hand, or when their degree of
remoteness was known by other evidence. The perception of distance by the
eye, which seems so like intuition, is thus, in reality, an inference
grounded on experience; an inference, too, which we learn to make; and
which we make with more and more correctness as our experience increases;
though in familiar cases it takes place, so rapidly as to appear exactly
on a par with those perceptions of sight which are really intuitive, our
perceptions of colour.(3)

Of the science, therefore, which expounds the operations of the human
understanding in the pursuit of truth, one essential part is the inquiry:
What are the facts which are the objects of intuition or consciousness,
and what are those which we merely infer? But this inquiry has never been
considered a portion of logic. Its place is in another and a perfectly
distinct department of science, to which the name metaphysics more
particularly belongs: that portion of mental philosophy which attempts to
determine what part of the furniture of the mind belongs to it originally,
and what part is constructed out of materials furnished to it from
without. To this science appertain the great and much debated questions of
the existence of matter; the existence of spirit, and of a distinction
between it and matter; the reality of time and space, as things without
the mind, and distinguishable from the objects which are said to exist
_in_ them. For in the present state of the discussion on these topics, it
is almost universally allowed that the existence of matter or of spirit,
of space or of time, is, in its nature, unsusceptible of being proved; and
that if anything is known of them, it must be by immediate intuition. To
the same science belong the inquiries into the nature of Conception,
Perception, Memory, and Belief; all of which are operations of the
understanding in the pursuit of truth; but with which, as phenomena of the
mind, or with the possibility which may or may not exist of analysing any
of them into simpler phenomena, the logician as such has no concern. To
this science must also be referred the following, and all analogous
questions: To what extent our intellectual faculties and our emotions are
innate—to what extent the result of association: Whether God, and duty,
are realities, the existence of which is manifest to us à priori by the
constitution of our rational faculty; or whether our ideas of them are
acquired notions, the origin of which we are able to trace and explain;
and the reality of the objects themselves a question not of consciousness
or intuition, but of evidence and reasoning.

The province of logic must be restricted to that portion of our knowledge
which consists of inferences from truths previously known; whether those
antecedent data be general propositions, or particular observations and
perceptions. Logic is not the science of Belief, but the science of Proof,
or Evidence. In so far as belief professes to be founded on proof, the
office of logic is to supply a test for ascertaining whether or not the
belief is well grounded. With the claims which any proposition has to
belief on the evidence of consciousness, that is, without evidence in the
proper sense of the word, logic has nothing to do.

§ 5. By far the greatest portion of our knowledge, whether of general
truths or of particular facts, being avowedly matter of inference, nearly
the whole, not only of science, but of human conduct, is amenable to the
authority of logic. To draw inferences has been said to be the great
business of life. Every one has daily, hourly, and momentary need of
ascertaining facts which he has not directly observed; not from any
general purpose of adding to his stock of knowledge, but because the facts
themselves are of importance to his interests or to his occupations. The
business of the magistrate, of the military commander, of the navigator,
of the physician, of the agriculturist, is merely to judge of evidence,
and to act accordingly. They all have to ascertain certain facts, in order
that they may afterwards apply certain rules, either devised by
themselves, or prescribed for their guidance by others; and as they do
this well or ill, so they discharge well or ill the duties of their
several callings. It is the only occupation in which the mind never ceases
to be engaged; and is the subject, not of logic, but of knowledge in
general.

Logic, however, is not the same thing with knowledge, though the field of
logic is coextensive with the field of knowledge. Logic is the common
judge and arbiter of all particular investigations. It does not undertake
to find evidence, but to determine whether it has been found. Logic
neither observes, nor invents, nor discovers; but judges. It is no part of
the business of logic to inform the surgeon what appearances are found to
accompany a violent death. This he must learn from his own experience and
observation, or from that of others, his predecessors in his peculiar
pursuit. But logic sits in judgment on the sufficiency of that observation
and experience to justify his rules, and on the sufficiency of his rules
to justify his conduct. It does not give him proofs, but teaches him what
makes them proofs, and how he is to judge of them. It does not teach that
any particular fact proves any other, but points out to what conditions
all facts must conform, in order that they may prove other facts. To
decide whether any given fact fulfils these conditions, or whether facts
can be found which fulfil them in a given case, belongs exclusively to the
particular art or science, or to our knowledge of the particular subject.

It is in this sense that logic is, what Bacon so expressively called it,
_ars artium_; the science of science itself. All science consists of data
and conclusions from those data, of proofs and what they prove: now logic
points out what relations must subsist between data and whatever can be
concluded from them, between proof and everything which it can prove. If
there be any such indispensable relations, and if these can be precisely
determined, every particular branch of science, as well as every
individual in the guidance of his conduct, is bound to conform to those
relations, under the penalty of making false inferences, of drawing
conclusions which are not grounded in the realities of things. Whatever
has at any time been concluded justly, whatever knowledge has been
acquired otherwise than by immediate intuition, depended on the observance
of the laws which it is the province of logic to investigate. If the
conclusions are just, and the knowledge real, those laws, whether known or
not, have been observed.

§ 6. We need not, therefore, seek any farther for a solution of the
question, so often agitated, respecting the utility of logic. If a science
of logic exists, or is capable of existing, it must be useful. If there be
rules to which every mind consciously or unconsciously conforms in every
instance in which it infers rightly, there seems little necessity for
discussing whether a person is more likely to observe those rules, when he
knows the rules, than when he is unacquainted with them.

A science may undoubtedly be brought to a certain, not inconsiderable,
stage of advancement, without the application of any other logic to it
than what all persons, who are said to have a sound understanding, acquire
empirically in the course of their studies. Mankind judged of evidence,
and often correctly, before logic was a science, or they never could have
made it one. And they executed great mechanical works before they
understood the laws of mechanics. But there are limits both to what
mechanicians can do without principles of mechanics, and to what thinkers
can do without principles of logic. A few individuals may, by
extraordinary genius, anticipate the results of science; but the bulk of
mankind require either to understand the theory of what they are doing, or
to have rules laid down for them by those who have understood the theory.
In the progress of science from its easiest to its more difficult
problems, each great step in advance has usually had either as its
precursor, or as its accompaniment and necessary condition, a
corresponding improvement in the notions and principles of logic received
among the most advanced thinkers. And if several of the more difficult
sciences are still in so defective a state; if not only so little is
proved, but disputation has not terminated even about the little which
seemed to be so; the reason perhaps is, that men’s logical notions have
not yet acquired the degree of extension, or of accuracy, requisite for
the estimation of the evidence proper to those particular departments of
knowledge.

§ 7. Logic, then, is the science of the operations of the understanding
which are subservient to the estimation of evidence: both the process
itself of proceeding from known truths to unknown, and all other
intellectual operations in so far as auxiliary to this. It includes,
therefore, the operation of Naming; for language is an instrument of
thought, as well as a means of communicating our thoughts. It includes,
also, Definition, and Classification. For, the use of these operations
(putting all other minds than one’s own out of consideration) is to serve
not only for keeping our evidences and the conclusions from them permanent
and readily accessible in the memory, but for so marshalling the facts
which we may at any time be engaged in investigating, as to enable us to
perceive more clearly what evidence there is, and to judge with fewer
chances of error whether it be sufficient. These, therefore, are
operations specially instrumental to the estimation of evidence, and as
such are within the province of Logic. There are other more elementary
processes, concerned in all thinking, such as Conception, Memory, and the
like; but of these it is not necessary that Logic should take any peculiar
cognizance, since they have no special connexion with the problem of
Evidence, further than that, like all other problems addressed to the
understanding, it presupposes them.

Our object, then, will be to attempt a correct analysis of the
intellectual process called Reasoning or Inference, and of such other
mental operations as are intended to facilitate this: as well as, on the
foundation of this analysis, and _pari __ passu_ with it, to bring
together or frame a set of rules or canons for testing the sufficiency of
any given evidence to prove any given proposition.

With respect to the first part of this undertaking, I do not attempt to
decompose the mental operations in question into their ultimate elements.
It is enough if the analysis as far as it goes is correct, and if it goes
far enough for the practical purposes of logic considered as an art. The
separation of a complicated phenomenon into its component parts, is not
like a connected and interdependent chain of proof. If one link of an
argument breaks, the whole drops to the ground; but one step towards an
analysis holds good and has an independent value, though we should never
be able to make a second. The results of analytical chemistry are not the
less valuable, though it should be discovered that all which we now call
simple substances are really compounds. All other things are at any rate
compounded of those elements: whether the elements themselves admit of
decomposition, is an important inquiry, but does not affect the certainty
of the science up to that point.

I shall, accordingly, attempt to analyse the process of inference, and the
processes subordinate to inference, so far only as may be requisite for
ascertaining the difference between a correct and an incorrect performance
of those processes. The reason for thus limiting our design, is evident.
It has been said by objectors to logic, that we do not learn to use our
muscles by studying their anatomy. The fact is not quite fairly stated;
for if the action of any of our muscles were vitiated by local weakness,
or other physical defect, a knowledge of their anatomy might be very
necessary for effecting a cure. But we should be justly liable to the
criticism involved in this objection, were we, in a treatise on logic, to
carry the analysis of the reasoning process beyond the point at which any
inaccuracy which may have crept into it must become visible. In learning
bodily exercises (to carry on the same illustration) we do, and must,
analyse the bodily motions so far as is necessary for distinguishing those
which ought to be performed from those which ought not. To a similar
extent, and no further, it is necessary that the logician should analyse
the mental processes with which Logic is concerned. Any ulterior and
minuter analysis must be left to metaphysics; which in this, as in other
parts of our mental nature, decides what are ultimate facts, and what are
resolvable into other facts. And I believe it will be found that the
conclusions arrived at in this work have no necessary connexion with any
particular views respecting the ulterior analysis. Logic is common ground
on which the partisans of Hartley and of Reid, of Locke and of Kant, may
meet and join hands. Particular and detached opinions of all these
thinkers will no doubt occasionally be controverted, since all of them
were logicians as well as metaphysicians; but the field on which their
principal battles have been fought, lies beyond the boundaries of our
science.

It cannot, indeed, be pretended that logical principles can be altogether
irrelevant to those more abstruse discussions; nor is it possible but that
the view we are led to take of the problem which logic proposes, must have
a tendency favourable to the adoption of some one opinion on these
controverted subjects rather than another. For metaphysics, in
endeavouring to solve its own peculiar problem, must employ means, the
validity of which falls under the cognizance of logic. It proceeds, no
doubt, as far as possible, merely by a closer and more attentive
interrogation of our consciousness, or more properly speaking, of our
memory; and so far is not amenable to logic. But wherever this method is
insufficient to attain the end of its inquiries, it must proceed, like
other sciences, by means of evidence. Now, the moment this science begins
to draw inferences from evidence, logic becomes the sovereign judge
whether its inferences are well-grounded, or what other inferences would
be so.

This, however, constitutes no nearer or other relation between logic and
metaphysics than that which exists between logic and all the other
sciences. And I can conscientiously affirm, that no one proposition laid
down in this work has been adopted for the sake of establishing, or with
any reference to its fitness for being employed in establishing,
preconceived opinions in any department of knowledge or of inquiry on
which the speculative world is still undecided.





BOOK I. OF NAMES AND PROPOSITIONS.


“La scolastique, qui produisit dans la logique, comme dans la morale, et
dans une partie de la métaphysique, une subtilité, une précision d’idées,
dont l’habitude inconnue aux anciens, a contribué plus qu’on ne croit au
progrès de la bonne philosophie.”—CONDORCET, _Vie de Turgot_.




CHAPTER I. OF THE NECESSITY OF COMMENCING WITH AN ANALYSIS OF LANGUAGE.


§ 1. It is so much the established practice of writers on logic to
commence their treatises by a few general observations (in most cases, it
is true, rather meagre) on Terms and their varieties, that it will,
perhaps, scarcely be required from me, in merely following the common
usage, to be as particular in assigning my reasons, as it is usually
expected that those should be who deviate from it.

The practice, indeed, is recommended by considerations far too obvious to
require a formal justification. Logic is a portion of the Art of Thinking:
Language is evidently, and by the admission of all philosophers, one of
the principal instruments or helps of thought; and any imperfection in the
instrument, or in the mode of employing it, is confessedly liable, still
more than in almost any other art, to confuse and impede the process, and
destroy all ground of confidence in the result. For a mind not previously
versed in the meaning and right use of the various kinds of words, to
attempt the study of methods of philosophizing, would be as if some one
should attempt to make himself an astronomical observer, having never
learned to adjust the focal distance of his optical instruments so as to
see distinctly.

Since Reasoning, or Inference, the principal subject of logic, is an
operation which usually takes place by means of words, and in complicated
cases can take place in no other way; those who have not a thorough
insight into the signification and purposes of words, will be under
chances, amounting almost to certainty, of reasoning or inferring
incorrectly. And logicians have generally felt that unless, in the very
first stage, they removed this fertile source of error; unless they taught
their pupil to put away the glasses which distort the object, and to use
those which are adapted to his purpose in such a manner as to assist, not
perplex his vision; he would not be in a condition to practise the
remaining part of their discipline with any prospect of advantage.
Therefore it is that an inquiry into language, so far as is needful to
guard against the errors to which it gives rise, has at all times been
deemed a necessary preliminary to the study of logic.

But there is another reason, of a still more fundamental nature, why the
import of words should be the earliest subject of the logician’s
consideration: because without it he cannot examine into the import of
Propositions. Now this is a subject which stands on the very threshold of
the science of logic.

The object of logic, as defined in the Introductory Chapter, is to
ascertain how we come by that portion of our knowledge (much the greatest
portion) which is not intuitive: and by what criterion we can, in matters
not self-evident, distinguish between things proved and things not proved,
between what is worthy and what is unworthy of belief. Of the various
questions which present themselves to our inquiring faculties, some
receive an answer from direct consciousness, others, if resolved at all,
can only be resolved by means of evidence. Logic is concerned with these
last. But before inquiring into the mode of resolving questions, it is
necessary to inquire, what are those which offer themselves? what
questions are conceivable? what inquiries are there, to which mankind have
either obtained, or been able to imagine it possible that they should
obtain, an answer? This point is best ascertained by a survey and analysis
of Propositions.

§ 2. The answer to every question which it is possible to frame, is
contained in a Proposition, or Assertion. Whatever can be an object of
belief, or even of disbelief, must, when put into words, assume the form
of a proposition. All truth and all error lie in propositions. What, by a
convenient misapplication of an abstract term, we call a Truth, means
simply a True Proposition; and errors are false propositions. To know the
import of all possible propositions, would be to know all questions which
can be raised, all matters which are susceptible of being either believed
or disbelieved. How many kinds of inquiries can be propounded; how many
kinds of judgments can be made; and how many kinds of propositions it is
possible to frame with a meaning; are but different forms of one and the
same question. Since, then, the objects of all Belief and of all Inquiry
express themselves in propositions; a sufficient scrutiny of Propositions
and of their varieties will apprize us what questions mankind have
actually asked of themselves, and what, in the nature of answers to those
questions, they have actually thought they had grounds to believe.

Now the first glance at a proposition shows that it is formed by putting
together two names. A proposition, according to the common simple
definition, which is sufficient for our purpose, is, _discourse_, _in
which something is affirmed or denied of something_. Thus, in the
proposition, Gold is yellow, the quality _yellow_ is affirmed of the
substance _gold_. In the proposition, Franklin was not born in England,
the fact expressed by the words _born in England_ is denied of the man
Franklin.

Every proposition consists of three parts: the Subject, the Predicate, and
the Copula. The predicate is the name denoting that which is affirmed or
denied. The subject is the name denoting the person or thing which
something is affirmed or denied of. The copula is the sign denoting that
there is an affirmation or denial; and thereby enabling the hearer or
reader to distinguish a proposition from any other kind of discourse.
Thus, in the proposition, The earth is round, the Predicate is the word
_round_, which denotes the quality affirmed, or (as the phrase is)
predicated: _the earth_, words denoting the object which that quality is
affirmed of, compose the Subject; the word _is_, which serves as the
connecting mark between the subject and predicate, to show that one of
them is affirmed of the other, is called the Copula.

Dismissing, for the present, the copula, of which more will be said
hereafter, every proposition, then, consists of at least two names; brings
together two names, in a particular manner. This is already a first step
towards what we are in quest of. It appears from this, that for an act of
belief, _one_ object is not sufficient; the simplest act of belief
supposes, and has something to do with, _two_ objects: two names, to say
the least; and (since the names must be names of something) two _nameable
things_. A large class of thinkers would cut the matter short by saying,
two _ideas_. They would say, that the subject and predicate are both of
them names of ideas; the idea of gold, for instance, and the idea of
yellow; and that what takes place (or a part of what takes place) in the
act of belief, consists in bringing (as it is often expressed) one of
these ideas under the other. But this we are not yet in a condition to
say: whether such be the correct mode of describing the phenomenon, is an
after consideration. The result with which for the present we must be
contented, is, that in every act of belief _two_ objects are in some
manner taken cognizance of; that there can be no belief claimed, or
question propounded, which does not embrace two distinct (either material
or intellectual) subjects of thought; each of them capable or not of being
conceived by itself, but incapable of being believed by itself.

I may say, for instance, “the sun.” The word has a meaning, and suggests
that meaning to the mind of any one who is listening to me. But suppose I
ask him, Whether it is true: whether he believes it? He can give no
answer. There is as yet nothing to believe, or to disbelieve. Now,
however, let me make, of all possible assertions respecting the sun, the
one which involves the least of reference to any object besides itself;
let me say, “the sun exists.” Here, at once, is something which a person
can say he believes. But here, instead of only one, we find two distinct
objects of conception: the sun is one object; existence is another. Let it
not be said, that this second conception, existence, is involved in the
first; for the sun may be conceived as no longer existing. “The sun” does
not convey all the meaning that is conveyed by “the sun exists:” “my
father” does not include all the meaning of “my father exists,” for he may
be dead; “a round square” does not include the meaning of “a round square
exists,” for it does not and cannot exist. When I say, “the sun,” “my
father,” or a “round square,” I call upon the hearer for no belief or
disbelief, nor can either the one or the other be afforded me; but if I
say, “the sun exists,” “my father exists,” or “a round square exists,” I
call for belief; and should, in the first of the three instances, meet
with it; in the second, with belief or disbelief, as the case might be; in
the third, with disbelief.

§ 3. This first step in the analysis of the object of belief, which,
though so obvious, will be found to be not unimportant, is the only one
which we shall find it practicable to make without a preliminary survey of
language. If we attempt to proceed further in the same path, that is, to
analyse any further the import of Propositions; we find forced upon us, as
a subject of previous consideration, the import of Names. For every
proposition consists of two names; and every proposition affirms or denies
one of these names, of the other. Now what we do, what passes in our mind,
when we affirm or deny two names of one another, must depend on what they
are names of; since it is with reference to that, and not to the mere
names themselves, that we make the affirmation or denial. Here, therefore,
we find a new reason why the signification of names, and the relation
generally between names and the things signified by them, must occupy the
preliminary stage of the inquiry we are engaged in.

It may be objected, that the meaning of names can guide us at most only to
the opinions, possibly the foolish and groundless opinions, which mankind
have formed concerning things, and that as the object of philosophy is
truth, not opinion, the philosopher should dismiss words and look into
things themselves, to ascertain what questions can be asked and answered
in regard to them. This advice (which no one has it in his power to
follow) is in reality an exhortation to discard the whole fruits of the
labours of his predecessors, and conduct himself as if he were the first
person who had ever turned an inquiring eye upon nature. What does any
one’s personal knowledge of Things amount to, after subtracting all which
he has acquired by means of the words of other people? Even after he has
learned as much as people usually do learn from others, will the notions
of things contained in his individual mind afford as sufficient a basis
for a _catalogue raisonné_ as the notions which are in the minds of all
mankind?

In any enumeration and classification of Things, which does not set out
from their names, no varieties of things will of course be comprehended
but those recognised by the particular inquirer; and it will still remain
to be established, by a subsequent examination of names, that the
enumeration has omitted nothing which ought to have been included. But if
we begin with names, and use them as our clue to the things, we bring at
once before us all the distinctions which have been recognised, not by a
single inquirer, but by all inquirers taken together. It doubtless may,
and I believe it will, be found, that mankind have multiplied the
varieties unnecessarily, and have imagined distinctions among things where
there were only distinctions in the manner of naming them. But we are not
entitled to assume this in the commencement. We must begin by recognising
the distinctions made by ordinary language. If some of these appear, on a
close examination, not to be fundamental, the enumeration of the different
kinds of realities may be abridged accordingly. But to impose upon the
facts in the first instance the yoke of a theory, while the grounds of the
theory are reserved for discussion in a subsequent stage, is not a course
which a logician can reasonably adopt.




