CHAPTER XIII. MISCELLANEOUS EXAMPLES OF THE EXPLANATION OF LAWS OF NATURE.


§ 1. Some of the most remarkable instances which have occurred since the
great Newtonian generalization, of the explanation of laws of causation
subsisting among complex phenomena, by resolving them into simpler and
more general laws, are to be found among the speculations of Liebig in
organic chemistry. These speculations, though they have not yet been
sufficiently long before the world to entitle us positively to assume that
no well-grounded objection can be made to any part of them, afford,
however, so admirable an example of the spirit of the Deductive Method,
that I may be permitted to present some specimens of them here.

It had been observed in certain cases, that chemical action is, as it
were, contagious; that is to say, a substance which would not of itself
yield to a particular chemical attraction, (the force of the attraction
not being sufficient to overcome cohesion, or to destroy some chemical
combination in which the substance was already held), will nevertheless do
so if placed in contact with some other body which is in the act of
yielding to the same force. Nitric acid, for example, does not dissolve
pure platinum, which may “be boiled with this acid without being oxidized
by it, even when in a state of such fine division that it no longer
reflects light.” But the same acid easily dissolves silver. Now if an
alloy of silver and platinum be treated with nitric acid, the acid does
not, as might naturally be expected, separate the two metals, dissolving
the silver, and leaving the platinum; it dissolves both: the platinum as
well as the silver becomes oxidized, and in that state combines with the
undecomposed portion of the acid. In like manner, “copper does not
decompose water, even when boiled in dilute sulphuric acid; but an alloy
of copper, zinc, and nickel, dissolves easily in this acid with evolution
of hydrogen gas.” These phenomena cannot be explained by the laws of what
is termed chemical affinity. They point to a peculiar law, by which the
oxidation which one body suffers, causes another, in contact with it, to
submit to the same change. And not only chemical composition, but chemical
decomposition, is capable of being similarly propagated. The peroxide of
hydrogen, a compound formed by hydrogen with a greater amount of oxygen
than the quantity necessary to form water, is held together by a chemical
attraction of so weak a nature, that the slightest circumstance is
sufficient to decompose it; and it even, though very slowly, gives off
oxygen and is reduced to water spontaneously (being, I presume, decomposed
by the tendency of its oxygen to absorb heat and assume the gaseous
state). Now it has been observed, that if this decomposition of the
peroxide of hydrogen takes place in contact with some metallic oxides, as
those of silver, and the peroxides of lead and manganese, it superinduces
a corresponding chemical action upon those substances; they also give
forth the whole or a portion of their oxygen, and are reduced to the metal
or to the protoxide; although they do not undergo this change
spontaneously, and there is no chemical affinity at work to make them do
so. Other similar phenomena are mentioned by Liebig. “Now no other
explanation,” he observes, “of these phenomena can be given, than that a
body in the act of combination or decomposition enables another body, with
which it is in contact, to enter into the same state.”

Here, therefore, is a law of nature of great simplicity, but which, owing
to the extremely special and limited character of the phenomena in which
alone it can be detected experimentally, (because in them alone its
results are not intermixed and blended with those of other laws,) had been
very little recognised by chemists, and no one could have ventured, on
experimental evidence, to affirm it as a law common to all chemical
action; owing to the impossibility of a rigorous employment of the Method
of Difference where the properties of different kinds of substance are
involved, an impossibility which we noticed and characterized in a
previous chapter.(90) Now this extremely special and apparently precarious
generalization has, in the hands of Liebig, been converted, by a masterly
employment of the Deductive Method, into a law pervading all nature, in
the same way as gravitation assumed that character in the hands of Newton;
and has been found to explain, in the most unexpected manner, numerous
detached generalizations of a more limited kind, reducing the phenomena
concerned in those generalizations into mere cases of itself.

The contagious influence of chemical action is not a powerful force, and
is only capable of overcoming weak affinities: we, may, therefore, expect
to find it principally exemplified in the decomposition of substances
which are held together by weak chemical forces. Now the force which holds
a compound substance together is generally weaker, the more compound the
substance is; and organic products are the most compound substances known,
those which have the most complex atomic constitution. It is, therefore,
upon such substances that the self-propagating power of chemical action is
likely to exert itself in the most marked manner. Accordingly, first, it
explains the remarkable laws of fermentation, and some of those of
putrefaction. “A little leaven,” that is, dough in a certain state of
chemical action, impresses a similar chemical action upon “the whole
lump.” The contact of any decaying substance, occasions the decay of
matter previously sound. Again, yeast is a substance actually in a process
of decomposition from the action of air and water, evolving carbonic acid
gas. Sugar is a substance which, from the complexity of its composition,
has no great energy of coherence in its existing form, and is capable of
being easily converted (by combination with the elements of water) into
carbonic acid and alcohol. Now the mere presence of yeast, the mere
proximity of a substance of which the elements are separating from each
other, and combining with the elements of water, causes sugar to undergo
the same change, giving out carbonic acid gas, and becoming alcohol. It is
not the elements contained in the yeast which do this. “An aqueous
infusion of yeast may be mixed with a solution of sugar, and preserved in
vessels from which the air is excluded, without either experiencing the
slightest change.” Neither does the insoluble residue of the yeast, after
being treated with water, possess the power of exciting fermentation.
(Here we have the method of Difference). It is not the yeast itself,
therefore; it is the yeast in a state of decomposition. The sugar, which
would not decompose and oxidize by the mere presence of oxygen and water,
is induced to do so when another oxidation is at work in the midst of it.

By the same principle Liebig is enabled to explain many cases of malaria;
the pernicious influence of putrid substances; a variety of poisons;
contagious diseases; and other phenomena. Of all substances, those
composing the animal body are the most complex in their composition, and
are in the least stable condition of union. The blood, in particular, is
the most unstable compound known. It is, therefore, not surprising that
gaseous or other substances, in the act of undergoing the chemical changes
which constitute, for instance, putrefaction, should, when brought into
contact with the tissues by respiration or otherwise, and still more when
introduced by inoculation into the blood itself, impress upon some of the
particles a chemical action similar to its own; which is propagated in
like manner to other particles, until the whole system is placed in a
state of chemical action more or less inconsistent with the chemical
conditions of vitality.

Of the three modes in which we observed in the last chapter that the
resolution of a special law into more general ones may take place, this
speculation exemplifies the second. The laws explained are such as this,
that yeast puts sugar into a state of fermentation. Between the remote
cause, the presence of yeast, and the consequent fermentation of the
sugar, there has been interpolated a proximate cause, the chemical action
between the particles of the yeast and the elements of air and water. The
special law is thus resolved into two others, more general than itself:
the first, that yeast is decomposed by the presence of air and water; the
second, that matter undergoing chemical action has a tendency to produce
similar chemical action in other matter in contact with it. But while the
investigation thus aptly exhibits the second mode of the resolution of a
complex law, it no less happily exemplifies the third; the subsumption of
special laws under a more general law, by gathering them up into one more
comprehensive expression which includes them all. For the curious fact of
the contagious nature of chemical action is only raised into a law of
_all_ chemical action by these very investigations; just as the Newtonian
attraction was only recognised as a law of all matter when it was found to
explain the phenomena of terrestrial gravity. Previously to Liebig’s
investigations, the property in question had only been observed in a few
special cases of chemical action; but when his deductive reasonings have
established that innumerable effects produced upon weak compounds, by
substances none of whose known peculiarities would account for their
having such a power, might be explained by considering the supposed
special property to exist in all those cases, these numerous
generalizations on separate substances are brought together into one law
of chemical action in general: the peculiarities of the various substances
being, in fact, eliminated, just as the Newtonian deduction eliminated
from the instances of terrestrial gravity the circumstance of proximity to
the earth.

§ 2. Another speculation of the same chemist, which, if it should
ultimately be found to agree with all the facts of the extremely
complicated phenomenon to which it relates, will constitute one of the
finest examples of the Deductive Method on record, is his theory of
respiration.

The facts of respiration, or in other words the special laws which it is
attempted to explain from, and resolve into, more general ones, are, that
the blood in passing through the lungs absorbs oxygen and gives out
carbonic acid gas, changing thereby its colour from a blackish purple to a
brilliant red. The absorption and exhalation are evidently chemical
phenomena; and the carbon of the carbonic acid must have been derived from
the body, that is, must have been absorbed by the blood from the
substances with which it came into contact in its passage through the
organism. Required to find the intermediate links—the precise nature of
the two chemical actions which take place; first, the absorption of the
carbon or of the carbonic acid by the blood, in its circulation through
the body; next, the excretion of the carbon, or the exchange of the
carbonic acid for oxygen, in its passage through the lungs.

Dr. Liebig believes himself to have found the solution of this _vexata
quæstio_ in a class of chemical actions in which scarcely any less acute
and penetrating inquirer would have thought of looking for it.

Blood is composed of two parts, the serum and the globules. The serum
absorbs and holds in solution carbonic acid in great quantity, but has no
tendency either to part with it or to absorb oxygen. The globules,
therefore, are concluded to be the portion of the blood which is operative
in respiration. These globules contain a certain quantity of iron, which
from chemical tests is inferred to be in the state of oxide.

Dr. Liebig recognised, in the known chemical properties of the oxides of
iron, laws which, if followed out deductively, would lead to the
prediction of the precise series of phenomena which respiration exhibits.

There are two oxides of iron, a protoxide and a peroxide. In the arterial
blood the iron is in the form of peroxide: in the venous blood we have no
direct evidence which of the oxides is present, but the considerations to
be presently stated lead to the conclusion that it is the protoxide. As
arterial and venous blood are in a perpetual state of alternate conversion
into one another, the question arises, in what circumstances the protoxide
of iron is capable of being converted into the peroxide, and _vice versâ_.
Now the protoxide readily combines with oxygen in the presence of water,
forming the hydrated peroxide: these conditions it finds in passing
through the lungs; it derives oxygen from the air, and finds water in the
blood itself. This would already explain one portion of the phenomena of
respiration. But the arterial blood, in quitting the lungs, is charged
with hydrated peroxide: in what manner is the peroxide brought back to its
former state?

The chemical conditions for the reduction of the hydrated peroxide into
the state of protoxide, are precisely those which the blood meets with in
circulating through the body; namely, contact with organic compounds.

Hydrated peroxide of iron, when treated with organic compounds (where no
sulphur is present) gives forth oxygen and water, which oxygen, attracting
the carbon from the organic substance, becomes carbonic acid; while the
peroxide, being reduced to the state of protoxide, combines with the
carbonic acid, and becomes a carbonate. Now this carbonate needs only come
again into contact with oxygen and water to be decomposed; the carbonic
acid being given off, and the protoxide, by the absorption of oxygen and
water, becoming again the hydrated peroxide.

The mysterious chemical phenomena connected with respiration can now, by a
beautiful deductive process, be completely explained. The arterial blood,
containing iron in the form of hydrated peroxide, passes into the
capillaries, where it meets with the decaying tissues, receiving also in
its course certain non-azotised but highly carbonised animal products, in
particular the bile. In these it finds the precise conditions required for
decomposing the peroxide into oxygen and the protoxide. The oxygen
combines with the carbon of the decaying tissues, and forms carbonic acid,
which, though insufficient in amount to neutralize the whole of the
protoxide, combines with a portion (one-fourth) of it, and returns in the
form of a carbonate, along with the other three-fourths of the protoxide,
through the venous system into the lungs. There it again meets with oxygen
and water: the free protoxide becomes hydrated peroxide: the carbonate of
protoxide parts with its carbonic acid, and by absorbing oxygen and water,
enters also into the state of hydrated peroxide. The heat evolved in the
transition from protoxide to peroxide, as well as in the previous
oxidation of the carbon contained in the tissues, is considered by Liebig
as the cause which sustains the temperature of the body. But into this
portion of the speculation we need not enter.(91)

This example displays the second mode of resolving complex laws, by the
interpolation of intermediate links in the chain of causation; and some of
the steps of the deduction exhibit cases of the first mode, that which
infers the joint effect of two or more causes from their separate effects;
but to trace out in detail these exemplifications may be left to the
intelligence of the reader. The third mode is not employed in this
example, since the simpler laws into which those of respiration are
resolved (the laws of the chemical action of the oxides of iron) were laws
already known, and do not acquire any additional generality from their
employment in the present case.

§ 3. The property which salt possesses of preserving animal substances
from putrefaction is resolved by Liebig into two more general laws, the
strong attraction of salt for water, and the necessity of the presence of
water as a condition of putrefaction. The intermediate phenomenon which is
interpolated between the remote cause and the effect, can here be not
merely inferred but seen; for it is a familiar fact, that flesh upon which
salt has been thrown is speedily found swimming in brine.

The second of the two factors (as they may be termed) into which the
preceding law has been resolved, the necessity of water to putrefaction,
itself affords an additional example of the Resolution of Laws. The law
itself is proved by the Method of Difference, since flesh completely dried
and kept in a dry atmosphere does not putrefy, as we see in the case of
dried provisions, and human bodies in very dry climates. A deductive
explanation of this same law results from Liebig’s speculations. The
putrefaction of animal and other azotised bodies is a chemical process, by
which they are gradually dissipated in a gaseous form, chiefly in that of
carbonic acid and ammonia; now to convert the carbon of the animal
substance into carbonic acid requires oxygen, and to convert the azote
into ammonia requires hydrogen, which are the elements of water. The
extreme rapidity of the putrefaction of azotised substances, compared with
the gradual decay of non-azotised bodies (such as wood and the like) by
the action of oxygen alone, he explains from the general law that
substances are much more easily decomposed by the action of two different
affinities upon two of their elements, than by the action of only one.

The purgative effect of salts with alkaline bases, when administered in
concentrated solutions, is explained from the two following principles:
Animal tissues (such as the stomach) do _not_ absorb concentrated
solutions of alkaline salts; and such solutions _do_ dissolve the solids
contained in the intestines. The simpler laws into which the complex law
is here resolved, are the second of the two foregoing principles combined
with a third, namely that the peristaltic contraction acts easily upon
substances in a state of solution. The negative general proposition, that
animal substances do not absorb these salts, contributes to the
explanation by accounting for the absence of a counteracting cause,
namely, absorption by the stomach, which in the case of other substances
possessed of the requisite chemical properties, interferes to prevent them
from reaching the substances which they are destined to dissolve.

§ 4. From the foregoing and similar instances, we may see the importance,
when a law of nature previously unknown has been brought to light, or when
new light has been thrown upon a known law by experiment, of examining all
cases which present the conditions necessary for bringing that law into
action; a process fertile in demonstrations of special laws previously
unsuspected, and explanations of others already empirically known.

For instance, Faraday discovered by experiment, that voltaic electricity
could be evolved from a natural magnet, provided a conducting body were
set in motion at right angles to the direction of the magnet: and, this he
found to hold not only of small magnets, but of that great magnet, the
earth. The law being thus established experimentally, that electricity is
evolved, by a magnet, and a conductor moving at right angles to the
direction of its poles, we may now look out for fresh instances in which
these conditions meet. Wherever a conductor moves or revolves at right
angles to the direction of the earth’s magnetic poles, there we may expect
an evolution of electricity. In the northern regions, where the polar
direction is nearly perpendicular to the horizon, all horizontal motions
of conductors will produce electricity; horizontal wheels, for example,
made of metal; likewise all running streams will evolve a current of
electricity which will circulate round them; and the air thus charged with
electricity may be one of the causes of the Aurora Borealis. In the
equatorial regions, on the contrary, upright wheels placed parallel to the
equator will originate a voltaic circuit, and waterfalls will naturally
become electric.

For a second example; it has recently been found, chiefly by the
researches of Professor Graham, that gases have a strong tendency to
permeate animal membranes, and diffuse themselves through the spaces which
such membranes inclose, notwithstanding the presence of other gases in
those spaces. Proceeding from this general law, and reviewing a variety of
cases in which gases lie contiguous to membranes, we are enabled to
demonstrate or to explain the following more special laws: 1st. The human
or animal body, when surrounded with any gas not already contained within
the body, absorbs it rapidly; such, for instance, as the gases of
putrefying matters: which helps to explain malaria. 2nd. The carbonic acid
gas of effervescing drinks, evolved in the stomach, permeates its
membranes, and rapidly spreads through the system, where, as suggested in
a former note, it probably combines with the iron contained in the blood.
3rd. Alcohol taken into the stomach passes into vapour and spreads through
the system with great rapidity; (which, combined with the high
combustibility of alcohol, or in other words its ready combination with
oxygen, may perhaps help to explain the bodily warmth immediately
consequent on drinking spirituous liquors.) 4th. In any state of the body
in which peculiar gases are formed within it, these will rapidly exhale
through all parts of the body; and hence the rapidity with which, in
certain states of disease, the surrounding atmosphere becomes tainted.
5th. The putrefaction of the interior parts of a carcase will proceed as
rapidly as that of the exterior, from the ready passage outwards of the
gaseous products. 6th. The exchange of oxygen and carbonic acid in the
lungs is not prevented, but rather promoted, by the intervention of the
membrane of the lungs and the coats of the blood vessels between the blood
and the air. It is necessary, however, that there should be a substance in
the blood with which the oxygen of the air may immediately combine;
otherwise instead of passing into the blood, it would permeate the whole
organism: and it is necessary that the carbonic acid, as it is formed in
the capillaries, should also find a substance in the blood with which it
can combine; otherwise it would leave the body at all points, instead of
being discharged through the lungs.

§ 5. The following is a deduction which confirms, by explaining, the old
but not undisputed empirical generalization, that soda powders weaken the
human system. These powders, consisting of a mixture of tartaric acid with
bicarbonate of soda, from which the carbonic acid is set free, must pass
into the stomach as tartrate of soda. Now, neutral tartrates, citrates,
and acetates of the alkalis are found, in their passage through the
system, to be changed into carbonates; and to convert a tartrate into a
carbonate requires an additional quantity of oxygen, the abstraction of
which must lessen the oxygen destined for assimilation with the blood, on
the quantity of which the vigorous action of the human system partly
depends.

The instances of new theories agreeing with and explaining old
empiricisms, are innumerable. All the just remarks made by experienced
persons on human character and conduct, are so many special laws, which
the general laws of the human mind explain and resolve. The empirical
generalizations on which the operations of the arts have usually been
founded, are continually justified and confirmed on the one hand, or
corrected and improved on the other, by the discovery of the simpler
scientific laws on which the efficacy of those operations depends. The
effects of the rotation of crops, of the various manures, and other
processes of improved agriculture, have been for the first time resolved
in our own day into known laws of chemical and organic action, by Davy and
Liebig. The processes of the medical art are even now mostly empirical:
their efficacy is concluded, in each instance, from a special and most
precarious experimental generalization: but as science advances in
discovering the simple laws of chemistry and physiology, progress is made
in ascertaining the intermediate links in the series of phenomena, and the
more general laws on which they depend; and thus, while the old processes
are either exploded, or their efficacy, in so far as real, explained,
better processes, founded on the knowledge of proximate causes, are
continually suggested and brought into use.(92) Many even of the truths of
geometry were generalizations from experience before they were deduced
from first principles. The quadrature of the cycloid is said to have been
first effected by measurement, or rather by weighing a cycloidal card, and
comparing its weight with that of a piece of similar card of known
dimensions.

§ 6. To the foregoing examples from physical science, let us add another
from mental. The following is one of the simple laws of mind: Ideas of a
pleasurable or painful character form associations more easily and
strongly than other ideas, that is, they become associated after fewer
repetitions, and the association is more durable. This is an experimental
law, grounded on the Method of Difference. By deduction from this law,
many of the more special laws which experience shows to exist among
particular mental phenomena may be demonstrated and explained:—the ease
and rapidity, for instance, with which thoughts connected with our
passions or our more cherished interests are excited, and the firm hold
which the facts relating to them have on our memory; the vivid
recollection we retain of minute circumstances which accompanied any
object or event that deeply interested us, and of the times and places in
which we have been very happy or very miserable; the horror with which we
view the accidental instrument of any occurrence which shocked us, or the
locality where it took place, and the pleasure we derive from any memorial
of past enjoyment; all these effects being proportional to the sensibility
of the individual mind, and to the consequent intensity of the pain or
pleasure from which the association originated. It has been suggested by
the able writer of a biographical sketch of Dr. Priestley in a monthly
periodical, that the same elementary law of our mental constitution,
suitably followed out, would explain a variety of mental phenomena
hitherto inexplicable, and in particular some of the fundamental
diversities of human character and genius. Associations being of two
sorts, either between synchronous, or between successive impressions; and
the influence of the law which renders associations stronger in proportion
to the pleasurable or painful character of the impressions, being felt
with peculiar force in the synchronous class of associations; it is
remarked by the writer referred to, that in minds of strong organic
sensibility synchronous associations will be likely to predominate,
producing a tendency to conceive things in pictures and in the concrete,
richly clothed in attributes and circumstances, a mental habit which is
commonly called Imagination, and is one of the peculiarities of the
painter and the poet; while persons of more moderate susceptibility to
pleasure and pain will have a tendency to associate facts chiefly in the
order of their succession, and such persons, if they possess mental
superiority, will addict themselves to history or science rather than to
creative art. This interesting speculation the author of the present work
has endeavoured, on another occasion, to pursue farther, and to examine
how far it will avail towards explaining the peculiarities of the poetical
temperament. It is at least an example which may serve, instead of many
others, to show the extensive scope which exists for deductive
investigation in the important and hitherto so imperfect Science of Mind.

§ 7. The copiousness with which I have exemplified the discovery and
explanation of special laws of phenomena by deduction from simpler and
more general ones, was prompted by a desire to characterize clearly, and
place in its due position of importance, the Deductive Method; which in
the present state of knowledge is destined henceforth irrevocably to
predominate in the course of scientific investigation. A revolution is
peaceably and progressively effecting itself in philosophy, the reverse of
that to which Bacon has attached his name. That great man changed the
method of the sciences from deductive to experimental, and it is now
rapidly reverting from experimental to deductive. But the deductions which
Bacon abolished were from premisses hastily snatched up, or arbitrarily
assumed. The principles were neither established by legitimate canons of
experimental inquiry, nor the results tested by that indispensable element
of a rational Deductive Method, verification by specific experience.
Between the primitive method of Deduction and that which I have attempted
to characterize, there is all the difference which exists between the
Aristotelian physics and the Newtonian theory of the heavens.

It would, however, be a mistake to expect that those great
generalizations, from which the subordinate truths of the more backward
sciences will probably at some future period be deduced by reasoning (as
the truths of astronomy are deduced from the generalities of the Newtonian
theory,) will be found, in all, or even in most cases, among truths now
known and admitted. We may rest assured, that many of the most general
laws of nature are as yet entirely unthought of; and that many others,
destined hereafter to assume the same character, are known, if at all,
only as laws or properties of some limited class of phenomena; just as
electricity, now recognised as one of the most universal of natural
agencies, was once known only as a curious property which certain
substances acquired by friction, of first attracting and then repelling
light bodies. If the theories of heat, cohesion, crystallization, and
chemical action, are destined, as there can be little doubt that they are,
to become deductive, the truths which will then be regarded as the
_principia_ of those sciences would probably, if now announced, appear
quite as novel as the law of gravitation appeared to the cotemporaries of
Newton; possibly even more so, since Newton’s law, after all, was but an
extension of the law of weight—that is, of a generalization familiar from
of old, and which already comprehended a not inconsiderable body of
natural phenomena. The general laws, of a similarly commanding character,
which we still look forward to the discovery of, may not always find so
much of their foundations already laid.

These general truths will doubtless make their first appearance in the
character of hypotheses; not proved, nor even admitting of proof, in the
first instance, but assumed as premisses for the purpose of deducing from
them the known laws of concrete phenomena. But this, though their initial,
cannot be their final state. To entitle an hypothesis to be received as
one of the truths of nature, and not as a mere technical help to the human
faculties, it must be capable of being tested by the canons of legitimate
induction, and must actually have been submitted to that test. When this
shall have been done, and done successfully, premisses will have been
obtained from which all the other propositions of the science will
thenceforth be presented as conclusions, and the science will, by means of
a new and unexpected Induction, be rendered Deductive.

END OF VOL. I.





BOOKS PUBLISHED BY

John W. Parker, West Strand, London.

Mr. J. S. Mill’s Principles of Political Economy. Second Edition. 2 vols.
Octavo. 30_s._

Mr. J. S. Mill’s Essays on some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy.
Octavo. 6_s._ 6_d._

Archbishop Whately’s Introductory Lectures on Political Economy. Third
Edition. Octavo, 8_s._

Mr. Cornewall Lewis on the Influence of Authority in Matters of Opinion.
Octavo, 10_s._ 6_d._

Mr. E. G. Wakefield’s View of the Art of Colonization. Octavo, 12_s._

The Evils of England, Social and Economical. By a London Physician. 2_s._
6_d._

Dr. Wayland’s Elements of Political Economy. 2_s._

Easy Lessons on Money Matters. Tenth Edition. 1_s._

Dr. Whewell’s History of the Inductive Sciences. Second Edition, revised
and continued. Three vols. 2_l._ 2_s._

Dr. Whewell’s Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences. Second Edition,
revised. Two Vols. Octavo. 30_s._

Dr. Whewell’s Indications of the Creator. Theological Extracts from “The
History and the Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences.” New Edition, with
Preface, 5_s._ 6_d._

Dr. Whewell on Induction, with especial reference to Mr. Mill’s System of
Logic. 2_s._

Archbishop Whately’s Elements of Logic. With all the Author’s Additions
and Emendations. Cheap Edition; Crown Octavo, 4_s._ 6_d._ Library Edition;
Demy Octavo, 10_s._ 6_d._

Archbishop Whately’s Elements of Rhetoric. With all the Author’s Additions
and Emendations. Cheap Edition; Crown Octavo, 4_s._ 6_d._ Library Edition;
Demy Octavo, 10_s._ 6_d._

Easy Lessons on Reasoning. Fifth Edition. 1_s._ 6_d._

Dr. Whewell’s Elements of Morality, including Polity. Second Edition,
reduced in size and price. Two Vols. 15_s._

Dr. Whewell’s Lectures on Systematic Morality. 7_s._ 6_d._

Butler’s Six Sermons on Moral Subjects. Edited by Dr. WHEWELL. With a
Preface and Syllabus. 3_s._ 6_d._

Butler’s Three Sermons on Human Nature. Edited by Dr. WHEWELL. With
Preface and Syllabus. Second Edition. 3_s._ 6_d._

Professor Brande’s Manual of Chemistry. Sixth Edition, almost wholly
re-written, considerably enlarged, and embodying all the recent
discoveries in the science up to the present time. 2 vols. Octavo. 2_l._
5_s._

Mr. T. Griffiths’s Recreations in Chemistry. Second Edition, much
enlarged. 5_s._

Mr. Trimmer’s Practical Chemistry for Farmers and Land-owners. 5_s._

Dr. Todd’s and Mr. Bowman’s Physiological Anatomy and Physiology of Man.
Vol. I. 15_s._ Part III. 7_s._

Mr. Tomes’s Lectures on Dental Physiology and Surgery. Octavo. With
upwards of 100 Illustrations. 12_s._

Dr. Lord’s Popular Physiology. Second Edition. 7_s._ 6_d._

House I Live In; or Popular Illustrations of the Structure and Functions
of the Human Body. Fifth Edition. 2_s._ 6_d._

Mr. Trimmer’s Practical Geology and Mineralogy. With Two Hundred
Illustrations. Octavo, 12_s._

Miss Zornlin’s Recreations in Geology. Second Edition. 4_s._ 6_d._

Colonel Jackson’s Minerals and their Uses. With Coloured Frontispiece.
7_s._ 6_d._

Miss Zornlin’s Recreations in Physical Geography; or the Earth as It Is.
Third Edition, 6_s._

Captain Smyth’s Cycle of Celestial Objects. Two Vols. Octavo. With
numerous Illustrations. 2_l._ 2_s._

Rev. H. Moseley’s Lectures on Astronomy. Third Edition. 5_s._ 6_d._

Rev. L. Tomlinson’s Recreations in Astronomy. With Illustrations. Third
Edition. 4_s._ 6_d._






FOOTNOTES


    1 In the later editions of Archbishop Whately’s _Logic_ and _Rhetoric_
      there are some expressions, which, though indefinite, resemble a
      disclaimer of the opinion here ascribed to him. If I have imputed
      that opinion to him erroneously, I am glad to find myself mistaken;
      but he has not altered the passages in which the opinion appeared to
      me to be conveyed, and which I still think inconsistent with the
      belief that Induction can be reduced to strict rules.

    2 Archbishop Whately.

    3 This important theory has recently been called in question by a
      writer of deserved reputation, Mr. Samuel Bailey; but I do not
      conceive that the grounds on which it has been admitted as an
      established doctrine for a century past, have been at all shaken by
      that gentleman’s objections. I have elsewhere said what appeared to
      me necessary in reply to his arguments (_Westminster Review, for
      October 1842_.) It may be necessary to add, that some other
      processes of comparison than those described in the text (but
      equally the result of experience), appear occasionally to enter into
      our judgment of distances by the eye.

_    4 Computation or Logic_, chap. ii.

    5 In the original, “had, _or had not_.” These last words, as involving
      a subtlety foreign to our present purpose, I have forborne to quote.

    6 It would, perhaps, be more correct to say that inflected cases are
      names and something more; and that this addition prevents them from
      being used as the subjects of propositions. But the purposes of our
      inquiry do not demand that we should enter with scrupulous accuracy
      into similar minutiæ.

_    7 Notare_ to mark; _con_notare, to mark _along with_; to mark one
      thing _with_ or _in addition to_ another.

    8 Archbishop Whately, who in the more recent editions of his _Elements
      of Logic_ has aided in reviving the important distinction treated of
      in the text, proposes the term “Attributive” as a substitute for
      “Connotative,” (p. 122, 9th ed.) The expression is, in itself,
      appropriate; but, as it has not the advantage of being connected
      with any verb, of so markedly distinctive a character as “to
      connote,” it is not, I think, fitted to supply the place of the word
      Connotative in scientific use.

    9 It would be well if this degeneracy of language took place only in
      the hands of the untaught vulgar; but some of the most remarkable
      instances are to be found in terms of art, and among technically
      educated persons, such as English lawyers. _Felony_, for example, is
      a law term, with the sound of which all are familiar; but there is
      no lawyer who would undertake to tell what a felony is, otherwise
      than by enumerating the various offences which are so called.
      Originally the word felony had a meaning; it denoted all offences,
      the penalty of which included forfeiture of lands or goods; but
      subsequent acts of parliament have declared various offences to be
      felonies without enjoining that penalty, and have taken away the
      penalty from others which continue nevertheless to be called
      felonies, insomuch that the acts so called have now no property
      whatever in common, save that of being unlawful and punishable.

   10 Before quitting the subject of connotative names, it is proper to
      observe, that the first writer who, in our own times, has adopted
      from the schoolmen the word _to connote_, Mr. Mill, in his _Analysis
      of the Phenomena of the Human Mind_, employs it in a signification
      different from that in which it is here used. He uses the word in a
      sense coextensive with its etymology, applying it to every case in
      which a name, while pointing directly to one thing, (which is
      consequently termed its signification,) includes also a tacit
      reference to some other thing. In the case considered in the text,
      that of concrete general names, his language and mine are the
      converse of one another. Considering (very justly) the signification
      of the name to lie in the attribute, he speaks of the word as
      _noting_ the attribute, and _connoting_ the things possessing the
      attribute. And he describes abstract names as being properly
      concrete names with their connotation dropped: whereas, in my view,
      it is the _de_notation which would be said to be dropped, what was
      previously connoted becoming the whole signification.

      In adopting a phraseology at variance with that which so high an
      authority, and one which I am less likely than any other person to
      undervalue, has deliberately sanctioned, I have been influenced by
      the urgent necessity for a term exclusively appropriated to express
      the manner in which a concrete general name serves to mark the
      attributes which are involved in its signification. This necessity
      can scarcely be felt in its full force by any one who has not found
      by experience, how vain is the attempt to communicate clear ideas on
      the philosophy of language without such a word. It is hardly an
      exaggeration to say, that some of the most prevalent of the errors
      with which logic has been infected, and a large part of the
      cloudiness and confusion of ideas which have enveloped it, would, in
      all probability, have been avoided, if a term had been in common use
      to express exactly what I have signified by the term _to connote_.
      And the schoolmen, to whom we are indebted for the greater part of
      our logical language, gave us this also, and in this very sense. For
      although some of their general expressions countenance the use of
      the word in the more extensive and vague acceptation in which it is
      taken by Mr. Mill, yet when they had to define it specifically as a
      technical term, and to fix its meaning as such, with that admirable
      precision which always characterizes their definitions, they clearly
      explained that nothing was said to be connoted except _forms_, which
      word may generally, in their writings, be understood as synonymous
      with _attributes_.

      Now, if the word _to connote_, so well suited to the purpose to
      which they applied it, be diverted from that purpose by being taken
      to fulfil another, for which it does not seem to me to be at all
      required; I am unable to find any expression to replace it, but such
      as are commonly employed in a sense so much more general, that it
      would be useless attempting to associate them peculiarly with this
      precise idea. Such are the words, to involve, to imply, &c. By
      employing these, I should fail of attaining the object for which
      alone the name is needed, namely, to distinguish this particular
      kind of involving and implying from all other kinds, and to assure
      to it the degree of habitual attention which its importance demands.

   11 Or rather, all objects except itself and the percipient mind; for,
      as we shall see hereafter, to ascribe any attribute to an object
      necessarily implies a mind to perceive it.

_   12 Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences_, vol. i. p. 40.

   13 This doctrine is laid down in the clearest and strongest terms by M.
      Cousin, whose observations on the subject are the more worthy of
      attention, as, in consequence of the ultra-German and ontological
      character of his philosophy considered generally, they may be
      regarded as the admissions of an opponent.

      “Nous savons qu’il existe quelque chose hors de nous, parceque nous
      ne pouvons expliquer nos perceptions sans les rattacher à des causes
      distinctes de nous-mêmes; nous savons de plus que ces causes, dont
      nous ne connaissons pas d’ailleurs l’essence, produisent les effets
      les plus variables, les plus divers, et même les plus contraires,
      selon qu’elles rencontrent telle nature ou telle disposition du
      sujet. Mais savons-nous quelque chose de plus? et même, vu le
      caractère indéterminé des causes que nous concevons dans les corps,
      y a-t-il quelque chose de plus à savoir? Y a-t-il lieu de nous
      enquérir si nous percevons les choses telles qu’elles sont? Non
      évidemment.... Je ne dis pas que le problème est insoluble, _je dis
      qu’il est absurde et enferme une contradiction_. Nous _ne savons pas
      ce que ces causes sont en elles-mêmes_, et la raison nous défend de
      chercher à le connaître: mais il est bien évident _à priori_,
      qu’_elles ne sont pas en elles-mêmes ce quelles sont par rapport à
      nous_, puisque la présence du sujet modifie nécessairement leur
      action. Supprimez tout sujet sentant, il est certain que ces causes
      agiraient encore puisqu’elles continueraient d’exister; mais elles
      agiraient autrement; elles seraient encore des qualités et des
      propriétés, mais qui ne resembleraient à rien de ce que nous
      connaissons. Le feu ne manifesterait plus aucune des propriétés que
      nous lui connaissons: que serait-il? C’est ce que nous ne saurons
      jamais. _C’est d’ailleurs peut-être un problème qui ne répugne pas
      seulement à la nature de notre esprit, mais à l’essence même des
      choses._ Quand même en effet on supprimerait par la pensée tous les
      sujets sentants, il faudrait encore admettre que nul corps ne
      manifesterait ses propriétés autrement qu’en relation avec un sujet
      quelconque, et dans ce cas _ses propriétés ne seraient encore que
      relatives_: en sorte qu’il me paraît fort raisonnable d’admettre que
      les propriétés déterminées des corps n’existent pas independamment
      d’un sujet quelconque, et que quand on demande si les propriétés de
      la matière sont telles que nous les percevons, il faudrait voir
      auparavant si elles sont en tant que déterminées, et dans quel sens
      il est vrai de dire qu’elles sont.”—_Cours d’Histoire de la
      Philosophie Morale au 18me siècle_, 8me leçon.

   14 An attempt, indeed, has been made by Reid and others, to establish
      that although some of the properties we ascribe to objects exist
      only in our sensations, others exist in the things themselves, being
      such as cannot possibly be copies of any impression upon the senses;
      and they ask, from what sensations our notions of extension and
      figure have been derived? The gauntlet thrown down by Reid was taken
      up by Brown, who, applying greater powers of analysis than had
      previously been applied to the notions of extension and figure,
      showed clearly what are the sensations from which those notions are
      derived, viz. sensations of touch, combined with sensations of a
      class previously too little adverted to by metaphysicians, those
      which have their seat in our muscular frame. Whoever wishes to be
      more particularly acquainted with this excellent specimen of
      metaphysical analysis, may consult the first volume of Brown’s
      _Lectures_, or Mill’s _Analysis of the Mind_.

      On this subject also, M. Cousin may be quoted in favour of
      conclusions rejected by some of the most eminent thinkers of the
      school to which he belongs. M. Cousin recognises, in opposition to
      Reid, the essential _subjectivity_ of our conceptions of the primary
      qualities of matter, as extension, solidity, &c., equally with those
      of colour, heat, and the remainder of what are called secondary
      qualities.—_Cours_, ut supra, 9me leçon.

_   15 Analysis of the Human Mind_, i. 126 et seqq.

   16 Dr. Whewell (_Of Induction_, p. 10) questions this statement, and
      asks, “Are we to say that a mole cannot dig the ground, except he
      has an idea of the ground, and of the snout and paws with which he
      digs it?” I thought it had been evident that I was here speaking of
      rational digging, and not of digging by instinct.

   17 “From hence also this may be deduced, that the first truths were
      arbitrarily made by those that first of all imposed names upon
      things, or received them from the imposition of others. For it is
      true (for example) that _man is a living creature_, but it is for
      this reason, that it pleased men to impose both these names on the
      same thing.”—_Computation or Logic_, ch. iii. sect. 8.

   18 “Men are subject to err not only in affirming and denying, but also
      in perception, and in silent cogitation.... Tacit errors, or the
      errors of sense and cogitation, are made by passing from one
      imagination to the imagination of another different thing; or by
      feigning that to be past, or future, which never was, nor ever shall
      be; as when, by seeing the image of the sun in water, we imagine the
      sun itself to be there; or by seeing swords, that there has been or
      shall be, fighting, because it uses to be so for the most part; or
      when from promises we feign the mind of the promiser to be such and
      such; or, lastly, when from any sign we vainly imagine something to
      be signified which is not. And errors of this sort are common to all
      things that have sense.”—_Computation or Logic_, ch. v., sect. 1.

   19 Ch. iii. sect. 3.

   20 Book iv. ch. vii.

   21 Καθόλου μὲν οὖν πᾱσα διαφορὰ προγινομένη τινὶ ἑτεροῖον ποιεῖ; ἀλλ᾽
      αἱ μὲν κοινῶς τε καὶ ἰδίως (differences in the accidental
      properties) ἀλλοῖον ποιοῦσιν; αἱ δὲ ἰδιαίτατα (differences in the
      essential properties) ἄλλο—_Isag._ cap. iii.

   22 Few among the great names in mental science have met with a harder
      measure of justice from the present generation than Locke; the
      unquestioned founder of the analytic philosophy of mind, but whose
      doctrines were first caricatured, then, when the reaction arrived,
      cast off by the prevailing school even with contumely, and who is
      now regarded by one of the conflicting parties in philosophy as an
      apostle of heresy and sophistry, while among those who still adhere
      to the standard which he raised, there has been a disposition in
      later times to sacrifice his reputation in favour of Hobbes; a great
      writer, and a great thinker for his time, but inferior to Locke not
      only in sober judgment but even in profundity and original genius.
      Locke, the most candid of philosophers, and one whose speculations
      bear on every subject the strongest marks of having been wrought out
      from the materials of his own mind, has been mistaken for an
      unworthy plagiarist, while Hobbes has been extolled as having
      anticipated many of his leading doctrines. He did anticipate many of
      them, and the present is an instance in what manner it was generally
      done. They both rejected the scholastic doctrine of essences; but
      Locke understood and explained what these supposed essences really
      were; Hobbes, instead of explaining the distinction between
      essential and accidental properties, and between essential and
      accidental propositions, jumped over it, and gave a definition which
      suits at most only essential propositions, and scarcely those, as
      the definition of Proposition in general.

   23 The always acute and often profound author of _An Outline of
      Sematology_ (Mr. B. H. Smart) justly says, “Locke will be much more
      intelligible if, in the majority of places, we substitute ‘the
      knowledge of’ for what he calls ‘the idea of’ ” (p. 10). Among the
      many criticisms on Locke’s use of the word Idea, this is the only
      one which, as it appears to me, precisely hits the mark; and I quote
      it for the additional reason that it precisely expresses the point
      of difference respecting the import of Propositions, between my view
      and what I have spoken of as the Conceptualist view of them. Where a
      Conceptualist says that a name or a proposition expresses our Idea
      of a thing, I should generally say (instead of our Idea) our
      Knowledge, or Belief, concerning the thing itself.

   24 If we allow a differentia to what is not really a species. For the
      distinction of Kinds, in the sense explained by us, not being in any
      way applicable to attributes, it of course follows that although
      attributes may be put into classes, those classes can be admitted to
      be genera or species only by courtesy.

   25 In the fuller discussion which Archbishop Whately has given to this
      subject in his later editions, he almost ceases to regard the
      definitions of names and those of things as, in any important sense,
      distinct. He seems (9th ed. p. 145) to limit the notion of a Real
      Definition to one which “explains anything _more_ of the nature of
      the thing than is implied in the name;” (including under the word
      “implied,” not only what the name connotes, but everything which can
      be deduced by reasoning from the attributes connoted). Even this, as
      he adds, is usually called, not a Definition, but a Description; and
      (as it seems to me) rightly so called. A Description, I conceive,
      can only be ranked among Definitions, when taken (as in the case of
      the zoological definition of man) to fulfil the true office of a
      Definition, by declaring the connotation given to a word in some
      special use, as a term of science or art; which special connotation
      of course would _not_ be expressed by the proper definition of the
      word in its ordinary employment.

      Mr. De Morgan, exactly reversing the doctrine of Archbishop Whately,
      understands by a Real Definition one which contains _less_ than the
      Nominal Definition, provided only that what it contains is
      sufficient for distinction. “By _real_ definition I mean such an
      explanation of the word, be it the whole of the meaning or only
      part, as will be sufficient to separate the things contained under
      that word from all others. Thus the following, I believe, is a
      complete definition of an elephant: An animal which naturally drinks
      by drawing the water into its nose, and then spirting it into its
      mouth.”—_Formal Logic_, p. 36. Mr. De Morgan’s general proposition
      and his example are at variance; for the peculiar mode of drinking
      of the elephant certainly forms no part of the meaning of the word
      elephant. It could not be said, because a person happened to be
      ignorant of this property, that he did not know what an elephant
      means.

   26 In the only attempt which, so far as I know, has been made to refute
      the preceding argumentation, it is maintained that in the first form
      of the syllogism,

      A dragon is a thing which breathes flame,
      A dragon is a serpent,
      Therefore some serpent or serpents breathe flame,

      “there is just as much truth in the conclusion as there is in the
      premisses, or rather, no more in the latter than in the former. If
      the general name serpent includes both real and imaginary serpents,
      there is no falsity in the conclusion; if not, there is falsity in
      the minor premiss.”

      Let us, then, try to set out the syllogism on the hypothesis that
      the name serpent includes imaginary serpents. We shall find that it
      is now necessary to alter the predicates; for it cannot be asserted
      that an imaginary creature breathes flame: in predicating of it such
      a fact, we assert by the most positive implication that it is real
      and not imaginary. The conclusion must run thus, “Some serpent or
      serpents either do or are _imagined_ to breathe flame.” And to prove
      this conclusion by the instance of dragons, the premisses must be, A
      dragon is _imagined_ as breathing flame, A dragon is a (real or
      imaginary) serpent: from which it undoubtedly follows, that there
      are serpents which are imagined to breathe flame; but the major
      premiss is not a definition, nor part of a definition; which is all
      that I am concerned to prove.

      Let us now examine the other assertion—that if the word serpent
      stands for none but real serpents, the minor premiss (A dragon is a
      serpent) is false. This is exactly what I have myself said of the
      premiss, considered as a statement of fact: but it is not false as
      part of the definition of a dragon; and since the premisses, or one
      of them, _must_ be false, (the conclusion being so,) the real
      premiss cannot be the definition, which is true, but the statement
      of fact, which is false.

   27 “Few people” (I have said in another place) “have reflected how
      great a knowledge of Things is required to enable a man to affirm
      that any given argument turns wholly upon words. There is, perhaps,
      not one of the leading terms of philosophy which is not used in
      almost innumerable shades of meaning, to express ideas more or less
      widely different from one another. Between two of these ideas a
      sagacious and penetrating mind will discern, as it were intuitively,
      an unobvious link of connexion, upon which, though perhaps unable to
      give a logical account of it, he will found a perfectly valid
      argument, which his critic, not having so keen an insight into the
      Things, will mistake for a fallacy turning on the double meaning of
      a term. And the greater the genius of him who thus safely leaps over
      the chasm, the greater will probably be the crowing and vain-glory
      of the mere logician, who, hobbling after him, evinces his own
      superior wisdom by pausing on its brink, and giving up as desperate
      his proper business of bridging it over.”

   28 Contraries:
      All A is B
      No A is B

      Subtraries:
      Some A is B
      Some A is not B

      Contradictories:
      All A is B
      Some A is not B

      Also contradictories:
      No A is B
      Some A is B

      Respectively subalternate:
      All A is B; No A is B
      Some A is B; and Some A is not B

   29 His conclusions are, “The first figure is suited to the discovery or
      proof of the properties of a thing; the second to the discovery or
      proof of the distinctions between things; the third to the discovery
      or proof of instances and exceptions; the fourth to the discovery,
      or exclusion, of the different species of a genus.” The reference of
      syllogisms in the last three figures to the _dictum de omni et
      nullo_ is, in Lambert’s opinion, strained and unnatural: to each of
      the three belongs, according to him, a separate axiom, co-ordinate
      and of equal authority with that _dictum_, and to which he gives the
      names of _dictum de diverso_ for the second figure, _dictum de
      exemplo_ for the third, and _dictum de reciproco_ for the fourth.
      See part i. or _Dianoiologie_, chap. iv. § 229 _et seqq._

      Mr. De Morgan’s “Formal Logic, or the Calculus of Inference,
      Necessary and Probable,” (a work published since the statement in
      the text was made,) far exceeds in elaborate minuteness Lambert’s
      treatise on the syllogism. Mr. De Morgan’s principal object is to
      bring within strict technical rules the cases in which a conclusion
      can be drawn from premisses of a form usually classed as particular.
      He observes, very justly, that from the premisses Most Bs are Cs,
      most Bs are As, it may be concluded with certainty that some As are
      Cs, since two portions of the class B, each of them comprising more
      than half, must necessarily in part consist of the same individuals.
      Following out this line of thought, it is equally evident that if we
      knew exactly what proportion the “most” in each of the premisses
      bear to the entire class B, we could increase in a corresponding
      degree the definiteness of the conclusion. Thus if 60 per cent of B
      are included in C, and 70 per cent in A, 30 per cent at least must
      be common to both; in other words, the number of As which are Cs,
      and of Cs which are As, must be at least equal to 30 per cent of the
      class B. Proceeding on this conception of “numerically definite
      propositions,” and extending it to such forms as these:—“45 Xs (or
      more) are each of them one of 70 Ys,” or “45 Xs (or more), are no
      one of them to be found among 70 Ys,” and examining what inferences
      admit of being drawn from the various combinations which may be made
      of premisses of this description, Mr. De Morgan establishes
      universal formulæ for such inferences; creating for that purpose not
      only a new technical language, but a formidable array of symbols
      analogous to those of algebra.

      Since it is undeniable that inferences, in the cases examined by Mr.
      De Morgan, can legitimately be drawn, and that the ordinary theory
      takes no account of them, I will not say that it was not worth while
      to show in detail how these also could be reduced to formulae as
      rigorous as those of Aristotle. What Mr. De Morgan has done was
      worth doing once (perhaps more than once, as a school exercise); but
      I question if its results are worth studying and mastering for any
      practical purpose. The practical use of technical forms of reasoning
      is to bar out fallacies: but the fallacies which require to be
      guarded against in ratiocination properly so called, arise from the
      incautious use of the common forms of language; and the logician
      must track the fallacy into that territory, instead of waiting for
      it on a territory of his own. While he remains among propositions
      which have acquired the numerical precision of the Calculus of
      Probabilities, the enemy is left in possession of the only ground on
      which he can be formidable. The “quantification of the predicate,”
      an invention to which Sir William Hamilton attaches so much
      importance as to have raised an angry dispute with Mr. De Morgan
      respecting its authorship, appears to me, I confess, as an accession
      to the art of Logic, of singularly small value. It is of course
      true, that “All men are mortal” is equivalent to “Every man is
      _some_ mortal.” But as mankind certainly will not be persuaded to
      “quantify” their predicates in common discourse, they want a logic
      which will teach them to reason correctly with propositions in the
      usual form, by furnishing them with a type of ratiocination to which
      propositions can be referred, retaining that form. Not to mention
      that the quantification of the predicate, instead of being a means
      of bringing out more clearly the meaning of the proposition,
      actually leads the mind out of the proposition, into another order
      of ideas. For when we say, All men are mortal, we simply mean to
      affirm the attribute mortality of all men; without thinking at all
      of the _class_ mortal in the concrete, or troubling ourselves about
      whether it contains any other beings or not. It is only for some
      artificial purpose that we ever look at the proposition in the
      aspect in which the predicate also is thought of as a class-name,
      either including the subject only, or the subject and something
      more.

   30 Suprà, p. 129.

   31 Logic, p. 239 (9th ed.)

   32 It is hardly necessary to say, that I am not contending for any such
      absurdity as that we _actually_ “ought to have known” and considered
      the case of every individual man, past, present, and future, before
      affirming that all men are mortal: although this interpretation has
      been, strangely enough, put upon the preceding observations. There
      is no difference between me and Archbishop Whately, or any other
      defender of the syllogism, on the practical part of the matter; I am
      only pointing out an inconsistency in the logical theory of it, as
      conceived by almost all writers. I do not say that a person who
      affirmed, before the Duke of Wellington was born, that all men are
      mortal, _knew_ that the Duke of Wellington was mortal; but I do say,
      that he _asserted_ it; and I ask for an explanation of the apparent
      logical fallacy, of adducing in proof of the Duke of Wellington’s
      mortality, a general statement which presupposes it. Finding no
      sufficient resolution of this difficulty in any of the writers on
      Logic, I have attempted to supply one.

_   33 Of Induction_, p. 85.

   34 For August 1846.

   35 There is a striking passage in the Metaphysics of Aristotle
      (commencement of chap. iii.) on the necessity of beginning the study
      of a subject by a clear perception of its difficulties. Εστί τοῖς
      εὐπορῆσαι βουλομένοις προῦργου τὸ διαπορῆσαι καλῶς. ἡ γὰρ ὕστερον
      εὐπορία λύσις των πρότερον ἀπορουμένων ἐστί. λύειν δ᾽ οὐκ ἔστιν
      ἀγνοοῦντα τὸν δεσμόν: ἀλλ᾽ ἡ της διανοίας ἀπορία δηλοῖ τοῦτο περὶ
      τοῦ πράγματος ... διὸ δεῖ τὰς δυσχερείας τελεωρηκέναι πάσας
      πρότερον, τούτων τε χάριν καὶ διὰ τὸ τοὺς ζητοῦντας ἄνευ τοῦ
      διαπορῆσαι πρῶτον, ὁμοίους εἰναὶ τοῖς ποῖ δει βαδίζειν ἀγνοοῦσι: καὶ
      πρὸς τούτοις, οὐδ᾽ ἐί ποτε τὸ ζητούμενον εὕρηκεν ἣ μὴ, γενώσκειν. τὸ
      γὰρ τέλος τούτῳ μὲν οὐ δῆλον, τῳ δὲ καλῶς προηπορκότι δῆλον.

   36 The reviewer misunderstands me when he supposes me to say that “the
      conclusion must be admitted _before_ we can admit the major
      premiss.” What I say is, that there must be ground for admitting it
      _simultaneously_, or else the major premise is not proved.

_   37 Mechanical Euclid_, pp. 149 _et seqq._

   38 We might, it is true, insert this property into the definition of
      parallel lines, framing the definition so as to require, _both_ that
      when produced indefinitely they shall never meet, and _also_ that
      any straight line which intersects one of them shall, if prolonged,
      meet the other. But by doing this we by no means get rid of the
      assumption; we are still obliged to take for granted the geometrical
      truth, that all straight lines in the same plane, which have the
      former of these properties, have also the latter. For if it were
      possible that they should not, that is, if any straight lines other
      than those which are parallel according to the definition, had the
      property of never meeting although indefinitely produced, the
      demonstrations of the subsequent portions of the theory of parallels
      could not be maintained.

   39 Whewell’s _Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences_, i. 130.

   40 Dr. Whewell (_Of Induction_ p. 84) thinks it unreasonable to contend
      that we know by experience, that our idea of a line exactly
      resembles a real line. “It does not appear,” he says, “how we can
      compare our ideas with the realities, since we know the realities
      only by our ideas.” We know the realities (I conceive) by our eyes.
      Dr. Whewell surely does not hold the “doctrine of perception by
      means of ideas,” which Reid gave himself so much trouble to refute.

      Dr. Whewell also says, that it does not appear why this resemblance
      of ideas to the sensations of which they are copies, should be
      spoken of as if it were a peculiarity of one class of ideas, those
      of space. My reply is, that I do not so speak of it. The peculiarity
      I contend for is only one of degree. All our ideas of sensation of
      course resemble the corresponding sensations, but they do so with
      very different degrees of exactness and of reliability. No one, I
      presume, can recall in imagination a colour or an odour with the
      same distinctness and accuracy with which almost every one can
      mentally reproduce an image of a straight line or a triangle. To the
      extent, however, of their capabilities of accuracy, our
      recollections of colours or of odours may serve as subjects of
      experimentation, as well as those of lines and spaces, and may yield
      conclusions which will be true of their external prototypes. A
      person in whom, either from natural gift or from cultivation, the
      impressions of colour were peculiarly vivid and distinct, if asked
      which of two blue flowers was of the darkest tinge, though he might
      never have compared the two, or even looked at them together, might
      be able to give a confident answer on the faith of his distinct
      recollection of the colours; that is, he might examine his mental
      pictures, and find there a property of the outward objects. But in
      hardly any case except that of simple geometrical forms, could this
      be done by mankind generally, with a degree of assurance equal to
      that which is given by a contemplation of the objects themselves.
      Persons differ most widely in the precision of their recollection,
      even of forms: one person, when he has looked any one in the face
      for half a minute, can draw an accurate likeness of him from memory;
      another may have seen him every day for six months, and hardly know
      whether his nose is long or short. But everybody has a perfectly
      distinct mental image of a straight line, a circle, or a rectangle.
      And every one concludes confidently from these mental images to the
      corresponding outward things.

_   41 Phil. Ind. Sc._ i. 59-61.

   42 Ibid. 57.

   43 Ibid. 54, 55.

   44 “If all mankind had spoken one language, we cannot doubt that there
      would have been a powerful, perhaps a universal, school of
      philosophers, who would have believed in the inherent connexion
      between names and things, who would have taken the sound _man_ to be
      the mode of agitating the air which is essentially communicative of
      the ideas of reason, cookery, bipedality, &c.” De Morgan, _Formal
      Logic_, p. 246.

   45 It would be difficult to name a man more remarkable at once for the
      greatness and the wide range of his mental accomplishments, than
      Leibnitz. Yet this eminent man gave as a reason for rejecting
      Newton’s scheme of the solar system, that God _could not_ make a
      body revolve round a distant centre, unless either by some impelling
      mechanism, or by miracle:—“Tout ce qui n’est pas explicable,” says
      he in a letter to the Abbé Conti, “par la nature des créatures, est
      miraculeux. Il ne suffit pas de dire: Dieu a fait une telle loi de
      nature; donc la chose est naturelle. Il faut que la loi soit
      exécutable par les natures des créatures. Si Dieu donnait cette loi,
      par exemple, à un corps libre, de tourner à l’entour d’un certain
      centre, _il faudrait ou qu’il y joignît d’autres corps qui par leur
      impulsion l’obligeassent de rester toujours dans son orbite
      circulaire, ou quil mît un ange à ses trousses, ou enfin il faudrait
      qu’il y concourût extraordinairement_; car naturellement il
      s’écartera par la tangente.”—_Works of Leibnitz_, ed. Dutens, iii.
      446.

_   46 Phil. Ind. Sc._ ii. 174.

_   47 Phil. Ind. Sc._ i., 238.

_   48 Phil. Ind. Sc._ i. 237.

_   49 Ibid._ 213.

_   50 Ibid._ 384, 385.

   51 In his recent pamphlet (p. 81), Dr. Whewell greatly attenuates the
      opinion here quoted, reducing it to a surmise “that if we could
      conceive the composition of bodies distinctly, we might be able to
      see that it is necessary that the modes of their composition should
      be definite.” The passage in the text asserts that we already see,
      or may and ought to see, this necessity; giving as the reason, that
      no other mode of combination is conceivable. That Dr. Whewell should
      ever have made this statement, is enough for the purposes of my
      illustration. To what he now says I have nothing to object.
      Undoubtedly, if we understood the ultimate molecular composition of
      bodies, we might find that their combining with one another in
      definite proportions is, in the present order of nature, a
      _necessary consequence_ of that molecular composition; and has thus
      the only kind of necessity of which, in my view of the subject, any
      law of nature is susceptible. But in that case, the doctrine would
      be taken out of the class of axioms altogether. It would be no
      longer an ultimate principle, but a mere derivative law; regarded as
      necessary, not because self-evident, but because demonstrable.

   52 The _Quarterly Review_ for June 1841, contains an article of great
      ability on Dr. Whewell’s two great works, the writer of which
      maintains, on the subject of axioms, the doctrine advanced in the
      text, that they are generalizations from experience, and supports
      that opinion by a line of argument strikingly coinciding with mine.
      When I state that the whole of the present chapter was written
      before I had seen the article, (the greater part, indeed, before it
      was published,) it is not my object to occupy the reader’s attention
      with a matter so unimportant as the degree of originality which may
      or may not belong to any portion of my own speculations, but to
      obtain for an opinion which is opposed to reigning doctrines, the
      recommendation derived from a striking concurrence of sentiment
      between two inquirers entirely independent of one another. I embrace
      the opportunity of citing from a writer of the extensive
      acquirements in physical and metaphysical knowledge and the capacity
      of systematic thought which the article evinces, passages so
      remarkably in unison with my own views as the following:—

      “The truths of geometry are summed up and embodied in its
      definitions and axioms.... Let us turn to the axioms, and what do we
      find? A string of propositions concerning magnitude in the abstract,
      which are equally true of space, time, force, number, and every
      other magnitude susceptible of aggregation and subdivision. Such
      propositions, where they are not mere definitions, as some of them
      are, carry their inductive origin on the face of their
      enunciation.... Those which declare that two straight lines cannot
      inclose a space, and that two straight lines which cut one another
      cannot both be parallel to a third, are in reality the only ones
      which express characteristic properties of space, and these it will
      be worth while to consider more nearly. Now the only clear notion we
      can form of straightness is uniformity of direction, for space in
      its ultimate analysis is nothing but an assemblage of distances and
      directions. And (not to dwell on the notion of continued
      contemplation, _i.e._, mental experience, as included in the very
      idea of uniformity; nor on that of transfer of the contemplating
      being from point to point, and of experience, during such transfer,
      of the homogeneity of the interval passed over) we cannot even
      propose the proposition in an intelligible form, to any one whose
      experience ever since he was born has not assured him of the fact.
      The unity of direction, or that we cannot march from a given point
      by more than one path direct to the same object, is matter of
      practical experience long before it can by possibility become matter
      of abstract thought. _We cannot attempt mentally to exemplify the
      conditions of the assertion in an imaginary case opposed to it,
      without violating our habitual recollection of this experience, and
      defacing our mental picture of space as grounded on it._ What but
      experience, we may ask, can possibly assure us of the homogeneity of
      the parts of distance, time, force, and measurable aggregates in
      general, on which the truth of the other axioms depends? As regards
      the latter axiom, after what has been said it must be clear that the
      very same course of remarks equally applies to its case, and that
      its truth is quite as much forced on the mind as that of the former
      by daily and hourly experience ... _including always, be it
      observed, in our notion of experience, that which is gained by
      contemplation of the inward picture which the mind forms to itself
      in any proposed case, or which it arbitrarily selects as an
      example—such picture, in virtue of the extreme simplicity of these
      primary relations, being called up by the imagination with as much
      vividness and clearness as could be done by any external impression,
      which is the only meaning we can attach to the word intuition, as
      applied to such relations._”

      And again, of the axioms of mechanics:—“As we admit no such
      propositions, other than as truths inductively collected from
      observation, even in geometry itself, it can hardly be expected
      that, in a science of obviously contingent relations, we should
      acquiesce in a contrary view. Let us take one of these axioms and
      examine its evidence: for instance, that equal forces
      perpendicularly applied at the opposite ends of equal arms of a
      straight lever will balance each other. What but experience, we may
      ask, in the first place, can possibly inform us that a force so
      applied will have any tendency to turn the lever on its centre at
      all? or that force can be so transmitted along a rigid line
      perpendicular to its direction, as to act elsewhere in space than
      along its own line of action? Surely this is so far from being
      self-evident that it has even a paradoxical appearance, which is
      only to be removed by giving our lever thickness, material
      composition, and molecular powers. Again we conclude, that the two
      forces, being equal and applied under precisely similar
      circumstances, must, if they exert any effort at all to turn the
      lever, exert equal and opposite efforts: but what _à priori_
      reasoning can possibly assure us that they _do_ act under precisely
      similar circumstances? that points which differ in place _are_
      similarly circumstanced as regards the exertion of force? that
      universal space may not have relations to universal force—or, at all
      events, that the organization of the material universe may not be
      such as to place that portion of space occupied by it in such
      relations to the forces exerted in it, as may invalidate the
      absolute similarity of circumstances assumed? Or we may argue, what
      have we to do with the notion of angular movement in the lever at
      all? The case is one of rest, and of quiescent destruction of force
      by force. Now how is this destruction effected? Assuredly by the
      counter-pressure which supports the fulcrum. But would not this
      destruction equally arise, and by the same amount of counteracting
      force, if each force simply pressed its own half of the lever
      against the fulcrum? And what can assure us that it is not so,
      except removal of one or other force, and consequent tilting of the
      lever? The other fundamental axiom of statics, that the pressure on
      the point of support is the sum of the weights ... is merely a
      scientific transformation and more refined mode of stating a coarse
      and obvious result of universal experience, viz. that the weight of
      a rigid body is the same, handle it or suspend it in what position
      or by what point we will, and that whatever sustains it sustains its
      total weight. Assuredly, as Mr. Whewell justly remarks, ‘No one
      probably ever made a trial for the purpose of showing that the
      pressure on the support is equal to the sum of the weights’ ... But
      it is precisely because in every action of his life from earliest
      infancy he has been continually making the trial, and seeing it made
      by every other living being about him, that he never dreams of
      staking its result on one additional attempt made with scientific
      accuracy. This would be as if a man should resolve to decide by
      experiment whether his eyes were useful for the purpose of seeing,
      by hermetically sealing himself up for half an hour in a metal
      case.”

      On the “paradox of universal propositions obtained by experience,”
      the same writer says: “If there be necessary and universal truths
      expressible in propositions of axiomatic simplicity and obviousness,
      and having for their subject-matter the elements of all our
      experience and all our knowledge, surely these are the truths which,
      if experience suggest to us any truths at all, it ought to suggest
      most readily, clearly, and unceasingly. If it were a truth,
      universal and necessary, that a net is spread over the whole surface
      of every planetary globe, we should not travel far on our own
      without getting entangled in its meshes, and making the necessity of
      some means of extrication an axiom of locomotion.... There is,
      therefore, nothing paradoxical, but the reverse, in our being led by
      observation to a recognition of such truths, as _general_
      propositions, coextensive at least with all human experience. That
      they pervade all the objects of experience, must ensure their
      continual suggestion _by_ experience; that they are true, must
      ensure that consistency of suggestion, that iteration of
      uncontradicted assertion, which commands implicit assent, and
      removes all occasion of exception; that they are simple, and admit
      of no misunderstanding, must secure their admission by every mind.”

      “A truth, necessary and universal, relative to any object of our
      knowledge, must verify itself in every instance where that object is
      before our contemplation, and if at the same time it be simple and
      intelligible, its verification must be obvious. _The sentiment of
      such a truth cannot, therefore, but be present to our minds whenever
      that object is contemplated, and must therefore make a part of the
      mental picture or idea of that object which we may on any occasion
      summon before our imagination.... All propositions, therefore,
      become not only untrue but inconceivable_, if ... axioms be violated
      in their enunciation.”

      Another high authority (if indeed it be another authority) may be
      cited in favour of the doctrine that axioms rest on the evidence of
      induction. “The axioms of geometry themselves may be regarded as in
      some sort an appeal to experience, not corporeal, but mental. When
      we say, the whole is greater than its part, we announce a general
      fact, which rests, it is true, on our ideas of whole and part; but,
      in abstracting these notions, we begin by considering them as
      subsisting in space, and time, and body, and again, in linear, and
      superficial, and solid space. Again, when we say, the equals of
      equals are equal, we mentally make comparisons, in equal spaces,
      equal times, &c., so that these axioms, however self-evident, are
      still general propositions so far of the inductive kind, that,
      independently of experience, they would not present themselves to
      the mind. The only difference between these and axioms obtained from
      extensive induction is this, that, in raising the axioms of
      geometry, the instances offer themselves spontaneously, and without
      the trouble of search, and are few and simple; in raising those of
      nature, they are infinitely numerous, complicated, and remote, so
      that the most diligent research and the utmost acuteness are
      required to unravel their web and place their meaning in
      evidence.”—SIR J. HERSCHEL’s _Discourse on the Study of Natural
      Philosophy_, pp. 95, 96.

   53 Dr. Whewell thinks it improper to apply the term Induction to any
      operation not terminating in the establishment of a general truth.
      Induction, he says (in p. 15 of his pamphlet) “is not the same thing
      as experience and observation. Induction is experience or
      observation _consciously_ looked at in a _general_ form. This
      consciousness and generality are necessary parts of that knowledge
      which is science.” And he objects (p. 8) to the mode in which the
      word Induction is employed in this work, as an undue extension of
      that term “not only to the cases in which the general induction is
      consciously applied to a particular instance, but to the cases in
      which the particular instance is dealt with by means of experience
      in that rude sense in which experience can be asserted of brutes,
      and in which of course we can in no way imagine that the law is
      possessed or understood as a general proposition.” This use of the
      term he deems a “confusion of knowledge with practical tendencies.”

      I disclaim, as strongly as Dr. Whewell can do, the application of
      such terms as induction, inference, or reasoning, to operations
      performed by mere instinct, that is, from an animal impulse, without
      the exertion of any intelligence. But I perceive no ground for
      confining the use of those terms to cases in which the inference is
      drawn in the forms and with the precautions required by scientific
      propriety. To the idea of Science, an express recognition and
      distinct apprehension of general laws as such, is essential: but
      nine-tenths of the conclusions drawn from experience in the course
      of practical life, are drawn without any such recognition: they are
      direct inferences from known cases, to a case supposed to be
      similar. I have endeavoured to shew that this is not only as
      legitimate an operation, but substantially the same operation, as
      that of ascending from known cases to a general proposition; (except
      that the latter process has one great security for correctness which
      the former does not possess). In Science, the inference must
      necessarily pass through the intermediate stage of a general
      proposition, because Science wants its conclusions for record, and
      not for instantaneous use. But the inferences drawn for the guidance
      of practical affairs, by persons who would often be quite incapable
      of expressing in unexceptionable terms the corresponding
      generalizations, may and frequently do exhibit intellectual powers
      quite equal to any which have ever been displayed in Science: and if
      these inferences are not inductive, what are they? The limitation
      imposed on the term by Dr. Whewell seems perfectly arbitrary;
      neither justified by any fundamental distinction between what he
      includes and what he desires to exclude, nor sanctioned by usage, at
      least from the time of Reid and Stewart, the principal legislators
      (as far as the English language is concerned) of modern metaphysical
      terminology.

   54 Suprà, p. 214.

_   55 Phil. Ind. Sc._ ii. 213, 214.

_   56 Ibid._

_   57 Phil. Ind. Sc._ ii. p. 173.

_   58 Cours de Philosophie Positive_, vol. ii, p. 202.

   59 Dr. Whewell, in his reply, contests the distinction here drawn, and
      maintains, that not only different descriptions, but different
      explanations of a phenomenon, may all be true. Of the three theories
      respecting the motions of the heavenly bodies, he says (p. 25):
      “Undoubtedly all these explanations may be true and consistent with
      each other, and would be so if each had been followed out so as to
      shew in what manner it could be made consistent with the facts. And
      this was, in reality, in a great measure done. The doctrine that the
      heavenly bodies were moved by vortices was successively modified, so
      that it came to coincide in its results with the doctrine of an
      inverse-quadratic centripetal force.... When this point was reached,
      the vortex was merely a machinery, well or ill devised, for
      producing such a centripetal force, and therefore did not contradict
      the doctrine of a centripetal force. Newton himself does not appear
      to have been averse to explaining gravity by impulse. So little is
      it true that if one theory be true the other must be false. The
      attempt to explain gravity by the impulse of streams of particles
      flowing through the universe in all directions, which I have
      mentioned in the _Philosophy_, is so far from being inconsistent
      with the Newtonian theory, that it is founded entirely upon it. And
      even with regard to the doctrine, that the heavenly bodies move by
      an inherent virtue; if this doctrine had been maintained in any such
      way that it was brought to agree with the facts, the inherent virtue
      must have had its laws determined; and then it would have been found
      that the virtue had a reference to the central body; and so, the
      ‘inherent virtue’ must have coincided in its effect with the
      Newtonian force; and then, the two explanations would agree, except
      so far as the word ‘inherent’ was concerned. And if such a part of
      an earlier theory as this word _inherent_ indicates, is found to be
      untenable, it is of course rejected in the transition to later and
      more exact theories, in Inductions of this kind, as well as in what
      Mr. Mill calls Descriptions. There is, therefore, still no validity
      discoverable in the distinction which Mr. Mill attempts to draw
      between descriptions like Kepler’s law of elliptical orbits, and
      other examples of induction.”

      If the doctrine of vortices had meant, not that vortices existed,
      but only that the planets moved _in the same manner_ as if they had
      been whirled by vortices; if the hypothesis had been merely a mode
      of representing the facts, not an attempt to account for them; if,
      in short, it had been only a Description; it would, no doubt, have
      been reconcileable with the Newtonian theory. The vortices, however,
      were not a mere aid to conceiving the motions of the planets, but a
      supposed physical agent, actively impelling them; a material fact,
      which might be true or not true, but could not be both true and not
      true. According to Descartes’ theory it was true, according to
      Newton’s it was not true. Dr. Whewell probably means that since the
      phrases, centripetal and projectile force, do not declare the nature
      but only the direction of the forces, the Newtonian theory does not
      absolutely contradict any hypothesis which may be framed respecting
      the mode of their production. The Newtonian theory, regarded as a
      mere _description_ of the planetary motions, does not; but the
      Newtonian theory as an _explanation_ of them does. For in what does
      the explanation consist? In ascribing those motions to a general law
      which obtains between all particles of matter, and in identifying
      this with the law by which bodies fall to the ground; a kind of
      motion which the vortices did not, and as it was rectilineal, could
      not, explain. The one explanation, therefore, absolutely excludes
      the other. Either the planets are not moved by vortices, or they do
      not move by the law by which heavy bodies fall. It is impossible
      that both opinions can be true. As well might it be said that there
      is no contradiction between the assertions, that a man died because
      somebody killed him, and that he died a natural death.

      So, again, the theory that the planets move by a virtue inherent in
      their celestial nature, is incompatible with either of the two
      others; either that of their being moved by vortices, or that which
      regards them as moving by a property which they have in common with
      the earth and all terrestrial bodies. Dr. Whewell says, that the
      theory of an inherent virtue agrees with Newton’s when the word
      inherent is left out, which of course it would be (he says) if
      “found to be untenable.” But leave that out, and where is the
      theory? The word inherent _is_ the theory. When that is omitted,
      there remains nothing except that the heavenly bodies move by “a
      virtue,” _i.e._ by a power of some sort.

      If Dr. Whewell is not yet satisfied, any other subject will serve
      equally well to test his doctrine. He will hardly say that there is
      no contradiction between the emission theory and the undulatory
      theory of light; or that there can be both one and two
      electricities; or that the hypothesis of the production of the
      higher organic forms by development from the lower, and the
      supposition of separate and successive acts of creation, are quite
      reconcileable; or that the theory that volcanoes are fed from a
      central fire, and the doctrines which ascribe them to chemical
      action at a comparatively small depth below the earth’s surface, are
      consistent with one another, and all true as far as they go.

      If different explanations of the same fact cannot both be true,
      still less, surely, can different predictions. Dr. Whewell quarrels
      (on what ground it is not necessary to consider) with the example I
      had chosen on this point, and thinks an objection to an illustration
      a sufficient answer to a theory. Examples not liable to his
      objection are easily found, if the proposition that conflicting
      predictions cannot both be true, can be made clearer by any
      examples. Suppose the phenomenon to be a newly-discovered comet, and
      that one astronomer predicts its return once in every 300
      years—another, once in every 400: can they both be right? When
      Columbus predicted that by sailing constantly westward he should in
      time return to the point from which he set out, while others
      asserted that he could never do so except by turning back, were both
      he and his opponents true prophets? Were the predictions which
      foretold the wonders of railways and steamships, and those which
      averred that the Atlantic could never be crossed by steam
      navigation, nor a railway train propelled ten miles an hour, both
      (in Dr. Whewell’s words) “true, and consistent with one another”?

      Dr. Whewell sees no distinction between holding contradictory
      opinions on a question of fact, and merely employing different
      analogies to facilitate the conception of the same fact. The case of
      different Inductions belongs to the former class, that of different
      Descriptions to the latter.

_   60 Of Induction_, p. 33.

   61 But though it is a condition of the validity of every induction that
      there be uniformity in the course of nature, it is not a necessary
      condition that the uniformity should pervade all nature. It is
      enough that it pervades the particular class of phenomena to which
      the induction relates. An induction concerning the motions of the
      planets, or the properties of the magnet, would not be vitiated
      though we were to suppose that wind and weather are the sport of
      chance, provided it be assumed that astronomical and magnetic
      phenomena are under the dominion of general laws. Otherwise the
      early experience of mankind would have rested on a very weak
      foundation; for in the infancy of science it could not be said to be
      known that _all_ phenomena are regular in their course.

      Neither would it be correct to say that every induction by which we
      infer any truth, implies the general fact of uniformity _as
      foreknown_, even in reference to the kind of phenomena concerned. It
      implies, _either_ that this general fact is already known, _or_ that
      we may now know it: as the conclusion, The Duke of Wellington is
      mortal, drawn from the instances A, B, and C, implies either that we
      have already concluded all men to be mortal, or that we are now
      entitled to do so from the same evidence. A vast amount of confusion
      and paralogism respecting the grounds of Induction would be
      dispelled by keeping in view these simple considerations.

   62 Infra, chap. xxi.

   63 Infra, chap. xxi, xxii.

   64 Dr. Whewell (_Of Induction_, p. 16) will not allow these and similar
      erroneous opinions to be called inductions; inasmuch as such
      superstitious fancies “were not collected from the facts by seeking
      a law of their occurrence, but were suggested by an imagination of
      the anger of superior powers, shown by such deviations from the
      ordinary course of nature.” I conceive the question to be, not in
      what manner these notions were at first suggested, but by what
      evidence they have, from time to time, been supposed to be
      substantiated. If the believers in these erroneous opinions had been
      put on their defence, they would have referred to experience; to the
      comet which preceded the assassination of Julius Cæsar, or to
      oracles and other prophecies known to have been fulfilled. It is by
      such appeals to facts that all analogous superstitions, even in our
      day, attempt to justify themselves; the supposed evidence of
      experience is what really gives them their hold on the mind. I quite
      admit that the influence of such coincidences would not be what it
      is, if strength were not lent to it by an antecedent presumption;
      but this is not peculiar to such cases; preconceived notions of
      probability form part of the explanation of many other cases of
      belief on insufficient evidence. The _à priori_ prejudice does not
      prevent the erroneous opinion from being sincerely regarded as a
      legitimate conclusion from experience; but is, on the contrary, the
      very thing which predisposes the mind to that interpretation of
      experience.

      Thus much in defence of the sort of examples objected to. But it
      would be easy to produce instances, equally adapted to the purpose,
      and in which no antecedent prejudice is at all concerned. “For many
      ages,” says Archbishop Whately, “all farmers and gardeners were
      firmly convinced—and convinced of their knowing it by
      experience—that the crops would never turn out good unless the seed
      were sown during the increase of the moon.” This was induction, but
      bad induction: just as a vicious syllogism is reasoning, but bad
      reasoning.

   65 The assertion, that any and every one of the conditions of a
      phenomenon may be and is, on some occasions and for some purposes,
      spoken of as the cause, has been disputed by an intelligent reviewer
      of this work, (_Prospective Review_ for February 1850,) who
      maintains that “we always apply the word cause rather to that
      element in the antecedents which exercises _force_, and which would
      _tend_ at all times to produce the same or a similar effect to that
      which, under certain conditions, it would actually produce.” And he
      says, that “every one would feel” the expression, that the cause of
      a surprise was the sentinel’s being off his post, to be incorrect;
      but that “the allurement or force which _drew_ him off his post,
      might be so called, because in doing so it removed a resisting power
      which would have prevented the surprise.” I cannot think that it
      would be wrong to say, that the event took place because the
      sentinel was absent, and yet right to say that it took place because
      he was bribed to be absent. Since the only direct effect of the
      bribe was his absence, the bribe could be called the remote cause of
      the surprise, only on the supposition that the absence was the
      proximate cause; nor does it seem to me that any one, who had not a
      theory to support, would use the one expression and reject the
      other.

      The reviewer observes, that when a person dies of poison, his
      possession of bodily organs is a necessary condition, but that no
      one would ever speak of it as the cause. I admit the fact; but I
      believe the reason to be, that the occasion could never arise for so
      speaking of it; for when in the inaccuracy of common discourse we
      are led to speak of some one condition of a phenomenon as its cause,
      the condition so spoken of is always one which it is at least
      possible that the hearer may require to be informed of. The
      possession of bodily organs is a known condition, and to give that
      as the answer, when asked the cause of a person’s death, would not
      supply the information sought. Once conceive that a doubt could
      exist as to his having bodily organs, or that he were to be compared
      with some being who had them not, and cases may be imagined in which
      it might be said that his possession of them was the cause of his
      death. If Faust and Mephistopheles together took poison, it might be
      said that Faust died because he was a human being, and had a body,
      while Mephistopheles survived because he was a spirit.

      It is for the same reason, that no one (as the reviewer remarks)
      “calls the cause of a leap, the muscles or sinews of the body,
      though they are necessary conditions; nor the cause of a
      self-sacrifice, the knowledge which was necessary for it; nor the
      cause of writing a book, that a man has time for it, which is a
      necessary condition.” These conditions (besides that they are
      antecedent _states_, and not proximate antecedent _events_, and are
      therefore never the conditions in closest apparent proximity to the
      effect) are all of them so obviously implied, that it is hardly
      possible there should exist that necessity for insisting on them,
      which alone gives occasion for speaking of a single condition as if
      it were the cause. Wherever this necessity exists in regard to some
      one condition, and does not exist in regard to any other, I conceive
      that it is consistent with usage, when scientific accuracy is not
      aimed at, to apply the name cause to that one condition. If the only
      condition which can be supposed to be unknown is a negative
      condition, the negative condition may be spoken of as the cause. It
      might be said that a person died for want of medical advice: though
      this would not be likely to be said, unless the person was already
      understood to be ill; and in order to indicate that this negative
      circumstance was what made the illness fatal, and not the weakness
      of his constitution, or the original virulence of the disease. It
      might be said that a person was drowned because he could not swim;
      the positive condition, namely that he fell into the water, being
      already implied in the word drowned. And here let me remark, that
      his falling into the water is in this case the only positive
      condition: all the conditions not expressly or virtually included in
      this (as that he could not swim, that nobody helped him, and so
      forth) are negative. Yet, if it were simply said that the cause of a
      man’s death was falling into the water, there would be quite as
      great a sense of impropriety in the expression, as there would be if
      it were said that the cause was his inability to swim; because,
      though the one condition is positive and the other negative, it
      would be felt that neither of them was sufficient, without the
      other, to produce death.

      With regard to the assertion that nothing is termed the cause,
      except the element which exerts active force; I waive the question
      as to the meaning of active force, and accepting the phrase in its
      popular sense, I revert to a former example, and I ask, would it be
      more agreeable to custom to say that a man fell because his foot
      slipped in climbing a ladder, or that he fell because of his
      weight—for his weight, and not the motion of his foot, was the
      active force which determined his fall. If a person walking out in a
      frosty day, stumbled and fell, it might be said that he stumbled
      because the ground was slippery, or because he was not sufficiently
      careful; but few people, I suppose, would say that he stumbled
      because he walked. Yet the only active force concerned was that
      which he exerted in walking: the others were mere negative
      conditions; but they happened to be the only ones which there could
      be any necessity to state; for he walked, most likely, in exactly
      his usual manner, and the negative conditions made all the
      difference. Again, if a person were asked why the army of Xerxes
      defeated that of Leonidas, he would probably say, because they were
      a thousand times the number; but I do not think he would say, it was
      because they fought; although that was the element of active force.
      The reviewer adds, “there are some conditions absolutely passive,
      and yet absolutely necessary to physical phenomena, viz., the
      relations of space and time; and to these no one ever applies the
      word cause without being immediately arrested by those who hear
      him.” Even from this statement I am compelled to dissent. Few
      persons would feel it incongruous to say (for example) that a secret
      became known because it was spoken of when A. B. was within hearing;
      which is a condition of space; or that the cause why one of two
      particular trees is taller than the other, is that it has been
      longer planted; which is a condition of time.

   66 There are a few exceptions; for there are some properties of objects
      which seem to be purely preventive; as the property of opaque
      bodies, by which they intercept the passage of light. This, as far
      as we are able to understand it, appears an instance not of one
      cause counteracting another by the same law whereby it produces its
      own effects, but of an agency which manifests itself in no other way
      than in defeating the effects of another agency. If we knew on what
      other relations to light, or on what peculiarities of structure,
      opacity depends, we might find that this is only an apparent, not a
      real, exception to the general proposition in the text. In any case
      it needs not affect the practical application. The formula which
      includes all the negative conditions of an effect in the single one
      of the absence of counteracting causes, is not violated by such
      cases as this; though, if all counteracting agencies were of this
      description, there would be no purpose served by employing the
      formula, since we should still have to enumerate specially the
      negative conditions of each phenomenon, instead of regarding them as
      implicitly contained in the positive laws of the various other
      agencies in nature.

   67 I use the words “straight line” for brevity and simplicity. In
      reality the line in question is not exactly straight, for, from the
      effect of refraction, we actually see the sun for a short interval
      during which the opaque mass of the earth is interposed in a direct
      line between the sun and our eyes; thus realizing, though but to a
      limited extent, the coveted desideratum of seeing round a corner.

   68 The reviewer of Dr. Whewell in the _Quarterly Review_.

   69 To the universality which mankind are agreed in ascribing to the Law
      of Causation, there is one claim of exception, one disputed case,
      that of the Human Will; the determinations of which, a large class
      of metaphysicians are not willing to regard as following the causes
      called motives, according to as strict laws as those which they
      suppose to exist in the world of mere matter. This controverted
      point will undergo a special examination when we come to treat
      particularly of the Logic of the Moral Sciences, (Book vi. ch. 2).
      In the meantime I may remark that these metaphysicians, who, it must
      be observed, ground the main part of their objection on the supposed
      repugnance of the doctrine in question to our consciousness, seem to
      me to mistake the fact which consciousness testifies against. What
      is really in contradiction to consciousness, they would, I think, on
      strict self-examination, find to be, the application to human
      actions and volitions of the ideas involved in the common use of the
      term Necessity; which I agree with them in objecting to. But if they
      would consider that by saying that a person’s actions _necessarily_
      follow from his character, all that is really meant (for no more is
      meant in any case whatever of causation) is that he invariably
      _does_ act in conformity to his character, and that any one who
      thoroughly knew his character could certainly predict how he would
      act in any supposable case; they probably would not find this
      doctrine either contrary to their experience or revolting to their
      feelings. And no more than this is contended for by any one but an
      Asiatic fatalist.

   70 Unless we are to consider as such the following statement, by one of
      the writers quoted in the text: “In the case of mental exertion, the
      result to be accomplished is _preconsidered_ or meditated, and is
      therefore known _à priori_, or before experience.”—(Bowen’s _Lowell
      Lectures on the Application of Metaphysical and Ethical Science to
      the Evidence of Religion_, Boston, 1849.) This is merely saying that
      when we will a thing we have an idea of it. But to have an idea of
      what we wish to happen, does not imply a prophetic knowledge that it
      will happen. Perhaps it will be said that the _first time_ we
      exerted our will, when we had of course no experience of any of the
      powers residing in us, we nevertheless must already have known that
      we possessed them, since we cannot _will_ that which we do not
      believe to be in our power. But the impossibility is perhaps in the
      words only, and not in the facts; for we may _desire_ what we do not
      know to be in our power; and finding by experience that our bodies
      move according to our _desire_, we may then, and only then, pass
      into the more complicated mental state which is termed will.

      After all, even if we had an instinctive knowledge that our actions
      would follow our will, this, as Brown remarks, would prove nothing
      as to the nature of Causation. Our knowing, previous to experience,
      that an antecedent will be followed by a certain consequent, would
      not prove the relation between them to be anything _more_ than
      antecedence and consequence.

   71 Reid’s _Essays on the Active Powers_, Essay iv. ch. 3.

_   72 Prospective Review_ for February 1850.

_   73 Vide supra_, p. 267, note.

   74 In combating the theory, that Volition is the universal cause, I
      have purposely abstained from one of the strongest positive
      arguments against it—that volitions themselves obey causes, and even
      external causes, namely, the inducements, or motives, which
      determine the will to act; because an objector might say that to
      employ this argument would be begging the question against the
      freedom of the will. Though it is not begging the question to affirm
      a doctrine, referring elsewhere for the proof of it, I am unwilling
      without necessity to build any part of my reasoning on a proposition
      which I am aware that those opposed to me in the present discussion
      do not admit.

   75 I omit, for simplicity, to take into account the effect, in this
      latter case, of the diminution of pressure, in diminishing the flow
      of water through the drain; which evidently in no way affects the
      truth or applicability of the principle.

   76 Unless, indeed, the consequent was generated not by the antecedent,
      but by the means we employed to produce the antecedent. As, however,
      these means are under our power, there is so far a probability that
      they are also sufficiently within our knowledge, to enable us to
      judge whether that could be the case or not.

_   77 Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy_, p. 179.

   78 For this speculation I am indebted to Mr. Alexander Bain.

   79 This view of the necessary coexistence of opposite excitements
      involves a great extension of the original doctrine of two
      electricities. The early theorists assumed that, when amber was
      rubbed, the amber was made positive and the rubber negative to the
      same degree; but it never occurred to them to suppose that the
      existence of the amber charge was dependent on an opposite charge in
      the bodies with which the amber was contiguous, while the existence
      of the negative charge on the rubber was equally dependent on a
      contrary state of the surfaces that might accidentally be confronted
      with it; that, in fact, in a case of electrical excitement by
      friction, four charges were the minimum that could exist. But this
      double electrical action is essentially implied in the explanation
      now universally adopted in regard to the phenomena of the common
      electric machine.

   80 Pp. 159-162.

   81 Infra, book iv., chap. ii. On Abstraction.

   82 I must, however, remark, that this example, which seems to militate
      against the assertion we made of the comparative inapplicability of
      the Method of Difference to cases of pure observation, is really one
      of those exceptions which, according to a proverbial expression,
      prove the general rule. For this case, in which Nature, in her
      experiment, seems to have imitated the type of the experiments made
      by man, she has only succeeded in producing the likeness of man’s
      most imperfect experiments; namely, those in which, though he
      succeeds in producing the phenomenon, he does so by employing
      complex means, which he is unable perfectly to analyse, and can form
      therefore no sufficient judgment what portion of the effects may be
      due, not to the supposed cause, but to some unknown agency of the
      means by which that cause was produced. In the natural experiment
      which we are speaking of, the means used was the clearing off a
      canopy of clouds; and we certainly do not know sufficiently in what
      this process consists, or on what it depends, to be certain _à
      priori_ that it might not operate upon the deposition of dew
      independently of any thermometric effect at the earth’s surface.
      Even, therefore, in a case so favourable as this to Nature’s
      experimental talents, her experiment is of little value except in
      corroboration of a conclusion already attained through other means.

   83 Discourse, pp. 156-8, and 171.

_   84 Outlines of Astronomy_, p. 584.

   85 Dr. Whewell, in his reply, expresses a very unfavourable opinion of
      the utility of the Four Methods, as well as of the aptness of the
      examples by which I have attempted to illustrate them. His words are
      these (pp. 44-6):

      “Upon these methods, the obvious thing to remark is, that they take
      for granted the very thing which is most difficult to discover, the
      reduction of the phenomena to formulæ such as are here presented to
      us. When we have any set of complex facts offered to us; for
      instance, those which were offered in the cases of discovery which I
      have mentioned,—the facts of the planetary paths, of falling bodies,
      of refracted rays, of cosmical motions, of chemical analysis; and
      when, in any of these cases, we would discover the law of nature
      which governs them, or, if any one chooses so to term it, the
      feature in which all the cases agree, where are we to look for our
      A, B, C, and _a, b, c_? Nature does not present to us the cases in
      this form; and how are we to reduce them to this form? You say,
      _when_ we find the combination of A B C with _a b c_ and A B D with
      _a b d_, then we may draw our inference. Granted; but when and where
      are we to find such combinations? Even now that the discoveries are
      made, who will point out to us what are the A, B, C, and _a, b, c_
      elements of the cases which have just been enumerated? Who will tell
      us which of the methods of inquiry those historically real and
      successful inquiries exemplify? Who will carry these formulæ through
      the history of the sciences, as they have really grown up; and shew
      us that these four methods have been operative in their formation;
      or that any light is thrown upon the steps of their progress by
      reference to these formulæ?”

      He adds that, in this work, the methods have not been applied “to a
      large body of conspicuous and undoubted examples of discovery,
      extending along the whole history of science,” which ought to have
      been done in order that the methods might be shown to possess the
      “advantage” (which he claims as belonging to his own) of being those
      “by which all great discoveries in science have really been
      made.”—(p. 66.)

      There is a striking similarity between the objections here made
      against Canons of Induction, and what was alleged, in the last
      century, by as able men as Dr. Whewell, against the acknowledged
      Canon of Ratiocination. Those who protested against the Aristotelian
      Logic said of the Syllogism, what Dr. Whewell says of the Inductive
      Methods, that it “takes for granted the very thing which is most
      difficult to discover, the reduction of the argument to formulæ such
      as are here presented to us.” The grand difficulty, they said, is to
      obtain your syllogism, not to judge of its correctness when
      obtained. On the matter of fact, both they and Dr. Whewell are
      right. The greatest difficulty in both cases is first that of
      obtaining the evidence, and next, of reducing it to the form which
      tests its conclusiveness. But if we try so to reduce it without
      knowing _to what_, we are not likely to make much progress. It is a
      more difficult thing to solve a geometrical problem, than to judge
      whether a proposed solution is correct: but if people were not able
      to judge of the solution when found, they would have little chance
      of finding it. And it cannot be pretended that to judge of an
      induction when found, is perfectly easy, is a thing for which aids
      and instruments are superfluous; for erroneous inductions, false
      inferences from experience, are quite as common, on some subjects
      much commoner, than true ones. The business of Inductive Logic is to
      provide rules and models (such as the Syllogism and its rules are
      for ratiocination) to which if inductive arguments conform, those
      arguments are conclusive, and not otherwise. This is what the Four
      Methods profess to be, and what I believe they are universally
      considered to be by experimental philosophers, who had practised all
      of them long before any one sought to reduce the practice to theory.

      The assailants of the Syllogism had also anticipated Dr. Whewell in
      the other branch of his argument. They said that no discoveries were
      ever made by syllogism; and Dr. Whewell says, or seems to say, that
      none were ever made by the four Methods of Induction. To the former
      objectors, Archbishop Whately very pertinently answered, that their
      argument, if good at all, was good against the reasoning process
      altogether; for whatever cannot be reduced to syllogism, is not
      reasoning. And Dr. Whewell’s argument, if good at all, is good
      against all inferences from experience. In saying that no
      discoveries were ever made by the four Methods, he affirms that none
      were ever made by observation and experiment; for assuredly if any
      were, it was by one or other of those methods.

      This difference between us accounts for the dissatisfaction which my
      examples give him; for I did not select them with a view to satisfy
      any one who required to be convinced that observation and experiment
      are modes of acquiring knowledge: I confess that in the choice of
      them I thought only of illustration, and of facilitating the
      _conception_ of the Methods by concrete instances. If it had been my
      object to justify the processes themselves as means of
      investigation, there would have been no need to look far off, or
      make use of recondite or complicated instances. As a specimen of a
      truth ascertained by the Method of Agreement, I might have chosen
      the proposition, “Dogs bark.” This dog, and that dog, and the other
      dog, answer to A B C, A D E, A F G. The circumstance of being a dog,
      answers to A. Barking answers to _a_. As a truth made known by the
      Method of Difference, “Fire burns” might have sufficed. Before I
      touch the fire I am not burnt; this is B C; I touch it, and am
      burnt; this is A B C, _a_ B C.

      Such familiar experimental processes are not regarded as inductions
      by Dr. Whewell; but they are perfectly homogeneous with those by
      which, even on his own shewing, the pyramid of science is supplied
      with its base. In vain he attempts to escape from this truth by
      laying the most arbitrary restrictions on the choice of examples
      admissible as instances of Induction: they must neither be such as
      are still matter of discussion (p. 47), nor must any of them be
      drawn from mental and social subjects (p. 53), nor from ordinary
      observation and practical life (pp. 11-15). They must be taken
      exclusively from the generalizations by which scientific thinkers
      have ascended to great and comprehensive laws of natural phenomena.
      Now it is seldom possible, in these complicated inquiries, to go
      much beyond the initial steps, without calling in the instrument of
      Deduction, and the temporary aid of hypotheses; as I myself, in
      common with Dr. Whewell, have maintained against the purely
      empirical school. Since therefore such cases could not conveniently
      be selected to illustrate the principles of mere observation and
      experiment, Dr. Whewell takes advantage of their absence to
      represent the Experimental Methods as serving no purpose in
      scientific investigation; forgetting that if those methods had not
      supplied the first generalizations, there would have been no
      materials for his own conception of Induction to work upon.

      His challenge, however, to point out which of the four methods are
      exemplified in certain important cases of scientific inquiry, is
      easily answered. “The planetary paths,” as far as they are a case of
      induction at all, (see, on this point, the second chapter of the
      present Book) fall under the Method of Agreement. The law of
      “falling bodies,” namely that they describe spaces proportional to
      the squares of the times, was historically a deduction from the
      first law of motion; but the experiments by which it was verified,
      and by which it might have been discovered, were examples of the
      Method of Agreement; and the apparent variation from the true law,
      caused by the resistance of the air, was cleared up by experiments
      _in vacuo_, constituting an application of the Method of Difference.
      The law of “refracted rays,” (the constancy of the ratio between the
      sines of incidence and of refraction for each refracting substance)
      was ascertained by direct measurement, and therefore by the Method
      of Agreement. The “cosmical motions” were determined by highly
      complex processes of thought, in which Deduction was predominant,
      but the Methods of Agreement and of Concomitant Variations had a
      large part in establishing the empirical laws. Every case without
      exception of “chemical analysis” constitutes a well marked example
      of the Method of Difference. To any one acquainted with the
      subjects—to Dr. Whewell himself, there would not be the smallest
      difficulty in setting out “the A B C and _a b c_ elements” of these
      cases.

      If discoveries are ever made by observation and experiment without
      Deduction, the four methods are methods of discovery: but even if
      they were not methods of discovery, it would not be the less true
      that they are the sole methods of Proof; and in that character, even
      the results of Deduction are amenable to them. The great
      generalizations which begin as Hypotheses must end by being proved,
      and are in reality (as will be shown hereafter) proved by the Four
      Methods. Now it is with Proof, as such, that Logic is principally
      concerned. This distinction has indeed no chance of finding favour
      with Dr. Whewell; for it is the peculiarity of his system not to
      recognise, in cases of Induction, any necessity for proof. If, after
      assuming an hypothesis and carefully collating it with facts,
      nothing is brought to light inconsistent with it, that is, if
      experience does not _dis_prove it, he is content: at least until a
      simpler hypothesis, equally consistent with experience, presents
      itself. If this be Induction, doubtless there is no necessity for
      the four methods. But to suppose that it is so, appears to me a
      radical misconception of the nature of the evidence of physical
      truths.

_   86 Ante_, p. 378.

   87 It seems hardly necessary to say that the word _impinges_, as a
      general term to express collision of forces, was here used by a
      figure of speech, and not as expressive of any theory respecting the
      nature of force.

_   88 Essays on some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy_, Essay V.

   89 There is no danger of confounding this acceptation of the term with
      the peculiar employment of the phrase “tangential force” in the
      theory of the planetary perturbations.

   90 Suprà, p. 420.

   91 As corroborating the opinion that the protoxide of iron in the
      venous blood is only partially carbonated, the fact has been
      suggested, that the system shows great readiness to absorb an extra
      quantity of carbonic acid, as furnished in effervescing drinks. In
      such cases the acid must combine with something, and that something
      is not improbably the free protoxide. It would be worth ascertaining
      whether the protoxide itself or its carbonate has the greatest
      facility in absorbing oxygen and turning itself into hydrated
      peroxide in the lungs. If the carbonate, then the beneficial effect,
      on the animal economy, of drinks which give an artificial supply of
      carbonic acid to the system, would be, to that extent, deductively
      established.

   92 It was an old generalization in surgery, that tight bandaging had a
      tendency to prevent or dissipate local inflammation. This sequence,
      being, in the progress of physiological knowledge, resolved into
      more general laws, led to the important surgical invention made by
      Dr. Arnott, the treatment of local inflammation and tumours by means
      of an equable pressure, produced by a bladder partially filled with
      air. The pressure, by keeping back the blood from the part, prevents
      the inflammation, or the tumour, from being nourished; in the case
      of inflammation, it removes the stimulus, which the organ is unfit
      to receive: in the case of tumours, by keeping back the nutritive
      fluid it causes the absorption of matter to exceed the supply, and
      the diseased mass is gradually absorbed and disappears.





***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A SYSTEM OF LOGIC, RATIOCINATIVE AND INDUCTIVE (VOL. 1 OF 2)***



CREDITS


August 31,  2008

            Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1
            Produced by David Clarke, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at <http://www.pgdp.net/>. (This
            file was produced from images generously made available by The
            Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries).



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 26495-0.txt or 26495-0.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/6/4/9/26495/


Updated editions will replace the previous one — the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
— you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you
share it without charge with others.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation.”

      You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

      You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

      You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES — Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND — If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY — You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.






***FINIS***

