CHAPTER II. OF RATIOCINATION, OR SYLLOGISM.


§ 1. The analysis of the Syllogism has been so accurately and fully
performed in the common manuals of Logic, that in the present work, which
is not designed as a manual, it is sufficient to recapitulate, _memoriæ
causâ_, the leading results of that analysis, as a foundation for the
remarks to be afterwards made on the functions of the syllogism, and the
place which it holds in science.

To a legitimate syllogism it is essential that there should be three, and
no more than three, propositions, namely, the conclusion, or proposition
to be proved, and two other propositions which together prove it, and
which are called the premisses. It is essential that there should be
three, and no more than three, terms, namely, the subject and predicate of
the conclusion, and another called the middleterm, which must be found in
both premisses, since it is by means of it that the other two terms are to
be connected together. The predicate of the conclusion is called the major
term of the syllogism; the subject of the conclusion is called the minor
term. As there can be but three terms, the major and minor terms must each
be found in one, and only one, of the premisses, together with the
middleterm which is in them both. The premiss which contains the
middleterm and the major term is called the major premiss; that which
contains the middle term and the minor term is called the minor premiss.

Syllogisms are divided by some logicians into three _figures_, by others
into four, according to the position of the middleterm, which may either
be the subject in both premisses, the predicate in both, or the subject in
one and the predicate in the other. The most common case is that in which
the middleterm is the subject of the major premiss and the predicate of
the minor. This is reckoned as the first figure. When the middleterm is
the predicate in both premisses, the syllogism belongs to the second
figure; when it is the subject in both, to the third. In the fourth figure
the middleterm is the subject of the minor premiss and the predicate of
the major. Those writers who reckon no more than three figures, include
this case in the first.

Each figure is divided into _modes_, according to what are called the
_quantity_ and _quality_ of the propositions, that is, according as they
are universal or particular, affirmative or negative. The following are
examples of all the legitimate modes, that is, all those in which the
conclusion correctly follows from the premisses. A is the minor term, C
the major, B the middleterm.

FIRST FIGURE.

All B is C   No B is C    All B is C    No B is C
All A is B   All A is B   Some A is B   Some A is B
therefore    therefore    therefore     therefore
All A is C   No A is C    Some A is C   Some A is not C

SECOND FIGURE.

No C is B    All C is B   No C is B         All C is B
All A is B   No A is B    Some A is B       Some A is not B
therefore    therefore    therefore         therefore
No A is C    No A is C    Some A is not C   Some A is not C

THIRD FIGURE.

All B is C    No B is C    Some B is C   All B is C    Some B is    No B is C
                                                       not C
All B is A    All B is A   All B is A    Some B is A   All B is A   Some B is A
therefore     therefore    therefore     therefore     therefore    therefore
Some A is C   Some A is    Some A is C   Some A is C   Some A is    Some A is
              not C                                    not C        not C

FOURTH FIGURE.

All C is B    All C is B   Some C is B   No C is B    No C is B
All B is A    No B is A    All B is A    All B is A   Some B is A
therefore     therefore    therefore     therefore    therefore
Some A is C   Some A is    Some A is C   Some A is    Some A is
              not C                      not C        not C

In these exemplars, or blank forms of making syllogisms, no place is
assigned to _singular_ propositions; not, of course, because such
propositions are not used in ratiocination, but because, their predicate
being affirmed or denied of the whole of the subject, they are ranked, for
the purposes of the syllogism, with universal propositions. Thus, these
two syllogisms—

All men are mortal,     All men are mortal,
All kings are men,      Socrates is a man,
therefore               therefore
All kings are mortal,   Socrates is mortal,

are arguments precisely similar, and are both ranked in the first mode of
the first figure.

The reasons why syllogisms in any of the above forms are legitimate, that
is, why, if the premisses be true, the conclusion must necessarily be so,
and why this is not the case in any other possible _mode_, (that is, in
any other combination of universal and particular, affirmative and
negative propositions,) any person taking interest in these inquiries may
be presumed to have either learnt from the common school books of the
syllogistic logic, or to be capable of divining for himself. The reader
may, however, be referred, for every needful explanation, to Archbishop
Whately’s _Elements of Logic_, where he will find stated with
philosophical precision, and explained with remarkable perspicuity, the
whole of the common doctrine of the syllogism.

All valid ratiocination; all reasoning by which, from general propositions
previously admitted, other propositions equally or less general are
inferred; may be exhibited in some of the above forms. The whole of
Euclid, for example, might be thrown without difficulty into a series of
syllogisms, regular in mode and figure.

Although a syllogism framed according to any of these formulæ is a valid
argument, all correct ratiocination admits of being stated in syllogisms
of the first figure alone. The rules for throwing an argument in any of
the other figures into the first figure, are called rules for the
_reduction_ of syllogisms. It is done by the _conversion_ of one or other,
or both, of the premisses. Thus an argument in the first mode of the
second figure, as—

No C is B
All A is B
therefore
No A is C,

may be reduced as follows. The proposition, No C is B, being an universal
negative, admits of simple conversion, and may be changed into No B is C,
which, as we showed, is the very same assertion in other words—the same
fact differently expressed. This transformation having been effected, the
argument assumes the following form:—

No B is C
All A is B
therefore
No A is C,

which is a good syllogism in the second mode of the first figure. Again,
an argument in the first mode of the third figure must resemble the
following:—

All B is C
All B is A
therefore
Some A is C,

where the minor premiss, All B is A, conformably to what was laid down in
the last chapter respecting universal affirmatives, does not admit of
simple conversion, but may be converted _per accidens_, thus, Some A is B;
which, though it does not express the whole of what is asserted in the
proposition All B is A, expresses, as was formerly shown, part of it, and
must therefore be true if the whole is true. We have, then, as the result
of the reduction, the following syllogism in the third mode of the first
figure:—

All B is C
Some A is B,
from which it obviously follows, that
Some A is C.

In the same manner, or in a manner on which after these examples it is not
necessary to enlarge, every mode of the second, third, and fourth figures
may be reduced to some one of the four modes of the first. In other words,
every conclusion which can be proved in any of the last three figures, may
be proved in the first figure from the same premisses, with a slight
alteration in the mere manner of expressing them. Every valid
ratiocination, therefore, may be stated in the first figure, that is, in
one of the following forms:—

Every B is C   No B is C
All A is B,    All A is B,
Some A is B,   Some A is B,
therefore      therefore
All A is C.    No A is C.
Some A is C.   Some A is not C.

Or if more significant symbols are preferred:—

To prove an affirmative, the argument must admit of being stated in this
form:—

All animals are mortal;
All men/Some men/Socrates are animals;
therefore
All men/Some men/Socrates are mortal.

To prove a negative, the argument must be capable of being expressed in
this form:—

No one who is capable of self-control is necessarily vicious;
All negroes/Some negroes/Mr. A’s negro are capable of self-control;
therefore
No negroes are/Some negroes are not/Mr. A’s negro is not necessarily
vicious.

Although all ratiocination admits of being thrown into one or the other of
these forms, and sometimes gains considerably by the transformation, both
in clearness and in the obviousness of its consequence; there are, no
doubt, cases in which the argument falls more naturally into one of the
other three figures, and in which its conclusiveness is more apparent at
the first glance in those figures, than when reduced to the first. Thus,
if the proposition were that pagans may be virtuous, and the evidence to
prove it were the example of Aristides; a syllogism in the third figure,

Aristides was virtuous,
Aristides was a pagan,
therefore
Some pagan was virtuous,

would be a more natural mode of stating the argument, and would carry
conviction more instantly home, than the same ratiocination strained into
the first figure, thus—

Aristides was virtuous,
Some pagan was Aristides,
therefore
Some pagan was virtuous.

A German philosopher, Lambert, whose _Neues Organon_ (published in the
year 1764) contains among other things one of the most elaborate and
complete expositions ever yet made of the syllogistic doctrine, has
expressly examined what sorts of arguments fall most naturally and
suitably into each of the four figures; and his solution is characterized
by great ingenuity and clearness of thought.(29) The argument, however, is
one and the same, in whichever figure it is expressed; since, as we have
already seen, the premisses of a syllogism in the second, third, or fourth
figure, and those of the syllogism in the first figure to which it may be
reduced, are the same premisses in everything except language, or, at
least, as much of them as contributes to the proof of the conclusion is
the same. We are therefore at liberty, in conformity with the general
opinion of logicians, to consider the two elementary forms of the first
figure as the universal types of all correct ratiocination; the one, when
the conclusion to be proved is affirmative, the other, when it is
negative; even though certain arguments may have a tendency to clothe
themselves in the forms of the second, third, and fourth figures; which,
however, cannot possibly happen with the only class of arguments which are
of first-rate scientific importance, those in which the conclusion is an
universal affirmative, such conclusions being susceptible of proof in the
first figure alone.

§ 2. On examining, then, these two general formulæ, we find that in both
of them, one premiss, the major, is an universal proposition; and
according as this is affirmative or negative, the conclusion is so too.
All ratiocination, therefore, starts from a _general_ proposition,
principle, or assumption: a proposition in which a predicate is affirmed
or denied of an entire class; that is, in which some attribute, or the
negation of some attribute, is asserted of an indefinite number of objects
distinguished by a common characteristic, and designated, in consequence,
by a common name.

The other premiss is always affirmative, and asserts that something (which
may be either an individual, a class, or part of a class) belongs to, or
is included in, the class respecting which something was affirmed or
denied in the major premiss. It follows that the attribute affirmed or
denied of the entire class may (if there was truth in that affirmation or
denial) be affirmed or denied of the object or objects alleged to be
included in the class: and this is precisely the assertion made in the
conclusion.

Whether or not the foregoing is an adequate account of the constituent
parts of the syllogism, will be presently considered; but as far as it
goes it is a true account. It has accordingly been generalized, and
erected into a logical maxim, on which all ratiocination is said to be
founded, insomuch that to reason, and to apply the maxim, are supposed to
be one and the same thing. The maxim is, That whatever can be affirmed (or
denied) of a class, may be affirmed (or denied) of everything included in
the class. This axiom, supposed to be the basis of the syllogistic theory,
is termed by logicians the _dictum de omni et nullo_.

This maxim, however, when considered as a principle of reasoning, appears
suited to a system of metaphysics once indeed generally received, but
which for the last two centuries has been considered as finally abandoned,
though there have not been wanting, in our own day, attempts at its
revival. So long as what were termed Universals were regarded as a
peculiar kind of substances, having an objective existence distinct from
the individual objects classed under them, the _dictum de omni_ conveyed
an important meaning; because it expressed the intercommunity of nature,
which it was necessary on that theory that we should suppose to exist
between those general substances and the particular substances which were
subordinated to them. That everything predicable of the universal was
predicable of the various individuals contained under it, was then no
identical proposition, but a statement of what was conceived as a
fundamental law of the universe. The assertion that the entire nature and
properties of the _substantia secunda_ formed part of the properties of
each of the individual substances called by the same name; that the
properties of Man, for example, were properties of all men; was a
proposition of real significance when man did not _mean_ all men, but
something inherent in men, and vastly superior to them in dignity. Now,
however, when it is known that a class, an universal, a genus or species,
is not an entity _per se_, but neither more nor less than the individual
substances themselves which are placed in the class, and that there is
nothing real in the matter except those objects, a common name given to
them, and common attributes indicated by the name; what, I should be glad
to know, do we learn by being told, that whatever can be affirmed of a
class, may be affirmed of every object contained in the class? The class
_is_ nothing but the objects contained in it: and the _dictum de omni_
merely amounts to the identical proposition, that whatever is true of
certain objects, is true of each of those objects. If all ratiocination
were no more than the application of this maxim to particular cases, the
syllogism would indeed be, what it has so often been declared to be,
solemn trifling. The _dictum de omni_ is on a par with another truth,
which in its time was also reckoned of great importance, “Whatever is,
is;” and not to be compared in point of significance to the cognate
aphorism, “It is impossible for the same thing to be and not to be;” since
this is, at the lowest, equivalent to the logical axiom that contradictory
propositions cannot both be true. To give any real meaning to the _dictum
de omni_, we must consider it not as an axiom, but as a definition; we
must look upon it as intended to explain, in a circuitous and paraphrastic
manner, the meaning of the word _class_.

An error which seemed finally refuted and dislodged from thought, often
needs only put on a new suit of phrases, to be welcomed back to its old
quarters, and allowed to repose unquestioned for another cycle of ages.
Modern philosophers have not been sparing in their contempt for the
scholastic dogma that genera and species are a peculiar kind of
substances, which general substances being the only permanent things,
while the individual substances comprehended under them are in a perpetual
flux, knowledge, which necessarily imports stability, can only have
relation to those general substances or universals, and not to the facts
or particulars included under them. Yet, though nominally rejected, this
very doctrine, whether disguised under the Abstract Ideas of Locke (whose
speculations, however, it has less vitiated than those of perhaps any
other writer who has been infected with it), under the ultra-nominalism of
Hobbes and Condillac, or the ontology of the later Kantians, has never
ceased to poison philosophy. Once accustomed to consider scientific
investigation as essentially consisting in the study of universals, men
did not drop this habit of thought when they ceased to regard universals
as possessing an independent existence: and even those who went the length
of considering them as mere names, could not free themselves from the
notion that the investigation of truth consisted entirely or partly in
some kind of conjuration or juggle with those names. When a philosopher
adopted fully the Nominalist view of the signification of general
language, retaining along with it the _dictum de omni_ as the foundation
of all reasoning, two such premisses fairly put together were likely, if
he was a consistent thinker, to land him in rather startling conclusions.
Accordingly it has been seriously held, by writers of deserved celebrity,
that the process of arriving at new truths by reasoning consists in the
mere substitution of one set of arbitrary signs for another; a doctrine
which they supposed to derive irresistible confirmation from the example
of algebra. If there were any process in sorcery or necromancy more
preternatural than this, I should be much surprised. The culminating point
of this philosophy is the noted aphorism of Condillac, that a science is
nothing, or scarcely anything, but _une langue bien faite_: in other
words, that the one sufficient rule for discovering the nature and
properties of objects is to name them properly: as if the reverse were not
the truth, that it is impossible to name them properly except in
proportion as we are already acquainted with their nature and properties.
Can it be necessary to say, that none, not even the most trivial knowledge
with respect to Things, ever was or could be originally got at by any
conceivable manipulation of mere names, as such; and that what can be
learnt from names, is only what somebody who used the names, knew before?
Philosophical analysis confirms the indication of common sense, that the
function of names is but that of enabling us to _remember_ and to
_communicate_ our thoughts. That they also strengthen, even to an
incalculable extent, the power of thought itself, is most true: but they
do this by no intrinsic and peculiar virtue; they do it by the power
inherent in an artificial memory, an instrument of which few have
adequately considered the immense potency. As an artificial memory,
language truly is, what it has so often been called, an instrument of
thought: but it is one thing to be the instrument, and another to be the
exclusive subject upon which the instrument is exercised. We think,
indeed, to a considerable extent, by means of names, but what we think of,
are the things called by those names; and there cannot be a greater error
than to imagine that thought can be carried on with nothing in our mind
but names, or that we can make the names think for us.

§ 3. Those who considered the _dictum de omni_ as the foundation of the
syllogism, looked upon arguments in a manner corresponding to the
erroneous view which Hobbes took of propositions. Because there are some
propositions which are merely verbal, Hobbes, in order apparently that his
definition might be rigorously universal, defined a proposition as if no
propositions declared anything except the meaning of words. If Hobbes was
right; if no further account than this could be given of the import of
propositions; no theory could be given but the commonly received one, of
the combination of propositions in a syllogism. If the minor premiss
asserted nothing more than that something belongs to a class, and if the
major premiss asserted nothing of that class except that it is included in
another class, the conclusion would only be, that what was included in the
lower class is included in the higher, and the result, therefore, nothing
except that the classification is consistent with itself. But we have seen
that it is no sufficient account of the meaning of a proposition, to say
that it refers something to, or excludes something from, a class. Every
proposition which conveys real information asserts a matter of fact,
dependent on the laws of nature, and not on artificial classification. It
asserts that a given object does or does not possess a given attribute; or
it asserts that two attributes, or sets of attributes, do or do not
(constantly or occasionally) coexist. Since such is the purport of all
propositions which convey any real knowledge, and since ratiocination is a
mode of acquiring real knowledge, any theory of ratiocination which does
not recognise this import of propositions, cannot, we may be sure, be the
true one.

Applying this view of propositions to the two premisses of a syllogism, we
obtain the following results. The major premiss, which, as already
remarked, is always universal, asserts, that all things which have a
certain attribute (or attributes) have or have not along with it, a
certain other attribute (or attributes). The minor premiss asserts that
the thing or set of things which are the subject of that premiss, have the
first-mentioned attribute; and the conclusion is, that they have (or that
they have not) the second. Thus in our former example,

All men are mortal,
Socrates is a man,
therefore
Socrates is mortal,

the subject and predicate of the major premiss are connotative terms,
denoting objects and connoting attributes. The assertion in the major
premiss is, that along with one of the two sets of attributes, we always
find the other: that the attributes connoted by “man” never exist unless
conjoined with the attribute called mortality. The assertion in the minor
premiss is that the individual named Socrates possesses the former
attributes; and it is concluded that he possesses also the attribute
mortality. Or if both the premisses are general propositions, as

All men are mortal,
All kings are men,
therefore
All kings are mortal,

the minor premiss asserts that the attributes denoted by kingship only
exist in conjunction with those signified by the word man. The major
asserts as before, that the last mentioned attributes are never found
without the attribute of mortality. The conclusion is, that wherever the
attributes of kingship are found, that of mortality is found also.

If the major premiss were negative, as, No men are omnipotent, it would
assert, not that the attributes connoted by “man” never exist without, but
that they never exist with, those connoted by “omnipotent:” from which,
together with the minor premiss, it is concluded, that the same
incompatibility exists between the attribute omnipotence and those
constituting a king. In a similar manner we might analyse any other
example of the syllogism.

If we generalize this process, and look out for the principle or law
involved in every such inference, and presupposed in every syllogism the
propositions of which are anything more than merely verbal; we find, not
the unmeaning _dictum de omni et nullo_, but a fundamental principle, or
rather two principles, strikingly resembling the axioms of mathematics.
The first, which is the principle of affirmative syllogisms, is, that
things which coexist with the same thing, coexist with one another. The
second is the principle of negative syllogisms, and is to this effect:
that a thing which coexists with another thing, with which other a third
thing does not coexist, is not coexistent with that third thing. These
axioms manifestly relate to facts, and not to conventions; and one or
other of them is the ground of the legitimacy of every argument in which
facts and not conventions are the matter treated of.

§ 4. It remains to translate this exposition of the syllogism from the one
into the other of the two languages in which we formerly remarked(30) that
all propositions, and of course therefore all combinations of
propositions, might be expressed. We observed that a proposition might be
considered in two different lights; as a portion of our knowledge of
nature, or as a memorandum for our guidance. Under the former, or
speculative aspect, an affirmative general proposition is an assertion of
a speculative truth, viz. that whatever has a certain attribute has a
certain other attribute. Under the other aspect, it is to be regarded not
as a part of our knowledge, but as an aid for our practical exigencies, by
enabling us, when we see or learn that an object possesses one of the two
attributes, to infer that it possesses the other; thus employing the first
attribute as a mark or evidence of the second. Thus regarded, every
syllogism comes within the following general formula:—

Attribute A is a mark of attribute B,
A given object has the mark A,
therefore
The given object has the attribute B.

Referred to this type, the arguments which we have lately cited as
specimens of the syllogism, will express themselves in the following
manner:—

The attributes of man are a mark of the attribute mortality,
Socrates has the attributes of man,
therefore
Socrates has the attribute mortality.

And again,

The attributes of man are a mark of the attribute mortality,
The attributes of a king are a mark of the attributes of man,
therefore
The attributes of a king are a mark of the attribute mortality.

And lastly,

The attributes of man are a mark of the _absence_ of the attribute
omnipotence,
The attributes of a king are a mark of the attributes of man,
therefore
The attributes of a king are a mark of the absence of the attribute
signified by the word omnipotent, (or, are _evidence_ of the absence of
that attribute.)

To correspond with this alteration in the form of the syllogisms, the
axioms on which the syllogistic process is founded must undergo a
corresponding transformation. In this altered phraseology, both those
axioms may be brought under one general expression; namely, that whatever
possesses any mark, possesses that which it is a mark of. Or, when the
minor premiss as well as the major is universal, we may state it thus:
Whatever is a mark of any mark, is a mark of that which this last is a
mark of. To trace the identity of these axioms with those previously laid
down, may be left to the intelligent reader. We shall find, as we proceed,
the great convenience of the phraseology into which we have last thrown
them, and which is better adapted than any I am acquainted with, to
express with precision and force what is aimed at, and actually
accomplished, in every case of the ascertainment of a truth by
ratiocination.




