CHAPTER V.
NIGHT IN THE BUSH.


Well, I was committed now; Tiapolo had to be smashed up before next
day, and my hands were pretty full, not only with preparations, but
with argument. My house was like a mechanics’ debating society: Uma was
so made up that I shouldn’t go into the bush by night, or that, if I
did, I was never to come back again. You know her style of arguing:
you’ve had a specimen about Queen Victoria and the devil; and I leave
you to fancy if I was tired of it before dark.

At last I had a good idea. What was the use of casting my pearls before
her? I thought; some of her own chopped hay would be likelier to do the
business.

“I’ll tell you what, then,” said I. “You fish out your Bible, and I’ll
take that up along with me. That’ll make me right.”

She swore a Bible was no use.

“That’s just your Kanaka ignorance,” said I. “Bring the Bible out.”

She brought it, and I turned to the title-page, where I thought there
would likely be some English, and so there was. “There!” said I. “Look
at that! ‘_London_: _Printed for the British and Foreign Bible
Society_, _Blackfriars_,’ and the date, which I can’t read, owing to
its being in these X’s. There’s no devil in hell can look near the
Bible Society, Blackfriars. Why, you silly!” I said, “how do you
suppose we get along with our own _aitus_ at home? All Bible Society!”

“I think you no got any,” said she. “White man, he tell me you no got.”

“Sounds likely, don’t it?” I asked. “Why would these islands all be
chock full of them and none in Europe?”

“Well, you no got breadfruit,” said she.

I could have torn my hair. “Now look here, old lady,” said I, “you dry
up, for I’m tired of you. I’ll take the Bible, which’ll put me as
straight as the mail, and that’s the last word I’ve got to say.”

The night fell extraordinary dark, clouds coming up with sundown and
overspreading all; not a star showed; there was only an end of a moon,
and that not due before the small hours. Round the village, what with
the lights and the fires in the open houses, and the torches of many
fishers moving on the reef, it kept as gay as an illumination; but the
sea and the mountains and woods were all clean gone. I suppose it might
be eight o’clock when I took the road, laden like a donkey. First there
was that Bible, a book as big as your head, which I had let myself in
for by my own tomfoolery. Then there was my gun, and knife, and
lantern, and patent matches, all necessary. And then there was the real
plant of the affair in hand, a mortal weight of gunpowder, a pair of
dynamite fishing-bombs, and two or three pieces of slow match that I
had hauled out of the tin cases and spliced together the best way I
could; for the match was only trade stuff, and a man would be crazy
that trusted it. Altogether, you see, I had the materials of a pretty
good blow-up! Expense was nothing to me; I wanted that thing done
right.

As long as I was in the open, and had the lamp in my house to steer by,
I did well. But when I got to the path, it fell so dark I could make no
headway, walking into trees and swearing there, like a man looking for
the matches in his bed-room. I knew it was risky to light up, for my
lantern would be visible all the way to the point of the cape, and as
no one went there after dark, it would be talked about, and come to
Case’s ears. But what was I to do? I had either to give the business
over and lose caste with Maea, or light up, take my chance, and get
through the thing the smartest I was able.

As long as I was on the path I walked hard, but when I came to the
black beach I had to run. For the tide was now nearly flowed; and to
get through with my powder dry between the surf and the steep hill,
took all the quickness I possessed. As it was, even, the wash caught me
to the knees, and I came near falling on a stone. All this time the
hurry I was in, and the free air and smell of the sea, kept my spirits
lively; but when I was once in the bush and began to climb the path I
took it easier. The fearsomeness of the wood had been a good bit rubbed
off for me by Master Case’s banjo-strings and graven images, yet I
thought it was a dreary walk, and guessed, when the disciples went up
there, they must be badly scared. The light of the lantern, striking
among all these trunks and forked branches and twisted rope-ends of
lianas, made the whole place, or all that you could see of it, a kind
of a puzzle of turning shadows. They came to meet you, solid and quick
like giants, and then span off and vanished; they hove up over your
head like clubs, and flew away into the night like birds. The floor of
the bush glimmered with dead wood, the way the match-box used to shine
after you had struck a lucifer. Big, cold drops fell on me from the
branches overhead like sweat. There was no wind to mention; only a
little icy breath of a land-breeze that stirred nothing; and the harps
were silent.

The first landfall I made was when I got through the bush of wild
cocoanuts, and came in view of the bogies on the wall. Mighty queer
they looked by the shining of the lantern, with their painted faces and
shell eyes, and their clothes and their hair hanging. One after another
I pulled them all up and piled them in a bundle on the cellar roof, so
as they might go to glory with the rest. Then I chose a place behind
one of the big stones at the entrance, buried my powder and the two
shells, and arranged my match along the passage. And then I had a look
at the smoking head, just for good-bye. It was doing fine.

“Cheer up,” says I. “You’re booked.”

It was my first idea to light up and be getting homeward; for the
darkness and the glimmer of the dead wood and the shadows of the
lantern made me lonely. But I knew where one of the harps hung; it
seemed a pity it shouldn’t go with the rest; and at the same time I
couldn’t help letting on to myself that I was mortal tired of my
employment, and would like best to be at home and have the door shut. I
stepped out of the cellar and argued it fore and back. There was a
sound of the sea far down below me on the coast; nearer hand not a leaf
stirred; I might have been the only living creature this side of Cape
Horn. Well, as I stood there thinking, it seemed the bush woke and
became full of little noises. Little noises they were, and nothing to
hurt—a bit of a crackle, a bit of a rush—but the breath jumped right
out of me and my throat went as dry as a biscuit. It wasn’t Case I was
afraid of, which would have been common-sense; I never thought of Case;
what took me, as sharp as the colic, was the old wives’ tales, the
devil-women and the man-pigs. It was the toss of a penny whether I
should run: but I got a purchase on myself, and stepped out, and held
up the lantern (like a fool) and looked all round.

In the direction of the village and the path there was nothing to be
seen; but when I turned inland it’s a wonder to me I didn’t drop.
There, coming right up out of the desert and the bad bush—there, sure
enough, was a devil-woman, just as the way I had figured she would
look. I saw the light shine on her bare arms and her bright eyes, and
there went out of me a yell so big that I thought it was my death.

“Ah! No sing out!” says the devil-woman, in a kind of a high whisper.
“Why you talk big voice? Put out light! Ese he come.”

“My God Almighty, Uma, is that you?” says I.

“_Ioe_,” [4] says she. “I come quick. Ese here soon.”

“You come alone?” I asked. “You no ’fraid?”

“Ah, too much ’fraid!” she whispered, clutching me. “I think die.”

“Well,” says I, with a kind of a weak grin, “I’m not the one to laugh
at you, Mrs. Wiltshire, for I’m about the worst scared man in the South
Pacific myself.”

She told me in two words what brought her. I was scarce gone, it seems,
when Fa’avao came in, and the old woman had met Black Jack running as
hard as he was fit from our house to Case’s. Uma neither spoke nor
stopped, but lit right out to come and warn me. She was so close at my
heels that the lantern was her guide across the beach, and afterwards,
by the glimmer of it in the trees, she got her line up hill. It was
only when I had got to the top or was in the cellar that she wandered
Lord knows where! and lost a sight of precious time, afraid to call out
lest Case was at the heels of her, and falling in the bush, so that she
was all knocked and bruised. That must have been when she got too far
to the southward, and how she came to take me in the flank at last and
frighten me beyond what I’ve got the words to tell of.

Well, anything was better than a devil-woman, but I thought her yarn
serious enough. Black Jack had no call to be about my house, unless he
was set there to watch; and it looked to me as if my tomfool word about
the paint, and perhaps some chatter of Maea’s, had got us all in a
clove hitch. One thing was clear: Uma and I were here for the night; we
daren’t try to go home before day, and even then it would be safer to
strike round up the mountain and come in by the back of the village, or
we might walk into an ambuscade. It was plain, too, that the mine
should be sprung immediately, or Case might be in time to stop it.

I marched into the tunnel, Uma keeping tight hold of me, opened my
lantern and lit the match. The first length of it burned like a spill
of paper, and I stood stupid, watching it burn, and thinking we were
going aloft with Tiapolo, which was none of my views. The second took
to a better rate, though faster than I cared about; and at that I got
my wits again, hauled Uma clear of the passage, blew out and dropped
the lantern, and the pair of us groped our way into the bush until I
thought it might be safe, and lay down together by a tree.

“Old lady,” I said, “I won’t forget this night. You’re a trump, and
that’s what’s wrong with you.”

She humped herself close up to me. She had run out the way she was,
with nothing on her but her kilt; and she was all wet with the dews and
the sea on the black beach, and shook straight on with cold and the
terror of the dark and the devils.

“Too much ’fraid,” was all she said.

The far side of Case’s hill goes down near as steep as a precipice into
the next valley. We were on the very edge of it, and I could see the
dead wood shine and hear the sea sound far below. I didn’t care about
the position, which left me no retreat, but I was afraid to change.
Then I saw I had made a worse mistake about the lantern, which I should
have left lighted, so that I could have had a crack at Case when he
stepped into the shine of it. And even if I hadn’t had the wit to do
that, it seemed a senseless thing to leave the good lantern to blow up
with the graven images. The thing belonged to me, after all, and was
worth money, and might come in handy. If I could have trusted the
match, I might have run in still and rescued it. But who was going to
trust the match? You know what trade is. The stuff was good enough for
Kanakas to go fishing with, where they’ve got to look lively anyway,
and the most they risk is only to have their hand blown off. But for
anyone that wanted to fool around a blow-up like mine that match was
rubbish.

Altogether the best I could do was to lie still, see my shot-gun handy,
and wait for the explosion. But it was a solemn kind of a business. The
blackness of the night was like solid; the only thing you could see was
the nasty bogy glimmer of the dead wood, and that showed you nothing
but itself; and as for sounds, I stretched my ears till I thought I
could have heard the match burn in the tunnel, and that bush was as
silent as a coffin. Now and then there was a bit of a crack; but
whether it was near or far, whether it was Case stubbing his toes
within a few yards of me, or a tree breaking miles away, I knew no more
than the babe unborn.

And then, all of a sudden, Vesuvius went off. It was a long time
coming; but when it came (though I say it that shouldn’t) no man could
ask to see a better. At first it was just a son of a gun of a row, and
a spout of fire, and the wood lighted up so that you could see to read.
And then the trouble began. Uma and I were half buried under a wagonful
of earth, and glad it was no worse, for one of the rocks at the
entrance of the tunnel was fired clean into the air, fell within a
couple of fathoms of where we lay, and bounded over the edge of the
hill, and went pounding down into the next valley. I saw I had rather
undercalculated our distance, or over-done the dynamite and powder,
which you please.

And presently I saw I had made another slip. The noise of the thing
began to die off, shaking the island; the dazzle was over; and yet the
night didn’t come back the way I expected. For the whole wood was
scattered with red coals and brands from the explosion; they were all
round me on the flat; some had fallen below in the valley, and some
stuck and flared in the tree-tops. I had no fear of fire, for these
forests are too wet to kindle. But the trouble was that the place was
all lit up-not very bright, but good enough to get a shot by; and the
way the coals were scattered, it was just as likely Case might have the
advantage as myself. I looked all round for his white face, you may be
sure; but there was not a sign of him. As for Uma, the life seemed to
have been knocked right out of her by the bang and blaze of it.

There was one bad point in my game. One of the blessed graven images
had come down all afire, hair and clothes and body, not four yards away
from me. I cast a mighty noticing glance all round; there was still no
Case, and I made up my mind I must get rid of that burning stick before
he came, or I should be shot there like a dog.

It was my first idea to have crawled, and then I thought speed was the
main thing, and stood half up to make a rush. The same moment from
somewhere between me and the sea there came a flash and a report, and a
rifle bullet screeched in my ear. I swung straight round and up with my
gun, but the brute had a Winchester, and before I could as much as see
him his second shot knocked me over like a nine-pin. I seemed to fly in
the air, then came down by the run and lay half a minute, silly; and
then I found my hands empty, and my gun had flown over my head as I
fell. It makes a man mighty wide awake to be in the kind of box that I
was in. I scarcely knew where I was hurt, or whether I was hurt or not,
but turned right over on my face to crawl after my weapon. Unless you
have tried to get about with a smashed leg you don’t know what pain is,
and I let out a howl like a bullock’s.

This was the unluckiest noise that ever I made in my life. Up to then
Uma had stuck to her tree like a sensible woman, knowing she would be
only in the way; but as soon as she heard me sing out, she ran forward.
The Winchester cracked again, and down she went.

I had sat up, leg and all, to stop her; but when I saw her tumble I
clapped down again where I was, lay still, and felt the handle of my
knife. I had been scurried and put out before. No more of that for me.
He had knocked over my girl, I had got to fix him for it; and I lay
there and gritted my teeth, and footed up the chances. My leg was
broke, my gun was gone. Case had still ten shots in his Winchester. It
looked a kind of hopeless business. But I never despaired nor thought
upon despairing: that man had got to go.

For a goodish bit not one of us let on. Then I heard Case begin to move
nearer in the bush, but mighty careful. The image had burned out; there
were only a few coals left here and there, and the wood was main dark,
but had a kind of a low glow in it like a fire on its last legs. It was
by this that I made out Case’s head looking at me over a big tuft of
ferns, and at the same time the brute saw me and shouldered his
Winchester. I lay quite still, and as good as looked into the barrel:
it was my last chance, but I thought my heart would have come right out
of its bearings. Then he fired. Lucky for me it was no shot-gun, for
the bullet struck within an inch of me and knocked the dirt in my eyes.

Just you try and see if you can lie quiet, and let a man take a sitting
shot at you and miss you by a hair. But I did, and lucky too. A while
Case stood with the Winchester at the port-arms; then he gave a little
laugh to himself, and stepped round the ferns.

“Laugh!” thought I. “If you had the wit of a louse you would be
praying!”

I was all as taut as a ship’s hawser or the spring of a watch, and as
soon as he came within reach of me I had him by the ankle, plucked the
feet right out from under him, laid him out, and was upon the top of
him, broken leg and all, before he breathed. His Winchester had gone
the same road as my shot-gun; it was nothing to me—I defied him now.
I’m a pretty strong man anyway, but I never knew what strength was till
I got hold of Case. He was knocked out of time by the rattle he came
down with, and threw up his hands together, more like a frightened
woman, so that I caught both of them with my left. This wakened him up,
and he fastened his teeth in my forearm like a weasel. Much I cared. My
leg gave me all the pain I had any use for, and I drew my knife and got
it in the place.

“Now,” said I, “I’ve got you; and you’re gone up, and a good job too!
Do you feel the point of that? That’s for Underhill! And there’s for
Adams! And now here’s for Uma, and that’s going to knock your blooming
soul right out of you!”

With that I gave him the cold steel for all I was worth. His body
kicked under me like a spring sofa; he gave a dreadful kind of a long
moan, and lay still.

“I wonder if you’re dead? I hope so!” I thought, for my head was
swimming. But I wasn’t going to take chances; I had his own example too
close before me for that; and I tried to draw the knife out to give it
him again. The blood came over my hands, I remember, hot as tea; and
with that I fainted clean away, and fell with my head on the man’s
mouth.

When I came to myself it was pitch dark; the cinders had burned out;
there was nothing to be seen but the shine of the dead wood, and I
couldn’t remember where I was nor why I was in such pain nor what I was
all wetted with. Then it came back, and the first thing I attended to
was to give him the knife again a half-a-dozen times up to the handle.
I believe he was dead already, but it did him no harm and did me good.

“I bet you’re dead now,” I said, and then I called to Uma.

Nothing answered, and I made a move to go and grope for her, fouled my
broken leg, and fainted again.

When I came to myself the second time the clouds had all cleared away,
except a few that sailed there, white as cotton. The moon was up—a
tropic moon. The moon at home turns a wood black, but even this old
butt-end of a one showed up that forest, as green as by day. The night
birds—or, rather, they’re a kind of early morning bird—sang out with
their long, falling notes like nightingales. And I could see the dead
man, that I was still half resting on, looking right up into the sky
with his open eyes, no paler than when he was alive; and a little way
off Uma tumbled on her side. I got over to her the best way I was able,
and when I got there she was broad awake, and crying and sobbing to
herself with no more noise than an insect. It appears she was afraid to
cry out loud, because of the _aitus_. Altogether she was not much hurt,
but scared beyond belief; she had come to her senses a long while ago,
cried out to me, heard nothing in reply, made out we were both dead,
and had lain there ever since, afraid to budge a finger. The ball had
ploughed up her shoulder, and she had lost a main quantity of blood;
but I soon had that tied up the way it ought to be with the tail of my
shirt and a scarf I had on, got her head on my sound knee and my back
against a trunk, and settled down to wait for morning. Uma was for
neither use nor ornament, and could only clutch hold of me and shake
and cry. I don’t suppose there was ever anybody worse scared, and, to
do her justice, she had had a lively night of it. As for me, I was in a
good bit of pain and fever, but not so bad when I sat still; and every
time I looked over to Case I could have sung and whistled. Talk about
meat and drink! To see that man lying there dead as a herring filled me
full.

The night birds stopped after a while; and then the light began to
change, the east came orange, the whole wood began to whirr with
singing like a musical box, and there was the broad day.

I didn’t expect Maea for a long while yet; and, indeed, I thought there
was an off-chance he might go back on the whole idea and not come at
all. I was the better pleased when, about an hour after daylight, I
heard sticks smashing and a lot of Kanakas laughing, and singing out to
keep their courage up. Uma sat up quite brisk at the first word of it;
and presently we saw a party come stringing out of the path, Maea in
front, and behind him a white man in a pith helmet. It was Mr.
Tarleton, who had turned up late last night in Falesá, having left his
boat and walked the last stage with a lantern.

They buried Case upon the field of glory, right in the hole where he
had kept the smoking head. I waited till the thing was done; and Mr.
Tarleton prayed, which I thought tomfoolery, but I’m bound to say he
gave a pretty sick view of the dear departed’s prospects, and seemed to
have his own ideas of hell. I had it out with him afterwards, told him
he had scamped his duty, and what he had ought to have done was to up
like a man and tell the Kanakas plainly Case was damned, and a good
riddance; but I never could get him to see it my way. Then they made me
a litter of poles and carried me down to the station. Mr. Tarleton set
my leg, and made a regular missionary splice of it, so that I limp to
this day. That done, he took down my evidence, and Uma’s, and Maea’s,
wrote it all out fine, and had us sign it; and then he got the chiefs
and marched over to Papa Randall’s to seize Case’s papers.

All they found was a bit of a diary, kept for a good many years, and
all about the price of copra, and chickens being stolen, and that; and
the books of the business and the will I told you of in the beginning,
by both of which the whole thing (stock, lock, and barrel) appeared to
belong to the Samoa woman. It was I that bought her out at a mighty
reasonable figure, for she was in a hurry to get home. As for Randall
and the black, they had to tramp; got into some kind of a station on
the Papa-malulu side; did very bad business, for the truth is neither
of the pair was fit for it, and lived mostly on fish, which was the
means of Randall’s death. It seems there was a nice shoal in one day,
and papa went after them with the dynamite; either the match burned too
fast, or papa was full, or both, but the shell went off (in the usual
way) before he threw it, and where was papa’s hand? Well, there’s
nothing to hurt in that; the islands up north are all full of
one-handed men, like the parties in the “Arabian Nights”; but either
Randall was too old, or he drank too much, and the short and the long
of it was that he died. Pretty soon after, the nigger was turned out of
the island for stealing from white men, and went off to the west, where
he found men of his own colour, in case he liked that, and the men of
his own colour took and ate him at some kind of a corroborree, and I’m
sure I hope he was to their fancy!

So there was I, left alone in my glory at Falesá; and when the schooner
came round I filled her up, and gave her a deck-cargo half as high as
the house. I must say Mr. Tarleton did the right thing by us; but he
took a meanish kind of a revenge.

“Now, Mr. Wiltshire,” said he, “I’ve put you all square with everybody
here. It wasn’t difficult to do, Case being gone; but I have done it,
and given my pledge besides that you will deal fairly with the natives.
I must ask you to keep my word.”

Well, so I did. I used to be bothered about my balances, but I reasoned
it out this way: We all have queerish balances; and the natives all
know it, and water their copra in a proportion so that it’s fair all
round; but the truth is, it did use to bother me, and, though I did
well in Falesá, I was half glad when the firm moved me on to another
station, where I was under no kind of a pledge and could look my
balances in the face.

As for the old lady, you know her as well as I do. She’s only the one
fault. If you don’t keep your eye lifting she would give away the roof
off the station. Well, it seems it’s natural in Kanakas. She’s turned a
powerful big woman now, and could throw a London bobby over her
shoulder. But that’s natural in Kanakas too, and there’s no manner of
doubt that she’s an A 1 wife.

Mr. Tarleton’s gone home, his trick being over. He was the best
missionary I ever struck, and now, it seems, he’s parsonising down
Somerset way. Well, that’s best for him; he’ll have no Kanakas there to
get luny over.

My public-house? Not a bit of it, nor ever likely. I’m stuck here, I
fancy. I don’t like to leave the kids, you see: and—there’s no use
talking—they’re better here than what they would be in a white man’s
country, though Ben took the eldest up to Auckland, where he’s being
schooled with the best. But what bothers me is the girls. They’re only
half-castes, of course; I know that as well as you do, and there’s
nobody thinks less of half-castes than I do; but they’re mine, and
about all I’ve got. I can’t reconcile my mind to their taking up with
Kanakas, and I’d like to know where I’m to find the whites?




THE BOTTLE IMP.


Note.—Any student of that very unliterary product, the English drama of
the early part of the century, will here recognise the name and the
root idea of a piece once rendered popular by the redoubtable O. Smith.
The root idea is there and identical, and yet I hope I have made it a
new thing. And the fact that the tale has been designed and written for
a Polynesian audience may lend it some extraneous interest nearer
home.—R. L. S.

There was a man of the Island of Hawaii, whom I shall call Keawe; for
the truth is, he still lives, and his name must be kept secret; but the
place of his birth was not far from Honaunau, where the bones of Keawe
the Great lie hidden in a cave. This man was poor, brave, and active;
he could read and write like a schoolmaster; he was a first-rate
mariner besides, sailed for some time in the island steamers, and
steered a whaleboat on the Hamakua coast. At length it came in Keawe’s
mind to have a sight of the great world and foreign cities, and he
shipped on a vessel bound to San Francisco.

This is a fine town, with a fine harbour, and rich people uncountable;
and, in particular, there is one hill which is covered with palaces.
Upon this hill Keawe was one day taking a walk with his pocket full of
money, viewing the great houses upon either hand with pleasure, “What
fine houses these are!” he was thinking, “and how happy must those
people be who dwell in them, and take no care for the morrow!” The
thought was in his mind when he came abreast of a house that was
smaller than some others, but all finished and beautified like a toy;
the steps of that house shone like silver, and the borders of the
garden bloomed like garlands, and the windows were bright like diamond;
and Keawe stopped and wondered at the excellence of all he saw. So
stopping, he was aware of a man that looked forth upon him through a
window so clear that Keawe could see him as you see a fish in a pool
upon the reef. The man was elderly, with a bald head and a black beard;
and his face was heavy with sorrow, and he bitterly sighed. And the
truth of it is, that as Keawe looked in upon the man, and the man
looked out upon Keawe, each envied the other.

All of a sudden, the man smiled and nodded, and beckoned Keawe to
enter, and met him at the door of the house.

“This is a fine house of mine,” said the man, and bitterly sighed.
“Would you not care to view the chambers?”

So he led Keawe all over it, from the cellar to the roof, and there was
nothing there that was not perfect of its kind, and Keawe was
astonished.

“Truly,” said Keawe, “this is a beautiful house; if I lived in the like
of it, I should be laughing all day long. How comes it, then, that you
should be sighing?”

“There is no reason,” said the man, “why you should not have a house in
all points similar to this, and finer, if you wish. You have some
money, I suppose?”

“I have fifty dollars,” said Keawe; “but a house like this will cost
more than fifty dollars.”

The man made a computation. “I am sorry you have no more,” said he,
“for it may raise you trouble in the future; but it shall be yours at
fifty dollars.”

“The house?” asked Keawe.

“No, not the house,” replied the man; “but the bottle. For, I must tell
you, although I appear to you so rich and fortunate, all my fortune,
and this house itself and its garden, came out of a bottle not much
bigger than a pint. This is it.”

And he opened a lockfast place, and took out a round-bellied bottle
with a long neck; the glass of it was white like milk, with changing
rainbow colours in the grain. Withinsides something obscurely moved,
like a shadow and a fire.

“This is the bottle,” said the man; and, when Keawe laughed, “You do
not believe me?” he added. “Try, then, for yourself. See if you can
break it.”

So Keawe took the bottle up and dashed it on the floor till he was
weary; but it jumped on the floor like a child’s ball, and was not
injured.

“This is a strange thing,” said Keawe. “For by the touch of it, as well
as by the look, the bottle should be of glass.”

“Of glass it is,” replied the man, sighing more heavily than ever; “but
the glass of it was tempered in the flames of hell. An imp lives in it,
and that is the shadow we behold there moving: or so I suppose. If any
man buy this bottle the imp is at his command; all that he
desires—love, fame, money, houses like this house, ay, or a city like
this city—all are his at the word uttered. Napoleon had this bottle,
and by it he grew to be the king of the world; but he sold it at the
last, and fell. Captain Cook had this bottle, and by it he found his
way to so many islands; but he, too, sold it, and was slain upon
Hawaii. For, once it is sold, the power goes and the protection; and
unless a man remain content with what he has, ill will befall him.”

“And yet you talk of selling it yourself?” Keawe said.

“I have all I wish, and I am growing elderly,” replied the man. “There
is one thing the imp cannot do—he cannot prolong life; and, it would
not be fair to conceal from you, there is a drawback to the bottle; for
if a man die before he sells it, he must burn in hell forever.”

“To be sure, that is a drawback and no mistake,” cried Keawe. “I would
not meddle with the thing. I can do without a house, thank God; but
there is one thing I could not be doing with one particle, and that is
to be damned.”

“Dear me, you must not run away with things,” returned the man. “All
you have to do is to use the power of the imp in moderation, and then
sell it to someone else, as I do to you, and finish your life in
comfort.”

“Well, I observe two things,” said Keawe. “All the time you keep
sighing like a maid in love, that is one; and, for the other, you sell
this bottle very cheap.”

“I have told you already why I sigh,” said the man. “It is because I
fear my health is breaking up; and, as you said yourself, to die and go
to the devil is a pity for anyone. As for why I sell so cheap, I must
explain to you there is a peculiarity about the bottle. Long ago, when
the devil brought it first upon earth, it was extremely expensive, and
was sold first of all to Prester John for many millions of dollars; but
it cannot be sold at all, unless sold at a loss. If you sell it for as
much as you paid for it, back it comes to you again like a homing
pigeon. It follows that the price has kept falling in these centuries,
and the bottle is now remarkably cheap. I bought it myself from one of
my great neighbours on this hill, and the price I paid was only ninety
dollars. I could sell it for as high as eighty-nine dollars and
ninety-nine cents, but not a penny dearer, or back the thing must come
to me. Now, about this there are two bothers. First, when you offer a
bottle so singular for eighty odd dollars, people suppose you to be
jesting. And second—but there is no hurry about that—and I need not go
into it. Only remember it must be coined money that you sell it for.”

“How am I to know that this is all true?” asked Keawe.

“Some of it you can try at once,” replied the man. “Give me your fifty
dollars, take the bottle, and wish your fifty dollars back into your
pocket. If that does not happen, I pledge you my honour I will cry off
the bargain and restore your money.”

“You are not deceiving me?” said Keawe.

The man bound himself with a great oath.

“Well, I will risk that much,” said Keawe, “for that can do no harm.”
And he paid over his money to the man, and the man handed him the
bottle.

“Imp of the bottle,” said Keawe, “I want my fifty dollars back.” And
sure enough he had scarce said the word before his pocket was as heavy
as ever.

“To be sure this is a wonderful bottle,” said Keawe.

“And now good-morning to you, my fine fellow, and the devil go with you
for me!” said the man.

“Hold on,” said Keawe, “I don’t want any more of this fun. Here, take
your bottle back.”

“You have bought it for less than I paid for it,” replied the man,
rubbing his hands. “It is yours now; and, for my part, I am only
concerned to see the back of you.” And with that he rang for his
Chinese servant, and had Keawe shown out of the house.

Now, when Keawe was in the street, with the bottle under his arm, he
began to think. “If all is true about this bottle, I may have made a
losing bargain,” thinks he. “But perhaps the man was only fooling me.”
The first thing he did was to count his money; the sum was
exact—forty-nine dollars American money, and one Chili piece. “That
looks like the truth,” said Keawe. “Now I will try another part.”

The streets in that part of the city were as clean as a ship’s decks,
and though it was noon, there were no passengers. Keawe set the bottle
in the gutter and walked away. Twice he looked back, and there was the
milky, round-bellied bottle where he left it. A third time he looked
back, and turned a corner; but he had scarce done so, when something
knocked upon his elbow, and behold! it was the long neck sticking up;
and as for the round belly, it was jammed into the pocket of his
pilot-coat.

“And that looks like the truth,” said Keawe.

The next thing he did was to buy a cork-screw in a shop, and go apart
into a secret place in the fields. And there he tried to draw the cork,
but as often as he put the screw in, out it came again, and the cork as
whole as ever.

“This is some new sort of cork,” said Keawe, and all at once he began
to shake and sweat, for he was afraid of that bottle.

On his way back to the port-side, he saw a shop where a man sold shells
and clubs from the wild islands, old heathen deities, old coined money,
pictures from China and Japan, and all manner of things that sailors
bring in their sea-chests. And here he had an idea. So he went in and
offered the bottle for a hundred dollars. The man of the shop laughed
at him at the first, and offered him five; but, indeed, it was a
curious bottle—such glass was never blown in any human glassworks, so
prettily the colours shone under the milky white, and so strangely the
shadow hovered in the midst; so, after he had disputed awhile after the
manner of his kind, the shop-man gave Keawe sixty silver dollars for
the thing, and set it on a shelf in the midst of his window.

“Now,” said Keawe, “I have sold that for sixty which I bought for
fifty—or, to say truth, a little less, because one of my dollars was
from Chili. Now I shall know the truth upon another point.”

So he went back on board his ship, and, when he opened his chest, there
was the bottle, and had come more quickly than himself. Now Keawe had a
mate on board whose name was Lopaka.

“What ails you?” said Lopaka, “that you stare in your chest?”

They were alone in the ship’s forecastle, and Keawe bound him to
secrecy, and told all.

“This is a very strange affair,” said Lopaka; “and I fear you will be
in trouble about this bottle. But there is one point very clear—that
you are sure of the trouble, and you had better have the profit in the
bargain. Make up your mind what you want with it; give the order, and
if it is done as you desire, I will buy the bottle myself; for I have
an idea of my own to get a schooner, and go trading through the
islands.”

“That is not my idea,” said Keawe; “but to have a beautiful house and
garden on the Kona Coast, where I was born, the sun shining in at the
door, flowers in the garden, glass in the windows, pictures on the
walls, and toys and fine carpets on the tables, for all the world like
the house I was in this day—only a storey higher, and with balconies
all about like the King’s palace; and to live there without care and
make merry with my friends and relatives.”

“Well,” said Lopaka, “let us carry it back with us to Hawaii; and if
all comes true, as you suppose, I will buy the bottle, as I said, and
ask a schooner.”

Upon that they were agreed, and it was not long before the ship
returned to Honolulu, carrying Keawe and Lopaka, and the bottle. They
were scarce come ashore when they met a friend upon the beach, who
began at once to condole with Keawe.

“I do not know what I am to be condoled about,” said Keawe.

“Is it possible you have not heard,” said the friend, “your uncle—that
good old man—is dead, and your cousin—that beautiful boy—was drowned at
sea?”

Keawe was filled with sorrow, and, beginning to weep and to lament, he
forgot about the bottle. But Lopaka was thinking to himself, and
presently, when Keawe’s grief was a little abated, “I have been
thinking,” said Lopaka. “Had not your uncle lands in Hawaii, in the
district of Kau?”

“No,” said Keawe, “not in Kau; they are on the mountain-side—a little
way south of Hookena.”

“These lands will now be yours?” asked Lopaka.

“And so they will,” says Keawe, and began again to lament for his
relatives.

“No,” said Lopaka, “do not lament at present. I have a thought in my
mind. How if this should be the doing of the bottle? For here is the
place ready for your house.”

“If this be so,” cried Keawe, “it is a very ill way to serve me by
killing my relatives. But it may be, indeed; for it was in just such a
station that I saw the house with my mind’s eye.”

“The house, however, is not yet built,” said Lopaka.

“No, nor like to be!” said Keawe; “for though my uncle has some coffee
and ava and bananas, it will not be more than will keep me in comfort;
and the rest of that land is the black lava.”

“Let us go to the lawyer,” said Lopaka; “I have still this idea in my
mind.”

Now, when they came to the lawyer’s, it appeared Keawe’s uncle had
grown monstrous rich in the last days, and there was a fund of money.

“And here is the money for the house!” cried Lopaka.

“If you are thinking of a new house,” said the lawyer, “here is the
card of a new architect, of whom they tell me great things.”

“Better and better!” cried Lopaka. “Here is all made plain for us. Let
us continue to obey orders.”

So they went to the architect, and he had drawings of houses on his
table.

“You want something out of the way,” said the architect. “How do you
like this?” and he handed a drawing to Keawe.

Now, when Keawe set eyes on the drawing, he cried out aloud, for it was
the picture of his thought exactly drawn.

“I am in for this house,” thought he. “Little as I like the way it
comes to me, I am in for it now, and I may as well take the good along
with the evil.”

So he told the architect all that he wished, and how he would have that
house furnished, and about the pictures on the wall and the
knick-knacks on the tables; and he asked the man plainly for how much
he would undertake the whole affair.

The architect put many questions, and took his pen and made a
computation; and when he had done he named the very sum that Keawe had
inherited.

Lopaka and Keawe looked at one another and nodded.

“It is quite clear,” thought Keawe, “that I am to have this house,
whether or no. It comes from the devil, and I fear I will get little
good by that; and of one thing I am sure, I will make no more wishes as
long as I have this bottle. But with the house I am saddled, and I may
as well take the good along with the evil.”

So he made his terms with the architect, and they signed a paper; and
Keawe and Lopaka took ship again and sailed to Australia; for it was
concluded between them they should not interfere at all, but leave the
architect and the bottle imp to build and to adorn that house at their
own pleasure.

The voyage was a good voyage, only all the time Keawe was holding in
his breath, for he had sworn he would utter no more wishes, and take no
more favours from the devil. The time was up when they got back. The
architect told them that the house was ready, and Keawe and Lopaka took
a passage in the _Hall_, and went down Kona way to view the house, and
see if all had been done fitly according to the thought that was in
Keawe’s mind.

Now the house stood on the mountain side, visible to ships. Above, the
forest ran up into the clouds of rain; below, the black lava fell in
cliffs, where the kings of old lay buried. A garden bloomed about that
house with every hue of flowers; and there was an orchard of papaia on
the one hand and an orchard of breadfruit on the other, and right in
front, toward the sea, a ship’s mast had been rigged up and bore a
flag. As for the house, it was three storeys high, with great chambers
and broad balconies on each. The windows were of glass, so excellent
that it was as clear as water and as bright as day. All manner of
furniture adorned the chambers. Pictures hung upon the wall in golden
frames: pictures of ships, and men fighting, and of the most beautiful
women, and of singular places; nowhere in the world are there pictures
of so bright a colour as those Keawe found hanging in his house. As for
the knick-knacks, they were extraordinary fine; chiming clocks and
musical boxes, little men with nodding heads, books filled with
pictures, weapons of price from all quarters of the world, and the most
elegant puzzles to entertain the leisure of a solitary man. And as no
one would care to live in such chambers, only to walk through and view
them, the balconies were made so broad that a whole town might have
lived upon them in delight; and Keawe knew not which to prefer, whether
the back porch, where you got the land breeze, and looked upon the
orchards and the flowers, or the front balcony, where you could drink
the wind of the sea, and look down the steep wall of the mountain and
see the _Hall_ going by once a week or so between Hookena and the hills
of Pele, or the schooners plying up the coast for wood and ava and
bananas.

When they had viewed all, Keawe and Lopaka sat on the porch.

“Well,” asked Lopaka, “is it all as you designed?”

“Words cannot utter it,” said Keawe. “It is better than I dreamed, and
I am sick with satisfaction.”

“There is but one thing to consider,” said Lopaka; “all this may be
quite natural, and the bottle imp have nothing whatever to say to it.
If I were to buy the bottle, and got no schooner after all, I should
have put my hand in the fire for nothing. I gave you my word, I know;
but yet I think you would not grudge me one more proof.”

“I have sworn I would take no more favours,” said Keawe. “I have gone
already deep enough.”

“This is no favour I am thinking of,” replied Lopaka. “It is only to
see the imp himself. There is nothing to be gained by that, and so
nothing to be ashamed of; and yet, if I once saw him, I should be sure
of the whole matter. So indulge me so far, and let me see the imp; and,
after that, here is the money in my hand, and I will buy it.”

“There is only one thing I am afraid of,” said Keawe. “The imp may be
very ugly to view; and if you once set eyes upon him you might be very
undesirous of the bottle.”

“I am a man of my word,” said Lopaka. “And here is the money betwixt
us.”

“Very well,” replied Keawe. “I have a curiosity myself. So come, let us
have one look at you, Mr. Imp.”

Now as soon as that was said, the imp looked out of the bottle, and in
again, swift as a lizard; and there sat Keawe and Lopaka turned to
stone. The night had quite come, before either found a thought to say
or voice to say it with; and then Lopaka pushed the money over and took
the bottle.

“I am a man of my word,” said he, “and had need to be so, or I would
not touch this bottle with my foot. Well, I shall get my schooner and a
dollar or two for my pocket; and then I will be rid of this devil as
fast as I can. For to tell you the plain truth, the look of him has
cast me down.”

“Lopaka,” said Keawe, “do not you think any worse of me than you can
help; I know it is night, and the roads bad, and the pass by the tombs
an ill place to go by so late, but I declare since I have seen that
little face, I cannot eat or sleep or pray till it is gone from me. I
will give you a lantern and a basket to put the bottle in, and any
picture or fine thing in all my house that takes your fancy;—and be
gone at once, and go sleep at Hookena with Nahinu.”

“Keawe,” said Lopaka, “many a man would take this ill; above all, when
I am doing you a turn so friendly, as to keep my word and buy the
bottle; and for that matter, the night and the dark, and the way by the
tombs, must be all tenfold more dangerous to a man with such a sin upon
his conscience, and such a bottle under his arm. But for my part, I am
so extremely terrified myself, I have not the heart to blame you. Here
I go then; and I pray God you may be happy in your house, and I
fortunate with my schooner, and both get to heaven in the end in spite
of the devil and his bottle.”

So Lopaka went down the mountain; and Keawe stood in his front balcony,
and listened to the clink of the horse’s shoes, and watched the lantern
go shining down the path, and along the cliff of caves where the old
dead are buried; and all the time he trembled and clasped his hands,
and prayed for his friend, and gave glory to God that he himself was
escaped out of that trouble.

But the next day came very brightly, and that new house of his was so
delightful to behold that he forgot his terrors. One day followed
another, and Keawe dwelt there in perpetual joy. He had his place on
the back porch; it was there he ate and lived, and read the stories in
the Honolulu newspapers; but when anyone came by they would go in and
view the chambers and the pictures. And the fame of the house went far
and wide; it was called _Ka-Hale Nui_—the Great House—in all Kona; and
sometimes the Bright House, for Keawe kept a Chinaman, who was all day
dusting and furbishing; and the glass, and the gilt, and the fine
stuffs, and the pictures, shone as bright as the morning. As for Keawe
himself, he could not walk in the chambers without singing, his heart
was so enlarged; and when ships sailed by upon the sea, he would fly
his colours on the mast.

So time went by, until one day Keawe went upon a visit as far as Kailua
to certain of his friends. There he was well feasted; and left as soon
as he could the next morning, and rode hard, for he was impatient to
behold his beautiful house; and, besides, the night then coming on was
the night in which the dead of old days go abroad in the sides of Kona;
and having already meddled with the devil, he was the more chary of
meeting with the dead. A little beyond Honaunau, looking far ahead, he
was aware of a woman bathing in the edge of the sea; and she seemed a
well-grown girl, but he thought no more of it. Then he saw her white
shift flutter as she put it on, and then her red holoku; and by the
time he came abreast of her she was done with her toilet, and had come
up from the sea, and stood by the track-side in her red holoku, and she
was all freshened with the bath, and her eyes shone and were kind. Now
Keawe no sooner beheld her than he drew rein.

“I thought I knew everyone in this country,” said he. “How comes it
that I do not know you?”

“I am Kokua, daughter of Kiano,” said the girl, “and I have just
returned from Oahu. Who are you?”

“I will tell you who I am in a little,” said Keawe, dismounting from
his horse, “but not now. For I have a thought in my mind, and if you
knew who I was, you might have heard of me, and would not give me a
true answer. But tell me, first of all, one thing: Are you married?”

At this Kokua laughed out aloud. “It is you who ask questions,” she
said. “Are you married yourself?”

“Indeed, Kokua, I am not,” replied Keawe, “and never thought to be
until this hour. But here is the plain truth. I have met you here at
the roadside, and I saw your eyes, which are like the stars, and my
heart went to you as swift as a bird. And so now, if you want none of
me, say so, and I will go on to my own place; but if you think me no
worse than any other young man, say so, too, and I will turn aside to
your father’s for the night, and to-morrow I will talk with the good
man.”

Kokua said never a word, but she looked at the sea and laughed.

“Kokua,” said Keawe, “if you say nothing, I will take that for the good
answer; so let us be stepping to your father’s door.”

She went on ahead of him, still without speech; only sometimes she
glanced back and glanced away again, and she kept the strings of her
hat in her mouth.

Now, when they had come to the door, Kiano came out on his verandah,
and cried out and welcomed Keawe by name. At that the girl looked over,
for the fame of the great house had come to her ears; and, to be sure,
it was a great temptation. All that evening they were very merry
together; and the girl was as bold as brass under the eyes of her
parents, and made a mock of Keawe, for she had a quick wit. The next
day he had a word with Kiano, and found the girl alone.

“Kokua,” said he, “you made a mock of me all the evening; and it is
still time to bid me go. I would not tell you who I was, because I have
so fine a house, and I feared you would think too much of that house
and too little of the man that loves you. Now you know all, and if you
wish to have seen the last of me, say so at once.”

“No,” said Kokua; but this time she did not laugh, nor did Keawe ask
for more.

This was the wooing of Keawe; things had gone quickly; but so an arrow
goes, and the ball of a rifle swifter still, and yet both may strike
the target. Things had gone fast, but they had gone far also, and the
thought of Keawe rang in the maiden’s head; she heard his voice in the
breach of the surf upon the lava, and for this young man that she had
seen but twice she would have left father and mother and her native
islands. As for Keawe himself, his horse flew up the path of the
mountain under the cliff of tombs, and the sound of the hoofs, and the
sound of Keawe singing to himself for pleasure, echoed in the caverns
of the dead. He came to the Bright House, and still he was singing. He
sat and ate in the broad balcony, and the Chinaman wondered at his
master, to hear how he sang between the mouthfuls. The sun went down
into the sea, and the night came; and Keawe walked the balconies by
lamplight, high on the mountains, and the voice of his singing startled
men on ships.

“Here am I now upon my high place,” he said to himself. “Life may be no
better; this is the mountain top; and all shelves about me toward the
worse. For the first time I will light up the chambers, and bathe in my
fine bath with the hot water and the cold, and sleep alone in the bed
of my bridal chamber.”

So the Chinaman had word, and he must rise from sleep and light the
furnaces; and as he wrought below, beside the boilers, he heard his
master singing and rejoicing above him in the lighted chambers. When
the water began to be hot the Chinaman cried to his master; and Keawe
went into the bathroom; and the Chinaman heard him sing as he filled
the marble basin; and heard him sing, and the singing broken, as he
undressed; until of a sudden, the song ceased. The Chinaman listened,
and listened; he called up the house to Keawe to ask if all were well,
and Keawe answered him “Yes,” and bade him go to bed; but there was no
more singing in the Bright House; and all night long, the Chinaman
heard his master’s feet go round and round the balconies without
repose.

Now the truth of it was this: as Keawe undressed for his bath, he spied
upon his flesh a patch like a patch of lichen on a rock, and it was
then that he stopped singing. For he knew the likeness of that patch,
and knew that he was fallen in the Chinese Evil. [5]

Now, it is a sad thing for any man to fall into this sickness. And it
would be a sad thing for anyone to leave a house so beautiful and so
commodious, and depart from all his friends to the north coast of
Molokai between the mighty cliff and the sea-breakers. But what was
that to the case of the man Keawe, he who had met his love but
yesterday, and won her but that morning, and now saw all his hopes
break, in a moment, like a piece of glass?

Awhile he sat upon the edge of the bath; then sprang, with a cry, and
ran outside; and to and fro, to and fro, along the balcony, like one
despairing.

“Very willingly could I leave Hawaii, the home of my fathers,” Keawe
was thinking. “Very lightly could I leave my house, the high-placed,
the many-windowed, here upon the mountains. Very bravely could I go to
Molokai, to Kalaupapa by the cliffs, to live with the smitten and to
sleep there, far from my fathers. But what wrong have I done, what sin
lies upon my soul, that I should have encountered Kokua coming cool
from the sea-water in the evening? Kokua, the soul ensnarer! Kokua, the
light of my life! Her may I never wed, her may I look upon no longer,
her may I no more handle with my loving hand; and it is for this, it is
for you, O Kokua! that I pour my lamentations!”

Now you are to observe what sort of a man Keawe was, for he might have
dwelt there in the Bright House for years, and no one been the wiser of
his sickness; but he reckoned nothing of that, if he must lose Kokua.
And again, he might have wed Kokua even as he was; and so many would
have done, because they have the souls of pigs; but Keawe loved the
maid manfully, and he would do her no hurt and bring her in no danger.

A little beyond the midst of the night, there came in his mind the
recollection of that bottle. He went round to the back porch, and
called to memory the day when the devil had looked forth; and at the
thought ice ran in his veins.

“A dreadful thing is the bottle,” thought Keawe, “and dreadful is the
imp, and it is a dreadful thing to risk the flames of hell. But what
other hope have I to cure my sickness or to wed Kokua? What!” he
thought, “would I beard the devil once, only to get me a house, and not
face him again to win Kokua?”

Thereupon he called to mind it was the next day the _Hall_ went by on
her return to Honolulu. “There must I go first,” he thought, “and see
Lopaka. For the best hope that I have now is to find that same bottle I
was so pleased to be rid of.”

Never a wink could he sleep; the food stuck in his throat; but he sent
a letter to Kiano, and about the time when the steamer would be coming,
rode down beside the cliff of the tombs. It rained; his horse went
heavily; he looked up at the black mouths of the caves, and he envied
the dead that slept there and were done with trouble; and called to
mind how he had galloped by the day before, and was astonished. So he
came down to Hookena, and there was all the country gathered for the
steamer as usual. In the shed before the store they sat and jested and
passed the news; but there was no matter of speech in Keawe’s bosom,
and he sat in their midst and looked without on the rain falling on the
houses, and the surf beating among the rocks, and the sighs arose in
his throat.

“Keawe of the Bright House is out of spirits,” said one to another.
Indeed, and so he was, and little wonder.

Then the _Hall_ came, and the whaleboat carried him on board. The
after-part of the ship was full of Haoles [6] who had been to visit the
volcano, as their custom is; and the midst was crowded with Kanakas,
and the forepart with wild bulls from Hilo and horses from Kau; but
Keawe sat apart from all in his sorrow, and watched for the house of
Kiano. There it sat, low upon the shore in the black rocks, and shaded
by the cocoa palms, and there by the door was a red holoku, no greater
than a fly, and going to and fro with a fly’s busyness. “Ah, queen of
my heart,” he cried, “I’ll venture my dear soul to win you!”

Soon after, darkness fell, and the cabins were lit up, and the Haoles
sat and played at the cards and drank whiskey as their custom is; but
Keawe walked the deck all night; and all the next day, as they steamed
under the lee of Maui or of Molokai, he was still pacing to and fro
like a wild animal in a menagerie.

Towards evening they passed Diamond Head, and came to the pier of
Honolulu. Keawe stepped out among the crowd and began to ask for
Lopaka. It seemed he had become the owner of a schooner—none better in
the islands—and was gone upon an adventure as far as Pola-Pola or
Kahiki; so there was no help to be looked for from Lopaka. Keawe called
to mind a friend of his, a lawyer in the town (I must not tell his
name), and inquired of him. They said he was grown suddenly rich, and
had a fine new house upon Waikiki shore; and this put a thought in
Keawe’s head, and he called a hack and drove to the lawyer’s house.

The house was all brand new, and the trees in the garden no greater
than walking-sticks, and the lawyer, when he came, had the air of a man
well pleased.

“What can I do to serve you?” said the lawyer.

“You are a friend of Lopaka’s,” replied Keawe, “and Lopaka purchased
from me a certain piece of goods that I thought you might enable me to
trace.”

The lawyer’s face became very dark. “I do not profess to misunderstand
you, Mr. Keawe,” said he, “though this is an ugly business to be
stirring in. You may be sure I know nothing, but yet I have a guess,
and if you would apply in a certain quarter I think you might have
news.”

And he named the name of a man, which, again, I had better not repeat.
So it was for days, and Keawe went from one to another, finding
everywhere new clothes and carriages, and fine new houses and men
everywhere in great contentment, although, to be sure, when he hinted
at his business their faces would cloud over.

“No doubt I am upon the track,” thought Keawe. “These new clothes and
carriages are all the gifts of the little imp, and these glad faces are
the faces of men who have taken their profit and got rid of the
accursed thing in safety. When I see pale cheeks and hear sighing, I
shall know that I am near the bottle.”

So it befell at last that he was recommended to a Haole in Beritania
Street. When he came to the door, about the hour of the evening meal,
there were the usual marks of the new house, and the young garden, and
the electric light shining in the windows; but when the owner came, a
shock of hope and fear ran through Keawe; for here was a young man,
white as a corpse, and black about the eyes, the hair shedding from his
head, and such a look in his countenance as a man may have when he is
waiting for the gallows.

“Here it is, to be sure,” thought Keawe, and so with this man he noways
veiled his errand. “I am come to buy the bottle,” said he.

At the word, the young Haole of Beritania Street reeled against the
wall.

“The bottle!” he gasped. “To buy the bottle!” Then he seemed to choke,
and seizing Keawe by the arm carried him into a room and poured out
wine in two glasses.

“Here is my respects,” said Keawe, who had been much about with Haoles
in his time. “Yes,” he added, “I am come to buy the bottle. What is the
price by now?”

At that word the young man let his glass slip through his fingers, and
looked upon Keawe like a ghost.

“The price,” says he; “the price! You do not know the price?”

“It is for that I am asking you,” returned Keawe. “But why are you so
much concerned? Is there anything wrong about the price?”

“It has dropped a great deal in value since your time, Mr. Keawe,” said
the young man stammering.

“Well, well, I shall have the less to pay for it,” says Keawe. “How
much did it cost you?”

The young man was as white as a sheet. “Two cents,” said he.

“What?” cried Keawe, “two cents? Why, then, you can only sell it for
one. And he who buys it—” The words died upon Keawe’s tongue; he who
bought it could never sell it again, the bottle and the bottle imp must
abide with him until he died, and when he died must carry him to the
red end of hell.

The young man of Beritania Street fell upon his knees. “For God’s sake
buy it!” he cried. “You can have all my fortune in the bargain. I was
mad when I bought it at that price. I had embezzled money at my store;
I was lost else; I must have gone to jail.”

“Poor creature,” said Keawe, “you would risk your soul upon so
desperate an adventure, and to avoid the proper punishment of your own
disgrace; and you think I could hesitate with love in front of me. Give
me the bottle, and the change which I make sure you have all ready.
Here is a five-cent piece.”

It was as Keawe supposed; the young man had the change ready in a
drawer; the bottle changed hands, and Keawe’s fingers were no sooner
clasped upon the stalk than he had breathed his wish to be a clean man.
And, sure enough, when he got home to his room, and stripped himself
before a glass, his flesh was whole like an infant’s. And here was the
strange thing: he had no sooner seen this miracle, than his mind was
changed within him, and he cared naught for the Chinese Evil, and
little enough for Kokua; and had but the one thought, that here he was
bound to the bottle imp for time and for eternity, and had no better
hope but to be a cinder for ever in the flames of hell. Away ahead of
him he saw them blaze with his mind’s eye, and his soul shrank, and
darkness fell upon the light.

When Keawe came to himself a little, he was aware it was the night when
the band played at the hotel. Thither he went, because he feared to be
alone; and there, among happy faces, walked to and fro, and heard the
tunes go up and down, and saw Berger beat the measure, and all the
while he heard the flames crackle, and saw the red fire burning in the
bottomless pit. Of a sudden the band played _Hiki-ao-ao_; that was a
song that he had sung with Kokua, and at the strain courage returned to
him.

“It is done now,” he thought, “and once more let me take the good along
with the evil.”

So it befell that he returned to Hawaii by the first steamer, and as
soon as it could be managed he was wedded to Kokua, and carried her up
the mountain side to the Bright House.

Now it was so with these two, that when they were together, Keawe’s
heart was stilled; but so soon as he was alone he fell into a brooding
horror, and heard the flames crackle, and saw the red fire burn in the
bottomless pit. The girl, indeed, had come to him wholly; her heart
leapt in her side at sight of him, her hand clung to his; and she was
so fashioned from the hair upon her head to the nails upon her toes
that none could see her without joy. She was pleasant in her nature.
She had the good word always. Full of song she was, and went to and fro
in the Bright House, the brightest thing in its three storeys,
carolling like the birds. And Keawe beheld and heard her with delight,
and then must shrink upon one side, and weep and groan to think upon
the price that he had paid for her; and then he must dry his eyes, and
wash his face, and go and sit with her on the broad balconies, joining
in her songs, and, with a sick spirit, answering her smiles.

There came a day when her feet began to be heavy and her songs more
rare; and now it was not Keawe only that would weep apart, but each
would sunder from the other and sit in opposite balconies with the
whole width of the Bright House betwixt. Keawe was so sunk in his
despair, he scarce observed the change, and was only glad he had more
hours to sit alone and brood upon his destiny, and was not so
frequently condemned to pull a smiling face on a sick heart. But one
day, coming softly through the house, he heard the sound of a child
sobbing, and there was Kokua rolling her face upon the balcony floor,
and weeping like the lost.

“You do well to weep in this house, Kokua,” he said. “And yet I would
give the head off my body that you (at least) might have been happy.”

“Happy!” she cried. “Keawe, when you lived alone in your Bright House,
you were the word of the island for a happy man; laughter and song were
in your mouth, and your face was as bright as the sunrise. Then you
wedded poor Kokua; and the good God knows what is amiss in her—but from
that day you have not smiled. Oh!” she cried, “what ails me? I thought
I was pretty, and I knew I loved him. What ails me that I throw this
cloud upon my husband?”

“Poor Kokua,” said Keawe. He sat down by her side, and sought to take
her hand; but that she plucked away. “Poor Kokua,” he said, again. “My
poor child—my pretty. And I had thought all this while to spare you!
Well, you shall know all. Then, at least, you will pity poor Keawe;
then you will understand how much he loved you in the past—that he
dared hell for your possession—and how much he loves you still (the
poor condemned one), that he can yet call up a smile when he beholds
you.”

With that, he told her all, even from the beginning.

“You have done this for me?” she cried “Ah, well, then what do I
care!”—and she clasped and wept upon him.

“Ah, child!” said Keawe, “and yet, when I consider of the fire of hell,
I care a good deal!”

“Never tell me,” said she; “no man can be lost because he loved Kokua,
and no other fault. I tell you, Keawe, I shall save you with these
hands, or perish in your company. What! you loved me, and gave your
soul, and you think I will not die to save you in return?”

“Ah, my dear! you might die a hundred times, and what difference would
that make?” he cried, “except to leave me lonely till the time comes of
my damnation?”

“You know nothing,” said she. “I was educated in a school in Honolulu;
I am no common girl. And I tell you, I shall save my lover. What is
this you say about a cent? But all the world is not American. In
England they have a piece they call a farthing, which is about half a
cent. Ah! sorrow!” she cried, “that makes it scarcely better, for the
buyer must be lost, and we shall find none so brave as my Keawe! But,
then, there is France; they have a small coin there which they call a
centime, and these go five to the cent or there-about. We could not do
better. Come, Keawe, let us go to the French islands; let us go to
Tahiti, as fast as ships can bear us. There we have four centimes,
three centimes, two centimes, one centime; four possible sales to come
and go on; and two of us to push the bargain. Come, my Keawe! kiss me,
and banish care. Kokua will defend you.”

“Gift of God!” he cried. “I cannot think that God will punish me for
desiring aught so good! Be it as you will, then; take me where you
please: I put my life and my salvation in your hands.”

Early the next day Kokua was about her preparations. She took Keawe’s
chest that he went with sailoring; and first she put the bottle in a
corner; and then packed it with the richest of their clothes and the
bravest of the knick-knacks in the house. “For,” said she, “we must
seem to be rich folks, or who will believe in the bottle?” All the time
of her preparation she was as gay as a bird; only when she looked upon
Keawe, the tears would spring in her eye, and she must run and kiss
him. As for Keawe, a weight was off his soul; now that he had his
secret shared, and some hope in front of him, he seemed like a new man,
his feet went lightly on the earth, and his breath was good to him
again. Yet was terror still at his elbow; and ever and again, as the
wind blows out a taper, hope died in him, and he saw the flames toss
and the red fire burn in hell.

It was given out in the country they were gone pleasuring to the
States, which was thought a strange thing, and yet not so strange as
the truth, if any could have guessed it. So they went to Honolulu in
the _Hall_, and thence in the _Umatilla_ to San Francisco with a crowd
of Haoles, and at San Francisco took their passage by the mail
brigantine, the _Tropic Bird_, for Papeete, the chief place of the
French in the south islands. Thither they came, after a pleasant
voyage, on a fair day of the Trade Wind, and saw the reef with the surf
breaking, and Motuiti with its palms, and the schooner riding
within-side, and the white houses of the town low down along the shore
among green trees, and overhead the mountains and the clouds of Tahiti,
the wise island.

It was judged the most wise to hire a house, which they did
accordingly, opposite the British Consul’s, to make a great parade of
money, and themselves conspicuous with carriages and horses. This it
was very easy to do, so long as they had the bottle in their
possession; for Kokua was more bold than Keawe, and, whenever she had a
mind, called on the imp for twenty or a hundred dollars. At this rate
they soon grew to be remarked in the town; and the strangers from
Hawaii, their riding and their driving, the fine holokus and the rich
lace of Kokua, became the matter of much talk.

They got on well after the first with the Tahitian language, which is
indeed like to the Hawaiian, with a change of certain letters; and as
soon as they had any freedom of speech, began to push the bottle. You
are to consider it was not an easy subject to introduce; it was not
easy to persuade people you were in earnest, when you offered to sell
them for four centimes the spring of health and riches inexhaustible.
It was necessary besides to explain the dangers of the bottle; and
either people disbelieved the whole thing and laughed, or they thought
the more of the darker part, became overcast with gravity, and drew
away from Keawe and Kokua, as from persons who had dealings with the
devil. So far from gaining ground, these two began to find they were
avoided in the town; the children ran away from them screaming, a thing
intolerable to Kokua; Catholics crossed themselves as they went by; and
all persons began with one accord to disengage themselves from their
advances.

Depression fell upon their spirits. They would sit at night in their
new house, after a day’s weariness, and not exchange one word, or the
silence would be broken by Kokua bursting suddenly into sobs. Sometimes
they would pray together; sometimes they would have the bottle out upon
the floor, and sit all evening watching how the shadow hovered in the
midst. At such times they would be afraid to go to rest. It was long
ere slumber came to them, and, if either dozed off, it would be to wake
and find the other silently weeping in the dark, or, perhaps, to wake
alone, the other having fled from the house and the neighbourhood of
that bottle, to pace under the bananas in the little garden, or to
wander on the beach by moonlight.

One night it was so when Kokua awoke. Keawe was gone. She felt in the
bed and his place was cold. Then fear fell upon her, and she sat up in
bed. A little moonshine filtered through the shutters. The room was
bright, and she could spy the bottle on the floor. Outside it blew
high, the great trees of the avenue cried aloud, and the fallen leaves
rattled in the verandah. In the midst of this Kokua was aware of
another sound; whether of a beast or of a man she could scarce tell,
but it was as sad as death, and cut her to the soul. Softly she arose,
set the door ajar, and looked forth into the moonlit yard. There, under
the bananas, lay Keawe, his mouth in the dust, and as he lay he moaned.

It was Kokua’s first thought to run forward and console him; her second
potently withheld her. Keawe had borne himself before his wife like a
brave man; it became her little in the hour of weakness to intrude upon
his shame. With the thought she drew back into the house.

“Heaven!” she thought, “how careless have I been—how weak! It is he,
not I, that stands in this eternal peril; it was he, not I, that took
the curse upon his soul. It is for my sake, and for the love of a
creature of so little worth and such poor help, that he now beholds so
close to him the flames of hell—ay, and smells the smoke of it, lying
without there in the wind and moonlight. Am I so dull of spirit that
never till now I have surmised my duty, or have I seen it before and
turned aside? But now, at least, I take up my soul in both the hands of
my affection; now I say farewell to the white steps of heaven and the
waiting faces of my friends. A love for a love, and let mine be
equalled with Keawe’s! A soul for a soul, and be it mine to perish!”

She was a deft woman with her hands, and was soon apparelled. She took
in her hands the change—the precious centimes they kept ever at their
side; for this coin is little used, and they had made provision at a
Government office. When she was forth in the avenue clouds came on the
wind, and the moon was blackened. The town slept, and she knew not
whither to turn till she heard one coughing in the shadow of the trees.

“Old man,” said Kokua, “what do you here abroad in the cold night?”

The old man could scarce express himself for coughing, but she made out
that he was old and poor, and a stranger in the island.

“Will you do me a service?” said Kokua. “As one stranger to another,
and as an old man to a young woman, will you help a daughter of
Hawaii?”

“Ah,” said the old man. “So you are the witch from the eight islands,
and even my old soul you seek to entangle. But I have heard of you, and
defy your wickedness.”

“Sit down here,” said Kokua, “and let me tell you a tale.” And she told
him the story of Keawe from the beginning to the end.

“And now,” said she, “I am his wife, whom he bought with his soul’s
welfare. And what should I do? If I went to him myself and offered to
buy it, he would refuse. But if you go, he will sell it eagerly; I will
await you here; you will buy it for four centimes, and I will buy it
again for three. And the Lord strengthen a poor girl!”

“If you meant falsely,” said the old man, “I think God would strike you
dead.”

“He would!” cried Kokua. “Be sure he would. I could not be so
treacherous—God would not suffer it.”

“Give me the four centimes and await me here,” said the old man.

Now, when Kokua stood alone in the street, her spirit died. The wind
roared in the trees, and it seemed to her the rushing of the flames of
hell; the shadows tossed in the light of the street lamp, and they
seemed to her the snatching hands of evil ones. If she had had the
strength, she must have run away, and if she had had the breath she
must have screamed aloud; but, in truth, she could do neither, and
stood and trembled in the avenue, like an affrighted child.

Then she saw the old man returning, and he had the bottle in his hand.

“I have done your bidding,” said he. “I left your husband weeping like
a child; to-night he will sleep easy.” And he held the bottle forth.

“Before you give it me,” Kokua panted, “take the good with the evil—ask
to be delivered from your cough.”

“I am an old man,” replied the other, “and too near the gate of the
grave to take a favour from the devil. But what is this? Why do you not
take the bottle? Do you hesitate?”

“Not hesitate!” cried Kokua. “I am only weak. Give me a moment. It is
my hand resists, my flesh shrinks back from the accursed thing. One
moment only!”

The old man looked upon Kokua kindly. “Poor child!” said he, “you fear;
your soul misgives you. Well, let me keep it. I am old, and can never
more be happy in this world, and as for the next—”

“Give it me!” gasped Kokua. “There is your money. Do you think I am so
base as that? Give me the bottle.”

“God bless you, child,” said the old man.

Kokua concealed the bottle under her holoku, said farewell to the old
man, and walked off along the avenue, she cared not whither. For all
roads were now the same to her, and led equally to hell. Sometimes she
walked, and sometimes ran; sometimes she screamed out loud in the
night, and sometimes lay by the wayside in the dust and wept. All that
she had heard of hell came back to her; she saw the flames blaze, and
she smelt the smoke, and her flesh withered on the coals.

Near day she came to her mind again, and returned to the house. It was
even as the old man said—Keawe slumbered like a child. Kokua stood and
gazed upon his face.

“Now, my husband,” said she, “it is your turn to sleep. When you wake
it will be your turn to sing and laugh. But for poor Kokua, alas! that
meant no evil—for poor Kokua no more sleep, no more singing, no more
delight, whether in earth or heaven.”

With that she lay down in the bed by his side, and her misery was so
extreme that she fell in a deep slumber instantly.

Late in the morning her husband woke her and gave her the good news. It
seemed he was silly with delight, for he paid no heed to her distress,
ill though she dissembled it. The words stuck in her mouth, it mattered
not; Keawe did the speaking. She ate not a bite, but who was to observe
it? for Keawe cleared the dish. Kokua saw and heard him, like some
strange thing in a dream; there were times when she forgot or doubted,
and put her hands to her brow; to know herself doomed and hear her
husband babble, seemed so monstrous.

All the while Keawe was eating and talking, and planning the time of
their return, and thanking her for saving him, and fondling her, and
calling her the true helper after all. He laughed at the old man that
was fool enough to buy that bottle.

“A worthy old man he seemed,” Keawe said. “But no one can judge by
appearances. For why did the old reprobate require the bottle?”

“My husband,” said Kokua, humbly, “his purpose may have been good.”

Keawe laughed like an angry man.

“Fiddle-de-dee!” cried Keawe. “An old rogue, I tell you; and an old ass
to boot. For the bottle was hard enough to sell at four centimes; and
at three it will be quite impossible. The margin is not broad enough,
the thing begins to smell of scorching—brrr!” said he, and shuddered.
“It is true I bought it myself at a cent, when I knew not there were
smaller coins. I was a fool for my pains; there will never be found
another: and whoever has that bottle now will carry it to the pit.”

“O my husband!” said Kokua. “Is it not a terrible thing to save oneself
by the eternal ruin of another? It seems to me I could not laugh. I
would be humbled. I would be filled with melancholy. I would pray for
the poor holder.”

Then Keawe, because he felt the truth of what she said, grew the more
angry. “Heighty-teighty!” cried he. “You may be filled with melancholy
if you please. It is not the mind of a good wife. If you thought at all
of me, you would sit shamed.”

Thereupon he went out, and Kokua was alone.

What chance had she to sell that bottle at two centimes? None, she
perceived. And if she had any, here was her husband hurrying her away
to a country where there was nothing lower than a cent. And here—on the
morrow of her sacrifice—was her husband leaving her and blaming her.

She would not even try to profit by what time she had, but sat in the
house, and now had the bottle out and viewed it with unutterable fear,
and now, with loathing, hid it out of sight.

By-and-by, Keawe came back, and would have her take a drive.

“My husband, I am ill,” she said. “I am out of heart. Excuse me, I can
take no pleasure.”

Then was Keawe more wroth than ever. With her, because he thought she
was brooding over the case of the old man; and with himself, because he
thought she was right, and was ashamed to be so happy.

“This is your truth,” cried he, “and this your affection! Your husband
is just saved from eternal ruin, which he encountered for the love of
you—and you can take no pleasure! Kokua, you have a disloyal heart.”

He went forth again furious, and wandered in the town all day. He met
friends, and drank with them; they hired a carriage and drove into the
country, and there drank again. All the time Keawe was ill at ease,
because he was taking this pastime while his wife was sad, and because
he knew in his heart that she was more right than he; and the knowledge
made him drink the deeper.

Now there was an old brutal Haole drinking with him, one that had been
a boatswain of a whaler, a runaway, a digger in gold mines, a convict
in prisons. He had a low mind and a foul mouth; he loved to drink and
to see others drunken; and he pressed the glass upon Keawe. Soon there
was no more money in the company.

“Here, you!” says the boatswain, “you are rich, you have been always
saying. You have a bottle or some foolishness.”

“Yes,” says Keawe, “I am rich; I will go back and get some money from
my wife, who keeps it.”

“That’s a bad idea, mate,” said the boatswain. “Never you trust a
petticoat with dollars. They’re all as false as water; you keep an eye
on her.”

Now, this word struck in Keawe’s mind; for he was muddled with what he
had been drinking.

“I should not wonder but she was false, indeed,” thought he. “Why else
should she be so cast down at my release? But I will show her I am not
the man to be fooled. I will catch her in the act.”

Accordingly, when they were back in town, Keawe bade the boatswain wait
for him at the corner, by the old calaboose, and went forward up the
avenue alone to the door of his house. The night had come again; there
was a light within, but never a sound; and Keawe crept about the
corner, opened the back door softly, and looked in.

There was Kokua on the floor, the lamp at her side; before her was a
milk-white bottle, with a round belly and a long neck; and as she
viewed it, Kokua wrung her hands.

A long time Keawe stood and looked in the doorway. At first he was
struck stupid; and then fear fell upon him that the bargain had been
made amiss, and the bottle had come back to him as it came at San
Francisco; and at that his knees were loosened, and the fumes of the
wine departed from his head like mists off a river in the morning. And
then he had another thought; and it was a strange one, that made his
cheeks to burn.

“I must make sure of this,” thought he.

So he closed the door, and went softly round the corner again, and then
came noisily in, as though he were but now returned. And, lo! by the
time he opened the front door no bottle was to be seen; and Kokua sat
in a chair and started up like one awakened out of sleep.

“I have been drinking all day and making merry,” said Keawe. “I have
been with good companions, and now I only come back for money, and
return to drink and carouse with them again.”

Both his face and voice were as stern as judgment, but Kokua was too
troubled to observe.

“You do well to use your own, my husband,” said she, and her words
trembled.

“O, I do well in all things,” said Keawe, and he went straight to the
chest and took out money. But he looked besides in the corner where
they kept the bottle, and there was no bottle there.

At that the chest heaved upon the floor like a sea-billow, and the
house span about him like a wreath of smoke, for he saw he was lost
now, and there was no escape. “It is what I feared,” he thought. “It is
she who has bought it.”

And then he came to himself a little and rose up; but the sweat
streamed on his face as thick as the rain and as cold as the
well-water.

“Kokua,” said he, “I said to you to-day what ill became me. Now I
return to carouse with my jolly companions,” and at that he laughed a
little quietly. “I will take more pleasure in the cup if you forgive
me.”

She clasped his knees in a moment; she kissed his knees with flowing
tears.

“O,” she cried, “I asked but a kind word!”

“Let us never one think hardly of the other,” said Keawe, and was gone
out of the house.

Now, the money that Keawe had taken was only some of that store of
centime pieces they had laid in at their arrival. It was very sure he
had no mind to be drinking. His wife had given her soul for him, now he
must give his for hers; no other thought was in the world with him.

At the corner, by the old calaboose, there was the boatswain waiting.

“My wife has the bottle,” said Keawe, “and, unless you help me to
recover it, there can be no more money and no more liquor to-night.”

“You do not mean to say you are serious about that bottle?” cried the
boatswain.

“There is the lamp,” said Keawe. “Do I look as if I was jesting?”

“That is so,” said the boatswain. “You look as serious as a ghost.”

“Well, then,” said Keawe, “here are two centimes; you must go to my
wife in the house, and offer her these for the bottle, which (if I am
not much mistaken) she will give you instantly. Bring it to me here,
and I will buy it back from you for one; for that is the law with this
bottle, that it still must be sold for a less sum. But whatever you do,
never breathe a word to her that you have come from me.”

“Mate, I wonder are you making a fool of me?” asked the boatswain.

“It will do you no harm if I am,” returned Keawe.

“That is so, mate,” said the boatswain.

“And if you doubt me,” added Keawe, “you can try. As soon as you are
clear of the house, wish to have your pocket full of money, or a bottle
of the best rum, or what you please, and you will see the virtue of the
thing.”

“Very well, Kanaka,” says the boatswain. “I will try; but if you are
having your fun out of me, I will take my fun out of you with a
belaying pin.”

So the whaler-man went off up the avenue; and Keawe stood and waited.
It was near the same spot where Kokua had waited the night before; but
Keawe was more resolved, and never faltered in his purpose; only his
soul was bitter with despair.

It seemed a long time he had to wait before he heard a voice singing in
the darkness of the avenue. He knew the voice to be the boatswain’s;
but it was strange how drunken it appeared upon a sudden.

Next, the man himself came stumbling into the light of the lamp. He had
the devil’s bottle buttoned in his coat; another bottle was in his
hand; and even as he came in view he raised it to his mouth and drank.

“You have it,” said Keawe. “I see that.”

“Hands off!” cried the boatswain, jumping back. “Take a step near me,
and I’ll smash your mouth. You thought you could make a cat’s-paw of
me, did you?”

“What do you mean?” cried Keawe.

“Mean?” cried the boatswain. “This is a pretty good bottle, this is;
that’s what I mean. How I got it for two centimes I can’t make out; but
I’m sure you shan’t have it for one.”

“You mean you won’t sell?” gasped Keawe.

“No, _sir_!” cried the boatswain. “But I’ll give you a drink of the
rum, if you like.”

“I tell you,” said Keawe, “the man who has that bottle goes to hell.”

“I reckon I’m going anyway,” returned the sailor; “and this bottle’s
the best thing to go with I’ve struck yet. No, sir!” he cried again,
“this is my bottle now, and you can go and fish for another.”

“Can this be true?” Keawe cried. “For your own sake, I beseech you,
sell it me!”

“I don’t value any of your talk,” replied the boatswain. “You thought I
was a flat; now you see I’m not; and there’s an end. If you won’t have
a swallow of the rum, I’ll have one myself. Here’s your health, and
good-night to you!”

So off he went down the avenue towards town, and there goes the bottle
out of the story.

But Keawe ran to Kokua light as the wind; and great was their joy that
night; and great, since then, has been the peace of all their days in
the Bright House.




THE ISLE OF VOICES.


Keola was married with Lehua, daughter of Kalamake, the wise man of
Molokai, and he kept his dwelling with the father of his wife. There
was no man more cunning than that prophet; he read the stars, he could
divine by the bodies of the dead, and by the means of evil creatures:
he could go alone into the highest parts of the mountain, into the
region of the hobgoblins, and there he would lay snares to entrap the
spirits of the ancient.

For this reason no man was more consulted in all the Kingdom of Hawaii.
Prudent people bought, and sold, and married, and laid out their lives
by his counsels; and the King had him twice to Kona to seek the
treasures of Kamehameha. Neither was any man more feared: of his
enemies, some had dwindled in sickness by the virtue of his
incantations, and some had been spirited away, the life and the clay
both, so that folk looked in vain for so much as a bone of their
bodies. It was rumoured that he had the art or the gift of the old
heroes. Men had seen him at night upon the mountains, stepping from one
cliff to the next; they had seen him walking in the high forest, and
his head and shoulders were above the trees.

This Kalamake was a strange man to see. He was come of the best blood
in Molokai and Maui, of a pure descent; and yet he was more white to
look upon than any foreigner: his hair the colour of dry grass, and his
eyes red and very blind, so that “Blind as Kalamake, that can see
across to-morrow,” was a byword in the islands.

Of all these doings of his father-in-law, Keola knew a little by the
common repute, a little more he suspected, and the rest he ignored. But
there was one thing troubled him. Kalamake was a man that spared for
nothing, whether to eat or to drink, or to wear; and for all he paid in
bright new dollars. “Bright as Kalamake’s dollars,” was another saying
in the Eight Isles. Yet he neither sold, nor planted, nor took
hire—only now and then from his sorceries—and there was no source
conceivable for so much silver coin.

It chanced one day Keola’s wife was gone upon a visit to Kaunakakai, on
the lee side of the island, and the men were forth at the sea-fishing.
But Keola was an idle dog, and he lay in the verandah and watched the
surf beat on the shore and the birds fly about the cliff. It was a
chief thought with him always—the thought of the bright dollars. When
he lay down to bed he would be wondering why they were so many, and
when he woke at morn he would be wondering why they were all new; and
the thing was never absent from his mind. But this day of all days he
made sure in his heart of some discovery. For it seems he had observed
the place where Kalamake kept his treasure, which was a lock-fast desk
against the parlour wall, under the print of Kamehameha the Fifth, and
a photograph of Queen Victoria with her crown; and it seems again that,
no later than the night before, he found occasion to look in, and
behold! the bag lay there empty. And this was the day of the steamer;
he could see her smoke off Kalaupapa; and she must soon arrive with a
month’s goods, tinned salmon and gin, and all manner of rare luxuries
for Kalamake.

“Now if he can pay for his goods to-day,” Keola thought, “I shall know
for certain that the man is a warlock, and the dollars come out of the
Devil’s pocket.”

While he was so thinking, there was his father-in-law behind him,
looking vexed.

“Is that the steamer?” he asked.

“Yes,” said Keola. “She has but to call at Pelekunu, and then she will
be here.”

“There is no help for it then,” returned Kalamake, “and I must take you
in my confidence, Keola, for the lack of anyone better. Come here
within the house.”

So they stepped together into the parlour, which was a very fine room,
papered and hung with prints, and furnished with a rocking-chair, and a
table and a sofa in the European style. There was a shelf of books
besides, and a family Bible in the midst of the table, and the
lock-fast writing desk against the wall; so that anyone could see it
was the house of a man of substance.

Kalamake made Keola close the shutters of the windows, while he himself
locked all the doors and set open the lid of the desk. From this he
brought forth a pair of necklaces hung with charms and shells, a bundle
of dried herbs, and the dried leaves of trees, and a green branch of
palm.

“What I am about,” said he, “is a thing beyond wonder. The men of old
were wise; they wrought marvels, and this among the rest; but that was
at night, in the dark, under the fit stars and in the desert. The same
will I do here in my own house and under the plain eye of day.”

So saying, he put the bible under the cushion of the sofa so that it
was all covered, brought out from the same place a mat of a wonderfully
fine texture, and heaped the herbs and leaves on sand in a tin pan. And
then he and Keola put on the necklaces and took their stand upon the
opposite corners of the mat.

“The time comes,” said the warlock; “be not afraid.”

With that he set flame to the herbs, and began to mutter and wave the
branch of palm. At first the light was dim because of the closed
shutters; but the herbs caught strongly afire, and the flames beat upon
Keola, and the room glowed with the burning; and next the smoke rose
and made his head swim and his eyes darken, and the sound of Kalamake
muttering ran in his ears. And suddenly, to the mat on which they were
standing came a snatch or twitch, that seemed to be more swift than
lightning. In the same wink the room was gone and the house, the breath
all beaten from Keola’s body. Volumes of light rolled upon his eyes and
head, and he found himself transported to a beach of the sea under a
strong sun, with a great surf roaring: he and the warlock standing
there on the same mat, speechless, gasping and grasping at one another,
and passing their hands before their eyes.

“What was this?” cried Keola, who came to himself the first, because he
was the younger. “The pang of it was like death.”

“It matters not,” panted Kalamake. “It is now done.”

“And, in the name of God, where are we?” cried Keola.

“That is not the question,” replied the sorcerer. “Being here, we have
matter in our hands, and that we must attend to. Go, while I recover my
breath, into the borders of the wood, and bring me the leaves of such
and such a herb, and such and such a tree, which you will find to grow
there plentifully—three handfuls of each. And be speedy. We must be
home again before the steamer comes; it would seem strange if we had
disappeared.” And he sat on the sand and panted.

Keola went up the beach, which was of shining sand and coral, strewn
with singular shells; and he thought in his heart—

“How do I not know this beach? I will come here again and gather
shells.”

In front of him was a line of palms against the sky; not like the palms
of the Eight Islands, but tall and fresh and beautiful, and hanging out
withered fans like gold among the green, and he thought in his heart—

“It is strange I should not have found this grove. I will come here
again, when it is warm, to sleep.” And he thought, “How warm it has
grown suddenly!” For it was winter in Hawaii, and the day had been
chill. And he thought also, “Where are the grey mountains? And where is
the high cliff with the hanging forest and the wheeling birds?” And the
more he considered, the less he might conceive in what quarter of the
islands he was fallen.

In the border of the grove, where it met the beach, the herb was
growing, but the tree further back. Now, as Keola went toward the tree,
he was aware of a young woman who had nothing on her body but a belt of
leaves.

“Well!” thought Keola, “they are not very particular about their dress
in this part of the country.” And he paused, supposing she would
observe him and escape; and seeing that she still looked before her,
stood and hummed aloud. Up she leaped at the sound. Her face was ashen;
she looked this way and that, and her mouth gaped with the terror of
her soul. But it was a strange thing that her eyes did not rest upon
Keola.

“Good day,” said he. “You need not be so frightened; I will not eat
you.” And he had scarce opened his mouth before the young woman fled
into the bush.

“These are strange manners,” thought Keola. And, not thinking what he
did, ran after her.

As she ran, the girl kept crying in some speech that was not practised
in Hawaii, yet some of the words were the same, and he knew she kept
calling and warning others. And presently he saw more people
running—men, women and children, one with another, all running and
crying like people at a fire. And with that he began to grow afraid
himself, and returned to Kalamake bringing the leaves. Him he told what
he had seen.

“You must pay no heed,” said Kalamake. “All this is like a dream and
shadows. All will disappear and be forgotten.”

“It seemed none saw me,” said Keola.

“And none did,” replied the sorcerer. “We walk here in the broad sun
invisible by reason of these charms. Yet they hear us; and therefore it
is well to speak softly, as I do.”

With that he made a circle round the mat with stones, and in the midst
he set the leaves.

“It will be your part,” said he, “to keep the leaves alight, and feed
the fire slowly. While they blaze (which is but for a little moment) I
must do my errand; and before the ashes blacken, the same power that
brought us carries us away. Be ready now with the match; and do you
call me in good time lest the flames burn out and I be left.”

As soon as the leaves caught, the sorcerer leaped like a deer out of
the circle, and began to race along the beach like a hound that has
been bathing. As he ran, he kept stooping to snatch shells; and it
seemed to Keola that they glittered as he took them. The leaves blazed
with a clear flame that consumed them swiftly; and presently Keola had
but a handful left, and the sorcerer was far off, running and stopping.

“Back!” cried Keola. “Back! The leaves are near done.”

At that Kalamake turned, and if he had run before, now he flew. But
fast as he ran, the leaves burned faster. The flame was ready to expire
when, with a great leap, he bounded on the mat. The wind of his leaping
blew it out; and with that the beach was gone, and the sun and the sea,
and they stood once more in the dimness of the shuttered parlour, and
were once more shaken and blinded; and on the mat betwixt them lay a
pile of shining dollars. Keola ran to the shutters; and there was the
steamer tossing in the swell close in.

The same night Kalamake took his son-in-law apart, and gave him five
dollars in his hand.

“Keola,” said he, “if you are a wise man (which I am doubtful of) you
will think you slept this afternoon on the verandah, and dreamed as you
were sleeping. I am a man of few words, and I have for my helpers
people of short memories.”

Never a word more said Kalamake, nor referred again to that affair. But
it ran all the while in Keola’s head—if he were lazy before, he would
now do nothing.

“Why should I work,” thought he, “when I have a father-in-law who makes
dollars of sea-shells?”

Presently his share was spent. He spent it all upon fine clothes. And
then he was sorry:

“For,” thought he, “I had done better to have bought a concertina, with
which I might have entertained myself all day long.” And then he began
to grow vexed with Kalamake.

“This man has the soul of a dog,” thought he. “He can gather dollars
when he pleases on the beach, and he leaves me to pine for a
concertina! Let him beware: I am no child, I am as cunning as he, and
hold his secret.” With that he spoke to his wife Lehua, and complained
of her father’s manners.

“I would let my father be,” said Lehua. “He is a dangerous man to
cross.”

“I care that for him!” cried Keola; and snapped his fingers. “I have
him by the nose. I can make him do what I please.” And he told Lehua
the story.

But she shook her head.

“You may do what you like,” said she; “but as sure as you thwart my
father, you will be no more heard of. Think of this person, and that
person; think of Hua, who was a noble of the House of Representatives,
and went to Honolulu every year; and not a bone or a hair of him was
found. Remember Kamau, and how he wasted to a thread, so that his wife
lifted him with one hand. Keola, you are a baby in my father’s hands;
he will take you with his thumb and finger and eat you like a shrimp.”

Now Keola was truly afraid of Kalamake, but he was vain too; and these
words of his wife’s incensed him.

“Very well,” said he, “if that is what you think of me, I will show how
much you are deceived.” And he went straight to where his father-in-law
was sitting in the parlour.

“Kalamake,” said he, “I want a concertina.”

“Do you, indeed?” said Kalamake.

“Yes,” said he, “and I may as well tell you plainly, I mean to have it.
A man who picks up dollars on the beach can certainly afford a
concertina.”

“I had no idea you had so much spirit,” replied the sorcerer. “I
thought you were a timid, useless lad, and I cannot describe how much
pleased I am to find I was mistaken. Now I begin to think I may have
found an assistant and successor in my difficult business. A
concertina? You shall have the best in Honolulu. And to-night, as soon
as it is dark, you and I will go and find the money.”

“Shall we return to the beach?” asked Keola.

“No, no!” replied Kalamake; “you must begin to learn more of my
secrets. Last time I taught you to pick shells; this time I shall teach
you to catch fish. Are you strong enough to launch Pili’s boat?”

“I think I am,” returned Keola. “But why should we not take your own,
which is afloat already?”

“I have a reason which you will understand thoroughly before
to-morrow,” said Kalamake. “Pili’s boat is the better suited for my
purpose. So, if you please, let us meet there as soon as it is dark;
and in the meanwhile, let us keep our own counsel, for there is no
cause to let the family into our business.”

Honey is not more sweet than was the voice of Kalamake, and Keola could
scarce contain his satisfaction.

“I might have had my concertina weeks ago,” thought he, “and there is
nothing needed in this world but a little courage.”

Presently after he spied Lehua weeping, and was half in a mind to tell
her all was well.

“But no,” thinks he; “I shall wait till I can show her the concertina;
we shall see what the chit will do then. Perhaps she will understand in
the future that her husband is a man of some intelligence.”

As soon as it was dark father and son-in-law launched Pili’s boat and
set the sail. There was a great sea, and it blew strong from the
leeward; but the boat was swift and light and dry, and skimmed the
waves. The wizard had a lantern, which he lit and held with his finger
through the ring; and the two sat in the stern and smoked cigars, of
which Kalamake had always a provision, and spoke like friends of magic
and the great sums of money which they could make by its exercise, and
what they should buy first, and what second; and Kalamake talked like a
father.

Presently he looked all about, and above him at the stars, and back at
the island, which was already three parts sunk under the sea, and he
seemed to consider ripely his position.

“Look!” says he, “there is Molokai already far behind us, and Maui like
a cloud; and by the bearing of these three stars I know I am come where
I desire. This part of the sea is called the Sea of the Dead. It is in
this place extraordinarily deep, and the floor is all covered with the
bones of men, and in the holes of this part gods and goblins keep their
habitation. The flow of the sea is to the north, stronger than a shark
can swim, and any man who shall here be thrown out of a ship it bears
away like a wild horse into the uttermost ocean. Presently he is spent
and goes down, and his bones are scattered with the rest, and the gods
devour his spirit.”

Fear came on Keola at the words, and he looked, and by the light of the
stars and the lantern, the warlock seemed to change.

“What ails you?” cried Keola, quick and sharp.

“It is not I who am ailing,” said the wizard; “but there is one here
very sick.”

With that he changed his grasp upon the lantern, and, behold I as he
drew his finger from the ring, the finger stuck and the ring was burst,
and his hand was grown to be of the bigness of three.

At that sight Keola screamed and covered his face.

But Kalamake held up the lantern. “Look rather at my face!” said he—and
his head was huge as a barrel; and still he grew and grew as a cloud
grows on a mountain, and Keola sat before him screaming, and the boat
raced on the great seas.

“And now,” said the wizard, “what do you think about that concertina?
and are you sure you would not rather have a flute? No?” says he; “that
is well, for I do not like my family to be changeable of purpose. But I
begin to think I had better get out of this paltry boat, for my bulk
swells to a very unusual degree, and if we are not the more careful,
she will presently be swamped.”

With that he threw his legs over the side. Even as he did so, the
greatness of the man grew thirty-fold and forty-fold as swift as sight
or thinking, so that he stood in the deep seas to the armpits, and his
head and shoulders rose like a high isle, and the swell beat and burst
upon his bosom, as it beats and breaks against a cliff. The boat ran
still to the north, but he reached out his hand, and took the gunwale
by the finger and thumb, and broke the side like a biscuit, and Keola
was spilled into the sea. And the pieces of the boat the sorcerer
crushed in the hollow of his hand and flung miles away into the night.

“Excuse me taking the lantern,” said he; “for I have a long wade before
me, and the land is far, and the bottom of the sea uneven, and I feel
the bones under my toes.”

And he turned and went off walking with great strides; and as often as
Keola sank in the trough he could see him no longer; but as often as he
was heaved upon the crest, there he was striding and dwindling, and he
held the lamp high over his head, and the waves broke white about him
as he went.

Since first the islands were fished out of the sea, there was never a
man so terrified as this Keola. He swam indeed, but he swam as puppies
swim when they are cast in to drown, and knew not wherefore. He could
but think of the hugeness of the swelling of the warlock, of that face
which was great as a mountain, of those shoulders that were broad as an
isle, and of the seas that beat on them in vain. He thought, too, of
the concertina, and shame took hold upon him; and of the dead men’s
bones, and fear shook him.

Of a sudden he was aware of something dark against the stars that
tossed, and a light below, and a brightness of the cloven sea; and he
heard speech of men. He cried out aloud and a voice answered; and in a
twinkling the bows of a ship hung above him on a wave like a thing
balanced, and swooped down. He caught with his two hands in the chains
of her, and the next moment was buried in the rushing seas, and the
next hauled on board by seamen.

They gave him gin and biscuit and dry clothes, and asked him how he
came where they found him, and whether the light which they had seen
was the lighthouse, Lae o Ka Laau. But Keola knew white men are like
children and only believe their own stories; so about himself he told
them what he pleased, and as for the light (which was Kalamake’s
lantern) he vowed he had seen none.

This ship was a schooner bound for Honolulu, and then to trade in the
low islands; and by a very good chance for Keola she had lost a man off
the bowsprit in a squall. It was no use talking. Keola durst not stay
in the Eight Islands. Word goes so quickly, and all men are so fond to
talk and carry news, that if he hid in the north end of Kauai or in the
south end of Kau, the wizard would have wind of it before a month, and
he must perish. So he did what seemed the most prudent, and shipped
sailor in the place of the man who had been drowned.

In some ways the ship was a good place. The food was extraordinarily
rich and plenty, with biscuits and salt beef every day, and pea-soup
and puddings made of flour and suet twice a week, so that Keola grew
fat. The captain also was a good man, and the crew no worse than other
whites. The trouble was the mate, who was the most difficult man to
please Keola had ever met with, and beat and cursed him daily, both for
what he did and what he did not. The blows that he dealt were very
sore, for he was strong; and the words he used were very unpalatable,
for Keola was come of a good family and accustomed to respect. And what
was the worst of all, whenever Keola found a chance to sleep, there was
the mate awake and stirring him up with a rope’s end. Keola saw it
would never do; and he made up his mind to run away.

They were about a month out from Honolulu when they made the land. It
was a fine starry night, the sea was smooth as well as the sky fair; it
blew a steady trade; and there was the island on their weather bow, a
ribbon of palm trees lying flat along the sea. The captain and the mate
looked at it with the night glass, and named the name of it, and talked
of it, beside the wheel where Keola was steering. It seemed it was an
isle where no traders came. By the captain’s way, it was an isle
besides where no man dwelt; but the mate thought otherwise.

“I don’t give a cent for the directory,” said he, “I’ve been past here
one night in the schooner _Eugenie_; it was just such a night as this;
they were fishing with torches, and the beach was thick with lights
like a town.”

“Well, well,” says the captain, “its steep-to, that’s the great point;
and there ain’t any outlying dangers by the chart, so we’ll just hug
the lee side of it. Keep her romping full, don’t I tell you!” he cried
to Keola, who was listening so hard that he forgot to steer.

And the mate cursed him, and swore that Kanaka was for no use in the
world, and if he got started after him with a belaying pin, it would be
a cold day for Keola.

And so the captain and mate lay down on the house together, and Keola
was left to himself.

“This island will do very well for me,” he thought; “if no traders deal
there, the mate will never come. And as for Kalamake, it is not
possible he can ever get as far as this.”

With that he kept edging the schooner nearer in. He had to do this
quietly, for it was the trouble with these white men, and above all
with the mate, that you could never be sure of them; they would all be
sleeping sound, or else pretending, and if a sail shook, they would
jump to their feet and fall on you with a rope’s end. So Keola edged
her up little by little, and kept all drawing. And presently the land
was close on board, and the sound of the sea on the sides of it grew
loud.

With that, the mate sat up suddenly upon the house.

“What are you doing?” he roars. “You’ll have the ship ashore!”

And he made one bound for Keola, and Keola made another clean over the
rail and plump into the starry sea. When he came up again, the schooner
had payed off on her true course, and the mate stood by the wheel
himself, and Keola heard him cursing. The sea was smooth under the lee
of the island; it was warm besides, and Keola had his sailor’s knife,
so he had no fear of sharks. A little way before him the trees stopped;
there was a break in the line of the land like the mouth of a harbour;
and the tide, which was then flowing, took him up and carried him
through. One minute he was without, and the next within: had floated
there in a wide shallow water, bright with ten thousand stars, and all
about him was the ring of the land, with its string of palm trees. And
he was amazed, because this was a kind of island he had never heard of.

The time of Keola in that place was in two periods—the period when he
was alone, and the period when he was there with the tribe. At first he
sought everywhere and found no man; only some houses standing in a
hamlet, and the marks of fires. But the ashes of the fires were cold
and the rains had washed them away; and the winds had blown, and some
of the huts were overthrown. It was here he took his dwelling, and he
made a fire drill, and a shell hook, and fished and cooked his fish,
and climbed after green cocoanuts, the juice of which he drank, for in
all the isle there was no water. The days were long to him, and the
nights terrifying. He made a lamp of cocoa-shell, and drew the oil of
the ripe nuts, and made a wick of fibre; and when evening came he
closed up his hut, and lit his lamp, and lay and trembled till morning.
Many a time he thought in his heart he would have been better in the
bottom of the sea, his bones rolling there with the others.

All this while he kept by the inside of the island, for the huts were
on the shore of the lagoon, and it was there the palms grew best, and
the lagoon itself abounded with good fish. And to the outer slide he
went once only, and he looked but the once at the beach of the ocean,
and came away shaking. For the look of it, with its bright sand, and
strewn shells, and strong sun and surf, went sore against his
inclination.

“It cannot be,” he thought, “and yet it is very like. And how do I
know? These white men, although they pretend to know where they are
sailing, must take their chance like other people. So that after all we
may have sailed in a circle, and I may be quite near to Molokai, and
this may be the very beach where my father-in-law gathers his dollars.”

So after that he was prudent, and kept to the land side.

It was perhaps a month later, when the people of the place arrived—the
fill of six great boats. They were a fine race of men, and spoke a
tongue that sounded very different from the tongue of Hawaii, but so
many of the words were the same that it was not difficult to
understand. The men besides were very courteous, and the women very
towardly; and they made Keola welcome, and built him a house, and gave
him a wife; and what surprised him the most, he was never sent to work
with the young men.

And now Keola had three periods. First he had a period of being very
sad, and then he had a period when he was pretty merry. Last of all
came the third, when he was the most terrified man in the four oceans.

The cause of the first period was the girl he had to wife. He was in
doubt about the island, and he might have been in doubt about the
speech, of which he had heard so little when he came there with the
wizard on the mat. But about his wife there was no mistake conceivable,
for she was the same girl that ran from him crying in the wood. So he
had sailed all this way, and might as well have stayed in Molokai; and
had left home and wife and all his friends for no other cause but to
escape his enemy, and the place he had come to was that wizard’s
hunting ground, and the shore where he walked invisible. It was at this
period when he kept the most close to the lagoon side, and as far as he
dared, abode in the cover of his hut.

The cause of the second period was talk he heard from his wife and the
chief islanders. Keola himself said little. He was never so sure of his
new friends, for he judged they were too civil to be wholesome, and
since he had grown better acquainted with his father-in-law the man had
grown more cautious. So he told them nothing of himself, but only his
name and descent, and that he came from the Eight Islands, and what
fine islands they were; and about the king’s palace in Honolulu, and
how he was a chief friend of the king and the missionaries. But he put
many questions and learned much. The island where he was was called the
Isle of Voices; it belonged to the tribe, but they made their home upon
another, three hours’ sail to the southward. There they lived and had
their permanent houses, and it was a rich island, where were eggs and
chickens and pigs, and ships came trading with rum and tobacco. It was
there the schooner had gone after Keola deserted; there, too, the mate
had died, like the fool of a white man as he was. It seems, when the
ship came, it was the beginning of the sickly season in that isle, when
the fish of the lagoon are poisonous, and all who eat of them swell up
and die. The mate was told of it; he saw the boats preparing, because
in that season the people leave that island and sail to the Isle of
Voices; but he was a fool of a white man, who would believe no stories
but his own, and he caught one of these fish, cooked it and ate it, and
swelled up and died, which was good news to Keola. As for the Isle of
Voices, it lay solitary the most part of the year; only now and then a
boat’s crew came for copra, and in the bad season, when the fish at the
main isle were poisonous, the tribe dwelt there in a body. It had its
name from a marvel, for it seemed the seaside of it was all beset with
invisible devils; day and night you heard them talking one with another
in strange tongues; day and night little fires blazed up and were
extinguished on the beach; and what was the cause of these doings no
man might conceive. Keola asked them if it were the same in their own
island where they stayed, and they told him no, not there; nor yet in
any other of some hundred isles that lay all about them in that sea;
but it was a thing peculiar to the Isle of Voices. They told him also
that these fires and voices were ever on the seaside and in the seaward
fringes of the wood, and a man might dwell by the lagoon two thousand
years (if he could live so long) and never be any way troubled; and
even on the seaside the devils did no harm if let alone. Only once a
chief had cast a spear at one of the voices, and the same night he fell
out of a cocoanut palm and was killed.

Keola thought a good bit with himself. He saw he would be all right
when the tribe returned to the main island, and right enough where he
was, if he kept by the lagoon, yet he had a mind to make things righter
if he could. So he told the high chief he had once been in an isle that
was pestered the same way, and the folk had found a means to cure that
trouble.

“There was a tree growing in the bush there,” says he, “and it seems
these devils came to get the leaves of it. So the people of the isle
cut down the tree wherever it was found, and the devils came no more.”

They asked what kind of tree this was, and he showed them the tree of
which Kalamake burned the leaves. They found it hard to believe, yet
the idea tickled them. Night after night the old men debated it in
their councils, but the high chief (though he was a brave man) was
afraid of the matter, and reminded them daily of the chief who cast a
spear against the voices and was killed, and the thought of that
brought all to a stand again.

Though he could not yet bring about the destruction of the trees, Keola
was well enough pleased, and began to look about him and take pleasure
in his days; and, among other things, he was the kinder to his wife, so
that the girl began to love him greatly. One day he came to the hut,
and she lay on the ground lamenting.

“Why,” said Keola, “what is wrong with you now?”

She declared it was nothing.

The same night she woke him. The lamp burned very low, but he saw by
her face she was in sorrow.

“Keola,” she said, “put your ear to my mouth that I may whisper, for no
one must hear us. Two days before the boats begin to be got ready, go
you to the sea-side of the isle and lie in a thicket. We shall choose
that place before-hand, you and I; and hide food; and every night I
shall come near by there singing. So when a night comes and you do not
hear me, you shall know we are clean gone out of the island, and you
may come forth again in safety.”

The soul of Keola died within him.

“What is this?” he cried. “I cannot live among devils. I will not be
left behind upon this isle. I am dying to leave it.”

“You will never leave it alive, my poor Keola,” said the girl; “for to
tell you the truth, my people are eaters of men; but this they keep
secret. And the reason they will kill you before we leave is because in
our island ships come, and Donat-Kimaran comes and talks for the
French, and there is a white trader there in a house with a verandah,
and a catechist. Oh, that is a fine place indeed! The trader has
barrels filled with flour, and a French warship once came in the lagoon
and gave everybody wine and biscuit. Ah, my poor Keola, I wish I could
take you there, for great is my love to you, and it is the finest place
in the seas except Papeete.”

So now Keola was the most terrified man in the four oceans. He had
heard tell of eaters of men in the south islands, and the thing had
always been a fear to him; and here it was knocking at his door. He had
heard besides, by travellers, of their practices, and how when they are
in a mind to eat a man, they cherish and fondle him like a mother with
a favourite baby. And he saw this must be his own case; and that was
why he had been housed, and fed, and wived, and liberated from all
work; and why the old men and the chiefs discoursed with him like a
person of weight. So he lay on his bed and railed upon his destiny; and
the flesh curdled on his bones.

The next day the people of the tribe were very civil, as their way was.
They were elegant speakers, and they made beautiful poetry, and jested
at meals, so that a missionary must have died laughing. It was little
enough Keola cared for their fine ways; all he saw was the white teeth
shining in their mouths, and his gorge rose at the sight; and when they
were done eating, he went and lay in the bush like a dead man.

The next day it was the same, and then his wife followed him.

“Keola,” she said, “if you do not eat, I tell you plainly you will be
killed and cooked to-morrow. Some of the old chiefs are murmuring
already. They think you are fallen sick and must lose flesh.”

With that Keola got to his feet, and anger burned in him.

“It is little I care one way or the other,” said he. “I am between the
devil and the deep sea. Since die I must, let me die the quickest way;
and since I must be eaten at the best of it, let me rather be eaten by
hobgoblins than by men. Farewell,” said he, and he left her standing,
and walked to the sea-side of that island.

It was all bare in the strong sun; there was no sign of man, only the
beach was trodden, and all about him as he went, the voices talked and
whispered, and the little fires sprang up and burned down. All tongues
of the earth were spoken there; the French, the Dutch, the Russian, the
Tamil, the Chinese. Whatever land knew sorcery, there were some of its
people whispering in Keola’s ear. That beach was thick as a cried fair,
yet no man seen; and as he walked he saw the shells vanish before him,
and no man to pick them up. I think the devil would have been afraid to
be alone in such a company; but Keola was past fear and courted death.
When the fires sprang up, he charged for them like a bull. Bodiless
voices called to and fro; unseen hands poured sand upon the flames; and
they were gone from the beach before he reached them.

“It is plain Kalamake is not here,” he thought, “or I must have been
killed long since.”

With that he sat him down in the margin of the wood, for he was tired,
and put his chin upon his hands. The business before his eyes
continued: the beach babbled with voices, and the fires sprang up and
sank, and the shells vanished and were renewed again even while he
looked.

“It was a by-day when I was here before,” he thought, “for it was
nothing to this.”

And his head was dizzy with the thought of these millions and millions
of dollars, and all these hundreds and hundreds of persons culling them
upon the beach and flying in the air higher and swifter than eagles.

“And to think how they have fooled me with their talk of mints,” says
he, “and that money was made there, when it is clear that all the new
coin in all the world is gathered on these sands! But I will know
better the next time!” said he.

And at last, he knew not very well how or when, sleep feel on Keola,
and he forgot the island and all his sorrows.

Early the next day, before the sun was yet up, a bustle woke him. He
awoke in fear, for he thought the tribe had caught him napping: but it
was no such matter. Only, on the beach in front of him, the bodiless
voices called and shouted one upon another, and it seemed they all
passed and swept beside him up the coast of the island.

“What is afoot now?” thinks Keola. And it was plain to him it was
something beyond ordinary, for the fires were not lighted nor the
shells taken, but the bodiless voices kept posting up the beach, and
hailing and dying away; and others following, and by the sound of them
these wizards should be angry.

“It is not me they are angry at,” thought Keola, “for they pass me
close.”

As when hounds go by, or horses in a race, or city folk coursing to a
fire, and all men join and follow after, so it was now with Keola; and
he knew not what he did, nor why he did it, but there, lo and behold!
he was running with the voices.

So he turned one point of the island, and this brought him in view of a
second; and there he remembered the wizard trees to have been growing
by the score together in a wood. From this point there went up a hubbub
of men crying not to be described; and by the sound of them, those that
he ran with shaped their course for the same quarter. A little nearer,
and there began to mingle with the outcry the crash of many axes. And
at this a thought came at last into his mind that the high chief had
consented; that the men of the tribe had set-to cutting down these
trees; that word had gone about the isle from sorcerer to sorcerer, and
these were all now assembling to defend their trees. Desire of strange
things swept him on. He posted with the voices, crossed the beach, and
came into the borders of the wood, and stood astonished. One tree had
fallen, others were part hewed away. There was the tribe clustered.
They were back to back, and bodies lay, and blood flowed among their
feet. The hue of fear was on all their faces; their voices went up to
heaven shrill as a weasel’s cry.

Have you seen a child when he is all alone and has a wooden sword, and
fights, leaping and hewing with the empty air? Even so the man-eaters
huddled back to back, and heaved up their axes, and laid on, and
screamed as they laid on, and behold! no man to contend with them! only
here and there Keola saw an axe swinging over against them without
hands; and time and again a man of the tribe would fall before it,
clove in twain or burst asunder, and his soul sped howling.

For awhile Keola looked upon this prodigy like one that dreams, and
then fear took him by the midst as sharp as death, that he should
behold such doings. Even in that same flash the high chief of the clan
espied him standing, and pointed and called out his name. Thereat the
whole tribe saw him also, and their eyes flashed, and their teeth
clashed.

“I am too long here,” thought Keola, and ran further out of the wood
and down the beach, not caring whither.

“Keola!” said, a voice close by upon the empty sand.

“Lehua! is that you?” he cried, and gasped, and looked in vain for her;
but by the eyesight he was stark alone.

“I saw you pass before,” the voice answered: “but you would not hear
me. Quick! get the leaves and the herbs, and let us free.”

“You are there with the mat?” he asked.

“Here, at your side;” said she. And he felt her arms about him. “Quick!
the leaves and the herbs, before my father can get back!”

So Keola ran for his life, and fetched the wizard fuel; and Lehua
guided him back, and set his feet upon the mat, and made the fire. All
the time of its burning, the sound of the battle towered out of the
wood; the wizards and the man-eaters hard at fight; the wizards, the
viewless ones, roaring out aloud like bulls upon a mountain, and the
men of the tribe replying shrill and savage out of the terror of their
souls. And all the time of the burning, Keola stood there and listened,
and shook, and watched how the unseen hands of Lehua poured the leaves.
She poured them fast, and the flame burned high, and scorched Keola’s
hands; and she speeded and blew the burning with her breath. The last
leaf was eaten, the flame fell, and the shock followed, and there were
Keola and Lehua in the room at home.

Now, when Keola could see his wife at last he was mighty pleased, and
he was mighty pleased to be home again in Molokai and sit down beside a
bowl of poi—for they make no poi on board ships, and there was none in
the Isle of Voices—and he was out of the body with pleasure to be clean
escaped out of the hands of the eaters of men. But there was another
matter not so clear, and Lehua and Keola talked of it all night and
were troubled. There was Kalamake left upon the isle. If, by the
blessing of God, he could but stick there, all were well; but should he
escape and return to Molokai, it would be an ill day for his daughter
and her husband. They spoke of his gift of swelling, and whether he
could wade that distance in the seas. But Keola knew by this time where
that island was—and that is to say, in the Low or Dangerous
Archipelago. So they fetched the atlas and looked upon the distance in
the map, and by what they could make of it, it seemed a far way for an
old gentleman to walk. Still, it would not do to make too sure of a
warlock like Kalamake, and they determined at last to take counsel of a
white missionary.

So the first one that came by, Keola told him everything. And the
missionary was very sharp on him for taking the second wife in the low
island; but for all the rest, he vowed he could make neither head nor
tail of it.

“However,” says he, “if you think this money of your father’s ill
gotten, my advice to you would be, give some of it to the lepers and
some to the missionary fund. And as for this extraordinary rigmarole,
you cannot do better than keep it to yourselves.”

But he warned the police at Honolulu that, by all he could make out,
Kalamake and Keola had been coining false money, and it would not be
amiss to watch them.

Keola and Lehua took his advice, and gave many dollars to the lepers
and the fund. And no doubt the advice must have been good, for from
that day to this, Kalamake has never more been heard of. But whether he
was slain in the battle by the trees, or whether he is still kicking
his heels upon the Isle of Voices, who shall say?




Footnotes:


[1] Please pronounce _pappa_ throughout.

[2] Alas!

[3] Aeolian

[4] Yes.

[5] Leprosy.

[6] Whites.




