II

UNITY AND POLARITY


Theosophy, both as a philosophy, or system of thought, which discovers
correlations between things apparently unrelated, and as a life,
or system of training whereby it is possible to gain the power to
perceive and use these correlations for worthy ends, is of great value
to the creative artist, whose success depends on the extent to which
he works organically, conforming to the cosmic pattern, proceeding
rationally and rhythmically to some predetermined end. It is of value
no less to the layman, the critic, the art amateur--to anyone in
fact who would come to an accurate and intimate understanding and
appreciation of every variety of esthetic endeavor. For the benefit of
such I shall try to trace some of those correlations which theosophy
affirms, and indicate their bearing upon art, and upon the art of
architecture in particular.

One of the things which theosophy teaches is that those transcendent
glimpses of a divine order and harmony throughout the universe
vouchsafed the poet and the mystic in their moments of vision are not
the paradoxes--the paronomasia as it were--of an intoxicated state of
consciousness, but glimpses of reality. We are all of us participators
in a world of concrete music, geometry and number--a world of
sounds, odors, forms, motions, colors, so mathematically related and
coordinated that our pigmy bodies, equally with the farthest star,
vibrate to the music of the spheres. There is a _Beautiful Necessity_
which rules the world, which is a law of nature and equally a law of
art, for art is idealized creation: nature carried to a higher power
by reason of its passage through a human consciousness. Thought and
emotion tend to crystallize into forms of beauty as inevitably as does
the frost on a window pane. Art therefore in one of its aspects is the
weaving of a pattern, the communication of an order and a method to
the material or medium employed. Although no masterpiece was ever
created by the conscious following to set rules, for the true artist
works unconsciously, instinctively, as the bird sings or as the bee
builds its honey-cell, yet an analysis of any masterpiece reveals the
fact that its author (like the bird and the bee) has "followed the
rules without knowing them."

Helmholtz says, "No doubt is now entertained that beauty is subject
to laws and rules dependent on the nature of human intelligence. The
difficulty consists in the fact that these laws and rules, on whose
fulfilment beauty depends, are not consciously present in the mind of
the artist who creates the work, or of the observer who contemplates
it." Nevertheless they are discoverable, and can be formulated,
after a fashion. We have only to read aright the lessons everywhere
portrayed in the vast picture-books of nature and of art.

The first truth therein published is the law of _Unity_--oneness; for
there is one Self, one Life, which, myriad in manifestation, is yet
in essence ever _one_. Atom and universe, man and the world--each is
a unit, an organic and coherent whole. The application of this law to
art is so obvious as to be almost unnecessary of elucidation, for to
say that a work of art must possess unity, must seem to proceed from a
single impulse and be the embodiment of one dominant idea, is to state
a truism. In a work of architecture the coördination of its various
parts with one another is almost the measure of its success. We
remember any masterpiece--the cathedral of Paris no less than the
pyramids of Egypt--by the singleness of its appeal; complex it may be,
but it is a coordinated complexity; variety it may possess, but it is
a variety in an all-embracing unity.

The second law, not contradicting but supplementing the first is the
law of _Polarity_, i.e., duality. All things have sex, are either
masculine or feminine. This too is the reflection on a lower plane
of one of those transcendental truths taught by the Ancient Wisdom,
namely that the Logos, in his voluntarily circumscribing his infinite
life in order that he may manifest, encloses himself within his
limiting veil, _maya_, and that his life appears as spirit (male), and
his _maya_ as matter (female), the two being never disjoined during
manifestation. The two terms of this polarity are endlessly repeated
throughout nature: in sun and moon, day and night, fire and water, man
and woman--and so on. A close inter-relation is always seen to subsist
between corresponding members of such pairs of opposites: sun, day,
fire, man express and embody the primal and active aspect of the
manifesting deity; moon, night, water, woman, its secondary and
passive aspect. Moreover, each implies or brings to mind the others
of its class: man, like the sun, is lord of day; he is like fire, a
devastating force; woman is subject to the lunar rhythm; like water,
she is soft, sinuous, fecund.

The part which this polarity plays in the arts is important, and the
constant and characteristic distinction between the two terms is a
thing far beyond mere contrast.

In music they are the major and minor modes: the typical, or
representative chords of the dominant seventh, and of the tonic (the
two chords into which Schopenhauer says all music can be resolved): a
partial dissonance, and a consonance: a chord of suspense, and a chord
of satisfaction. In speech the two are vowel, and consonant sounds:
the type of the first being _a_, a sound of suspense, made with the
mouth open; and of the second _m_, a sound of satisfaction, made by
closing the mouth; their combination forms the sacred syllable Om
(_Aum_). In painting they are warm colors, and cold: the pole of
the first being in red, the color of fire, which excites; and of the
second in blue, the color of water, which calms; in the Arts of design
they are lines straight (like fire), and flowing (like water); masses
light (like the day), and dark (like night). In architecture they are
the column, or vertical member, which resists the force of gravity;
and the lintel, or horizontal member, which succumbs to it; they are
vertical lines, which are aspiring, effortful; and horizontal lines,
which are restful to the eye and mind.

It is desirable to have an instant and keen realization of this sex
quality, and to make this easier some sort of classification and
analysis must be attempted. Those things which are allied to and
partake of the nature of _time_ are masculine, and those which are
allied to and partake of the nature of _space_ are feminine: as
motion, and matter; mind, and body; etc. The English words "masculine"
and "feminine" are too intimately associated with the idea of physical
sex properly to designate the terms of this polarity. In Japanese
philosophy and art (derived from the Chinese) the two are called _In_
and _Yo_ (In, feminine; Yo, masculine); and these little words, being
free from the limitations of their English correlatives, will be found
convenient, Yo to designate that which is simple, direct, primary,
active, positive; and In, that which is complex, indirect, derivative,
passive, negative. Things hard, straight, fixed, vertical, are Yo;
things soft, curved, horizontal, fluctuating, are In--and so on.

[Illustration 6: WILD CHERRY; MAPLE LEAF]

[Illustration 7: CALLAS IN YO]

In passing it may be said that the superiority of the line, mass, and
color composition of Japanese prints and kakemonos to that exhibited
in the vastly more pretentious easel pictures of modern Occidental
artists--a superiority now generally acknowledged by connoisseurs--is
largely due to the conscious following, on the part of the Japanese,
of this principle of sex-complementaries.

Nowhere are In and Yo more simply and adequately imaged than in the
vegetable kingdom. The trunk of a tree is Yo, its foliage, In; and
in each stem and leaf the two are repeated. A calla, consisting of
a single straight and rigid spadix embraced by a soft and tenderly
curved spathe, affords an almost perfect expression of the
characteristic differences between Yo and In and their reciprocal
relation to each other. The two are not often combined in such
simplicity and perfection in a single form. The straight, vertical
reeds which so often grow in still, shallow water, find their
complement in the curved lily-pads which lie horizontally on its
surface. Trees such as pine and hemlock, which are excurrent--those in
which the branches start successively (i.e., after the manner of time)
from a straight and vertical central stem--are Yo; trees such as
the elm and willow, which are deliquescent--those in which the trunk
dissolves as it were simultaneously (after the manner of space) into
its branches--are In. All tree forms lie in or between these two
extremes, and leaves are susceptible of a similar classification. It
will be seen to be a classification according to time and space,
for the characteristic of time is _succession_, and of space,
_simultaneousness_: the first is expressed symbolically by elements
arranged with relation to axial lines; the second, by elements
arranged with relation to focal points (Illustrations 6,7).

The student should train himself to recognize In and Yo in all
their Protean presentments throughout nature--in the cloud upon the
mountain, the wave against the cliff, in the tracery of trees against
the sky--that he may the more readily recognize them in his chosen
art, whatever that art may be. If it happens to be painting, he will
endeavor to discern this law of duality in the composition of every
masterpiece, recognizing an instinctive obedience to it in that
favorite device of the great Renaissance masters of making an
architectural setting for their groups of figures, and he will
delight to trace the law in all its ramifications of contrast between
complementaries in line, color, and mass (Illustration 8).

[Illustration 8: THE LAW OF POLARITY CLEOPATRA MELTING THE PEARL. BY
TIEPOLO]

With reference to architecture, it is true, generally speaking,
that architectural forms have been developed through necessity, the
function seeking and finding its appropriate form. For example, the
buttress of a Gothic cathedral was developed by the necessity of
resisting the thrust of the interior vaulting without encroaching upon
the nave; the main lines of a buttress conform to the direction of the
thrust, and the pinnacle with which it terminates is a logical shape
for the masonry necessary to hold the top in position (Illustration
9). Research along these lines is interesting and fruitful of result,
but there remains a certain number of architectural forms whose origin
cannot be explained in any such manner. The secret of their undying
charm lies in the fact that in them In and Yo stand symbolized and
contrasted. They no longer obey a law of utility, but an abstract
law of beauty, for in becoming sexually expressive as it were, the
construction itself is sometimes weakened or falsified. The familiar
classic console or modillion is an example: although in general
contour it is well adapted to its function as a supporting bracket,
embedded in, and projecting from a wall, yet the scroll-like ornament
with which its sides are embellished gives it the appearance of
not entering the wall at all, but of being stuck against it in some
miraculous manner. This defect in functional expressiveness is
more than compensated for by the perfection with which feminine
and masculine characteristics are expressed and contrasted in the
exquisite double spiral, opposed to the straight lines of the moulding
which it subtends (Illustration 10). Again, by fluting the shaft of a
column its area of cross-section is diminished but the appearance of
strength is enhanced because its masculine character--as a supporting
member resisting the force of gravity--is emphasized.

[Illustration 9: CROSS SECTION OF BUTTRESS.]

The importance of the so-called "orders" lies in the fact that they
are architecture epitomized as it were. A building consists of a wall
upholding a roof: support and weight. The type of the first is the
column, which may be conceived of as a condensed section of wall; and
of the second, the lintel, which may be conceived of as a condensed
section of roof. The column, being vertical, is Yo; the lintel, being
horizontal, is In. To mark an entablature with horizontal lines in the
form of mouldings, and the columns with vertical lines in the form
of flutes, as is done in all the "classic orders," is a gain
in functional and sex expressiveness, and consequently in art
(Illustration 11).

[Illustration 10: CORINTHIAN MODILLION; CLASSIC CONSOLE; IONIC CAP]

The column is again divided into the shaft, which is Yo; and the
capital, which is In. The capital is itself twofold, consisting of a
curved member and an angular member. These two appear in their utmost
simplicity in the _echinus_ (In) and the _abacus_ (Yo) of a
Greek Doric cap. The former was adorned with painted leaf forms,
characteristically feminine, and the latter with the angular fret
and meander (Illustration 12). The Ionic capital, belonging to a more
feminine style, exhibits the abacus subordinated to that beautiful
cushion-shaped member with its two spirally marked volutes. This,
though a less rational and expressive form for its particular office
than is the echinus of the Doric cap, is a far more perfect symbol of
the feminine element in nature. There is an essential identity between
the Ionic cap and the classic console before referred to--although
superficially the two do not resemble each other--for a straight line
and a double spiral are elements common to both (Illustration 10).
The Corinthian capital consists of an ordered mass of delicately
sculptured leaf and scroll forms sustaining an abacus which though
relatively masculine is yet more curved and feminine than that of any
other style. In the caulicole of a Corinthian cap In and Yo are again
contrasted. In the unique and exquisite capital from the Tower of the
Winds at Athens, the two are well suggested in the simple, erect, and
pointed leaf forms of the upper part, contrasted with the complex,
deliquescent, rounded ones from which they spring. The essential
identity of principle subsisting between this cap and the Renaissance
baluster by San Gallo is easily seen (Illustration 13).

[Illustration 11]

[Illustration 12]

This law of sex-expressiveness is of such universality that it can
be made the basis of an analysis of the architectural ornament of any
style or period. It is more than mere opposition and contrast. The egg
and tongue motif, which has persisted throughout so many centuries and
survived so many styles, exhibits an alternation of forms resembling
phallic emblems. Yo and In are well suggested in the channeled
triglyphs and the sculptured metopes of a Doric frieze, in the
straight and vertical mullions and the flowing tracery of Gothic
windows, in the banded torus, the bead and reel, and other familiar
ornamented mouldings (Illustrations 14, 15, 16).

There are indications that at some time during the development
of Gothic architecture in France, this sex-distinction became a
recognized principle, moulding and modifying the design of a cathedral
in much the same way that sex modifies bodily structure. The masonic
guilds of the Middle Ages were custodians of the esoteric--which is
the theosophic--side of the Christian faith, and every student of
esotericism knows how fundamental and how far-reaching is this idea of
sex.

[Illustration 13: CAPITAL FROM THE TOWER OF THE WINDS, ATHENS;
CORINTHIAN CAP FROM HADRIAN BUILDINGS, ATHENS; ROSETTE FROM TEMPLE OF
MARS, ROME; CAULICULUS OF CORINTHIAN CAP; BULUSTER BY SAN GALLO]

[Illustration 14: EGG AND TONGUE; BEAD AND REEL; BANDED TORUS]

The entire cathedral symbolized the crucified body of Christ; its two
towers, man and woman--that Adam and that Eve for whose redemption
according to current teaching Christ suffered and was crucified. The
north or right-hand tower ("the man's side") was called the sacred
male pillar, Jachin; and the south, or left-hand tower ("the woman's
side"), the sacred female pillar, Boaz, from the two columns flanking
the gate to Solomon's Temple--itself an allegory to the bodily temple.
In only a few of the French cathedrals is this distinction clearly
and consistently maintained, and of these Tours forms perhaps the most
remarkable example, for in its flamboyant façade, over and above the
difference in actual breadth and apparent sturdiness of the two towers
(the south being the more slender and delicate), there is a clearly
marked distinction in the character of the ornamentation, that of the
north tower being more salient, angular, radial--more masculine in
point of fact (Illustration 17). In Notre Dame, the cathedral of
Paris, as in the cathedral of Tours, the north tower is perceptibly
broader than the south. The only other important difference appears to
be in the angular label-mould above the north entrance: whatever may
have been its original function or significance, it serves to define
the tower sexually, so to speak, as effectively as does the beard on
a man's face. In Amiens the north tower is taller than the south, and
more massive in its upper stages. The only traceable indication of
sex in the ornamentation occurs in the spandrels at the sides of the
entrance arches: those of the north tower containing single circles,
and those of the south tower containing two in one. This difference,
small as it may seem, is significant, for in Europe during the Middle
Ages, just as anciently in Egypt and again in Greece--in fact wherever
and whenever the Secret Doctrine was known--sex was attributed to
numbers, odd numbers being conceived of as masculine, and even, as
feminine. Two, the first feminine number, thus became a symbol of
femininity, accepted as such so universally at the time the cathedrals
were built, that two strokes of a bell announced the death of a woman,
three, the death of a man.

[Illustration 15: FRIEZE OF THE FARNESE PALACE; ROMAN CONSOLE. VATICAN
MUSEUM; FRIEZE IN THE EMPIRE STYLE BY PERCIER AND FONTAINE.
FRIEZE FROM THE TEMPLE OF VESTA AT TIVOLI. (ROMAN); ROMAN DORIC
FRIEZE--VIGNOLE]

[Illustration 16]

[Illustration 17]

The vital, organic quality so conspicuous in the best Gothic
architecture has been attributed to the fact that necessity determined
its characteristic forms. Professor Goodyear has demonstrated that
it may be due also in part to certain subtle vertical leans and
horizontal bends; and to nicely calculated variations from strict
uniformity, which find their analogue in nature, where structure is
seldom rigidly geometrical. The author hazards the theory that still
another reason why a Gothic cathedral seems so living a thing is
because it abounds in contrasts between what, for lack of more
descriptive adjectives, he is forced to call masculine and feminine
forms.

[Illustration 18]

[Illustration 19]

Ruskin says, in _Stones of Venice_, "All good Gothic is nothing more
than the development, in various ways, and on every conceivable scale,
of the group formed by the pointed arch for the bearing line below,
and the gable for the protecting line above, and from the huge, gray,
shaly slope of the cathedral roof, with its elastic pointed vaults
beneath, to the crown-like points that enrich the smallest niche of
its doorway, one law and one expression will be found in all. The
modes of support and of decoration are infinitely various, but the
real character of the building, in all good Gothic, depends on the
single lines of the gable over the pointed arch endlessly rearranged
and repeated." These two, an angular and a curved form, like the
everywhere recurring column and lintel of classic architecture,
are but presentments of Yo and In (Illustration 18). Every Gothic
traceried window, with straight and vertical mullions in the
rectangle, losing themselves in the intricate foliations of the arch,
celebrates the marriage of this ever diverse pair. The circle and the
triangle are the In and Yo of Gothic tracery, its Eve and Adam, as
it were, for from their union springs that progeny of trefoil,
quatrefoil, cinquefoil, of shapes flowing like water, and shapes
darting like flame, which makes such visible music to the entranced
ear.

[Illustration 20: SAN GIMIGNANO S. JACOPO.]

By seeking to discover In and Yo in their myriad manifestations, by
learning to discriminate between them, and by attempting to express
their characteristic qualities in new forms of beauty--from
the disposition of a façade to the shaping of a moulding--the
architectural designer will charge his work with that esoteric
significance, that excess of beauty, by which architecture rises
to the dignity of a "fine" art (Illustrations 19, 20). In so doing,
however, he should never forget, and the layman also should ever
remember, that the supreme architectural excellence is fitness,
appropriateness, the perfect adaptation of means to ends, and the
adequate expression of both means and ends. These two aims, the one
abstract and universal, the other concrete and individual, can always
be combined, just as in every human countenance are combined a type,
which is universal, and a character, which is individual.




