The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Bobbsey Twins in the Country
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Bobbsey Twins in the Country

Author: Laura Lee Hope


        
Release date: November 1, 1996 [eBook #714]
                Most recently updated: January 1, 2021

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/714

Credits: Produced by Diane and Don Nafis.  HTML version by Al Haines.






Produced by Diane and Don Nafis.  HTML version by Al Haines.









THE BOBBSEY TWINS IN THE COUNTRY


BY

LAURA LEE HOPE




CONTENTS

     I.  THE INVITATION
    II.  THE START
   III.  SNOOP ON THE TRAIN
    IV.  A LONG RIDE
     V.  MEADOW BROOK
    VI.  FRISKY
   VII.  A COUNTRY PICNIC
  VIII.  FUN IN THE WOODS
    IX.  FOURTH OF JULY
     X.  A GREAT DAY
    XI.  THE LITTLE GARDENERS
   XII.  TOM'S RUNAWAY
  XIII.  PICKING PEAS
   XIV.  THE CIRCUS
    XV.  THE CHARIOT RACE
   XVI.  THE FLOOD
  XVII.  A TOWN AFLOAT
 XVIII.  THE FRESH-AIR CAMP
   XIX.  SEWING SCHOOL
    XX.  A MIDNIGHT SCARE
   XXI.  WHAT THE WELL CONTAINED
  XXII.  LITTLE JACK HORNER--GOOD-BYE




THE BOBBSEY TWINS IN THE COUNTRY



CHAPTER I

THE INVITATION

"There goes the bell! It's the letter carrier! Let me answer!" Freddie
exclaimed.

"Oh, let me! It's my turn this week!" cried Flossie.

"But I see a blue envelope. That's from Aunt Sarah!" the brother cried.

Meanwhile both children, Freddie and Flossie, were making all possible
efforts to reach the front door, which Freddie finally did by jumping
over the little divan that stood in the way, it being sweeping day.

"I beat you," laughed the boy, while his sister stood back,
acknowledging defeat.

"Well, Dinah had everything in the way and anyhow, maybe it was your
turn. Mother is in the sewing room, I guess!" Flossie concluded, and so
the two started in search of the mother, with the welcome letter from
Aunt Sarah tight in Freddie's chubby fist.

Freddie and Flossie were the younger of the two pairs of twins that
belonged to the Bobbsey family. The little ones were four years old,
both with light curls framing pretty dimpled faces, and both being just
fat enough to be good-natured. The other twins, Nan and Bert, were
eight years old, dark and handsome, and as like as "two peas" the
neighbors used to say. Some people thought it strange there should be
two pairs of twins in one house, but Nan said it was just like
four-leaf clovers, that always grow in little patches by themselves.

This morning the letter from Aunt Sarah, always a welcome happening,
was especially joyous.

"Do read it out loud," pleaded Flossie, when the blue envelope had been
opened in the sewing room by Mrs. Bobbsey.

"When can we go?" broke in Freddie, at a single hint that the missive
contained an invitation to visit Meadow Brook, the home of Aunt Sarah
in the country.

"Now be patient, children," the mother told them. "I'll read the
invitation in just a minute," and she kept her eyes fastened on the
blue paper in a way that even to Freddie and Flossie meant something
very interesting.

"Aunt Sarah wants to know first how we all are."

"Oh, we're all well," Freddie interrupted, showing some impatience.

"Do listen, Freddie, or we won't hear," Flossie begged him, tugging at
his elbow.

"Then she says," continued the mother, "that this is a beautiful summer
at Meadow Brook."

"Course it is. We know that!" broke in Freddie again.

"Freddie!" pleaded Flossie.

"And she asks how we would like to visit them this summer."  "Fine,
like it--lovely!" the little boy almost shouted, losing track of words
in his delight.

"Tell her we'll come, mamma," went on Freddie. "Do send a letter quick
won't you, mamma?"

"Freddie Bobbsey!" spoke up Flossie, in a little girl's way of showing
indignation. "If you would only keep quiet we could hear about going,
but--you always stop mamma. Please, mamma, read the rest," and the
golden head was pressed against the mother's shoulder from the arm of
the big rocking chair.

"Well, I was only just saying--" pouted Freddie.

"Now listen, dear." The mother went on once more reading from the
letter: "Aunt Sarah says Cousin Harry can hardly wait until vacation
time to see Bert, and she also says, 'For myself I cannot wait to see
the babies. I want to hear Freddie laugh, and I want to hear Flossie
"say her piece," as she did last Christmas, then I just want to hug
them both to death, and so does their Uncle Daniel.'"

"Good!--goody!" broke in the irrepressible Freddie again. "I'll just
hug Aunt Sarah this way," and he fell on his mother's neck and squeezed
until she cried for him to stop.

"I guess she'll like that," Freddie wound up, in real satisfaction at
his hugging ability.

"Not if you spoil her hair," Flossie insisted, while the overcome
mother tried to adjust herself generally.

"Is that all?" Flossie asked.

"No, there is a message for Bert and Nan too, but I must keep that for
lunch time. Nobody likes stale news," the mother replied.

"But can't we hear it when Bert and Nan come from school?" coaxed
Flossie.

"Of course," the mother assured her. "But you must run out in the air
now. We have taken such a long time to read the letter."

"Oh, aren't you glad!" exclaimed Flossie to her brother, as they ran
along the stone wall that edged the pretty terrace in front of their
home.

"Glad! I'm just--so glad--so glad--I could almost fly up in the air!"
the boy managed to say in chunks, for he had never had much experience
with words, a very few answering for all his needs.

The morning passed quickly to the little ones, for they had so much to
think about now, and when the school children appeared around the
corner Flossie and Freddie hurried to meet Nan and Bert, to tell them
the news.

"We're going! we're going!" was about all Freddie could say.

"Oh, the letter came--from Aunt Sarah!" was Flossie's way of telling
the news. But it was at the lunch table that Mrs. Bobbsey finished the
letter.

"'Tell Nan,'" she read, "'that Aunt Sarah has a lot of new patches and
tidies to show her, and tell her I have found a new kind of jumble
chocolate that I am going to teach her to make.' There, daughter, you
see," commented Mrs. Bobbsey, "Aunt Sarah has not forgotten what a good
little baker you are."

"Chocolate jumble," remarked Bert, and smacked his lips. "Say, Nan, be
sure to learn that. It sounds good," the brother declared.

Just then Dinah, the maid, brought in the chocolate, and the children
tried to tell her about going to the country, but so many were talking
at once that the good-natured colored girl interrupted the confusion
with a hearty laugh.

"Ha! ha! ha! And all you-uns be goin' to de country!"

"Yes, Dinah," Mrs. Bobbsey told her, "and just listen to what Aunt
Sarah says about you," and once more the blue letter came out, while
Mrs. Bobbsey read:

"'And be sure to bring dear old Dinah! We have plenty of room, and she
will so enjoy seeing the farming.'"

"Farming! Ha! ha! Dat I do like. Used to farm all time home in
Virginie!" the maid declared. "And I likes it fuss-rate! Yes, Dinah'll
go and hoe de corn and" (aside to Bert) "steal de watermelons!"

The prospects were indeed bright for a happy time in the country, and
the Bobbseys never disappointed themselves when fun was within their
reach.



