CHAPTER XII

THE LAY AUTHORS


Theology and Philosophy, each in its own way attempting to go beyond
inadequate popular belief, could only very gradually transcend the
limits of those narrow communities within which their influence was
first felt and reach the circles in which that popular belief held
sway. During the earliest successes of the theological and
philosophical spirit hardly a voice was raised that might have
suggested that the belief in the imperishability and divine nature
of the human Soul, of the inherence of all things spiritual in one
imperishable, fundamental substance, might become something more
than a mystery known to the wise and illuminated, and enter into the
convictions of the people and the unlearned. "After the death of the
body, the Image of Life remains alive; for that alone is descended
from the gods"--such is the announcement of Pindar. But for all the
confidence with which, as though anticipating no contradiction, he
here proclaims the view of the soul's immortality and bases it upon
its divine nature, such an opinion can at that time have been no
more than the persuasion of isolated communities formed and
instructed in that particular doctrine. It cannot be merely
accidental,[1\12] that in the fragments which have come down to us
of the lyric and semi-lyric (elegiac and iambic) poetry--poetry
intended for a wide and unspecialized public and expressing feelings
and ideas in language that all could understand--hardly a trace
appears of that enhanced conception of the worth and nature of the
Soul. Reflexion does not linger over such dark subjects; whenever
they are illuminated for a passing moment, we discern the outlines
of those figures from the spirit world just as the Homeric
imagination had given them shape.

Life and light are only to be found in this world;[2\12] Death, to
which we are all "owing",[3\12] leads the soul into a realm of
nothingness.[4\12] Inarticulate, voiceless, the dead man lies in the
grave like a statue.[5\12] Upon earth, and not in any shadowy
hereafter, is completed that judgment[6\12] which divine Justice
passes upon the criminal himself, or upon his descendants in whom
something of him still lives on. It is the lack of such descendants
that forms the bitterest pang, as he goes down to Hades, of the man
who passes childless out of this life.[7\12] {412}

More distinctly and bitterly, in this age of advancing civilization
and growing sensibility, sounds the wail over the pain and
affliction of life, the obscurity of its ways, and the uncertainty
of its outcome.[8\12] Silenos, the prophetic wood-spirit, so went
the ancient legend, when captured by King Midas in his rose-gardens
at Bermios earned his release with the judgment of melancholy wisdom
that the Greek was never tired of repeating in ever-varying
forms--not to be born is the best thing for men, but having been
born, let him pray that he may return as soon as possible to the
kingdom of Night,[9\12] and of Hades.[10\12] The cheerful enjoyment
of life is no longer so sure of itself as once it had been in the
days of its naïve confidence: and yet there is no substitute
attempted, no compensatory hereafter in a next world of justice and
untroubled happiness. We rather hear the opinion expressed that rest
is the greatest of all earthly blessings; and rest is brought by
Death. Nevertheless there is little demand for consolation; a robust
and virile sense of life that can put up with whatever may befall of
evil or hardship in healthy indifference, is in the air, and speaks
to us from many a page of this poetic legacy with unpretending
veracity. No attempt is made to smooth over the hardship and cruelty
of life. Man's power is small, his efforts go unrewarded, one
necessity after another besets his short life: over all alike hangs
the shadow of inevitable death. All things come at last to the awful
chasm--the bravest virtue and the highest authority in the
world.[11\12] Yet life is good and death an evil; else, why do the
blessed gods not die? asks Sappho[12\12] with feminine naiveté;
though indeed, her life's path had lain through the deepest valley
of the shadow. Even the dead man, if he wishes to be preserved from
utter nothingness, must depend upon the world of the living as the
only place of reality; the fame of his virtues and his deeds is all
that outlasts his death.[13\12] Perhaps some dim perception of that
fame reaches even to the dead.[14\12] They themselves are for the
living as though they had passed into nothingness; we should not,
thinks a poet, give them another thought after we have buried
them.[15\12]

Here even the time-honoured conventions associated with the cult of
souls seem to be perversely cast aside. In general, the poet with
his wide-ranging observation of mankind had small occasion to be
reminded of the cult of the soul that the narrow circles of family
or city offered to their dead, or of the conceptions thereby
encouraged of the continued life enjoyed by the departed. The
omission is supplied by the Orators of the fifth and fourth
centuries and by what they say--and do {413} not say--of the state
of things hereafter. The greatest period of lyric poetry was by that
time already fading into the past, and yet whoever wished in
speaking before a citizen assembly to meet with general agreement
and understanding was still obliged to refrain from speaking of the
blessed immortality, the eternity and divinity of the soul. The
Orators[16\12] never pass beyond the conceptions of the survival,
power, and rights of the souls of the departed which were called
forth and maintained in existence by the cult of the soul. The
continued existence of the souls in the next world is not called in
question; but the opinion that the souls still preserve their
consciousness and have any knowledge of what happens on this earth
is only expressed with the most cautious avoidance of
definiteness.[17\12] What--apart from the sacrificial offerings of
their relatives--still binds the dead to the life upon earth, is
little more than the fame accorded to them among the living.[18\12]
Even in the elevated language of solemn funeral orations the
consolations offered to the survivors omit all mention of any
enhanced state of being, any thought of immortal life in
fully-conscious blessedness, that might belong now to the glorious
departed.[19\12] Such high visions and hopes for the future were
still, it appears, as little necessary or demanded for the comfort
of the people as they had been in the times of the great wars of
liberty.[20\12] The beloved dead who had given their lives for their
country in those wars, as well as many others of the time whom death
had overtaken, were the recipients of the epitaphs composed by
Simonides the master of brilliant and condensed inscriptions.
Nevertheless, not once does he vouchsafe a word that might point
forward to a land of blessed immortality for the departed. There is
a vestige of life still remaining for the dead--but it is in this
world; the memory of the living and their own great name honoured by
after generations is all that can prolong their existence.

It seems like an echo from another world when (about the middle of
the fifth century) Melanippides the dithyrambic poet addresses a god
in the words: "Hear me Father, marvel of all mortal men, Thou that
rulest over the _everliving Souls_." The words must be addressed to
Dionysos;[21\12] for such as entered into the magic circle of his
nightly festival those visions of the imperishability of the human
soul and its divine power acquired reality. Such wisdom received but
partial assent from those who lived unaffected by the conceptions of
isolated sects of the theologically or philosophically minded. {414}

§ 2

A peculiar position is taken up by Pindar. Two contrasted views of
the nature, origin, and destiny of the soul seem to be combined in
his mind with equal claim to authority.

In the Victory Odes allusions predominate which imply an agreement
with the popular view expressed in the sayings of poets and the
presuppositions of the cult of souls and the worship of Heroes.
After its separation from the body, the soul disappears into the
underworld.[22\12] The piety and affectionate memory of relatives
and descendants remains as a link between the dead and the
living;[23\12] whether the soul itself is still conscious of any
connexion with the world of the living seems uncertain.[24\12] Its
power is over and done with--it is certainly no condition of blessed
happiness into which it has entered. Only the glorious name, the
fame that is honoured in song, rewards the great deeds of the
virtuous after death.[25\12]

An exalted state of being, after their departure from this earth, is
attributed to the _Heroes_ alone. The belief in the existence,
importance, and power of these illuminated spirits holds complete
sway;[26\12] it emerges in lively reality from the words and
narrations of the poet throughout all his work. Moreover, the
ancient conception--in reality rendered untenable by the belief in
Heroes--that only with the undivided union of body and soul is
complete life imaginable, is discernible in many allusions and
stories of Translation that imply that conception. Amphiaraos, the
most illustrious of those who have been translated to everlasting
life, is specially dear to the heart of the Theban poet, and is
glorified more than once in the language of unaffected faith in such
miracles.[27\12] But, further, even when death has occurred in the
meantime, elevation to a higher life remains possible--even beyond
the heights of the "Hero". Semele lives for ever, though she died
under the crash of the thunder-bolt.[28\12] The barrier between men
and gods is not insuperable; we can distantly approach the immortals
not only in greatness of mind, but in bodily vigour.[29\12] One
mother gave birth to both races, though the gulf between them is
indeed a deep one; man is nought--a shadow's dream-image; for the
gods the brazen heavens remain for ever as an unconquerable
stronghold.[30\12] Only a miracle of divine interference with the
lawful and normal course of nature, can raise the individual soul to
the everlasting life of the gods and Heroes.

Such visions as these could be indulged in by one who still {415}
kept his feet firmly fixed upon the ground of popular belief. And
yet side by side with them in Pindar's works are to be found
descriptions of quite another order in which is expressed, with
elaborate fullness and dogmatic exactitude, a complete doctrine of
the nature, destiny, and fate of the soul; passages in which, in
spite of some little poetic licence in detail, a well ordered and,
in the main, consistent whole is pictured.

The Soul, the "Image of Life", the other Self of the living and
visible man, sleeps while the limbs of man are active; when the
individual is asleep it shows him dream-visions of the
future.[31\12] This psyche[32\12] which during the waking and
conscious hours of the man is itself lying in the darkness of
unconsciousness, is far from being the totality of mental powers
gathered together in a single creature, or at any rate, in a single
concept, such as the philosophers as well as the everyday use of the
word at that period understood by the name "psyche". Here, again,
the name once more denotes the double of mankind dwelling within the
living man such as it was known to primeval popular belief and to
the Homeric poems. A theological meaning has, however, been added to
it. This "Image" of man, we are told, "is alone descended from the
gods," and with this the _reason_ also is discovered why the
soul-image alone after the destruction of the body by death remains
alive.[33\12]

Derived from the gods and therefore eternally exempt from
destruction, everlasting and immortal, the soul is none the less
condemned to finiteness; it dwells within the mortal body of man.
This is the result of the "ancient guilt" of which, quite in the
manner of theological poetry, Pindar also speaks.[34\12] After the
death of the body it is to await in Hades the stern sentence that
"One" shall pronounce over its earthly deeds.[35\12] For the
condemned there is in store "affliction past beholding"[36\12] in
deep Tartaros, "where the slow rivers of murky night spit out
endless darkness," and forgetfulness encloses the victims.[37\12]
The just enter into the subterranean places of bliss where the sun
gives them light when he has set upon earth.[38\12] In flowery
meadows they enjoy an existence of resplendent idleness, such as
only the Greek imagination, nourished amid the artistic surroundings
of Greek life, could describe without falling into emptiness and
futility.

But the soul has not even so found its last resting place. It must
again give life to a body and not until it has completed upon earth
a third faultless life can it hope for an end of its earthly course
of being.[39\12] The conditions of each new life {416} upon earth
depend upon the degree of purity that the soul has achieved in its
previous lifetimes. When at last the Queen of the Underworld
considers that its "ancient guilt" has been atoned for, she sends
forth the souls after the ninth year[40\12] of their last sojourn in
Hades once more to live in the upper world, this time in happiness.
Here they pass through one more lifetime as kings, mighty men of
valour, and Wise Men.[41\12] Then at last they escape from the
necessity of earthly rebirth. As "Heroes" they are honoured among
men;[42\12] and they have therefore entered into a state of higher
being which the popular belief of Pindar's time ascribed not only to
the souls of the great ancestral figures of the past, but also to
many who had departed hence in more recent times after a life of
valour and service.[43\12] Now they are beyond the reach of Hades as
much as of the world of men. Faith seeks them in "Islands of the
Blest" far out in Okeanos; thither, to the "Citadel of Kronos" they
travel on the "Way of Zeus"[44\12] and enjoy, in company with the
great ones of the past, under the protection of Kronos[45\12] and
his assessor Rhadamanthys, a life of bliss for ever undisturbed.

Such conceptions of the origin, fortunes, and ultimate destiny of
the soul, the more they diverge from commonly held opinions, the
more certainly must they be regarded as being part of the private
and real persuasion of the poet himself. The poet, who on other
occasions when he makes passing and casual reference to the things
of the next world accommodates himself to the traditional view,
gives himself up willingly to such hopes and aspirations where the
circumstances of his song provided an opportunity of dealing at
length with such matters--especially in hymns of mourning for the
dead. He may have paid attention in such poems to the special
opinions of those who were to be the first hearers of his song.
Theron, the ruler of Akragas, to whom was dedicated the second
Olympian Ode of Victory that deals so fully with the hope of bliss
to come, was an old man whose thoughts might well be occupied with
the life after death.[46\12] In this case, therefore, we may presume
perhaps the special interest of the person whose praises are sung in
these reflections that lead so far away from the commonly accepted
view of the Soul.[47\12] But that Pindar, proud and self-willed,
conscious of specific knowledge and proud of that consciousness,
should have given expression to strange doctrine so foreign to
popular ideas simply out of complaisance to another's will, and in
**subservience to another man's belief--that is quite unthinkable.
It is rather the substance of what he believes himself {417} and has
achieved by his own struggles that in a solemn hour he reveals for a
moment to like-minded friends.

The different elements out of which Pindar has composed his special
view are not hard to distinguish. He is following theological
doctrine in what he tells of the divine origin of the soul, its
wanderings through several bodies, the judgment in Hades, the
special place assigned to the just, and that of the wicked. But it
is layman's theology that he is propounding; it does not bind itself
to a single unalterable formula, and betrays throughout that its
exponent is a poet. Pindar, throughout the whole of his poetic
activity, combines the office of singer with that of professional
teacher, more especially where he has to speak of the things of an
invisible divine world. But for all his didactic professionalism he
remains the poet, for whom as depository and trustee of the Myth it
is out of the question to abandon the traditional, whether in legend
or belief. His task is to keep pure what has been handed down to
him, to make it more profound, perhaps to supplement and complete
it, but with all this to justify it. Thus, poetic legend and popular
belief enter even into his theologian's doctrine of the Soul; the
Islands of the Blest, the elevation of man to Hero--these were
things he could not give up.

From what particular direction Pindar's theological interests may
have come to him we cannot say with precision or certainty. Orphic
as well as Pythagorean doctrines may have come to his notice in
Sicily whither he made repeated visits after 477 B.C.[48\12] For
both sects this country was the original nursery and breeding
ground.

There, too, the poet may perhaps have (even at that date) met with
certain varieties of the Orphic mystical doctrine which, like his
own views, were intermingled with elements taken from conventional
mythology. Examples of this type of Orphic mysticism allied with
foreign elements are the verses which, inscribed upon gold tablets,
were found not long ago in graves near the ancient Sybaris.[49\12]
Three of these poems begin with phrases that are common to them all,
and imply the same underlying conceptions; after that they part
company and represent two different views. The soul of the dead
person[50\12] thus addresses itself to the Queen of the lower world,
and the other gods of the depths below: "I draw near to you purified
and born of pure parents."[51\12] It belongs then to a mortal who,
like his parents before him, has been "purified" in the sacred
mysteries of a religious association.[52\12] It claims also to be
descended from the blessed race of the deities of the lower {418}
world.[53\12] "Lightning robbed me of life," so one of the versions
goes on,[54\12] "and so I escaped from the Circle, the burdensome,
the grievous". In these words purely Orphic belief is expressed: the
Soul has now at last escaped entirely from the "Circle of
Births",[55\12] and it enters as it tells us "with speedy feet into
the wished-for precinct",[56\12] and buries itself in the bosom of
the Queen of the Underworld.[57\12] It is the latter, probably, who
at the end greets the liberated soul with the words: "Fortunate and
to be called Blessed art thou; now shalt thou be, instead of a
mortal--_a god_."

Much less exalted are the hopes expressed in the other two versions
of the mystic document--two versions that resemble each other in
most essentials. Here the soul asserts that it has done penance for
unrighteous deeds; now it appears before the revered Persephoneia to
implore her graciously to send it to the dwelling places of the pure
and the holy.[58\12]

How are we to explain the discrepancy? It would indeed be possible
to explain the more restrained version as that of a sect whose
members were less confident of their own divine origin and of the
necessary return of the soul at last to its enfranchised divine
state. It is much more probable, however--since in fact the
presupposition of the divine nature of the soul and its kinship with
the divine is really made in both cases and with the same
words--that we here have to do with the beliefs of one and the same
sect, and that the varying heights of felicity aspired to correspond
to different stages of the process of redemption. He who through
participation in the sacred mysteries has atoned for the ancient
guilt, can be admitted by the goddess into the paradise of the blest
in the midst of Hades. But he must still, in subsequent rebirths
upon earth first complete the cycle before he can be fully released
from rebirth and become once more what he was at the beginning,
entirely a god. The dead man of the first tablet has reached the
final goal of his pilgrimage; the other two have only reached an
intermediate resting place.[59\12] Another inscription, found in a
grave of the same neighbourhood,[60\12] by its use of a mystic
formula[61\12] appended also to the first version of the
above-mentioned poems, reveals itself as an expression of faith
deriving from the same sect. Among a variety of disconnected
instructions and appeals to the dead,[62\12] strung together with no
particular arrangement, it contains the following statement: "a
_god_ hast thou become instead of a mortal", This then always
remained the crowning point of the salvation promised by the sect.
{419}

In the cult and beliefs of this sect which thus with divided voice
speaks to us in these verses, the worship of the ancient Greek
divinities of the Underworld (among whom Dionysos is not this time
included) was fused with the boldest conception belonging to the
Dionysiac mysteries: the confident assurance that the divine nature
of the soul must in the end break through, purified and triumphant
over the earthliness that obscured it. Pindar in another, but not
very different, way has brought the same elements into conjunction.
One would indeed like to be able to estimate the influence which his
doctrine, which lay so close to his own heart, may have exercised on
the hearers and readers of his poems. He was at once something more
and something less than a theological teacher. Never again among the
Greeks did the blessed life of the sanctified soul receive such
majestic expression, clothed in such ample and resplendent diction,
as that which poured so freely from the heart of this richly gifted
poet. But though the poet may have touched the heart of his hearer
and tempted his imagination to stray along the path laid out for
him, yet it cannot have been easy (and perhaps the greatness of the
poet's triumph almost made it harder) permanently to mistake the
magic gleam of poetry for the sunlight of reality. One may doubt
whether the poems in which Pindar recounted his dreams of future
blessedness can have found many hearers in whom they awakened not
merely æsthetic satisfaction, but belief in the literal truth of the
teaching, in the reality of those beautiful, dim, haloed figures.

§ 3

But perhaps by the expression of such doubts we do less than justice
to the influence which a Greek poet might exercise upon the minds
and dispositions of his hearers. Greek popular opinion was very much
inclined to place the poet on a pedestal to which his modern
representative would hardly care to aspire, and to which at any rate
he could never attain. The purely artistic value and importance of a
poem did not seem to be impaired by the demand that it should at the
same time instruct and edify. The poet was to be the teacher of his
people in an age when, in the conditions of Greek life, the people
had no other instructor. He was to be a teacher in the highest sense
of all when, speaking in the language of the most exalted poetry, he
dealt with the doubts and certainties of religion and the
relationship between religion and morality. In these matters he
could supplement out of the wealth of {420} his own far-reaching
reflection what was lacking in the public morality of the time
through the absence of an official, authoritative religious Book. By
giving them intelligible and memorable expression, together with
greater cohesion and unity, he could strengthen the foundations of
the common stock of moral ideas that had been evolved in the course
of social and city life. He might also expand and give greater depth
to the ideas of popular morality, tempering them in the fire of his
own more rigorous thought and interpreting and refining them from
the heights of a more elevated understanding of the divine. What he
thus gave back to the people stamped with the impress of his own
very personal temperament and outlook, no longer remained the casual
opinion of a single individual, but took root in suitably
constituted minds and became for many a valued possession, an
enduring addition to their consciousness.

It was not until the rise in later times of a fully developed
philosophy extending its range of interpretation to the whole of
life that poetry was deprived of its special office of instructress
to the aspiring minds among the people.[63\12] Poetry had always
been willing to exercise this function, but never so decidedly or
with such fully conscious purpose as in the times of transition at
the beginning of which Pindar lived--the transition from an
unsophisticated faith in the traditional view of all things visible
and invisible to a fresh stabilization of belief secured by, and
resting upon, philosophic conviction. The need felt for the
readjustment or verification of the ancestral or traditional forms
of belief was vividly awakened, and it was still only poetry that
could extend the light of its teaching to illuminate the minds of
whole classes of the population. The influence of the poets must
have increased in proportion as the numbers increased of those who
were ready to receive the special bounty which they were able to
offer. But if the influence wielded by Pindar, the Pan-Hellenic poet
of the great Festivals, as the teacher of his people was, as we have
seen, considerable, a very wide field indeed for the propagation of
fruitful ideas lay open to the Attic tragedians in the huge
concourse of the people which flocked together to hear their
creations--a multitude which seemed all the greater for being
confined within a narrower space. The poets themselves frequently
allow it to be seen how seriously they regarded themselves as the
teachers of their public, and the people admitted their claims. All
men expected and demanded instruction from the word of the poet--the
highest instruction from the highest poetry.[64\12] We shall not be
much mistaken {421} if we believe that the opinions and reflections
to which Aeschylus, Sophokles, and not least Euripides, gave
utterance in their tragic drama did not remain the sole property of
those in whose minds they had first arisen.

§ 4

The Attic Tragedy of the fifth century must of its own accord, even
if the conscious purpose of the dramatists had not tended in the
same direction, have developed into an artistic product based on
psychological interest. The real theatre of that drama must
inevitably have become the interior of its hero's mind.

The tragic poet attempted something hitherto unknown. The characters
and events of ancient legend or history which had passed shadowlike
before the minds of the hearers or readers of all earlier poetry, at
the mercy of those hearers' own private and variously limited
imagination--these same events and characters were now to take form
and body and appear visibly before the eyes of all beholders alike
in equal clearness. What had hitherto seemed a dream-vision of the
imagination now visibly presented itself to the eyes of the
beholder, unchanging, precise, independent of the limitations of
intellect among the audience, a concrete and self-moving object of
waking perception. Thus reawakened to a palpable and fully realized
life, the myth was seen in a new light. What in it was mere incident
became subordinated to the personality of the man who plays his part
in these events before our eyes, and whose importance and content is
not exhausted in the single particular action. The old legend in
becoming drama has undergone an extension both spatial and temporal,
and even in externals the plot that unfolds itself in a series of
momentary acts plays the least part in the story. The speeches and
counter-speeches of the hero and the other actors who take part in
the story were bound to take up the greater part of the time.
Motives of action, expressed, debated and fought out in words,
become more important than their eventual outcome in passionate deed
or mortal woe. With the advance of artistic skill the intellect
seeks to grasp the permanent outlines of the character that in the
given circumstances can be moved by particular motives to particular
acts. Thus, the complete materialization of the myth leads to its
complete spiritualization. The eyes and mind of the beholder are
directed less to the external events--these, being familiar from the
ancient legend, could {422} awaken little curiosity--and more to the
inward meaning and import of what the hero does and suffers.

And it was here that the dramatic poet was faced with his special
and peculiar problem. What was to happen in his drama was settled
out of hand by the course of the ancient legend (in a few cases by
the course of historical events) and the lines along which his
invention must move were planned out for him in advance. To give
life to the personages of the drama, motivation and justification to
the events of the drama--that was his particular business. But in
this he was thrown entirely upon his own resources. Even if he could
he was not permitted to derive the inner motive forces of the action
from the real modes of feeling and thinking that had belonged to the
distant past in which the myth had first been conceived. Such
motives would have remained unintelligible to the audience, and his
play would have been stillborn. But on the other hand, how was he to
make plausible and intelligible to the vastly different mentality
and changed feelings of the age in which he lived actions which
really sprang from the habits and moral ideas of a long since
vanished age? It is open to him (if he is not content to be a mere
annalist simply stringing together bare events) to take the actual
incident given him by the mythical legend and set over against it
the actor in the story whose emotions are those of a modern man, and
upon whose shoulders the burden of the event is laid; he may
represent this opposition as beyond reconciliation, and so lead to
the most simple and overwhelming of tragic conflicts. This simple
opposition of character and destiny which places both the poet and
his hero--another Hamlet--in a position of direct hostility to the
mythological background can, however, never become the rule. It is
the business of the poet as far as possible to assimilate and make
his own the spirit that actually called forth the dark and cruel
legend of the past, while yet remaining true to the mode of
perception proper to his own time. He must manage to leave
undisturbed the full primitive sense of the mythical story and bring
it about that by its marriage with the spirit of a later age its
meaning is not destroyed but deepened. He is committed to the search
for an adjustment between the mental attitudes of an older and a
newer age.

Such an adjustment came most easily to Aeschylus and satisfied the
needs of his temperament. As one who had grown to manhood in the
Athens of the period before the Persian wars his own character had
its roots in ancient and traditional modes of thought. These he
built up under the guiding {423} influence of his own special ways
of thinking and feeling into a new and loftier whole: to corroborate
this whole, which appeared to him as a law of the moral world, by
reference to typical examples taken from mythology--examples chosen
by him with deliberate care to serve as subjects of his dramatic
poetry--this was one of the chief aims of his art. To the plot in
its moral--nay, its religious--sense, all his thoughts are directed;
the characters of the actors themselves are only illuminated from
the standpoint of this special interest; their wider, independent
existence outside the life of the drama which completely **envelops
them is not meant to draw attention to itself. He himself gives us
the right, in studying his plays, to leave out of sight for a moment
the representational aspect of the particular and the personal--all
that in fact makes them essentially works of art--in order to
observe more closely the under-current of generalized belief which
we may reasonably call the ethic and theology of the poet.

Behind the living tissue of his artistic creation Aeschylus allows
us to perceive pretty clearly the firm outlines of his own ethical
and religious convictions. He fuses together elements prescribed to
him from without with that which was dictated by his own spirit.
What is prescribed to him by legend--which he allows to run its full
course, in strictly dramatic form and by preference as a trilogy, a
form in this case uniquely adapted to the subject--is a history that
deals with the continued operation of the forces of evil and
suffering upon several generations of a family, persisting from
father to son and from son to son's son. The belief also in such
interconnexion of human destinies is prescribed to him from without.
That the sins of the ancestors were visited upon their descendants
here upon earth was an ancient article of faith especially strong in
Attica.[65\12] What Aeschylus contributes on his part is the
unswerving conviction that the son and grandson of the sinner are
punished for their _own_ sin too. Suffering is punishment,[66\12]
and suffering would not have overtaken Oedipus, nor the sons of
Oedipus, if Laïos had been the only guilty one--if their own sin had
not deserved punishment.

And yet it does not lie within their power to choose whether the
guilt shall be theirs or not: they cannot escape the deed of sin.
How, we may ask, can a guilty deed be necessitated, imposed upon the
guilty one by the decree of a higher power, and yet at the same time
the _fault_ of the doer of the deed, as though he had acted of his
own free will? {424} The question is a perplexing and a formidable
one, and it was by no means unnoticed by the poet. Behind the
external apparatus of myth he finds himself faced by the problem of
the freedom or determination of man's will, which, as civilization
and culture advance, feels itself morally responsible for every
decision. He finds a way out of the difficulty in the view that it
is not merely the deed of wickedness itself, but the conscious
decision that leads up to the deed that arises out of the family
inheritance of crime. The conscious choice and decision, though
regarded as necessary, seemed to demonstrate fully the personal
guilt and responsibility of the doer.[67\12] The cloud of evil that
proceeds from the deed of the ancestor casts a dark shadow also over
the minds of his son and his son's son. Not from his own mind or
character does the will to do wrong take its origin. The noble, pure
and resolute Eteokles, the model of intelligent manhood, the shield
and protection of his people, falls in a moment, a victim to ominous
destiny; his clear-sighted spirit is darkened, he gives himself
up--his better self--for lost,[68\12] and rushes upon his doom with
awful resolve. The "sins derived from his ancestors"[69\12] drive
him on. Then, and not till then, is the full measure of penance at
last paid for the crime done by the ancestor;[70\12] his descendants
are his representatives, and become guilty on his behalf and then,
for their own guilt as well as his, they suffer retribution.
Divinity, or a spirit of vengeance sent with a divine mission,
drives the victims burdened with the inheritance of crime to the
criminal deed. The divine guidance is actuated no longer, as in
ancient and undying popular belief, by personal desire of vengeance,
anger or malice,[71\12] but by divine justice, acting with "just
deceit",[72\12] that the measure of guilt may be fulfilled, and that
the divine will to justice may have a means to complete
satisfaction. The evil Spirit of the House assists Klytaimnestra to
conceive the thought of murdering her husband;[73\12] God himself
guides and urges forward Orestes to the act of matricide which he
plans and carries out with fully conscious purpose--a crime that is
also a duty. To the poet the old ideas of the duty of avenging
murder are a very living reality. The right to worship and cult
possessed by the souls, their claim to vengeance when they have been
violently done to death, their ghostly influence exerted upon the
life and destinies of their immediate kinsfolk upon whom the duty of
taking vengeance rests--all these things are for him not the
obsolete fancies of an older generation but true and awful
realities.[74\12] Whole dramas, the **Choephoroi and the Eumenides,
for {425} instance, would appear as a meaningless beating of the air
if they were not animated and made significant by unaltered faith in
the right and the might of the souls, the reality and potency of the
daimonic counsel, the Erinyes,[75\12] who appear on behalf of the
murdered mother. And now at last light breaks through the dark and
clouded sky of awful imagination: where Duty and Crime have become
inextricably confused, divine grace, though yielding nothing of its
rights, finds at last a solution.

All these things, however--conflict and solution, crime and its
expiation in ever-renewed crime and the suffering that arises
thence--fulfil themselves in _this_ world. Guilt is avenged always
upon earth. The "other" world is by no means an indispensable link
in this chain of conceptions and fancies; the poet's view is rarely
turned in that direction. Speculation upon the state of the soul
after death, upon a blessed life in the kingdom of the
spirits,[76\12] does not interest him. Only such portions of the
eschatological imaginings of the theologians as might serve the
purposes of moral inspiration or support, found favour with the
poet. There are occasional allusions to the judgment that, in Hades,
"another Zeus" holds over the deeds of earthly life,[77\12] but they
remain dark and vague. It is not explained in what relation this
judgment in Hades stands to the complete equivalence of guilt and
destiny that, here upon earth, Zeus and Moira bring to completion in
the person of the criminal himself and, after his death, of his
descendants. Side by side with the allusions to the judgment in the
underworld implying the complete consciousness of the dead, stand
expressions that call up a picture of the senseless, twilight
existence of the souls in Hades like that described in Homer.[78\12]
The poet, to whom every feature of the beliefs derived from the cult
of the souls about the relations of the departed to the life of the
dwellers on earth was intensely and vividly real, never cared to fix
his attention for long upon the nature and condition of the dead in
their separate other-world existence. In fact his chosen work of
giving a moral significance and deeper meaning to popular and
ancient faith was wholly derived from this faith itself; and so also
was the lofty and consistent idea of divinity which fills the
background of his picture of life. The generation which had fought
at Marathon, in spite of a profounder and even more sombre
meditation upon life and destiny, could still dispense almost
entirely with the assistance of the theological doctrines of the
sects who sought refuge from the dark and austere {426} realities of
this unsatisfying world in thoughts of an imagined hereafter.

§ 5

Towards the great problems of dramatic philosophy--the problems of
the freedom or compulsion of the will, the guilt and destiny of
man--Sophokles took up a position that differed essentially from
that of his great predecessor. A maturer and calmer self-abandonment
to the observation of life and its difficulties made him less able
to rest content with simple or sweeping solutions of the
complexities; made him seek out other and more various modes of
understanding. The individual man, stamped with the unique
impression of his peculiar being, with him becomes more fully
detached from the background of omnipotent might and universal law.
The individual finds within himself the rules of his behaviour, the
causes of his success, or his tragic failure. No petty, egotistical
motive inspires the action of Antigone or Elektra: they are obedient
to the old, unwritten laws of the gods. But the force that leads
them to obey is derived solely from the special fashion and impulse
of their own hearts. No one else could do what they do, suffer what
they suffer. We realize the necessity and justification of what they
do and suffer solely from the contemplation of the strength and
weakness of their own characters as displayed for us in the action
that takes place upon the stage. Indeed, the length to which
Sophokles, in the "Elektra", goes in the suppression of such
universally recognized and binding motives as those derived from the
duty of vengeance and the rights of injured souls, may well cause
surprise. The special and individual case must for him carry its own
justification within itself, and in fact it receives such
justification so completely from the character and behaviour of the
actors in the drama that, unlike the hero of Aeschylus' tragedy,
Orestes needs to have no qualm of doubt in the performance of his
deed, and suffers no remorse after the murder of the wicked
murderess. Once again as in the Homeric story, with Orestes'
"righteous deed of blood",[79\12] the circle of calamity is
complete: no Erinys rises from the earth to demand his
overthrow.[80\12]

So, too, when the suffering and calamity that befalls the mortal
hero comes not from his own conscious decision and exercise of will,
but from obscure decrees of fate it is still the special character
of the hero which not only demands the greater part of our
attention, but entirely conditions and sufficiently explains the
course of events. The same {427} misfortune might overtake another
man, but neither its inward nor its outward effects would be the
same as they are for Oedipus or Aias. Only tragically extreme
characters can have a tragic fate.

And yet, in these as in other tragedies, what gives the first
impulse and direction to the course of the story does not arise from
the will or character of their heroes. The mind of Aias is not free
but subject when he performs the deed that sends him to his death.
Oedipus, Deianeira take vengeance upon themselves for the deeds of
horror that they have brought about without knowing what they did.
Notwithstanding the fact that the interest of the "Philoktetes"
centres so completely round the vividly contrasted characters of
Philoktetes, Neoptolemos, and Odysseus, yet the situation which
brings them into opposition is one which it was beyond the power or
the purpose of man to bring about or to hinder. An obscure destiny
plunges man into suffering, drives him to actions in the face of
which easy and ready-made judgments about "guilt" and the relation
between suffering and desert are silenced. It is not inherited
family crime that here forces the son and the grandson to deeds that
can hardly be called their own. The poet, it is true, knows of these
conceptions[81\12] that play so large a part in the poetry of
Aeschylus, but they are mere historical tradition to him, not vital
motives of his drama. Nor is it mere irrational chance, or
impersonal fate working by necessity and without passion that
directs the mind and guides the hand of the actor in his bondage.
Clearly or obscurely moving about in the background of events the
will of a divine power can be discerned that, inevitable as
fate,[82\12] guides the deeds and the fate of men in accordance with
its own purpose.

The divine purpose brings to maturity a plan in which the individual
man and his destiny are mere instruments. To make plain the
premeditated character of this purposeful direction of human affairs
is the object of the prophetic anticipations of the future, the
divine oracles and prophecies of seers of which we hear so much in
the plays. If this divine purpose should involve the fatal act, the
undeserved suffering of the individual, then that purpose will be
fulfilled though human happiness may be destroyed in the process,
and though pain, crime, agony, and violent death may overwhelm the
mortal individual. The well-being of the individual does not enter
into the question where the intentions of a divinity that sees far
beyond this puny existence are concerned. An honest, simple-minded,
good-hearted man, without {428} deceit or fault, like Philoktetes,
is abandoned for many long years to every kind of suffering in order
that he may not interfere prematurely in the development of the war
against Troy with the magic weapons that are in his
possession.[83\12] He is an involuntary martyr for the good of the
whole community. In order that Herakles may be released from this
life at the precise moment of time that has been fixed by divine
foreknowledge,[84\12] Deianeira, the most devoted and womanly
character in the whole of the Attic drama, must out of the goodness
of her heart and the love she bears to her husband send him to the
most awful of deaths and then perish herself. Simply because such is
the will of heaven[85\12] must Oedipus, unknowing and blameless,
slay his father, marry his mother, and plunge himself into the
deepest depth of misery.

Thus, out of the darkness, the hand of divine superiority guides the
destinies of humanity, the will and behaviour of men, according to
its own purposes. The problematical in human life, the disparity
between personal guilt and personal suffering, which daily
experience brings before our eyes, seemed to the poet to be rendered
more intelligible by this conception. He preaches dutiful submission
to these dispensations of a higher power. He himself is one of the
pious, in the specific sense of the word,[86\12] for whom to
perceive the will of the gods is sufficient to call forth adoration
of the gods; who feel no need that this mighty will should justify
itself to human ideas of morality and goodness.[87\12] It may be
right to call this will a holy will; but there is no need for it to
prove itself such at the bar of human judgment. Nor does such piety
find itself disturbed in its worship when, in order to assert the
divine prerogative over humanity (whose first duty it is to
recognize the limits of what is allowed and possible for it), divine
inhumanity and cold lust of vengeance manifest themselves so clearly
as in the Athene of the "Ajax".[88\12] It gives the measure of the
peculiar and unique character of Sophoklean art and the Sophoklean
attitude to life--a quite personal character not to be explained on
abstract grounds--that this attitude of awed submissiveness in
matters of religion could exist side by side with the strong
appreciation and justification of the unfettered action of free
individuality. Rarely--only once or twice in the plays--is a cry of
pain wrested from the lips of one of these uncomplaining victims of
a purpose not their own.[89\12] As a rule, the eye shuns to behold,
the judgment to criticize, the ultimate reasons of divine action. It
is partly artistic restraint no doubt, but religious discretion,
too, makes the poet leave {429} such things in
semi-obscurity.[90\12] The majesty of divine power remains for the
most part in the background and does not mingle familiarly with men
or too notoriously interfere with human destiny.[91\12]

But the individual who with his sufferings must serve a purpose that
is not his own, Humanity that lives under such bitter laws--what
elevating and consoling thoughts are awakened by the contemplation
of their fate. The poet employs all the resources of his
overwhelming art to secure the profoundest sympathies of his hearers
for the undeserved sufferings of the victim, for the delusions of
well-intentioned but limited vision that must always stray from the
goal at which it aims. The moral of the play is not lost even on the
sufferer's foe as he beholds the error and guilt of the noble but
misguided heart.[92\12] What thus overwhelms the strong and the
wise, the good and the well-meaning, through no fault of their own,
may descend upon any member of the human family. Thus the destinies
of men are allotted. The lament over the vanity and the sorrow of
life, its brief happiness, and the uncertainty of its joy, is poured
forth in memorable lines.[93\12] They end on a note of resignation
which gives the keynote of the poet's own character; but there is a
bitterness which remains behind.

It might have been supposed that one who thus abandoned all attempt
to reconcile the worth and actions of men with their fate upon
earth, would feel all the more need, for his own satisfaction and
that of others, to prove the existence of a divine justice that
should restore the balance in a future state of being. But the poet
shows little sign of any such need. Thoughts of what may happen
after death are never of very great moment to him. They never
distinctly affect the behaviour of those whose deeds or suffering
fill his plays.[94\12]

When, however, light is thrown for a passing moment on the unknown
land beyond the grave the scene that imagination reveals hardly
differs at all from the picture that had once been present to the
minds of the Homeric singers. The place that is in store for the
departed is Hades,[95\12] the unlovely country of the dead,[96\12]
whither the Soul flits powerless, shadowlike, little more than a
nothing,[97\12] feeling no joy but no pain either;[98\12] where it
enters upon a state of insensibility that the grief-stricken
sufferer on earth often longs for as a much-desired haven of
rest.[99\12] Plouton, Persephone, all the deities of the earth
below,[100\12] there rule over the departed. But it is not grace nor
kindliness that prevails there--only Justice: Hades demands equal
justice for all.[101\12] {430} Pious veneration of the gods
continues also in the other world,[102\12] and for the rest we hear
nothing of either reward or punishment or of a final supplementing
in the land of the Souls of the inadequacy of the justice that
fulfils itself on earth.

But though departed into Hades the dead have still a claim upon the
upper world and on those who still are living there. Together with
the Homeric picture of the lower world is united the cult of the
souls and the ideas, connected with that cult, of the continued life
of the dead. The next of kin owe to the departed the ceremonious
burial that is the first expression of their pious solicitude for
his soul's welfare.[103\12] In two plays the "Ajax" and the
"Antigone", the love and loyalty of the survivors is obliged to
fight for this right of the dead in desperate encounter with earthly
authority and even with the sacrifice of their own devoted lives.
Such instances serve to bring out clearly the fact that it is no
empty convention or tradition that is thus defended and carried
through to the end. Nor does the completion of the burial mark the
end of the dead man's relations with the upper world: even after
that he may be benefited by offerings made at his grave.[104\12]
Information of what happens on earth may penetrate to the
dead;[105\12] and he himself, under the protection of the underworld
spirits and of their assessor Dikê, who take cognizance of his
claims,[106\12] may interfere in the affairs of the living as a
"Curse-spirit" upon those who disregard his wishes,[107\12] by
sending threatening dream-visions upon his foes,[108\12] and as a
very present help and unseen ally to his friends in their hour of
need.[109\12]

As to an eternity of bliss awaiting the soul, the god in man, after
its final release from the shackles of the body, the poet knows as
little of such as he does of an eternity of damnation for the
wicked. Only the quite special state of grace which is enjoyed by
those who have been purified in the mysteries of the goddesses at
Eleusis receives mention by him[110\12]: he is frequently disposed
to think of this supreme expression of Attic worship with patriotic
pride.[111\12] But it is only a minority of the good who thus
achieve by the grace of the goddesses a privileged "life" in the
kingdom of shadows. One and only one is lifted by the divine grace
clear of the human fate of annihilation, and in the Grove of the
Erinyes the sorely-tried Oedipus is translated without seeing death
out of this earthly life.[112\12] So living a reality to this poet
of ancient piety is the conviction that the divine miracle of
translation[113\12] is a literal truth, that he is even ready {431}
to make this strange circumstance serve as the sole aim and purpose
of a whole drama: a miracle which all the other scenes serve not so
much to prepare as simply to postpone, and thus heighten the
expectancy with which the event is awaited. It is not supreme virtue
that secures an immortality for Oedipus which others also who showed
an equal degree of goodness might possibly attain. He reveals
himself to us as an innocent sufferer indeed,[114\12] but also as
obdurate in his rash and violent nature, vindictive, stubborn, and
self-willed, not ennobled but rather brutalized by his
sufferings.[115\12] Nevertheless, divine power elevates him to the
state of immortal _Hero_ less almost for the sake of the
satisfaction and bliss to himself as in order that he may be the
saviour of the Attic land, the country of humanity and kindness that
has taken into its protection[116\12] the unfortunate one, and
desires to preserve for ever his power of blessing.[117\12] Just as
once it had pleased divine power to overwhelm the innocent victim in
a sea of crime and suffering, so now it pleases the same divine
power to raise the sufferer, without any new or special merit on his
side, to a fate of superhuman bliss.[118\12] In his case a divine
miracle occurs, into the ultimate reasons for which it is not
profitable to inquire.

In his views, so far as he allows us to see them, of the things of
the next world, Sophokles differs not at all from those who still
saw life and worshipped the gods as their fathers had done before
them. The great poet of human, tragic destiny, the profound student
of the divine government of this mournful world, was unwilling to
set by the side of it a brighter and more comforting picture of a
spirit world of the imagination. In this, too, he is modest and will
not say much--he knows no more of these matters, and in no other
fashion, than "any other honest citizen of Athens".[119\12]

§ 6

In the course of a long life Sophokles was able to make himself
complete master of his art and grow up into strong and generous
manhood without the guidance or support of either theological or
philosophical learning. Theology he did not care to seek out in its
hiding place, the obscurity of isolated sects. Philosophy, in the
period of his impressionable youth, had not yet reached Athens, and
when he had attained riper years his noble simplicity of temper had
little to gain or to fear from the meditated wisdom or folly of the
younger generation. In serene detachment he passed on his way
through all the press and clamour of the market place. {432}

The moving impulse which since the end of the sixth century had
collected together at Athens all the intellectual forces of Greece
for a final expansion of their capacity now began, in the middle of
the fifth century, to take hold of philosophy as it had long since
done literature and the fine arts. Athens saw the last
representatives of Ionian physiology gathered together within her
walls. Some, like Anaxagoras, took up their residence there for a
long period, and left the impress of their teaching upon the
foremost minds of the city. The others who paid briefer visits were
those who in conscious opposition to the recent trend of thinking,
stoutly upheld the older principles of philosophic Monism or
Hylozoism, such as Diogenes of Apollonia or Hippon of Samos; or who
sought like Archelaos to reconcile the old and the new Ionic
doctrine. Besides these, Athens was a headquarters of the wandering
exponents of the newest wisdom, the Sophists. Nowhere did unfettered
discussion find such cultivated appreciation of its daring; nowhere
was such an eager welcome given to the dialectical word-play that,
seeming to be an end in itself, was destined to become the most
fruitful nursery of native Athenian philosophy. All traditional
beliefs and customs that had not their origin or their justification
in reflexion were already doomed as soon as they, together with
every conventional view of life and the world, were deprived of
their natural protection of unchallenged self-evidence by the cold
scrutiny of the sovereign tyrant Dialectic. The Sophists, those
skirmishers of a new and as yet unrecognizable philosophy, scattered
and put to flight the old guard of positive and doctrinal wisdom,
but to the individual, who was bidden to depend upon his own
resources, they offered stimulus to reflection in abundance but no
permanent foothold in the shifting sands of opinion. It would be but
a final assertion of the principle that there are no principles if
by any chance the Sophists themselves should for a moment speak in
the language of edification and, for example, lend the support of
their eloquence to certain articles of doctrine that provided a
positive teaching as to the nature and life of the soul.[120\12]

If Sophokles remained quite unaffected by this whole movement which
reached its flood tide in Athens, Euripides was drawn completely
into its current. He sought out philosophers and sophists personally
and in their writings. His was a spirit that urgently desired to
know the truth and he followed every available guide to knowledge
and wisdom for a stage upon their journey. But he was never able to
continue permanently in any one direction; in the restlessness {433}
and bewilderment of search and experiment he is the true son of his
age.

His philosophical and sophistical leanings were sufficiently marked
to make it impossible for him to accept any part of the belief or
tradition of his countrymen without trial. So far as it is possible
within the limits of dramatic art, he instituted an unsparing and
unhesitating criticism of all accepted things, and in the process
felt himself immeasurably superior to the wit and wisdom of the
past. And yet he never satisfied himself. He could never rest
content with a merely negative position, for all onesidedness was
foreign to his nature. The tremendous honesty of his nature made it
impossible for him to admit that element of frivolity which made the
sophistic movement and the dialectical negation of all certainty so
simple and attractive, and at the same time took away half its
sting. But he could take nothing easily; and so with all his
sophistic enlightenment he was never happy. The pupil of the
Sophists would hear every other side as well; there were even
moments when he longed to take refuge in the restful narrowness of
old and traditional piety. But it was not given to him to settle
down in any fixed set of opinions; all his convictions were
provisional, mere hypotheses adopted for the purposes of experiment.
Afloat on a changeful sea, he let himself be driven hither and
thither by every wind of intellectual excitement or artistic
necessity.

When all convictions were involved together in a state of perpetual
change and instability, the conception of the nature and being of
the soul and its relation to the powers of life and death could not
alone remain in fixed and dogmatic certainty.

Where the content and character of the fable chosen as the subject
of his drama demand it, the poet frankly adopts the popular view of
the nature and destiny of the departed soul, its power and claim
upon the worship of the survivors upon earth. In the fairy-tale play
of the "Alcestis" the whole apparatus of popular belief plays its
part; the God of Death and his awful office, the dwelling of the
dead in the underworld, are spoken of as facts and creatures of
experience and reality.[121\12] The elaborate funeral ceremonies
owed to the dead are treated with the utmost seriousness and
precision.[122\12] A whole drama, the "Suppliant Women", has as its
real subject, or at least as its ostensible motive, the religious
importance of a ritual burial,[123\12] nor is there any lack of
isolated passages in which the importance of burial and the honour
paid to graves is stressed.[124\12] The survivors on earth give
pleasure to the dead by offerings at their graves,[125\12] {434} and
in this way obtain their goodwill and can count upon their
support.[126\12] Power and honour belong not only to the great ones
of antiquity translated to a higher state of being;[127\12] not only
"Heroes" can extend their influence beyond their graves and affect
the course of earthly events:[128\12] from the soul of his murdered
father, the son expects assistance and succour in his time of need.
The dread creatures of antique faith, the Erinyes, exact vengeance
for the murdered mother.[129\12]

But at this point it becomes apparent that the poet only associates
himself for his own purposes with this circle of ancient and
sanctified popular fancy--so long in fact as it suits the tone that
he wishes to give to the drama and its characters. The Erinyes are
excellent material for the play--that in reality their horrid
figures only exist in the imagination of the mentally diseased is
clearly asserted in the "Orestes".[130\12] The whole series of
beliefs and demands--murder ever calling forth fresh murder in
accordance with the sacred duty of vengeance, the Erinyes, the
bloodthirsty patrons of the murdered victim who leaves no proper
avenger behind him--all these have ceased to have any validity for
him. The "animal and bloodthirsty" part of these figures of ancient
belief call forth the loathing of the poet living in the days of
organized justice and humaner manners.[131\12] He does not believe
in the souls' right to blood; the ancient legends which depend on
this right are an abomination to him. In fact, he only seems to have
written his plays about them in order, by the manner of his
presentation, to have his revenge upon this material that was almost
unavoidably thrust upon him by the tradition of the tragic stage.
The duty of the living to offer a cult to the departed souls becomes
doubtful in its turn. The seriousness with which that cult is
sometimes handled in the plays is compromised by such reflections as
these: it is certain that it matters little to the dead whether rich
offering are placed in their graves or not; such things only satisfy
the idle vanity of the living;[132\12] honour and dishonour are of
no further consequence to the dead.[133\12] How should they be, if
the departed no longer feel either pleasure or pain, are nothing at
all, as is repeatedly declared even in the middle of the
"Alcestis"?[134\12]

It is evident that only from an arbitrarily adopted point of view do
the picturesque creations of popular belief in the soul and of the
cult of souls seem real to the poet; apart from this they disappear
from his mind like the creatures of a dream.[135\12] The teachings
of the theologians supplied him with no real substitute for popular
faith; at the most they were a {435} momentary and passing stimulus.
No doubt he did not shut his eyes completely to these manifestations
of the spiritual life of his time. His plays contain allusions to
Orphic poetry and he joins the asceticism of the Orphics to the cold
virtue of his Hippolytos.[136\12] The thought that the soul has
fallen from a higher state of being and is enclosed within the body
like the dead man in his coffin takes captive his imagination for a
moment. "Who knows then whether life is not a kind of death," so
that in death the soul awakes to its real life?[137\12] The gloomy
view of human destiny upon this earth to which the poet so often
gives expression, might seem to hint at a consolation to come in a
more satisfactory hereafter; but the poet has no longing for the
consolation offered by the theologians. Among the many and various
reflections of the poet upon the reality that may reveal itself when
the curtain is drawn aside by death, we never meet with the
conception that lies at the bottom of the assurances made by the
theologians--the conception that the spiritual individual is certain
of its immortality because in its individuality it is of divine
nature and is itself a god.[138\12] True, he is the author of the
bold saying so often quoted and varied in later times, that God is
nothing else but the mind that dwells in men.[139\12] But this makes
no allusion to the theological doctrine of the multiplicity of
individual gods or daimones banished into the life of men; it rather
implies a semi-philosophic doctrine of the soul in which one may
perceive for the first time the expression of a permanent conviction
on the part of the poet.

In quite inapposite contexts Euripides sometimes introduces passing
allusions to a philosophical view of the world and humanity, that is
the more certainly to be regarded as the private conviction of the
poet himself as the utterances fail to correspond fully with the
character of the person in the play who makes them, and do not arise
necessarily from the dramatic situation. Everything in the world has
had its origin from Earth and "the Aether of Zeus"; the Earth is the
maternal womb from which the Aether brings everything to
birth.[140\12] Both constituents combine to produce the multiplicity
of appearance; they are not fused together nor are they to be
derived from a single common original element;[141\12] they remain
in dualistic contrast side by side.[142\12] It was probably the
dualism of this cosmological fancy that reminded the ancients of
Anaxagoras; but these statements cannot be regarded as simply a
poetical version of the doctrine of Anaxagoras;[143\12] for they
derive the multiplicity of matter and things from the simple element
of "Earth" from which {436} they arise only by a process of change
and transformation, while in the "seedmixture" of Anaxagoras, the
unchangeable seeds of all things only separate themselves out from
the whole and give rise by mechanical reassemblings to all the
perceived appearances of the world. The "Aether" of Euripides in its
relations with the "Earth" is besides being the active partner also
the intellectual and animated element. The isolation of such an
element from the rest of matter does indeed remind us of the
procedure of Anaxagoras. But the poet's Aether is still an element
though it may be penetrated by mind and animated by spirit; it is
not a mental being standing over against all the other elements in
essential distinctness like the _Nous_ of Anaxagoras. The fact that
it is the element of the Aether, i.e. the dry and hot air, in which
intellectual capacity is said to inhere, may be regarded as having
been borrowed from Diogenes of Apollonia, a philosopher who was held
in considerable estimation at Athens at that time, and who was well
known to Euripides.[144\12] In his doctrine, the air (which indeed,
in contrast to the view of Euripides, produces all other things
simply out of itself) is expressly identified with the "Soul" and is
itself described as "having understanding".[145\12]

This view of the elementary forces and constitution of the universe,
made up as it is from philosophical suggestions of a scarcely
reconcilable character, in which the dualistic tendency is in fact
finally predominant, suggests itself to the poet whenever in an
exalted mood he speaks of the final destiny of the human soul. The
soul on its separation from the body will depart to join the
"Aether". But in such conceptions it is not always the imagination
of the philosopher-poet that finds expression. On this subject it is
accompanied or replaced by a more popular view that only distantly
resembles it, but which led to the same result. When we hear now and
again of the Aether, the luminous atmosphere above the clouds, as
being the _dwelling place_ of the departed souls,[146\12] the
view--more theological than philosophic in its character--seems to
be implied that after death the liberated soul will float upwards to
the seat of the gods[147\12] which has long ceased to be situated
upon Olympos, but is in "heaven" or in this same Aether. This, too,
was the meaning of a saying traditionally ascribed to Epicharmos the
comic-poet of Sicily who was himself versed in philosophy. In this
saying the pious man is assured that for him death will bring no
evil for his "mind" will dwell permanently in "heaven".[148\12] This
conception, which appears so frequently in later epitaphs, {437}
must have been familiar to popular imagination at Athens at an early
period; at least in the grave-epigram officially dedicated by the
state to the memory of the Athenians who fell in the year 432 before
Poteidaia, we find the belief expressed (as a commonly received
opinion) that the souls of these brave men have been received by the
"Aether" just as the earth has received their bodies.[149\12] Such
official use implies a commonly accepted opinion and the fundamental
ideas of the popular cult of the souls might have led to similar
results. From the beginning popular belief had regarded the psyche,
which got its name from the air or breath, as closely akin to the
winds, the mobile air and its spirits. It would not be difficult for
the idea to arise that the soul, as soon as it was free to decide
for itself what should become of it, should go to join the elemental
spirits that are its kinsfolk. Perhaps this, too, is what Epicharmos
means when on another occasion he says that in death when the united
are parted asunder each returns whence it came, the body to earth,
but the soul up to the heights--its name, in which allusion is made
to its perpetual mobility, being now after the example of Xenophanes
derived from the breath of the wind, the moving air (~pneu=ma~), a
usage which became very common in later times.[150\12]

But perhaps the use of such a name is an indication that this poet
also regards the soul as standing in a close relation and kinship
with the Aether that is destined to receive it after its release
from the body; so that from this side, too[151\12]--in addition to
the more popular conception just mentioned--Euripides may have
received a hint for his peculiar version of the physiological theory
of Diogenes. In his view the soul participates in the nature of the
Aether. But it is more important to notice that the Aether
participates in the nature and true reality of the soul; it
possesses life, consciousness and power of thought. They both belong
to one family. The Aether according to the poet--and here the
speculations of Anaximenes as revived by Diogenes are
unmistakable[152\12]--is a true vital atmosphere, an all-embracing
psychic element, so that it becomes, not a mere vehicle of mind, but
the All-Mind itself. The concept is even condensed and
half-personified, it is called by the name of the highest divine
power, Zeus,[153\12] and the poet as though speaking of a personal
god, calls it "immortal".[154\12] The human mind, too, as akin to
the universal god and the All-Mind, appears, as it had been in the
teaching of Diogenes,[155\12] as a part of this God, this universal
Mind. God is the mind, and the mind and understanding in us is
God--so the poet clearly asserts.[156\12] In death, when {438} the
separation of the mind from its earthly elements takes place, the
Pneuma of man will "not indeed live", as it had done in the separate
existence of the individual man, but it will "preserve an immortal
consciousness", entering into the immortal Aether and fusing itself
with the All-living and the All-thinking.[157\12] None of the
physiologists who conceived the same idea of an immortality
excluding the personal immortality of the individual, of the
universal spirit of life in mankind, has expressed his meaning with
such distinctness as this philosophic layman.

The poet may have wished to remain permanently upon the sublime
heights of this Pantheistic vision; but he must, in his peculiar
all-embracing spirit that never held fast to any one view with
enduring persistence, have experienced too often the truth of the
saying of Protagoras that every statement calls forth its equally
legitimate opposite,[158\12] to have become an unswerving adherent
of any single opinion. Death, and whatever may reveal itself after
death, is beyond the experience of any man.[159\12] It may be that
complete disappearance into nothingness follows death; that the dead
man becomes simply nothing.[160\12] It may be that in the permanence
of the human race the great name and the renown of glorious deeds
lives on undying.[161\12] Whether there may remain besides a vestige
of life in a spirit world, who can tell? Perhaps such a thing is
hardly even to be wished.[162\12] It is just what makes death such a
comforting thing, that it puts an end to all feeling and therefore
to all pain and every care. We should not lament over our fate if,
like the harvests that follow each other in the course of the years,
one generation of men after another flowers, fades, and is carried
off. So it is ordered in the course of Nature, and we ought not to
be dismayed by anything that is rendered inevitable by her
laws.[163\12]


NOTES TO CHAPTER XII

[1\12: The learned and more particularly the philosophers of later
ages paid special attention to utterances of the older poetry that
gave expression to belief of a spiritualist tendency. Just as they
selected and preserved passages from Pindar (and from Melanippides
in the case soon to be mentioned), which bore witness to an advanced
view of the soul, so they must also have given us similar passages
from other melic or from iambic and elegiac poets--if such passages
had existed. They must, for example, have been absent from the
~thrê=noi~ of Simonides which were famous as the models of this kind
of poetry. And so with all the rest.]

[2\12: Hades puts an end to all pleasure for every man; hence the
warning that man should enjoy his youth upon earth: Thgn. 973 ff.;
cf. 877 f., 1191 ff., 1009 f.; Sol. 24; Thgn. 719 ff.]

[3\12: ~thana/tô| pa/ntes opheilo/metha~--an ancient saying often
repeated; cf. Bergk on Simon. 122, 2; Nauck on Soph., _El._ 1173
[Blaydes ad loc.].]

[4\12: Hades himself plays the part of Thanatos and carries off the
souls to the lower world. Thus as early as Semon. i, 13 f., ~tou\s
d' A/rei dedême/nous pe/mpei melai/nês Aï/dês hupo\ chthono/s~. In
metaphorical language ~Ha/idês~ for ~tha/natos~ is quite regular
from the time of Pindar onwards. This, in turn, lent support to the
use of the name of ~Ha/idês~ instead of the _personified_
~Tha/natos~. So esp. in Pi., _O._ ix, 33-5; cf. besides, _Epigr.
Gr._ 89, 3-4. ~to/nde . . . ma/rpsas Ha/idês hoi skoti/as
amphe/balen pte/rugas~; cf. 201, 2; 252, 1-2. (And therefore in
Eur., _Alc._ 261, we should not alter the ~pterôto\s Ha/idas~ who is
named instead of Thanatos--not even in favour of the otherwise
ingenious ~ble/pôn . . . ha/|dan~.)]

[5\12: ~dêro\n e/nerthen gê=s ole/sas psuchê\n kei/somai hô/ste
li/thos a/phthoggos~ Thgn. 567 f.--the condition of things in Hades
is regarded exactly as in the Homeric pictures: Thgn. 704-10.]

[6\12: See esp. Sol. 13, 29 ff.: Thgn. 731-42; 205 ff.]

[7\12: Mimn. ii, 13: ~a/llos d' hau= pai/dôn epideu/etai, hô=nte
ma/lista himei/rôn kata\ gê=s e/rchetai eis Aï/dên~. Without
children there can be no assurance that the cult of the soul will be
carried on. But we may well believe that the attaching of so much
importance to offspring was assisted by the natural human belief
that the man who left children behind him on earth did not
completely perish in death (hence ~aeigene/s esti kai\ atha/naton
hôs thnêtô=| hê ge/nnêsis~ as in Plato, _Smp._ 206 E). This alone
gives a meaning and a reason for the widespread belief among the
Greeks that the wicked man who is punished after his death in his
children and children's children himself feels that punishment.]

[8\12: Semon. 1; 3. Mimn. 2. Sol. 13, 63 ff.; 14. Thgn. 167 f.; 425
ff. We may also add here the expressions of resignation, Hdt. vii,
46; i, 31.]

[9\12: ~Nukto\s tha/lamos~ [Ion] _fr._ 8, 2.]

[10\12: On the story of Midas and Silenos see _Griech. Roman_, p.
204 f. As to the ancient and often repeated maxim ~archê\n~ (or
~pa/ntôn) me\n mê\ phu=nai epichthoni/oisin a/riston ktl.~, see
Bgk., _Opusc._ ii, 214; _PLG^4. ii, p. 155 f. Nietzsche, _Rh. Mus._
xxviii, 212 ff. (whose view that the {440} beginning ~archê\n . . .~
is old and original--but not his involved explanation of this--has
been fully confirmed by the finding of the primitive form of the
~agô/n~: Mahaffy, _On the Flinders Petrie Papyri_, i, p. 70).]

[11\12: Simon, _fr._ 39; 38.]

[12\12: _fr._ 137.--Usener, _Götternamen_, 229, 13, says of Sappho
that "she was possessed by the belief that as a poetess she would
live again after her death among the gods, and would therefore
become a _heroine_; see _frr._ 68 and 136". But from these fragments
of Sappho no such belief can be extracted without first reading into
them a good deal that they do not say.]

[13\12: Of the man who has fallen in glory on the battlefield
Tyrtaios says, 12, 31 f.: ~oude/ pote kle/os esthlo\n apo/llutai
oud' o/nom' au/tou=, all' hupo\ gê=s per eô\n gi/gnetai
_atha/natos_~ (i.e. in renown upon earth). Thgn. says to his Kyrnos,
243 ff., in your lifetime my songs will make you famous ~kai\ ho/tan
dnopherê=s hupo\ keu/thesi gai/ês bê=|s polukôku/tous eis Ai/dao
do/mous, oude/pot' oude\ thanô\n apolei=s kle/os alla\ melê/seis
a/phthiton anthrô/pois aie\n e/chôn o/noma . . .~ cf. Aesch.,
_Epigr._ iii, 3 (241 Bgk. = 449 Di.), ~zôo\n de\ phthime/nôn
pe/letai kle/os~.]

[14\12: Even in Hades the dead perceive ~chthoni/a| phreni/~ if they
themselves or the ~aretai/~ of their descendants upon earth are
praised: Pi., _P._ v, 98: cf. _O._ viii, 81 ff.; xiv, 20 ff.; [Ion]
_Anth. Pal._ vii, 43, 3 (to Eurip.), ~i/sthi d' hupo\ chthono\s ô/n,
ho/ti soi kle/os a/phthiton e/stai ktl.~--In the expressions
collected by Meuss, _Jahrb. f. Philol._ 1889, p. 812 f., from the
fourth century orators there only remains a very faint recollection
of such a belief.]

[15\12: Semon. 2, ~tou= me\n thano/ntos ouk a\n enthumoi/metha, ei/
ti phronoi=men, plei=on hême/rês miê=s~.--Stes. 51, ~atele/stata
ga\r kai\ ama/chana tou\s thano/ntas klai/ein~. 52, ~thano/ntos
andro\s pa=s' apo/llutai pot' anthrô/pôn cha/ris~.]

[16\12: This emerges at once if we review the material collected by
H. Meuss upon "the conceptions appearing in the Attic orators of
existence after death": _Jahrb. f. Philol._ 1889, pp. 801-15. For
the cult of the soul and all that attaches to it the orators are our
most authoritative witnesses and as such are frequently examined in
the sections of this book that deal with the subject.]

[17\12: ~_ei/_ tines tô=n teteleutêko/tôn la/boien _tro/pô| tini\_
tou= nu=n gignome/nou pra/gmatos ai/sthêsin~ and frequently in this
style: cf. the passages quoted by Westermann on D., _Lept._ (20),
87; cf. also Lehrs, _Pop. Aufs._ 329 ff. The question is always
whether the dead are capable in any way of apprehending what goes on
in this world. The continued life of the dead is never doubtful but
rather implied throughout, for without such implication no
possibility whatever would be left for that ~ei~--.]

[18\12: See Nägelsbach, _Nachhom. Theol._ 420. Meuss, p. 812.]

[19\12: This is well brought out by Lehrs, _Pop. Aufs._ 331. But the
statement holds good in an even more precise and exclusive sense
than he there gives it. The words of Hyper., _Epit._ xiii, § 39,
deal simply with the existence in Hades of those who have died for
their country (with some traditional embellishments; see above,
chap. vii, n. 5)--this much can hardly ever have been expressly
doubted or denied by any orator. But it is wrong to say (as Lehrs
does: p. 331) that Hyp. expresses, though in other words, what was
afterwards laid down by [D.H.] _Rhet._ vi, 5, as proper "for such
funeral speeches" (no, only for _private_ funerals--which is quite
another matter). It is true that the advice there given is to say
that the soul is _~atha/natos~_ and now dwells {441} "with the
gods". But it never enters into the head of Hyp. to say any such
thing (nor in the frag. of the speech preserved by Stob., _Fl._ 124,
36). In fact, the precept of this sophistic writer (still more the
advice given by Men. Rhet., _de Encom._ 414, 16 ff.; 421, 16 ff.
Sp.) rather reveals the enormous contrast between the style of the
sophistic funeral oratory of a later period and the real
characteristics of the old Attic funeral orations: a difference
founded upon the difference of sentiment manifested by the public
that listened to such speeches in two different ages. Even the
statements of [Dem.] _Epit._ (60) 34 (~pa/redroi toi=s ka/tô
theoi=s~ together with the ~agathoi\ a/ndres~ of earlier times ~en
maka/rôn nê/sois~) betray sophistic colouring though falling far
short of the excesses of Ps.-D.H. and Men. Rhet.]

[20\12: The only thing ~ agê/rantos~ about those who have fallen in
the wars of freedom is their ~eulogi/ê~ Simon. 100, 4; cf. 106, 4
(with Bgk.'s note). 99, 3-4 ~oude\ tethna=si thano/ntes epei/ sph'
aretê\ kathu/perthen kudai/nous' ana/gei dô/matos ex Aï/deô~ (which
is imitated in the epitaph of Thrasymachos the Kretan ~oude\ thanô\n
areta=s o/num' ôle/sas, alla\ se Pha/ma kudai/nous' ana/gei dô/matos
ex Aï/da~, _BCH._ 1889, p. 60).]

[21\12: ~klu=thi/ moi ô= pa/ter, thau=ma brotô=n, ta=s aeizô/ou
mede/ôn psucha=s~, Melanipp. 6. The words ~thau=ma brotô=n~
(modelled on the ~thau=ma brotoi=si~ of Homer) can refer only to
Dionysos (of the gods who enter into the question here): ~Diô/nusos,
cha/rma brotoi=sin~, ~X~ 325. Further, it is natural to think of
Dionysos in the work of a dithyrambic poet.]

[22\12: The dead man ~amph' Ache/ronti naieta/ôn~, Pi., _N._ iv, 85.
This is the general assumption: e.g. _P._ xi, 19-22; _O._ ix, 33-5;
_I._ viii, 59 f.; _fr._ 207 Bgk.]

[23\12: ~e/sti de\ kai/ ti thano/ntessin me/ros ka\n no/mon
erdo/menon; katakru/ptei d' ou ko/nis suggo/nôn kedna\n cha/rin~,
_O._ viii, 77 ff.]

[24\12: Something of the kind is adopted for the moment, e.g. in
_O._ xiv, 20 ff.; viii, 81 ff. A real belief in such a possibility
appears perhaps most clearly in _P._ v, 98 ff.]

[25\12: For him who dies fighting for his country there is in
store--not blessedness but only Fame, _I._ vii, 26 ff. He who comes
~kala\ e/rxais aoida=s a/ter eis Aï/da stathmo/n~ has little reward
for his pains (his reward would, in fact, have been just the praise
given in the ~aoida/~), _O._ x, 91 ff., cf. _N._ vii, 30-2.]

[26\12: A strange expression is the ~dai/môn gene/thlios~ of _O._
xiii, 105 (in the same poem we also have ~Xenophô=ntos dai/môn~ 28,
which in this case at least is something more than "destiny",
otherwise the normal meaning of ~dai/môn~ in Pindar, cf. _P._ v,
123, _I._ vii, 43). It almost seems as if it were intended to
describe the ancestor spirit that brings good luck to the house like
the _genius generis_ or ~hê/rôs suggenei/as~ (see above, chap. v, n.
132).]

[27\12: Amphiaraos, _O._ vi, 14; _N._ ix, 24 ff.; x, 8 f. (Amph.
from his underground cavern sees the fighting in the war of the
Epigonoi, _P._ viii, 39-56. There is no suggestion that the
~Epi/gonoi~ inquire at his oracle--as Dissen supposes; with this the
~hô=d' eipe _marname/nôn_~ 43 is inconsistent.)--Ganymedes
translated to eternal life, _O._ i, 44; x, 104 f. Apart from this
there are temporary translations to the gods or from one place on
earth to another, _O._ i, 36 ff.; ix, 59; _P._ ix, 5ff.; _I._ viii,
20 f.]

[28\12: _O._ ii, 27 ff.]

[29\12: ~alla/ ti prosphe/romen e/mpan ê\ me/gan no/on ê/toi phu/sin
athana/tois~, _N._ vi, 4 f.]

[30\12: ~skia=s o/nar a/nthrôpos~, _P._ viii, 95. ~he\n andrô=n he\n
theô=n ge/nos, ek mia=s de\ pne/omen matro\s ampho/teroi; diei/rgei
de\ pa=sa kekrime/na du/namis, {442} hôs to\ me\n oude/n, ho de\
chalkeos asphale\s aie\n he/dos me/nei ourano/s~, _N._ vi, 1 ff.]

[31\12: _fr._ 131 Bgk.]

[32\12: Pindar in these lines speaks only of the ~aiô=nos ei/dôlon~;
but that by this he means the ~psuchê/~ is obvious in itself and is
stated by Plutarch, who preserves the lines, _Cons. ad Apoll._ 35,
p. 120 D (~peri\ psuchê=s le/gôn~; cf. _Rom._ 28).--~psuchê/~ in
Pindar sometimes stands for what is otherwise called ~kardi/a~ or
~phrê/n~, "heart" or "disposition" e.g. _P._ i, 48; iv, 122; _N._
ix, 39; _I._ iv, 53b, and _O._ ii, 77, and prob. also _P._ iii, 41;
"disposition," _N._ ix, 32. The word is sometimes (as in Homer)
equivalent to ~zôê/~, _P._ iii, 101, ~psucha\n lipô/n~. It
simultaneously = "life" and the _alter ego_ dwelling within the
living man, _O._ viii, ~psucha\s ba/lon~; cf. _N._ i, 47. But the
poet knows also the full meaning of ~psucha/~ in the older idiom and
belief. Entirely in the manner of Homeric usage ~psucha/~ denotes
the spiritual double of mankind, which survives the man himself, in
those instances where the ~psuchê/~ of the dead is said to be still
in existence: ~psucha\n komi/xai~, _P._ iv, 159; _N._ viii, 44 f.;
~su\n Agamemnoni/a| psucha=|~ (is Kassandra sent into Hades), _P._
xi, 20 f. Persephone ~anadidoi= psucha\s pa/lin~ (out of Hades),
_fr._ 133, 3 (Bgk.); _I._ i, 68, ~psucha\n Aï/da| tele/ôn~ (in
death).--~psuchai/~ is also used in the old idiomatic sense in _fr._
132, 1: which is, however, spurious.--~psucha/~ in Pindar never
denotes the psychical powers of the living man inclusive of the
intellect, much less the intellect, ~nou=s~, alone.]

[33\12: ~kai\ sô=ma me\n pa/ntôn he/petai thana/tô| peristhenei=,
zô=on d' e/ti lei/petai aiô=nos ei/dôlon; to\ _ga\r_ esti mo/non ek
theô=n~, _fr._ 131 (96 Boeckh).]

[34\12: ~oi=si de\ Phersepho/na poina\n palaiou= pe/ntheos
de/xetai~--_fr._ 133. What is meant is undoubtedly the ancient
"guilt" of the soul for which Perseph. receives satisfaction. This
guilt can only be called a ~pe/nthos~ if she who accepts the
satisfaction is regarded as herself grief-stricken by the guilty
dead; if, in fact, the deed has been the occasion of mourning for
Persephone. That this can apply to the goddess of the underworld is
startling, but it cannot be got rid of by artificial interpretation
(as Dissen would like to get rid of it). Pindar follows throughout
the analogy of the ancient procedure of expiation in the case of
blood-guiltiness. But this procedure seems to be familiar with the
idea that, apart from the ~agchistei/a~ of the murdered man, the
underworld gods themselves (as guardians of the Souls) are
immediately injured by the deed and stricken by grief and must
receive satisfaction on their own account. Hence in certain legends
(typificatory of ritual) the murderer not only has to fly from the
land but to undergo servitude to the ~chtho/nioi~: Apollo,
especially after the slaying of Python, has to serve ~A/dmêtos~,
i.e. Hades for an _ennaëteris_ (more on this subject below, n. 40).
Thus, the guilty soul banished from its proper home serves a "great
year" under Persephone, and this is the ~poina/~ that it pays.]

[35\12: _O._ ii, 63-5. Everything here refers to judgment and
compensation _in Hades_. In the words ~thano/ntôn me\n entha/d'
auti/k' apa/lamnoi phre/nes poina\s e/tisan~ the ~entha/de~ cannot
possibly belong to the ~poina\s e/tisan~, as Aristarchos supposed,
so that the words should refer to the punishment in the course of a
new birth upon _earth_ of crimes committed in Hades (in itself a
remarkable conception). ~thano/ntes~ alone would not be put for
~thano/ntes _kai\ anabebiôko/tes_~, and we can only understand by
the word those who after a life-time upon earth have died and are
now spending their time below in the underworld. Moreover, it is
hardly likely (as Ty. Mommsen reminds us _adnot. crit. ad Olymp._
24) that the exposition of the "knowledge of the future" (62) on the
part of {443} a man still living upon earth would begin with what
may happen to man, not after his death, but in a second appearance
upon earth that is to fall to his lot later on. We must first of all
be told what happens after the conclusion of the present condition
of life, viz. that upon earth. Finally, the use of ~auti/ka~ is
quite satisfactory if it refers to the judgment in Hades that
follows immediately after death; while it is meaningless in
Aristarchos' interpretation (hence Rauchenstein writes ~au=tis~--a
mere conjecture and a superfluous one). The view that the ~me\n--de/~
of 63-4 necessitates Aristarchos' explanation is not convincing (as
Lübbert thinks, _Ind. Schol. Bonn. hib._ 1887, p.
xviii--incidentally he quite unjustifiably introduces specifically
Platonic fancies into Pindar, p. xix). The ~thano/ntôn me/n~ of 63
is not answered till ~ho/soi d' eto/lmasan . . .~ 75, just as the
~auti/ka~ of 63 does not receive its contrast till we come to what
happens much later--after the life on earth has been thrice
repeated--described in 75 ff. The ~de/~ of 64 and 67 are subordinate
(not adversative) to what is introduced by the ~me/n~ of 63 and they
continue the thought. The ~entha/de~ of 63 might indeed, in
accordance with an otherwise correct usage, be connected with
~apa/lamnoi phre/nes~, as it is by one of the Scholiasts: "the
~phre/nes~ which have committed crimes here upon earth." But
~apa/lamnos~ does not mean _sceleratus_, _impius_ (nor does it in
the passages adduced for this meaning by Zacher, _Diss. Halens._
iii, 237: Thgn. 281; Sim. v, 3). The ~apa/lamnoi phre/nes~ are
simply equivalent to the ~amenêna\ ka/rêna~ of Homer, and are a very
suitable expression for the ~psuchai/~ of the dead (though not
indeed for the ~psuchai/~ of the reborn as Aristarchos would have
it). No alternative remains save to connect ~thano/ntôn~ and
~entha/de~: simulac mortui sunt hic, s. decedunt hinc (Dissen). The
sentence ~ta\ d' en ta=|de . . .~ must then either be a more exact
description of what has been stated generally just before in
~poina\s e/tisan~ (and this is Mommsen's view supported by one
Schol.), or else be subordinated--together with its contrasted
~i/sais de\ . . .~ 67 ff.--to ~poina\s e/tisan~. ~poina/~ in Pindar
means regularly compensation, whether expiation for evil deeds or
reward for good (cf. _P._ i, 59; _N._ i, 70b). If we might suppose
that by a brachylogy not beyond possibility in Pindar ~poina\s
e/tisan~ is put for ~poina\s e/tisan kai\ ede/xanto~, then the sense
might be: after death the souls receive at once recompense for their
actions--and _then_ follows the division of the bad 64 ff., and the
good 67 ff. But we may perhaps rest content with Mommsen's
explanation.]

[36\12: _O._ ii, 74.]

[37\12: Plu., _de Lat. Viv._ 7, p. 1130 C after citing the lines of
Pindar _fr._ 130 (95) adds: (the rivers of Erebos) ~decho/menoi kai\
apokru/ptontes agnoi/a| kai\ lê/thê| tou\s koazome/nous~. This
_might_ possibly be an addition made by Plu. on his own account--he
had frequently spoken of ~eis a/gnoian auto\n embalei=n~, etc., in
his war against the Epicurean ~la/the biô/sas~ and here the same
thing appears again from Erebos. But the words are more probably a
paraphrase from Pindar. At any rate, what is said in Plu. about the
~_mnê=mai_ kai\ lo/goi~ of the ~eusebei=s~ in clear contrast with
the _~lê/thê~_ of the ~asebei=s~, comes from Pindar: this is shown
by the allusions of Aristid. i, p. 146, 1 Dind. From this parallel
it is also clearly proved that the ~lê/thê~ does not refer (as
Lehrs, _Pop. Aufs._ 313 thinks) to the forgetfulness of the
~kolazo/menoi~ in the minds of the living, but forgetfulness of
their previous life by the ~kolazo/menoi~ themselves. Accordingly we
are to suppose that Pindar assigns retention of memory and complete
consciousness only to the good in Hades, as their special privilege
(cf. the position of Teiresias in ~k~ 494), while the punishment
{444} of the wicked is enhanced by ~lê/thê~ (cf. above, chap. vii,
n. 21 ). Not to have fallen a victim to ~lê/thê~ in Hades--not to
have drunk the waters of Lethe--is occasionally alluded to in
poetico-religious utterances of later times as a special privilege
of the good, e.g. _Epigr. Gr._ 204, 11 (first century B.C.); 414,
10. ~Lê/thês~ and ~Mnêmosu/nês pê/gê~ in Hades (as in the sanctuary
of Trophonios at Lebadea, Paus. 9, 39, 8); _Epigr._ 1037 (cf. above,
chap. vii, n. 21; chap. xi, n. 96; and see also below).]

[38\12: ~toi=si la/mpei me/n me/nos aeli/ou ta\n entha/de nu/kta
ka/tô~ _fr._ 129. In this naive conception, what Helios only
threatens to do in Homer, ~du/somai eis Aï/dao kai\ en neku/essi
phaei/nô~, he does in reality and regularly during the earthly
night. The same idea must be referred to in _O._ ii, 61 ff., ~i/son
de\ nu/ktessin aiei\ i/son en hame/rais ha/lion e/chontes~ (so
Boeckh)--the ~esthloi/~ live in the ~chô=ros eusebô=n~ in Hades:
they have by night and day the same sun (as we: the ~apone/steron~
of 62 also implies this), that is to say, just as much of the sun as
we have on earth only in reverse order of time. The sun only shines
upon the ~eusebei=s~ below; ~mo/nois ga\r hêmi=n hê/lios kai\
phe/ggos hilaro/n esti~ sing the initiated in Hades in Ar., _Ran._
454 f. (but it is the _same_ sun which shines upon them as shines on
us, ~phô=s ka/lliston hô/sper entha/de~ 155. solemque suum sua
sidera norunt is a subtlety of later excogitation). Helios shining
by night in Hades occurs again in the late Greek Hymn ~eis Hê/lion~
(_Orph._, p. 291 Ab.), v, 11, ~ê\n gai/ês keuthmô=na mo/lê|s neku/ôn
t' epi\ chô=ron~. _Epigr. Gr._ 228b, 7-8, ~Lêtogene/s, su\ de\
pai=das en hêrô/essi phula/ssois, _eusebe/ôn aei\ chô=ron
epercho/menos_~.]

[39\12: _O._ ii, 75 ff.]

[40\12: _fr._ 133 ~ena/tô| e/teï~. What is meant is beyond all
question "after the expiration of an _ennaëteris_" (period of 99
months, i.e. 8 years and 3 intercalary months), a period which
besides being familiar as a cycle of religious festivals (Apolline
specially but not exclusively) also occurs in the ancient procedure
of atonement for murder as the period of self-banishment and
servitude in a foreign land undergone by the murderer. Apollo after
slaying Python serves ~me/gan eis eniauto/n~ (i.e. an ennaëteris) in
the house of Admetos (i.e. the god of the lower world) and then
returns purified (Müller, _Dorians_, i, 338); in the same way
Herakles serves Eurystheus (at least a trace of this is found in
[Apollod.] 2, 5, 11, 1; see Müller, _Dorians_, i, 445).--After the
murder of Iphitos Herakles has to serve as bondsman to Omphale
(peculiar in this case is the combination of this species of
atonement for murder with the buying-off of the relatives of the
murdered man [Apollod.] 2, 6, 2, 5; D.S. 4, 31, 5). At the end of
this period of service he is once more "pure" (~hagno\s ê=n~ S.,
_Trach._ 258).--Kadmos after slaying the dragon and the ~Spartoi/~
serves Ares (the chthonic?) for an ~eniauto/s~ of eight years
[Apollod.] 3, 4, 2, 1; Müller, _Orchomen._ 213.--Hippotes after the
murder of Mantis has to fly the country ~de/ka e/tê~ [Apollod.] 2,
8, 3, 3.--On the analogy of this custom the gods, too, who have
broken an oath sworn by the Styx are banished nine years from the
rest of the Olympians (and confined to Hades, since menial service
of the ~chtho/nioi~ is the essential idea of all such
~apeniautismo/s~), Hes., _Th._ 793 ff.: Orph. _fr._ 157. With a
reminiscence of this expiatory banishment Pindar makes the souls at
the conclusion of their earthly pilgrimage (which is itself a
banishment) undergo a final period of penance in Hades for an
ennaëteris, at the end of which the ~poinê/~ for the ancient crime
is regarded as completely paid off.--The life on earth and the
period in Hades which follows is regarded as an exile of the souls
(on account of serious crime).--Such an idea was most natural if the
real home of the soul was thought of as being {445} a divine (not
earthly) country; the idea occurs quite clearly in Empedokles
(certainly uninfluenced by the brief allusions of Pindar); see
above, chap. xi, n. 75.]

[41\12: _fr._ 133. The similarity to the promises made by Emped.
_fr._ 146 (457 f.) is immediately apparent, but is not to be
explained by imitation of Pindar by Emped., but simply by the
similarity of imaginative outlook which led to similar results in
the two cases.--Elevation to the rank of Hero is the reward which
next awaits the man who is born a king, according to this view. Very
remarkable is the manner in which Pindar, _O._ ii, 58-62, effects
the transition to his eschatological statement: the man who
possesses ~plou=tos aretai=s dedaidalme/nos~ knows the future, viz,
what we are then told about the fate of the soul hereafter. This
assertion, which seems to attribute to the virtuous Great Man at
once a higher and a profounder knowledge, is perhaps best explained
by the allusions of _fr._ 133. He who has reached this highest stage
of earthly happiness must deduce from that very circumstance that
for him now it is fated after another death to become a Hero. He
therefore knows that everything, indeed, happens that is related in
ll. 63-74, but that before him in particular lies that which follows
in ll. 75 ff.; and this is to be regarded as the real import of what
the man in question "knows", 62, while the rest, 63-74, is only
added for the sake of completeness. Theron, therefore--for it is he
who is alluded to throughout--may be assured beforehand that after
death he will be gathered to the Heroes. This is what Pindar means
to say here, or at least to give the ~sunetoi/~ to understand 91 ff.
As a matter of historical fact Theron was worshipped with ~hêrôïkai\
timai/~ after his death, D.S. xi, 53, 2.]

[42\12: _fr._ 133. There is according to Dissen a contradiction
between _fr._ 133 and _O._ ii, 75 ff.: in the latter three periods
of life on earth are necessary before the final departure, in _fr._
133 only two. This variation would be got rid of if we could adopt
the interpretation given by Ty. Mommsen, _adnot. crit. Olymp._ 30,
and assert that in _O._ ii also Pindar only speaks of two earthly
lives with a single residence in Hades intervening. But the words
~es tri\s hekate/rôthi mei/nantes~, 75-6, can hardly bear any other
interpretation than "three times on each of the two sides" (not: "on
both sides--once on that side, twice on this side: total three
times"). At the same time there is nothing in _fr._ 133 to prevent
us taking the same number of lives (three as a minimum) to be
implied there too. We are not there told that the birth as kings,
etc., must always be the one to follow the first birth: in this case
also two earlier lives may have gone before.]

[43\12: See above, chap. iv, § 8.]

[44\12: ~e/teilan Dio\s hodo\n para\ Kro/nou tu/rsin~, _O._ ii, 77.
What exactly is to be understood by the "way of Zeus" was presumably
clearer to the ~sunetoi/~ versed in the mythology of mysticism for
whom Pindar is here writing, than it is to us. It must mean (as
Boeckh supposes) the way which Zeus treads in order to reach that
Island, far to the West in Okeanos, inaccessible as the Land of the
Hyperboreans to ship or traveller on foot; it is a special
~athana/tôn hodo/s~ like that which leads to Homer's grotto of the
Nymphs, ~n~ 112. Acc. to Bergk, _Opusc._ ii, 708, it is "certain"
that Pindar means the Milky Way. Along this the gods travel to the
house of Zeus, Ovid, _M._ i, 168; and Orpheus in the same way _fr._
123, 17 Ab., speaks of the ~theô=n hodoi\ ouraniô/nôn~ in the
heavens. But the souls could only be made to travel along the Milky
Way if their habitation was placed in the sky as it often was later.
So, as Bergk points out, following Lob., _Agl._ 935, {446} the
Empedotimos of Herakld. Pont. calls the Milky Way ~hodo\s psuchô=n
tô=n ha=|dên to\n en oura/nô| diaporeuome/nôn~ ap. Philop. in
Arist., _Mete._, p. 117, 10 Hayd.; see above, chap. ix, n. 111. But
Pindar situates his ~maka/rôn nê=sos~ in the Ocean (78): it is
difficult to see how the souls could arrive there on the Milky Way
from the place where they find themselves after death. (We may
surely acquit Pindar of the later fancies about an Okeanos in the
heavens.) Q.S. iii, 761 ff. (cited by Tafel) knows of a special way
belonging to the gods which leads from heaven down to the ~Êlu/sion
pedi/on~. But the way by which the souls reach the ~maka/rôn nê=sos~
does not, like that way, begin in heaven. We should rather think of
some way only passable for gods and spirits leading from the
inhabited world over the pathless Ocean to the latter's "sources"
far in the West.]

[45\12: In _O._ ii, 84-5, it is certainly Kronos who is meant (as
Didymos took it, though he gave an absurd interpretation of the
passage) and not Zeus as Aristarchos imagined. The exceedingly
corrupt and (owing to the intrusion of glosses) unmetrical lines are
beyond certain restoration: the emendations of the Byzantine
scholars give the required sense.--What happened to the incorrigibly
wicked? In accordance with the theory of the soul's Transmigration
two alternative views as to their fate were possible: they might be
regarded as passing from body to body unceasingly (Empedokl.) or as
doing penance by suffering eternal punishment in Hell (as with Plato
and others). The circumstances in which he alludes to these matters
do not give Pindar any special occasion to declare himself for
either view. He has only to speak of the final condition of the
just; the fate of the ~asebei=s~ is left in semi-obscurity.
Something about the matter is, however, said in _fr._ 132; ~psuchai\
asebe/ôn~ hover under the vault of heaven that covers the earth
(~gai/a|~ either corrupt or grammatically bad Greek), while the
pious above the vault of heaven (~epoura/nioi~) sing to the "Great
Blessed One". Everything in this is un-Pindaric, the inadequacy and
even incorrectness of the language (~molpai=s en hu/mnois~), the
unconcealed monotheism of the phrase ~ma/kara me/gan~, the
conception of the souls as having nothing else to do than sing to
the One God, the whole idea that these blessed ones dwell "in
heaven". This last is an idea familiar to Greeks of a later period,
nor is the division of souls into ~hupoura/nioi~ and ~epoura/nioi~
unknown to them; cf. _Epigr. Gr._ 650, 9 ff. But Pindar cannot have
written anything of the kind. It is even doubtful whether Clem. Al.
who, _Str._ iv, 640 P., names as the author of the lines ~to\n
melopoio/n~, meant Pindar by the words: Theodoret. (_Gr. Aff. C._
viii, 599 C), who attributes the second half of the frag. to Pindar,
had no other source but the same Clem. Al. But it may be doubted
whether the whole is to be attributed to any Greek of the older
faith. It has quite the appearance, as Zeller, _Socr. and
Socratics_, p. 24, n. 3, strikingly suggests, of one of those
_Jewish_ forgeries in which Jewish monotheism and the ideas
connected with it were to be fathered upon Greek antiquity. Welcker,
_Kl. Schr._ v, 252 ff.; Götterl._ i, 741 f., defends the _fr._ (and
most unconvincingly connects the ~psuchai\ hupoura/nioi~ and
~epoura/nioi~ of the _fr._ with the quite different ~dai/mones
epichtho/nioi~ and ~hupochtho/nioi~ of Hes., _Op._ 123 and 141). He
thinks he can defend the genuineness of the lines (which had already
been declared spurious by Dissen) by pointing to the words of Horace
about Pindar's ~thrê=noi~ (_O._ iv, 2, 21): flebili sponsae iuvenem
raptum plorat, et vires animumque moresque aureos educit in astra
nigroque invidet Orco. Even supposing that this referred to the
transport of the souls to the stars the witness of Horace thus given
would only {447} remove a single difficulty from a passage that has
other overwhelming difficulties in profusion. But Horace says
nothing of the transport of the "Soul" to the heavenly regions,
_vires_, _animus_, _mores_, all these together refer not at all to
the ~psuchê/~ but to the ~ê=thos~ and the ~aretai/~ of the dead.
Pindar, Horace means, rescues the memory of the nature and merits of
the youth from decay: only the fame which the poet secures for him
is under discussion. _educit in astra_ and _invidet Orco_ mean
nothing more than: he rescues the memory of the dead from oblivion,
exactly as in the epitaph quoted above, n. 20: ~houde\ thanô\n
areta=s o/num' ô/lesas alla/ se Pha/ma kudai/nous' ana/gei dô/matos
ex Aï/da~. Thus, it is least of all to be concluded from Horace's
words that Pindar transported the souls of the ~eusebei=s~ into the
heavens (rather that in the ~thrê=noi~--as much as anywhere else:
see above, n. 25--Pindar sometimes only recognizes the immortality
of fame: of that alone does Horace speak).]

[46\12: _O._ ii celebrates the victory which Theron had won at
Olympia in _Ol._ 76, but was probably written some time after that
victory. Theron died _Ol._ 77, 1, or 76, 4.]

[47\12: Sicily was rich in cults of ~chtho/nioi~, in which Gelon,
Hieron and their ancestors were hierophants, Hdt. vii, 153; Pi.,
_O._ vi, 95. So, too, Akragas the city of Theron (and the home of
Empedoldes which also is not without its importance) was
~Phersepho/nas he/dos~, Pi., _P._ xii, 2, having been given by Zeus
to Persephone on her marriage, Sch. Pi., _O._ ii, 16 (as also had,
in addition to other cities, Pindar's native city Thebes, Euphorion,
_fr._ 48; cf. Eur., _Phoen._ 684 ff. Theron's family traced its
descent from Eteokles the son of Oedipus). It is very possible that
the hopes of a blessed immortality of the soul such as were fostered
in many ways in the cult of the ~chtho/nioi~ and particularly in
that of Persephone, should have been familiar to Theron from such a
cult and attractive to him.]

[48\12: The theological character of much of Pindar's work makes
knowledge of mystic doctrine not surprising in him. In _fr._ 137 he
speaks of the Eleusinia (to which he otherwise owes nothing). In
_fr._ 131, though the words are unfortunately most corrupt and
probably contain lacunae as they have been transmitted, he speaks of
the "releasing Initiations", ~olbi/a d' ha/pantes ai=sa lusi/ponon
_teleta/n_~--this is the form of the words required by the metre
(dactylo-epitritic), and thus (not ~teleuta/n~) they appear in Plu.,
_Cons. Apoll._ 35, p. 120 D, and also in cod. Vatic. 139 (which I
have collated).]

[49\12: _IG._ xiv = _IG. Sic. et It._, 641, 1-2-3. [Harrison-Murray,
_Prolegom._ 661 ff.; _Vors._ 66 B, 18, 19.]--The inscription of the
oldest of these poems belongs to the fourth century B.C. The verses
can, however, be cited here because the original or rather the two
originals upon which the poems are modelled were older than the
oldest of the three surviving inscr. (which itself shows serious
corruption of the primitive text); and nothing prevents us from
supposing that the original forms of these verses go to the fifth
century.--The common ancestor of versions 2 and 3 is not derived
from version 1, even in the parts in which it agrees with that
version, but from a still older original.--Acc. to Dieterich,
_Nekyia_ 128 f., 135 f., the lines are taken from a poem of
_Orpheus'_ descent to Hades; but of this they themselves offer not
the slightest suggestion.]

[50\12: The feminine ~e/rchomai ek katharô=n kathara/~--and also
~nu=n d' hike/tis hêkô~ (though this indeed is metrically impossible)
_IG._ xiv, 641, 2, l. 6--refers probably to the ~psuchê/~ and not to
the sex of the dead person as though a woman were speaking in all
three cases. Moreover, in {448} No. 1, 9, Persephone speaks as
though to a man ~o/lbie kai\ makariste/, theo\s d' e/sê| anti\
brotoi=o~.]

[51\12: l. 1, ~e/rchomai ek katharô=n kathara/, chthoni/ôn
basi/leia~. This is certainly the right punctuation (and is given by
the editors), and not Hofmann's ~ek katharô=n, kathara\ chth. b.~
"Pure and born of the pure" (referring to the immediate parents of
the dead: more distant ancestry would be expressed by ~apo/~); cf.
~ka/kistos kak kakô=n~, etc. (Nauck on Soph., _OT._ 1397; _Ph._
874); ~agathoi\ ex agathô=n o/ntes~, Andoc., _M._ 109.]

[52\12: The parents are ~katharoi/~, the soul of the dead
~kathara/~, simply as being "purified", "sanctified", in ~teletai/~
of the ~chtho/nioi~. In the same way, elsewhere, the Mystai are
~ho/sioi~ "the pure": see above, chap. vi, n. 18.]

[53\12: ~kai\ ga\r egô\n humô=n ge/nos o/lbion eu/chomai ei=men~--so
in all three versions.]

[54\12: ~alla/ me moi=r' eda/masse kai\ asteropê=ta keraunô=n~
(particip.): so in the original to which the readings of three
versions point, as restored by O. Hofmann in _GDI._ 1654.
~asteroblê=ta~ is in No. 1--this might simply = ~asteropoblê=ta~,
but it may only have been substituted by mistake for ~asteropê=ta
( = asteropêtê/s~ of Homer). The line in this form occurs in No. 1,
4. Versions 2 and 3 have ~_ei/te_ me moi=r' eda/mass' _ei/t'_
astropê=ta keraunô=n~. But the dead had no _choice_ between natural
death (for this is what ~moi=ra~ must mean as contrasted with death
by the thunderbolt) and death by being struck by lightning; one or
other of the two (or more) forms of death must in actual fact have
occurred. In this embarrassment--for death by lightning is not a
very frequent occurrence--the ancient verse was altered in such a
way that it might refer also to one who had died a natural death.
The attempt was indeed not a great success. Originally death by
lightning can alone have been mentioned (as in No. 1) and the
original form of the lines must have referred to someone who had
actually perished in this way. The dead person was then immediately
regarded as sanctified simply on account of the method of his death;
he became a ~_hiero\s_ nekro/s~ translated to a higher and continued
life: see above, chap. ix, n. 127, and Appendix i. This is the only
interpretation of the lines which gives any point to the
introduction here of this peculiar manner of death--one who has been
thus translated out of life will certainly now be ~theo\s anti\
brotoi=o~.]

[55\12: ~ku/klos tê=s gene/seôs~, rota fati, etc. Lob., _Agl._ 798
ff.]

[56\12: ~himertou= d' epe/ban stepha/nou posi\ karpali/moisi,
Despoi/nas d' hupo\ ko/lpon e/dun chthoni/as basilei/as~, No. 1,
6-7. The ~ste/phanos~ will probably be the sacred precinct, the
enclosure that surrounds the realm of Persephone, as Dieterich, _De
hymn. Orph._ 35, very plausibly suggests.]

[57\12: See Appendix xi.]

[58\12: ~hô/s me pro/phrôn pe/mpsê| he/dras es euage/ôn~. The
~he/drai euage/ôn~ correspond to the ~chô=ros eusebô=n~ of other
poets and mythologists. But the strange phrase does also contain an
allusion to the fact that this paradise of the "pure" is specially
reserved for the initiates of the mysteries. The ~euagê/s~, the man
untouched by any ~a/gos~, is ~ho/sios (ho/sios e/stô kai\ euagê/s~
law ap. And., _M._ 96): ~euagei=n = hosiou=n~ in an ins. from
Ialysos in Rhodes, _IGM. Aeg._ i, 677. Ordinary non-religious
language also preserves the original meaning of the word: it
frequently means (in contrast to ~skotô/dês~ and the like) "bright,
pure, clean" (and in places, too, where it is customary to insert
without good reason ~euaugê/s~, following the ex. of Hemsterh. on
Eur., _Suppl._ 662).]

[59\12: The similarity with the stages of the reward given to the
good in Pindar is obvious: ~chô=ros eusebô=n~ in Hades; then and not
till then {449} escape from the underworld and from human life as
well. The only difference is that in Pi. the soul's final end is to
become a ~hê/rôs~ while here it becomes ~theo/s~.]

[60\12: _IG._ xiv, 642.]

[61\12: id. 641, 1, v, 10, ~e/riphos es ga/l' e/peton~. 642, 4,
~theo\s ege/nou ex anthrô/pou. e/riphos es ga/la e/petes~. The
conjunction of the two phrases in 642 shows that "As a kid I fell
into the milk" is a condition of "I became a God". We may certainly
recognize in the phrase a ~su/nthêma~ or ~su/mbolon~ of the Mystai
like those usual in other secret initiatory rites--~ek tumpa/nou
ephagon ktl.~, Lob. 23 ff.--which refer to performance of symbolical
actions in the initiation ceremonies. The precise sense of _this_
~su/nthêma~ cannot be made out (Dieterich's efforts, _H. Orph._, p.
35, have not succeeded in clearing up the matter).]

[62\12: Worth remarking is the instruction ~all' hopo/tam' psuchê\
proli/pê| pha/os aeli/oio, _dexio\n_ eisie/nai pephulagme/nos eu=
ma/la pa/nta~ (this or something like it may have been the original
form of the lines which have been thrown into confusion by the
intrusion of the explanatory words ~dei= tina~). Then at the
conclusion ~(ô=) chai=re chai=re, dexia\n hodoiporô=n leimô=na/s te
hierou\s kai\ a/lsea Phersephonei/as.~ (~kai/~: this and nothing
else is probably concealed by the KAT of the inscription--~kai/~
long before a vowel in 3rd thesis is even in Homer not unheard of.)
Here at a comparatively early date we meet with the legend of the
Two Ways at the entrance to the underworld, of which that to the
right leads to the ~chô=ros eusebô=n~, the left to the place of
punishment of the ~a/dikoi~. It may derive from the fancies of South
Italian mystic sects. ~dexio/n~ and ~aristero/n~ in the Pythagorean
table of Opposites--and in _oionistike_ for a long time before
that--mean the same as ~agatho/n~ and ~kako/n~ (Arist., _Metaph._ 1,
5, p. 986a, 24; cf. Iamb., _VP._ 156).--The ~U~ Pythagoreum denoted
the parting of the ways of life to the right (to virtue) and to the
left (vice): Serv., _A._ vi, 136; cf. O. Jahn, _Pers._, p. 155 f.
Plato transferred the Two Ways to the underworld probably following
Pythagorean example, _Rp._ 614 C; cf. ~tô\ hodô/~, _Gorg._ 524 A;
_divorso itinere_, Cato ap. Sall., _C._ 52, 13, in a Platonist
passage. To the right the fountain of Mnemosyne, to the left that of
Lethe--grave-tablet from Petelia: _Epigr. Gr._ 1037 = _IG._ xiv.
638. The Two Ways in the underworld (of which that to the right hand
regularly leads to salvation) are also spoken of by the ~poêtê/s~
whose lines are quoted by Hippol., _RH._ 5, 8, p. 164, 80 D.-S.
(perhaps "Orpheus" as Dieterich, _Nek._ 193 thinks); cf. also Verg.,
_A._ vi, 540 ff., Hegesipp., _AP._ vii, 545, and the Jewish forgery
under the name of Philem., Mein. 4, 67, 6 f. (ii, p. 539
K.).--_Three_ Ways in the world of the spirits, which he takes as
being in the sky, are seen by the Empedotimos of Herakld. Pont. (see
above, chap. ix, n. 111): Serv., _G._ i, 34. Plutarch also alludes
to _three_ Ways in the underworld, _Lat. Viv._ vii, p. 1130, for in
giving his quotation from Pindar's ~thrê=nos~ _fr._ 129-30 he
suddenly, without having previously said anything about the other
two Ways, speaks of the ~_tri/tê_ tô=n anosi/ôs bebiôko/tôn kai\
para/nomôn _hodo/s_~ which leads into Erebos. We should suppose that
he found these three Ways in Pindar whom he is making use of
throughout the passage. Three Ways would seem natural to one who
knew of three classes of souls; the ~eusebei=s~ and the ~asebei=s~
having in between them those who have not strayed seriously from
either side of the middle way of ordinary morality and deserve
neither reward nor severe punishment. To these then was probably
allotted, instead of the bliss or sorrow of the two other classes,
the indifferent state of the Homeric ~ei/dôla kamo/ntôn~. So at
least it appears from Lucian, _Luct._ 7-9. A similar triple {450}
division occurs in a popular form ap. D.H. viii, 52 ad fin.: (1) a
place of punishment, a kind of Tartaros: (2) ~to\ lê/thês pedi/on~
(which is here the indifferent state); (3) the ~aithê/r~ which is the
dwelling-place of the Blessed. Verg., too, has three classes, but he
places the middling characters in the _limbus infantium_, beyond
which the road first divides towards Elysium and Tartarus. Did
Pindar then anticipate these and incidentally--he need not have been
logically consistent about it--introduce such a triple division of
the souls?]

[63\12: Plato's violent attacks on poets and poetry--in which
nevertheless acc. to his own account ~oude\n spoudê=s chari/n, alla\
paidia=s he/neka pa/nta dra=tai~--show once more clearly enough that
in his time the old Greek view of the poets as the true _teachers_
of their age was by no means a thing of the past. It was precisely
as teachers, whether rightly or wrongly so regarded, that they
seemed to him dangerous and worth opposing.]

[64\12: Aristophanes is only formulating popular opinion--and in
unusually naive language--when he says _Ran._ 1030 ~tau=ta ga\r
a/ndras chrê\ poiêta\s askei=n; ske/psai ga\r ap' archê=s hôs
_ôphe/limoi_ tô=n poiêtô=n hoi gennai=oi gege/nêntai ktl.~ And again
1053 ff. where he is referring particularly to tragic dramatists,
~apokru/ptein chrê\ to\ ponêro\n to/n ge poiêtê/n, kai\ mê\
para/gein mêde\ dida/skein. toi=s me\n ga\r paidari/oisin e/sti
dida/skalos ho/stis phra/zei, toi=s hêbô=sin de\ poiêtai/~.]

[65\12: This idea is alluded to as early as ~D~ 160 ff. Then Hes.,
_Op._ 282 ff. It is established for Hdt.; cf. i, 91, vi, 86. Further
examples collected by Nägelsbach, _Nachhom. Theol._ 34 f. Thgn. 205
ff., 731 ff., is particularly definite. Among Attic authors; cf.
Sol., _fr._ 13, 29 (~_anai/tioi_ e/rga ti/nousin~); E., _Hipp._ 831
ff., 1378 ff. (where note ~to\n oude\n o/nt' epai/tion~), _fr._ 980;
[Lys.] 6, 20; Lycurg. 79. It is briefly alluded to as a commonly
held opinion by Isoc. 11, 25; cf. Lys., _fr._ 53 Th. The case of
Diagoras of Melos the ~a/theos~ may also be remembered; cf. above,
chap. vii, n. 16.--This idea of the punishment of the son for the
deeds of the father receives its justification acc. to Plu., _Ser.
Nu. Vi._ 16, 559 D (quite in accordance with primitive ideas) in the
unity that belongs to all the members of the same ~ge/nos~--so that
in the person of the son it is the father himself, though he may be
dead, who is also punished. The idea arises from the deeply
ingrained feeling of the unity, solidarity, and continuity of the
ancient family cult-circle pre-supposed by the cult of souls. (This
is primitive and meets us, e.g. in India as well: "release us from
the wrongs that our fathers have done; take away the sins of that we
ourselves have committed" is the prayer to Varuna in the Rigveda, 7,
86, 5. ~ta\ ek prote/rôn aplakê/mata~ are transferred also to the
next generation "like a pestilence-breeding substance", Oldenberg,
_Rel. d. V._ 289. Elsewhere the conception emerges that the guilty
ancestor lives again in the descendant and is punished in his
person: Robinsohn, _Psychol. d. Naturv._ 47.)]

[66\12: It is precisely on this point, namely, that evil does not
befall men without their own fault, that the Chorus, i.e. the poet,
of the _Agamemnon_ (757), acknowledges ~di/cha d' a/llôn mono/phrôn
eimi/~.]

[67\12: In this way, too, the Stoics saved the responsibility of men
for their own deeds in spite of the unavoidable ~eimarme/nê~. The
deeds would not have come to fruition if the personal
~sugkata/thesis~ of the man had not been added to the original
necessary cause conditioning the acts. The ~sugk.~, though not
itself "free", yet always remains ~eph' hêmi=n~ and makes us
responsible: Cic., _Fat._ 18; Nemes. _Nat. Hom._, p. 291 Matth.]
{451}

[68\12: Clearly so from l. 689 onwards.]

[69\12: ~ta\ ga\r ek prote/rôn aplakê/mata/ nin pro\s ta/sd' (ta\s
Erinu/as) apa/gei~, _Eum._ 934.]

[70\12: Only when Eteokles and Polyneikes have fallen in single
combat ~e/lêxe dai/môn~, _Sept._ 956.]

[71\12: This idea is quite common in Homer (Nägelsbach, _Hom.
Theol._ 70 f., 320 f.), and in later times reappears frequently in
the case of such authors as always, or on occasion, express popular
ideas: Thgn. Hdt. esp. Eur. (cf. _Fr. Trag. Adesp._ 4, 55 N.), and
the orators: see Nägelsbach, _Nachhom. Th._ 54 ff., 332 f., 378.]

[72\12: ~apa/tês _dikai/as_ ouk apostatei= theo/s~, _fr._ 301 S.
This, too, must be the meaning of other expressions in which the
poet refers less plainly to the righteous purpose of divine
deception: _Pers._ 93 ff., 742; _frr._ 156, 302 (cf. also _Suppl._
403 f.).--Aristoph. makes his Clouds speak quite in accordance with
the Aeschylean ideas, _Nub._ 1458 ff. This grim idea must, in fact,
have had considerable success and spread beyond the stage. Falsehood
and deception for a good end presented no difficulty to the mind of
the Greeks (even as applied to their gods). Hence Sokrates (in
Xen.), Plato, and certain Stoics could quite openly approve of and
recommend such falsehoods (and the author of the ~Diale/xeis~, c. 3
in defending the same theory also appeals to the lines of Aesch.).]

[73\12: _Ag._ 1497-1508. Here there is a clear opposition between
the popular view which attributed all guilt to an ~ala/stôr~
tempting to crime (a reminiscence of which appears in Soph., _El._
197 ff.), and the more elevated conception of the poet who holds
fast to the view that though the ~ala/stôr~ may contribute to the
result the agent of the evil deed is not ~anai/tios~.]

[74\12: The dead man stands in need of the cult paid by his
surviving kinsfolk, _Cho._ 484 (his grave a ~bômo/s~, _Cho._ 106;
~choai\ gamê/lioi~ for him, 486 f.). As an appeasement of his easily
aroused wrath ~choai\ nerte/rôn meili/gmata~, _Cho._ 15. The dead
man is still conscious of events both past and present upon earth:
~phro/nêma tou= thano/ntos ou dama/zei puro\s malera\ gna/thos~,
_Cho._ 324 f. In the song of awakening addressed to the departed and
the invocations sung by Electra and the Chorus in _Cho._ the soul of
Agamem. is similarly regarded as fully alive and accessible to the
callers (though, indeed, ~ex amaura=s phreno/s~ 157) and addressed
accordingly (cf. 139, 147 f., 156 f., 479 ff.; _Pers._ 636). It is
even expected that his soul, invisibly present in the upper world,
will take an active share in the work of vengeance: ~a/kouson es
pha/os molô/n, xu\n de\ genou= pro\s echthrou/s~, _Cho._ 459; cf.
489. So, too, Orestes, _Eum._ 598, hopes in his extremity of need
that ~arôga\s ek ta/phou pe/mpsei patê/r~. More especially the
murdered man has a right to be avenged by his ~agchistei=s (oud' ap'
a/llôn~, _Cho._ 472) and Apollo himself has commanded Orestes to
take such vengeance, _Cho._ 269 ff., etc. Dread results of
neglecting this duty, _Cho._ 278-96 (possibly an interpolated
passage, but still an extension of the words of A. himself 271 ff.
in a sense thoroughly in consonance with popular belief).]

[75\12: The Erinyes only avenge the murder of a blood-relation and
not therefore when one of a married pair is murdered by the other,
_Eum._ 210-12, 604 ff. But the opinion emerges that they are
particularly charged with the vengeance of a _mother_ who has been
murdered by her son (rather than a father who has suffered the same
fate), 658 ff., 736 ff. (Reminiscences of such a view in S., _El._
341 ff., 352 ff.; E., _Orest._ 552 ff., _fr._ 1064.) This may
possibly be an old popular belief (not fully understood by A.
himself) which need not, however (as is often {452} supposed),
depend upon an ancient system of "matriarchy" for which there is no
other evidence in Greece. It is simply explained by the fact that
the father has plenty of men still living among his kinsfolk who
will avenge him (even against his own son), whereas the mother who
is separated from her _own_ family can expect no avenger from that
side, while in the family of her husband there will be nobody yet
old enough to take vengeance on her own son. For this reason it is
for her most particularly and necessarily that the daimonic avengers
of murder must intervene, and they are the Erinyes, who are always
thought of as only active where no earthly avenger is available.--Of
course, it could never be denied that there exists also ~_patro\s_
euktai/an Erinu/n~, _Sep._ 783.]

[76\12: ~dai/môn, theo/s, di=os ana/ktôr, isodai/môn basileu/s~ are
titles given only to the dead Persian king, _Pers._ 620, 633, 644,
651. They are, however, probably intended to characterize Persian
and not Greek beliefs (the Greek king, too, is still a king in
Hades, but not a ~dai/môn~, _Cho._ 355-62).]

[77\12: ~kakei= dika/zei tamplakê/math', hôs _lo/gos_, Zeu\s a/llos~
(cf. ~Zê=na tô=n kekmêko/tôn~ 158) ~en kamou=sin husta/tas di/kas~,
_Suppl._ 230 f.; cf. 414 ff.--~me/gas ga\r Ha/idês esti\n eu/thunos
brotô=n e/nerthe chtho/nos, deltogra/phô| de\ pa/nt' epôpa=|
phreni/~, _Eum._ 273 ff. Not even in Hades do the Erinyes let the
murderer go, _Eum._ 340. The punishment in Hades seems to be
regarded as merely supplementary to the (perhaps delayed) punishment
of crime on earth ~rhopê\ d' episkopei= di/kas tachei=a _tou\s me\n_
en pha/ei, ta\ d' en metaichmi/ô| sko/tou me/nei chroni/zontas
a/chê, tou\s d' a/kratos e/chei nu/x~, _Cho._ 61 ff.]

[78\12: ~tou\s thano/ntas ei the/leis euergetei=n ei/t' ou=n
kakourgei=n, amphidexi/ôs e/chei tô=| mê/te chai/rein mê/te
lupei=sthai nekrou/s~, _fr_ 266. This does, not, however, agree with
_Cho._ 324 f., or with the frequently occurring expressions which
presuppose consciousness and feeling (and so also ~chai/rein~ and
~lupei=sthai~) in the dead. Consistency in such matters must not, in
fact, be looked for in a non-theological poet. The ~psuchê/~ of the
dead man a shadow without the sap of life, _fr._ 229. Death a refuge
from earthly suffering, _fr._ 255. The speedy death which the Chorus
wish for themselves, _Ag._ 1449 ff., brings with it ~to\n aei\
ate/leuton hu/pnon~ and therefore a condition of unconsciousness if
not of complete nothingness.--The shadow of Dareios takes his leave
of the Persian nobles in the foll. words: ~humei=s de/, pre/sbeis,
chai/ret', en kakoi=s ho/môs psuchê\n dido/ntes hêdonê=| kath'
hême/ran, hôs toi=s thanou=si plou=tos oude\n ôphelei=~, _Pers._ 840
ff. This view of life is perhaps intended to have an Oriental
colouring (like the epitaph of Sardanapalus which is rightly quoted
in illustration of this passage); the reason given ~hôs toi=s
thanou=si ktl.~ is perhaps to be similarly explained.]

[79\12: ~_e/ndikoi_ sphagai/~, 37. Orestes is to his father's house
~_di/kê|_ kathartê\s pro\s theô=n hôrmême/nos~ 70.]

[80\12: One reason why no Erinys pursues Orestes after he has
murdered his mother is, indeed, the fact that Sophokles is treating
the "Elektra" in isolation as an independent drama and could not
therefore introduce a fresh thread of interest at the end, if he was
to bring it to a satisfactory conclusion. But the mere fact that he
could so arrange matters shows that for him, in contrast with
Aeschylus, the belief in the veritable reality of the Erinys and the
necessary perpetuation of the idea of vengeance in the family was
already obscured and almost obsolete. The ancient family blood-feud
is less important to him than the rights of the separate and
independent individual.]

[81\12: Casual allusions, _El._ 504 ff.; _OC._ 965; _Ant._ 856; and
cf. 584 ff., 594 ff.] {453}

[82\12: ~ou ga\r i/dois a\n athrô=n broto\n ho/stis a\n, ei theo\s
a/goi, ekphugei=n du/naito~, _O.C._ 252. ~ho/tan de/ tis theô=n
bla/ptê|, du/nait' a\n oud' a\n ho sthe/nôn phugei=n~, _El._ 696 f.
~ai/schê me/n, ô= gunai=kes, oud' a\n hei=s phu/goi brotô=n poth'
hô=| kai\ Zeu\s~ (as the one who rules and ordains everything, cf.
_El._ 175; _O.C._ 1085) ~ephormê/sê| kaka/; no/sous d' ana/gkê ta\s
theêla/tous phe/rein~, _fr._ 619 N.]

[83\12: _Phil._ 191-200.]

[84\12: It is fixed long before by an oracle: 821 ff.; 1159 ff. It
is not exactly overpowering violence or heaven-sent madness that
drives Deianeira to carry out the prophecy; it is rather an obscure
force that transforms her purest intentions to an evil result. She
herself is completely innocent: ~hê/marte chrêsta\ môme/nê~.]

[85\12: The reason for this will of the gods is not revealed to us,
either in _OT._ or in the subsequent treatment given in _OC._ The
only thing that is made quite clear there is the complete innocence
of Oedipus; as to the meaning of the divine purpose that has plunged
him into such deeds of horror the sufferer can only say ~theoi=s
ga\r ê=n hou/tô phi/lon, ta/ch' a/n ti _mêni/ousin_ eis ge/nos
pa/lai~ (964 f.). This is a passage in which modern interpretation
of the ancients finds the "upholding of the moral order in the
world" clearly expressed as a motive of divine will.]

[86\12: ~kai\ ga\r ê=n tô=n theosebesta/tôn~, Sch., _El._ 831.]

[87\12: _fr._ 226 N., ~sopho\s ga\r oudei\s plê\n ho\n a\n tima=|
theo/s. all' eis theo/n s' horô=ta, ka\n _e/xô di/kês chôrei=n
keleu/ê|_, kei=s' hodoiporei=n chreô/n. aischro\n ga\r oude\n hô=n
huphêgou=ntai theoi/~.]

[88\12: Aias has angered the goddess because he has boasted that he
could do without her help. Thus he has drawn upon himself
~_astergê=_ thea=s orgê/n~, 776. The goddess makes him insane that
he may recognize ~tê\n theô=n ischu\n **ho/sê~, 118. Thus, her
superior power is shown and the folly of men who despise that power.
But as for showing that the revengeful act of the goddess has any
sort of moral purpose or meaning behind it, the pious poet makes no
such attempt.--The interpolation of ideas more familiar in modern
times does not make it any easier to understand the peculiar
character of such antique ~euse/beia~ and ~deisidaimoni/a~. The same
kind of fearful awe of the gods which we find here, runs through the
whole of Herodotos' historical writing (Hdt. was not without reason
a friend of Sophokles) and meets us again in the character of Nikias
and to a large extent in Xenophon, too. Thuc. and, on the whole,
Eurip. (for he varies) calmly ignore it or else violently reject it.
Its nature is shown (better than in the more usual ~euse/beia~) by
the phrase ~hê pro\s tou\s theou\s _eula/beia_~ which also occurs:
[D.] 59 (_Neaer._) 74.]

[89\12: _Trach._ 1266 f.; 1272 (where, however, there remains a
suspicion that the traditional text may be unsound); _fr._ 103 N.
Parallels occur also in _Phil._]

[90\12: There exists a region of divine mystery that is not to be
fathomed: ~ou ga\r a\n ta\ thei=a krupto/ntôn theô=n ma/thois a/n,
oud' ei pa/nt' epexe/lthois skopô=n~, _fr._ 833; cf. _OT._ 280 f.
and ~polla\ kai\ lathei=n kalo/n~, _fr._ 80 N.]

[91\12: The behaviour of Athene in the prologue of the _Aias_ is an
exception.]

[92\12: Odysseus beholding the insane Aias: ~epoikti/rô de/ nin
du/stênon o/nta kai/per o/nta dusmenê=, hothou/nek' a/tê|
sugkate/zeuktai kakê=|, oude\n to\ tou/tou ma=llon ê\ toumo\n
skopô=n; horô= ga\r hêma=s oude\n o/ntas a/llo plê\n ei/dôl'
ho/soiper zô=men, ê\ kou/phên skia/n~, _Ai._ 121 ff.]

[93\12: ~iô\ geneai\ brotô=n ktl.~ _OT._ 1186 ff.; ~ho/stis tou=
ple/onos me/rous chrê/|zei . . .~ _OC._ 1211-38; cf. _frr._ 12, 535,
536, 588, 859, 860.]

[94\12: Nor is Antigone affected by such motives as might appear
from a casual or isolated study of such lines as _Ant._ 73 ff. The
whole play {454} shows that Antig. throughout follows the ~a/grapta
kasphalê= theô=n no/mima~ and the instincts of her own nature,
without paying any attention to what may happen to her on earth and
without a side glance at what may be the result in the world below
of her "pious crime".]

[95\12: We often have ~en Ha/idou kekeutho/tôn~ (_Ant._ 911)
~muchou\s kichei=n tou= ka/tô theou=~ (_Ai._ 571) and other phrases
= "be dead" (cf. to be an ~oikê/tôr~ of Erebos, _Ai._ 395 ff. Hades
seems to be called ~pando/kos xeno/stasis~ _fr._ 252). The confusion
of the idea of a kingdom of Hades with that of the grave is shown in
the not infrequent expression ~en Ha/idou, par' Ha/idê|
_kei=sthai_~, _El._ 463; _OT._ 972; _Ph._ 861; ~phi/lê met' autou=
_kei/somai_ phi/lou me/ta~, _Ant._ 73; cf. _fr._ 518.]

[96\12: ~to\n apo/tropon Ha/idan~, _Ai._ 608; _fr._ 518.]

[97\12: The dead man is a ~skia/~, _Ai._ 1231. ~spodo\s kai\ skia\
anôphelê/s~, _El._ 1159a. ~mêde/n~, _El._ 1166; _Ai._ 1231.--In
spite of this, in the Homeric manner, a definite shape and a measure
of semi-conscious existence is presumed in the shades in Hades:
_OT._ 1371 ff.--Doubt: ~_ei/_ tis e/st' ekei= cha/ris~, _El._ 356.]

[98\12: ~thano/ntôn oude\n a/lgos a/ptetai~, _OC._ 955. ~toi=s ga\r
thanou=si mo/chthos ou prosgi/gnetai~, _Tr._ 1173. ~tou\s ga\r
thano/ntas ouch horô= lupoume/nous~, _El._ 1170. (All three lines
are denied to Soph. by the latest criticism.)]

[99\12: _Ph._ 797 f.; _Ai._ 854; _OC._ 1220 ff.; _fr._ 631 (cf. A.,
_fr._ 255; _Fr. Tr. Adesp._ 360. ~limê\n kakô=n ho tha/natos~, a
commonplace of later moralists: see Wyttenb. Plu., _Mor._ vi, p.
720, was taken over from tragedy).--The converse _fr._ 64, 275.]

[100\12: Collectively ~hoi ne/rteroi, hoi ne/rteroi theoi/~, _OC._
1661; _Ant._ 602. Hades in particular is often mentioned, and also
~Plou/tôn~: ~Ha/idês stenagmoi=s kai\ go/ois plouti/zetai~, _OT._
30; _fr._ 251. ~ho para\ to\n Ache/ronta (ta\n Ache/rontos akta/n~,
_Ant._ 812. ~akta\n hespe/rou theou=~, _OT._ 177) ~theo\s ana/ssôn~,
_El._ 184. Persephone and Aidoneus, _OC._ 1556 ff. Erinyes,
Thanatos, Kerberos: _OC._ 1568 ff. ~pompai=os Hermê=s chtho/nios~,
_Ai._ 832; and see _El._ 110 B., etc.--~Ha/idês~ (here as often =
~Tha/natos~) desires to devour men: ~dai/sasthai~, _El._ 542, f.--a
popular conception or at least popular language: see above, chap.
vii, n. 25.]

[101\12: Hades ~ho\s ou/te tou\pieike\s ou/te tê\n cha/rin oi=den,
monê\n d' e/sterxe tê\n haplôs di/kên~, _fr._ 703, i.e. the justice
of absolute equality (for all earthly distinctions have passed
away): ~ho/ g' Ha/idês tou\s no/mous i/sous pothei=~, _Ant._ 519.]

[102\12: ~hê ga\r euse/beia sunthnê/|skei brotoi=s~ (it dies when
the man dies to whom it belonged: i.e. it follows him, or his
~psuchê/~, into the lower-world. No textual corruption need be
assumed here, ~ka\n zô=si ka\n tha/nôsin ouk apo/llutai~, _Ph._ 1443
f.]

[103\12: Without ritual burial the dead man is ~tô=n ka/tôthe theô=n
a/moiros akte/ristos ano/sios ne/kus~, _Ant._ 1070 f.]

[104\12: ~enta/phia hoi=a toi=s ka/tô nomi/zetai~, _El._ 326.
~kteri/smata~, 434, 931. ~loutra/~, 84, 434 (cf. above, chap. v, nn.
106, 107), ~e/mpura~, 405. ~choai/~, 440.--_El._ 452, prayer is made
to the dead that he "shall help us and Orestes" ~ho/pôs to\ loipo\n
auto\n aphneôte/rais chersi\n ste/phômen ê\ ta\ nu=n dôrou/metha~
(at present only a lock of hair and a girdle, 448 ff.).--Offerings
to the dead made by foes and even the approach of such persons to
the neighbourhood of the grave is displeasing and hateful to the
departed who lies therein: _El._ 431 ff., 442 ff.; _Ai._ 1394 f.
(cf. above, chap. v, n. 109). In this case as in the cult of the
soul generally the presence of the dead man in the grave, or else in
its immediate neighbourhood, is presupposed--not his departure into
an inaccessible land of the dead. The latter view, retained from
Homeric {455} poetry, is generally allowed to remain incongruously
side by side with the former.]

[105\12: _El._ 1066 ff.]

[106\12: The god of the underworld is ~ouk aperi/tropos~ of the
murdered man: _El._ 182 f. Hence all the gods and spirits of the
lower world are summoned to take vengeance for the murder of
Agamemnon: _El._ 110-16. We hear of ~Di/kê hê xu/noikos tô=n ka/tô
theô=n~ as the patron of the dead in their claim to justice: _Ant._
451.]

[107\12: Herakles in giving his last commands to Hyllos finally
threatens the latter: ~ei de\ mê/, menô= s' egô\ kai\ ne/rthen ô/n,
arai=os eis aei\ baru/s~, _Tr._ 1201 f.; cf. _fr._ 367; see above,
chap. v, n. 148.]

[108\12: Elektra thinks that Agamemnon himself may have sent the
~duspro/sopt' onei/rata~ to Klytaimnestra: _El._ 459 f. (There is no
reason for altering the traditional text here--with Nauck--to make
the gods the senders of the dreams instead of the dead man.
~hê/rôes~, too, can send nocturnal visions of terror: see above,
chap. ix, n. 102.) Here Elektra supposes that by sending such
harbingers of his wrath the unavenged victim of murder has signified
his readiness to assist in the taking of vengeance. This makes
perfectly good sense and is the only interpretation that suits the
context of Elektra's admonitions to her sister.]

[109\12: ~arôgo/s~, _El._ 454. ~zô=sin hoi ga=s ka/tô kei/menoi.
pali/rruton ga\r hai=ma hupexairou=si tô=n ktano/ntôn hoi pa/lai
thano/ntes~, _El._ 1419 f. "The dead man brings death to the
living," Nauck on _Tr._ 1163.]

[110\12: _frr._ 753, 805.]

[111\12: _OC._ 1049 ff., 680; _fr._ 736.]

[112\12: Oedipus does not die but vanishes (is seen no more, 1649);
the depths of the earth open and receive him: 1661 f., 1681. What is
meant is _translation_ without death as in the case of Amphiaraos,
etc. The poet only hints at the miracle in intentionally vague
words--but they cannot refer to anything but translation. ~ô/leto~
1656, and ~e/thane~ are therefore only inaccurate expressions to
describe his departure (see also above, chap. iii, n. 2). The
Messenger of 1583 f. refuses, however, to give a distinct answer to
the question of the Chorus ~o/lôle ga\r du/stênos~; he will only
hint that Oedipus has indeed ~o/lôle~ (1580), but has not simply
died--he has instead been translated out of earthly life. The
corrupt ~hôs leloipo/ta kei=non to\n aei\~ (this was already what
the Alexandrians read) ~bi/oton exepi/staso~ may not therefore be
altered simply into ~to\n aino/n, to\n a/bion bi/oton~. It may
perhaps have originally been something like ~to\n e/ntha, to\n en
gê=|, to\n andrô=n bi/oton~ (cf. Medea to her children ~es a/llo
schê=m' aposta/ntes bi/ou~, E., _Med._ 1039. A dead woman
~hupokechô/rêke aiphni/dion tou= _kath' hêma=s_ bi/ou~. Ins. from
Amorgos, _BCH._ 1891, p. 576, ll. 9-10).]

[113\12: A distinct act of precaution against disbelief in such a
miracle: _OC._ 1665 f. (cf. ~e/rrei de\ ta\ thei=a~, _OT._ 906 ff.;
which refers esp. to the belief in the Oracle of Loxias, a matter of
great importance to Soph.).]

[114\12: The innocence of Oedipus and the fact that the awful crimes
committed by him have been done in ignorance and against his will
~theô=n ago/ntôn~, is stressed in order that his elevation to the
position of _Heros_ may not seem to be an honour done to a
guilt-stained criminal. But the poet does not attribute positive
virtues to him even in _OC._--far less in fact than in _OT._]

[115\12: One has only to read the play without preconceived ideas to
see that this passionate and savage old man, pitilessly heaping
dreadful curses on his sons, gloating vindictively over the coming
misfortunes {456} of his own country, is quite ignorant of the "deep
peace from the gods" or the "illumination of the pious sufferer"
which conventional literary interpretation has been anxious to
ascribe to him. The poet is not one to gloss over the harsh
realities of life with trite phrases of vapid consolation, and he
has clearly perceived that the usual effect of unhappiness and
misery upon men is not to "illuminate" but to enfeeble and vulgarize
them. His Oedipus is pious (he was that from the beginning in _OT._
as well), but he is made savage, ~êgri/ôtai~, exactly like
Philoktetes in his misery (_Ph._ 1321).]

[116\12: Humanitarianism of Athens and her king: 562 ff., 1125 ff.]

[117\12: It is emphasized over and over again that the settlement of
Oedipus on Attic soil is meant to bring about the salvation of the
Athenians and the discomfiture of the Thebans (Apollo's oracle has
thus decreed it): 92 f., 287 f., 402, 409 ff., 576 ff., 621 ff. The
whereabouts of the valuable possession must therefore be kept secret
(as frequently with the graves of Heroes: see above, chap. iv, n.
38); 1520 ff. This elevation of Oedipus to be the ~sôtê/r~ of Attica
(459 f.) is evidently what makes the interest and importance for the
poet of the whole mystery which he relates.]

[118\12: ~nu=n ga\r theoi/ s' orthou=si, pro/sthe d' ô/llusan~, 394.
The gods now feel ~ô/ran tina/~ for Oedipus, 386. After many
~pê/mata pa/lin sphe dai/môn di/kaios au/xoi (a/n)~, 1565 f. It is,
in fact, an act of kindness after a long period of ill-usage; there
is a reversal of fortune, but there is no reward or indemnification
given in recognition of a just claim. It is all _grace_.]

[119\12: In this, too, ~hôs a/n tis hei=s tô=n chrêstô=n Athênai/ôn~
(Ion ap. Ath. 13, 604 D).]

[120\12: Prodikos is, acc. to Welcker, _Kl. Schr._ ii, 497 ff.,
responsible for most of the theories propounded in the Ps.-Platonic
_Axiochus_ on the subject of the ~athanasi/a tê=s psuchê=s~, _Ax._
370 B ff., the tendency of the soul to the heavenly ~aithê/r~ (366
A, and even of the Platonizing fantasy at the end about the fate of
the departed (371-2). Prodikos, if we adopted this attribution,
would become less the "forerunner of Sokrates" (as Welcker calls
him) than the forerunner of Plato. There is, however, no real reason
to attribute to him any more share in that document than is asserted
distinctly in it. The brief and carelessly composed pamphlet
consists of a medley of the conventional ingredients of the usual
~lo/goi paramuthêtikoi/~ loosely strung together. To Prod. is
assigned: the disquisition on the troubles of life in all its stages
336 D-367 E; and the saying ~ho/ti ho tha/natos ou/te peri\ tou\s
zô=nta/s estin ou/te peri\ tou\s metêllacho/tas ktl.~, 369 B (cf.
Buresch, _Leip. Stud._ ix, 8-9). These two passages put together
would establish as the opinion of Prodikos just the opposite of what
Welcker wishes to ascribe to him. He would show himself as a true
~peisitha/natos (--ex ekei/nou thanata=| mou hê psuchê/~, 366 C),
who would make death a mere exit into a state of unconsciousness
after the troubles of life, and thus seem an absolute nonentity. But
the piece is in reality quite without authority: it apparently puts
forward the name of Prodikos, who is so often stated in Plato to
have been the "teacher" of Sokrates, merely in order to have a
definite authority (like the fabulous Gobryes later on) for what the
author does not wish to represent Sokrates as saying on his own
account. One of the sayings attributed to the imaginary Prodikos,
~ho/ti ho tha/natos . . .~ is, however, only too clearly a simple
appropriation of Epicurus' aphorism, ~ho tha/natos oude\n pro\s
hêma=s ktl.~ (p. 61, 6 Usen.; cf. p. 227, 30; 391. Heinze also
points this out, _Ber. sächs. Ges. d. Wiss._ 1884, p. 332). The
other passage (366 D ff.) agrees suspiciously {457} with what Teles
(p. 38 Hens.) has to say on the same subject apparently in entire
dependence on Krates the Cynic. It seems extremely probable that the
author of the _Axiochus_ also had Krates before him or even Teles
(as Wyttenbach already suggested, Plu., _Mor._ vi, p. 41); and that
he attributes what he has thus borrowed from extraneous sources to
"Prodikos" by a fiction that never came amiss to the composers of
such dialogues.--It follows then that what Prodikos really said
about the soul and its destiny is unknown to us; cf. on this
recently much-discussed subject: Brinkmann, _Rh. Mus._ 51, 444 ff.]

[121\12: In the Prologue Thanatos at once describes his claims and
his office. He has to receive the departed and cut off the lock of
hair from the forehead (75 f. probably as a sign that the dead enter
into the possession of the underworld deities: in Verg., _A._ iv,
698 f. Proserpina in the same way dedicates the dead to Orcus). He
then leads them to Hades, 871. He comes in person to the grave and
enjoys the offerings laid there, 844 ff., 851 f. (like the dead man
himself on other occasions, see above, chap. v, n. 108). Properly
speaking he is only the servant of Hades; but just as the word
~ha/|dês~ was already common as = ~tha/natos~, so Thanatos himself
is also actually called ~Ha/idês~ (268, see above, n. 4); only as
identical with Hades can he be called ~a/nax nekrô=n~, 843; cf.
~daimo/nôn koi/ranos~, 1140.--In the underworld are Charon ~ho
psuchopompo/s~, 361, 254 ff., 458 f., and Kerberos, 360. Hades and
Hermes ~chtho/nios~ receive the dead. ~ei de/ ti kakei= ple/on e/st'
agathoi=s~ Alkestis will have the seat of honour next to Persephone:
744 ff. By the living who survive she is regarded on account of her
incomparable virtue as ~ma/kaira dai/môn~ and her grave is not the
abode of a dead woman but a place of worship, 995-1005. Such facile
elevation to the rank of "Heroine" was supposed to be characteristic
of Thessaly and Eurip. may in this also have intended to give his
poem a touch of Thessalian local colour. (~dai/môn~ as an
intermediate stage between ~theoi/~ and ~a/nthrôpoi~; so frequently
in Eur., e.g. _Tro._ 55-6; _Med._ 1391; is this the meaning of the
~me/son~ in _Hel._ 1137?)--Thoroughly in keeping with popular belief
is ~chai=re kan Ha/idou do/mois eu= soi ge/noito~, 626 f. (such a
~chai=re~ is the last word with which ~hôs nomi/zetai~ one addresses
the dead ~exiou=san husta/tên ho/don~, 609 f.). Similar also (but
really implying the conception of the dead as resting in the grave
and not in Hades) is: ~kou=pha/ soi chthô\n epa/nôthe pe/soi~, 463.]

[122\12: The funeral dirge, 86 ff.; ~ko/smos~ buried with the dead,
618 ff.; mourning ceremonies: the manes of the horses are cut short;
no sound of flute or lyre is to be heard in the town for twelve
months, 428 ff. (~pe/nthos etê/sion~ is usual, 336). These extreme
observances are probably taken from the mourning customs of the
Thessalian dynastic families.]

[123\12: Burial of the dead in accordance with ~no/mos palaio\s
daimo/nôn~, _Suppl._ 563; ~no/mima theô=n~, 19; a general Hellenic
custom, 526 f.--Burial of Polyneikes in spite of Kreon's
prohibition: _Phoen._ and probably ~Antigo/nê~.]

[124\12: ~toi=s ga\r thanou=si chrê\ to\n ou tethnêko/ta tima\s
dido/nta chtho/nion eusebei=n theo/n~, _Ph._ 1320 f. ~en eusebei=
gou=n no/mima mê\ kle/ptein nekrô=n~, _Hel._ 1277. The honour of the
grave more important even than good fortune upon earth, _Hec._ 317
f. Lament over the dishonouring of the grave of Agamem., _El._ 323
ff. Request for the burial of Astyanax, _Tro._ 1133 ff., of Orestes,
_IT._ 702 ff., of Makaria, _Hcld._ 588 ff. The shade of the murdered
Polydoros prays especially for burial, _Hec._ 47 ff. (31 f., 796
f.). He is an example of the wandering of the ~a/taphoi~ upon the
upper earth; he ~a/thaptos alai/nei~, _Tro._ 1084 (see above, p.
163, and Append. vii).--Funeral ceremony for those who have {458}
been drowned at sea, _Hel._ 1057 ff., 1253 ff.; though there the
idea is only used as an excuse for the intrigue.]

[125\12: ~choai/~ for the dead, e.g. _Or._ 112 ff., _El._ 511 ff.;
_IT._ 159 ff.]

[126\12: ~choai/~ make the dead ~eumenê=~ towards the givers of the
offering, _Or._ 119. The children call upon the soul of the murdered
father to help them, _El._ 676 ff., in the belief that ~pa/nt'
akou/ei ta/de patê/r~, 684. The soul of the dead man hovers above
the living observing everything, _Or._ 674 ff. Invocation of the
dead (striking both hands on the ground: see above, chap. iii, n.
10), _Tro._ 1305 f. Expectation that the dead thus called on will
~sô=sai~ his friends, _Or._ 797, or help them, _El._ 679. Calling
upon the departed in Hades ~a/rêxon, elthe\ kai\ _skia\_ pha/nêthi/
moi~, _HF._ 494 (though with the qualification ~_ei/_ tis phtho/ggos
eisakou/setai thnêtô=n par' Ha/idê|~, 490).]

[127\12: Translation miracles are touched upon by the poet with
obvious pleasure; cf. transl. of Kadmos and Harmonia, _Bac._ 1330
ff., 1338 ff.: of Peleus, _Andr._ 1257 ff.; of Helen, _Or._ 1629
ff.: of Herakles, _Hcld._ 910; of Menelaos (in unmistakable
sarcasm), _Hel._ 1676 ff. So, too, in the spurious conclusion to the
_IA._ there is a translation of Iphigeneia, 1583 ff. (~pro\s theou\s
aphi/ptato~, 1608).]

[128\12: Eurystheus buried in the temple of Athene Pallenis will
bring safety to Athens and evil to her enemies: _Hcld._ 1026 ff.
Eurysth. says ~soi\ me\n eu/nous kai\ po/lei _sôtê/rios_ me/toikos
aei\ kei/somai kata\ chthono/s~, 1032 f.; i.e. he will become a
~hê/rôs _sôtê/r_~ of the land (just as Oedip. was to become ~sôtê/r~
for Attica. S., _OC._ 460, and Brasidas Heros ~sôtê/r~ of the
Amphipolitans, Thuc. 5, 11, 1). Heroic cult of Hippolytos, _Hip._
1423 ff., _fr._ 446.]

[129\12: The Erinyes are spoken of (apparently with real belief) in
_IT._ 79 ff. and elsewhere.]

[130\12: _Or._ 258 f., not very different, _IT._ 288-94.]

[131\12: ~to\ thêriô=des tou=to kai\ miaipho/non~, _Or._ 524.
Orestes instead of committing murder himself should have brought his
father to justice, _Or._ 500 f. Agamemnon himself if he could have
been asked would not have desired this bloody vengeance, _Or._ 288
ff. It is only Apollo's unwise counsel that has led Orestes to the
murder of his mother, _El._ 971 ff., 1296 f.; _Or._ 276 ff., 416,
591. After the deed Orestes does indeed feel remorse but no
religious terrors, _El._ 1177 (in spite of which there is much about
the pursuing Erinyes of his mother). How completely this whole
series of ideas, the duty of vengeance, etc., has lost its meaning
for the poet, is to be felt more especially in the sophistical
frigidity with which the subject is treated in an ~agô/n~ between
Tyndareos and Orestes, _Or._ 491-604, and in the hair-splitting of
the speech of Orestes himself, 932 ff.]

[132\12: ~dokô= de\ toi=s thanou=si diaphe/rein brachu/, ei
plousi/ôn tis teu/xetai kterisma/tôn; keno\n de\ gau/rôm' esti\ tô=n
zô/ntôn to/de~, _Tro._ 1248 ff.]

[133\12: _fr._ 176.]

[134\12: ~oude\n e/sth' ho katthanô/n~, _Alc._ 381. The dead are
~hoi ouke/t' o/ntes~ 322. ~toi=s~ (the dead) ~me\n ga\r oude\n
a/lgos a/psetai/ pote, pollô=n de\ mo/chthôn _eukleê\s_ epau/sato~,
937 f. But even fame is nothing to the dead. Admetos says to his
father in the scurrilous dialogue ~thanei= ge me/ntoi duskleê/s,
ho/tan tha/nê|s~. To which the old man unconcernedly replies ~kakô=s
akou/ein ou me/lei thano/nti moi~ (725 f.).]

[135\12: It might seem simpler to regard all the utterances of
persons in the plays which correspond to conventional beliefs as
being merely dramatic expressions of the character's own (orthodox)
view, and in no sense put forward by the poet as his own opinion.
And certainly the separate and independently acting persons of the
drama can only {459} speak and act in accordance with their own
proper conceptions and springs of action--not in accordance with the
poet's. But in the antique drama this complete detachment of the
creatures of the dramatic imagination from their creator, the poet
of the drama, only holds good in a limited sense. The ancient
dramatists exercised their office of judge much more vigorously than
the greatest of the moderns. The course of his play showed clearly
what acts and characters the poet disapproved of, but also which
opinions he sanctioned and which he did not. We have only to
remember the attacks of Oedipus and Iokaste upon the judgments of
the gods in _OT._ (or the story of Sen., _Ep._ 115, 14: Eur. _fr._
324). Accordingly we may take it that such utterances of dramatic
characters as are not supplied with practical or spoken corrective
are among those of which the poet did not disapprove. Euripides so
very frequently puts words into the mouth of his characters which
can only express his own moods or opinions that we may also assume
that when their language harmonizes with traditional belief then,
too, the most subjective of the tragedians is for the moment
expressing his own view. Thus, for example, we cannot doubt that the
strain of piety running through the whole of the _Hiketides_
(subjection of ~phro/nêsis~ to God's wisdom, 216 ff., submission to
the guidance of the gods, 592 ff., and to Zeus' government of the
world, 734 ff.), and especially the whole-hearted elaboration of the
picture of Theseus as a model of ~euse/beia~ represent the actual
opinion of the poet at that particular period (he clearly speaks of
himself, 180-3). At other times, too (apart from the _Bacchae_),
though generally for a short time only, he shows vague aspirations
towards orthodoxy.]

[136\12: _Alc._ 968 ff.; _Hipp._ 952 ff.--Asceticism of the _mystai_
of Zeus and Zagreus of the Mountain Mother and the Kouretes:
~Krê=tes~, _fr._ 472.]

[137\12: _Polyid. fr._ 638; _Phrixos_, _fr._ 833. It is usual (cf.
Bergk, _Gr. Litt._ 3, 475, 33) to see here a reminiscence of
Herakleitos. But the latter's ~atha/natoi thnêtoi/, thnêtoi\
atha/natoi, zô=ntes to\n ekei/nôn tha/naton, to\n de\ ekei/nôn bi/on
tethneô=tes~ (_fr._ 67 Byw. 62 D.) is clearly intended to express the
view that "death" and "life" are purely relative concepts; that
death (of the one, i.e. Fire) and life (of the other, i.e, Water or
Earth) are simultaneously present in the same object (see also
_frr._ 68, 78 = 36, 88). According to this view it would be strictly
true that life on earth is not more life than it is death; but that
is certainly not what Eurip. means to say. Philo and Sext. Emp. are
mistaken in attributing to Herakl. the Orphic doctrine of the
"death" of the soul which takes place when it is enclosed in the
~sô=ma~, as its ~sê=ma~ (see above, chap. xi, n. 19). But it is
precisely this Orphic doctrine that is present to the mind of Eurip.
(and Plato, _Gorg._ 492 E, 493 A, brings it into immediate connexion
with the verses of E.). He is speaking of the true "death" of the
soul in the life of the body and of its release to a real (and not a
merely relative) life after death; and thinks that "life" has no
claim to the distinguishing name (cf. ~ho\ dê\ bi/oton kale/ousi~
Emped. 117 Mull. = _fr._ 15 D.).]

[138\12: _Palingenesia_ is alluded to once only and in jest as a
desirable reward for the virtuous, _HF._ 655-68; cf. M. Ant. xii,
5.]

[139\12: ~ho nou=s ga\r hêmô=n estin en heka/stô| theo/s~, _fr._
1018.]

[140\12: _fr._ 839 (_Chrysipp._) fully physical in _fr._ 898, 7
ff.--_fr._ 1023 ~Aithe/ra kai\ Gai=an pa/ntôn gene/teiran aei/dô~.
Cf. _fr._ 1004.]

[141\12: _fr._ 484 ~(Melan. hê sophê/)--hôs ourano/s te gai=a/ t'
ê=n morphê\ mi/a ktl.~ Here, too, the poet is speaking of a mere
initial association of the elements afterwards to be parted, but
thought of as always from the {460} beginning independent--there is
no derivation of both from a single common original element, or of
one out of the other. Eurip. may really have been thinking here of
the ~ho/mou pa/nta chrê/mata ê=n~ of Anaxagoras (as the ancient
authorities supposed), esp. as, with Anax. also, out of the general
conglomeration _two_ masses, ~aê/r~ and ~aithê/r~, first emerge
(though in this case ~nou=s~ is not included in the ~aithê/r~ as it
is with Eurip.). Here, too, then the usual dualism of the Euripidean
cosmogony is preserved. For the rest this _fr._ 484 allows us to
perceive that in spite of all his physiological tendencies Eurip.
can never quite get rid of the _mythical_ element in his
cosmogonical events. The reason why Ouranos and Gaia in particular
recommend themselves to him as elemental forces (and ~koinoi\
hapa/ntôn gonei=s~, _fr._ 1004) was that these figures had long been
set at the beginning of the world and of the gods by cosmogonical
poetry (~aithê/r~ is simply the more physiological term for what is
half-personified as ~Ourano/s~). This probably explains why matter
(or at least the more solid forms of matter as distinguished from
the ~aithê/r~ the ~lepto/taton pa/ntôn chrêma/tôn~) is for him
included in the description "earth". In this he is not following the
old physiologists, none of whom had called "earth" the original
matter--at least not earth alone (see Ilberg, _Quaest.
Pseudohippocrat._, p. 16 ff., 1883). "Earth" as describing the
merely material, matter deserted by spirit, may have come to him
from popular usage. As early as ~Ô~ 54 the body deserted by soul and
life is called ~kôphê\ gai=a~ (cf. Eur. _frr._ 532; 757, 5). Thus
for the poet the contrast between ~gê=~ and ~aithê/r~ almost amounts
to that between "matter" and "mind", except that he either could not
or would not think of a "mind" without any material substratum and
that for this reason his ~aithê/r~ still preserves a remnant of
matter.]

[142\12: This is esp. clear in _fr._ 839, 8 ff. In the disruption of
the elements out of which ~pa/nta~ are composed each of the two,
~gê=~ and ~aithê/r~, preserves itself undiminished and unmixed.
~thnê/|skei d' oude\n tô=n gignome/nôn _diakrino/menon_ d' a/llo
pro\s a/llou morphê\n idi/an ape/deixen~ (restores itself in its
independent being). Whereupon we feel ourselves irresistibly
reminded of the saying of Anaxagoras--~oude\n ga\r chrê=ma gi/netai
oude\ apo/llutai, all' ap' eo/ntôn chrêma/tôn summi/sgetai/ te kai\
diakri/netai, kai\ hou/tôs a\n orthô=s kaloi=en to/ te gi/nesthai
summi/sgesthai kai\ to\ apo/llusthai diakri/nesthai~, _fr._ 17 Mull.
[and D.].]

[143\12: That it was not Anaxagoras, or at least not he alone, who
gave the decided direction to the philosophic ideas of Eurip. has
rightly come to be held of late. We do not find a trace in Eurip. of
the separation of ~nou=s~ from matter, at least not in the form in
which Anaxagoras understood it. For E. the mind is bound to one of
the two primal elements and quite foreign to the other, the earth.
Thus he arrives at a dualism indeed, but in quite a different sense
from that of Anaxag. Dümmler, _Proleg. zu Platons Staat_ (Progr.
Basel, 1891), p. 48, points out reminiscences in Eurip. of Diogenes
of Apollonia--but it is not true to say that the poet's views show
the "closest kinship" with the monistic system of Diog., or with any
Monism.]

[144\12: _Tro._ 884 ff. The air, called by the name of Zeus, and
identical with the ~nou=s brotô=n~, can only be taken from the
doctrine of Diog.: Diels, _Rh. Mus._ 42, 12.]

[145\12: Diog. Apoll., _frr._ 3, 4, 5 Mull. (= 8, 3, 4 D.). The soul
is ~aê\r thermo/teros tou= e/xô, en hô=| esmen~, though it is colder
than the air which is ~para\ tô=| hêli/ô|~, _fr._ 6 [5]. The soul is
therefore more akin to the ~aithê/r~ than to the ~aê/r~ (~aithê/r~
and ~aê/r~ were at that time often confused: e.g. in E., _fr._ 944,
~aithê/r~ instead of ~aê/r~).] {461}

[146\12: _Suppl._ 1140 ~aithê\r e/chei nin ê/dê ktl.~ Elektra
expects to find her dead father in the Aither, _El._ 59. Of a dying
man, ~pneu=m' aphei\s eis aithe/ra~, _fr_ 971 (differently, _Or._
1086 f.); cf. also _Suppl._ 531-6 (imitated from Epicharm.), where
again the ~aithê/r~ is only spoken of as the abode, and not as the
original and consubstantial element of the soul.]

[147\12: ~aithê\r oi/kêsis Dio/s~, Eur., _fr._ 487 (_Melanip._).]

[148\12: Epich., _fr._ 7, p. 257 Lor. [= _fr._ 265 Kaibel].]

[149\12: _CIA._ i, 442, ~aithê\r me\n psucha\s hupede/xato, sô/[mata
de\ chthô\n~ tô=nde. . . .~]

[150\12: ~sunekri/thê kai\ diekri/thê, kapê=lthen ho/then ê=lthen
pa/lin, ga= me\n es ga=n, pneu=m' a/nô; ti/ tô=nde cha/lepo/n?
ou\de\ he/n~, Epich. ap. Plu., _Cons. ad Apoll._ 15, 110 A; Epich.,
_fr._ 8 [245 Kaib.]. ~pneu=ma~ as a general name for the ~psuchê/~
occurs also in Epich., _fr._ 7 [265]. No earlier authority is to be
found for this usage that became so common later (under Stoic
influence) than Xenophanes who ~prô=tos apephê/nato ho/ti hê psuchê\
pneu=ma~ (D.L. ix, 19). Epicharm. may have been actually following
Xenophanes (whose writings he knew: Arist., _Meta._ iii, 5, 1010a,
6) in this use of the word. Eurip. then did the same, _Suppl._ 533.
~pneu=ma~ is the name given to the ~aê/r~ in so far as it is in
_motion_. ~(hupolêpte/on, ei=nai sô=ma to\n ae/ra) gi/netai de\
pneu=ma kinêthei/s. outhe\n ga\r he/tero/n esti pneu=ma ê\
kinou/menos aê/r~: Hero, ~mêchan. su/st.~, p. 121 (ed. Diels = i, p.
6. ed. Schmidt) after Straton. The soul is called a ~pneu=ma~ just
because the soul is that which has continual movement from its very
nature (and is the principle of movement); as such it had already
been regarded by Alkmaion (and later by Plato), and even before that
by Pythagoras (see above, chap. xi, n. 40); in a different way by
Herakleitos and Demokritos also. The universal ~aê/r~ and the
Soul-~pneu=ma~, if we give the terms their proper meaning, are to be
thought of as being of the same nature, so that the ~aê/r~, too
(still more the ~aithê/r~ as a higher ~aê/r~), is psychical and
animated by soul. That at least was how Diogenes of Apollonia
regarded it. (~aê/r~ = the outer air, ~pneu=ma~ the air which is
inside men's bodies: [Hp.] _de Flatib._ 3 [vi, 94 L.], a section
taken from Diog. Ap.)]

[151\12: Numerous references in Eurip. to verses of Epicharm. are
pointed out by Wilamowitz, _Eurip. Herakles_, i, 29. The fact that
Eurip. knew the poems of Epich. and valued them for their
philosophic contents is clearly made out by Wilamowitz' study. But
he goes on to assert that all the allusions of Eurip. refer only to
the (or one of the) forgeries in the name of Epicharm., of which many
were known in antiquity. The reason alleged for this
statement--"Euripides never quotes comedies"--is merely a petitio
principii. It may be that Eurip. does not "quote" contemporary Attic
comedy, but whether he maintained the same attitude to the
brilliantly original comic poet of Sicily, whom Aristotle and even
Plato (_Gorg._ 505 E and esp. _Tht._ 152 E) were not ashamed to
notice, is the very point at issue; nothing is gained by unproved
denial of this main premiss.--Moreover, it would be a most unusual
species of forger that preferred to publish gems like ~na=phe kai\ .
. .~ (imitated by Eurip.) or ~no/os horê=|~--under another man's
name. The fragments of the ~Politei/a~, which is really a forgery
fathered on Epicharmos (ap. Clem. Al., _Str._ v, p. 719 P. = Lor.,
p. 297), are of a very different character.]

[152\12: Archelaos makes a less satisfactory model for Eurip. here.
Arch. in his reconciliation of the doctrines of Anaxagoras and
Diogenes did not separate ~nou=s~ from the mixture of the material
elements (or from the ~aê/r~), but he distinguished between them,
while for the poet ~aithê/r~ and mind are the same.] {462}

[153\12: ~aithê/r~ = Zeus, _fr._ 941. ~aithê/r. . . . Zeu\s ho\s
anthrô/pois onoma/zetai~, _fr._ 877. Hence the ~aithê/r~ is
~koruphê\ theô=n~, _fr._ 919.--In the same way for Diog. Ap. the air
is god (Cic., _ND._ i, 29) and Zeus (Philod., _Piet._ c. 6b, p. 70
Gomp.; _Dox._ 536).--In E., _fr._ 941: ~to\n hupsou= to/nd' a/peiron
aithe/ra kai\ gê=n pe/rix e/chonth' hugrai=s en agka/lais~ the
~aithê/r~ is not put instead of ~aê/r~ (for ~to\n hupsou=~ only
suits ~aithê/r~ in its proper sense), but the two are combined under
the one word (~_hugrai=s_ en agka/lais~ could not be said of the
~aithê/r~ in the strict sense), just as the ~aê/r~ of Diogenes
includes the ~aithê/r~ (for the hot ~aê\r para\ tô=| hêli/ô|~, _fr._
6 [5 Diels] is, in fact, the ~aithê/r~, and so, too, essentially, is
the warm ~aê/r~ in our bodies).]

[154\12: ~--eis atha/naton aithe/r' empesô/n~, _Hel._ 1016.]

[155\12: ~ho ento\s aê\r~ (which alone ~aistha/netai~--not the
senses) ~mikro\n mo/rion ô\n tou= theou=~, Diog. ap. Thphr., _Sens._
42.]

[156\12: The living air, or Zeus, is ~nou=s brotô=n~, _Tro._ 886.
And vice versa, the ~nou=s~ in each one of us is no other than God,
_fr._ 1018.]

[157\12: ~ho nou=s tô=n katthano/ntôn zê=| me\n ou/, gnô/mên d'
e/chei atha/naton, eis atha/naton aithe/r' empesô/n~, _Hel._ 1013
ff.--Ambiguity attaches to the passages in which a dying person is
said to depart ~eis a/llo schê=ma bi/ou~ (_Med._ 1039), ~es a/llas
bio/tou morpha/s~ (_Ion_, 1068), to ~he/teron aiô=na kai\ moi=ran~
(_IA._ 1508). It is possible that in each case a personal existence
continued in a land of the dead is understood--but if they mean no
more than that they are remarkably pregnant in form. In reading them
(esp. _Med._ 1039) one is reminded of the remarkable lines of
Philiskos (pupil of Isocr.) ap. [Plu.] _Vit. X Or._, p. 243, 60
West. ~tô=| ga\r es a/llo schê=ma metharmosthe/nti kai\ a/llois en
ko/smoisi bi/ou sô=ma labo/nth' he/teron~--said of the dead Lysias.
But here the idea of metempsychosis seems really to be involved,
which it can hardly be in the case of Eurip.]

[158\12: Eur. adopts it for himself, _fr._ 189 (_Antiope_), and
confirms it by so many ~lo/gôn ha/millai~ in which he allows the
most contradictory opinions about a single subject to be given
equally plausible expression.]

[159\12: ~apeirosu/nê a/llou bio/tou~, etc. _Hip._ 191-7. ~to\ zê=n
ga\r i/smen, tou= thanei=n d' apeiri/a| pa=s tis phobei=tai phô=s
lipei=n to/d' hêli/ou~, _fr._ 816, 10 f. (_Phoinix_).]

[160\12: The dead man is ~gê= kai\ skia/--to\ mêde\n eis oude\n
rhe/pei~, _fr._ 532; cf. 533, 534. ~to\ mê\ gene/sthai tô=| thanei=n
i/son; hô/sper ouk idou=sa phô=s~ the dead woman knows nothing of
herself or her sufferings, _Tro._ 636-44 (a locus often initiated
in "consolations": _Axioch._ 365 D, Plu., _Cons. ad Apoll._ 15, p.
110 A).]

[161\12: ~phê/mê to\n esthlo\n kan muchoi=s dei/knusi gê=s~, _fr._
865. ~aretê\ de\ ka\n tha/nê| tis ouk apo/llutai, zê=| d' ouket'
o/ntos sô/matos~, _fr._ 734; cf. _Andr._ 772. At the sacrifice of
Makaria the chorus in _Hcld._ 621 ff. can only offer as consolation
the fame which awaits her--~oud' akleê/s nin do/xa pro\s anthrô/pôn
hupode/xetai~.]

[162\12: Makaria voluntarily going to meet her death--~ei/ ti dê\
kata\ chthono/s; _ei/ê ge me/ntoi mêde/n_. ei ga\r he/xomen kakei=
meri/mnas hoi thanou/menoi brotô=n ouk oi=d' ho/poi tis tre/psetai;
to\ ga\r thanei=n me/giston pha/rmakon nomi/zetai~, _Hcld._ 592 ff.;
cf. _fr._ 916.]

[163\12: _fr_, 757 (the metaphor of ll. 5 ff. is employed for
homiletic purposes by Epictet. ii, 6, 11-14); _Andr._ 1270 ff.]


{{463}}

