CHAPTER V

THE CULT OF SOULS


Greek civilization as we see it reflected in the Homeric poems
strikes us as so variously developed, and yet so complete in itself,
that if we had no further sources of information, we should
naturally suppose that the characteristic culture of the Greeks
there reached the highest point attainable under the conditions set
by national character and external circumstance. In reality the
Homeric poems stand on the border line between an older development
that has come to complete maturity and a new, and in many ways
differently constituted, order of things. The poems themselves offer
an idealized picture of a past that was on the point of disappearing
entirely. The profound upheavals of the following centuries can be
measured by their final results; we can guess the underlying forces
from a study of the individual symptoms. But the fact remains that
in the very imperfect state of our information about this period of
transformation, we can do little more than recognize the existence
of all the conditions necessary for a complete reorganization of
Greek life. We can see how the once less-important races in Greece
now come into the foreground of history; how they set up new
kingdoms by the right of conquest on the ruins of the old, and bring
into prominence their own special ways of thinking. Colonization
over a wide area meant the expansion of Greek life; while the
colonies themselves, as is so often the case, traversed all the
stages of development at a much faster rate. Commerce and industry
developed, calling forth and satisfying new demands. New elements of
the population came to the fore, governments began to fall and the
old rule of the kings gave way to Aristocracy, Tyranny, Democracy.
In friendly and (in the West especially) hostile relationship the
Greeks came into contact more than formerly with foreign peoples in
every stage of civilization who influenced them in many directions.

All these great movements must have produced many fresh currents in
intellectual life too. And in fact the attempt to get free from
tradition, from the long-standing culture that seemed, when
reflected in the Homeric poems, so permanent and {157} complete in
itself, is seen most clearly in the sphere of poetry. The poets
threw off the tyranny of the epic convention. They ceased to obey
its formal verse-rhythm. And with the freedom thus gained from its
vocabulary of stock words, phrases, and images, it was inevitable
that the point of view also should change and gain in width. The
poet no longer turns his gaze away from his own time and his own
person. He himself becomes the central figure of his poetry, and to
express the ferment of his own emotions he invents for himself the
most natural rhythm, in close alliance with music which now becomes
an important and independent element in Greek life. It is as though
the Greeks had just discovered the full extent of their own
capacities and dared to make free use of them. In every branch of
the plastic arts the hand of the artist wins in the course of the
centuries an ever greater capacity to give visible shape to the
imagined world of beauty. Even the ruins of that world reveal to us
more plainly and impressively (because less mixed with conscious
reflexion) than any literary achievement, the thing that is of
permanent value in Greek art.

It was impossible that religion, alone unaffected by the general
atmosphere of change, should remain unaltered in the old paths. But
here, even more than in other directions, we must admit that the
inward reality of the change remains hidden from us. We can see
indeed many external alterations, but of the directing spirit which
called them forth we hardly catch more than a glimpse. It is easy,
by comparing the later condition of religion with the Homeric, to
see how enormously the _objects_ of religious worship have
multiplied. We can see how much more sumptuous and elaborate
ceremonial has become and observe the development in beauty and
variety, in conjunction with the fine arts, of the great religious
festivals of the different cities and peoples of Greece. Temples and
sculpture bear unmistakable witness to the increased power and
importance of religion. That an inward and far-reaching change had
come over religious thought and belief might have been already
guessed from the fame and importance which belonged to the oracle at
Delphi, now coming into real power; and from the many new
developments in Greek religious life taking their origin from this
spiritual centre. At this time there grew up, under the influence of
a deepening moral sense, that new interpretation of religion that we
meet with in its completed form in Aeschylus and Pindar. The age was
decidedly more "religious-minded" than that in which Homer lived. It
is as though the Greeks then went through a period such as {158}
most civilized nations go through at some time or other, and such as
the Greeks themselves were to repeat more than once in after
centuries--a period in which the mind after it has at least half
succeeded in winning its freedom from disquieting and oppressive
beliefs in invisible powers shrinks back once more. Under the
influence of adversity it feels the need of some comforting
illusions behind which it may take shelter and be relieved in part
of the burden of responsibility.

The obscurity of this period of growth hides also from our sight the
origin and development of beliefs about the soul very different from
the Homeric. The results of the process are however visible enough
and we can still discern how a regular cult of the disembodied soul
and eventually a belief in immortality fully worthy of the name were
being built up at this time. These things are the result of
phenomena which partly represent the re-emergence of elements in
religious life which had been submerged in the previous period, and
partly the entry of fresh forces which in conjunction with the
resuscitated old give rise between them to a third and new creation.

