CHAPTER XIV

THE LATER AGE OF THE GREEK WORLD

PART I

PHILOSOPHY


Plato and the Platonic account of the nature, origin, and destiny of
the soul closes a period. It marks the end of that theological and
spiritualist movement to the force and significance of which nothing
bears clearer witness than the fact that it could have such a
conclusion. After this point its development ceases--at least it
disappears from the surface of Greek life: like one of those Asiatic
torrents with which the ancients were familiar it buries itself
underground for a long stretch of its course, only to reappear
eventually, with all the greater effect, far away from the place of
its origin. Even Plato's own school almost immediately after the
death of its master and directing spirit turned its attention in a
direction quite other than that which he had given it.[1\14] To have
retained the Platonic outlook would have made his pupils even more
isolated in their very different age than Plato himself had been in
his own.

Greece entered upon a new and final phase of her development. The
ominous breakdown of the older political fabric at the end of the
fourth century might have seemed likely to put an end to the natural
vitality of the Greek peoples. With the conquest of the East by
Macedonians and Greeks, however, new tasks were set before that
people and with the new task they acquired new faculties. The
_polis_, indeed, the purest expression of Greek constructive
ability, could not be restored to life. Such of the old and narrow
city-republics as had not perished completely in that stormy period
only languished in a stagnant peace. Rare, indeed, are the
exceptions in which (as particularly in Rhodos) a more vigorous and
independent life asserted itself. The new and swollen cities of the
Macedonian Empire, with their motley populations drawn from many
nationalities, could not make good the loss. The Leagues in which
Greece seemed to be making an effort to find a political
organization of a wider compass soon broke down under the effects of
inward {491} corruption and external violence. Even in its deepest
and most essential character the old national spirit of Greece,
which had drawn its strength from its clear-cut individuality,
seemed to be suffering damage through the unlimited extension
eastwards and westwards of Greek life. It did not cease to be an
immeasurable advantage to be a Greek, but a Greek now meant anyone
who had a share in the one thing that still distinguished and
characterized the Greeks, namely, Greek culture--and Greek culture
was no longer confined to a single nation. It was no fault of this
Greek humanism that not a single one of the vast populations of the
East (and in the West at last Rome stood alone) was able to make
their own this culture so generously offered to the whole world, so
that there, too, all should become _Greek_ who were capable of
becoming free human beings. Nevertheless, from all countries and
nationalities uncounted multitudes of _individuals_ entered into the
circle of this extended Hellenism. The way was open for all who
could live without the need of a way of life and thinking modelled
strictly upon national lines: for the culture which now united all
Greeks and Greek communities was based upon science--and science
knows nothing of national frontiers.

The science which could thus present itself as the guiding principle
of such a large and heterogeneous mass of cultured people, must at
any rate have reached a condition of stability if not of completely
rounded finality. After all the stir and controversy of the previous
centuries it had at last arrived at a period of contented enjoyment
of its own resources: the long drawn-out struggle, the restless
years of search were now held to have borne fruit. In philosophy at
least there was a distinct slackening of the insatiable zeal and
boldness of individual thinkers in posing new questions and wresting
answers or in seeking for fresh solutions to old problems. A few
great systems, formulated in accordance with the fixed tenets of the
various schools of thought, still offered a refuge to those who
demanded fixity and definition in their opinions; for centuries they
kept up their special traditions without serious alteration until
they, too, fell in pieces at last. A greater measure of independence
and variety was displayed by the special sciences which since they
had now been completely released for the first time from the
leading-strings of philosophy proceeded to develop freely in
accordance with their own principles. Art, too, was by no means
devoid as yet of originality and attractiveness, and in spite of the
overwhelming achievements of the past refused to be driven {492}
into a position of subservience and imitation. But it was no longer,
in conjunction with the peculiar customs and manners of a people,
the mistress and dispenser of wisdom and knowledge of the world. Art
becomes a plaything and an incidental diversion: it is science that
determines the general character and content of culture. But this
scientifically minded culture shares in the natural temper of all
science. Science has its feet firmly planted in life itself: it
keeps men's minds actively employed in this world; it has small
temptation to leave the firm ground of what is knowable and can
never be too well known, to voyage out into the region of the
intangible which can never be a subject of scientific inquiry. A
cool rationalism, a calm adherence to the intelligible and
thinkable, without any leanings to the gloomy terrors of a
mysterious world of the unknown--such is the temper that marks the
science and culture of the Hellenistic age and marks it more
distinctively than any other period of Greek culture. Such mysticism
as was still vigorous and effective kept itself timidly in the
background at this time; in the everyday world it is rather the
direct contrary of mysticism that we are made aware of; the unlovely
results of the prevailing rationalism, a bleak reasonableness, a
knowing and prosaic common sense such as stares dully at us from the
pages of Polybios' History as the point of view of the narrator
himself and of those of whom he writes. It was no age of heroes or
of the heroic. A weaker and more delicate generation holds the
field. The breakdown of political life and the disappearance of its
obligations made it more possible than it had ever been before for
the individual to lead his own life in his own way.[2\14] And he
makes the most of his freedom, his culture, the treasures of an
inward, private life enriched with all the brilliance and charm of
an old and perfected civilization. All the past had thought and
laboured on his behalf; he is not idle, but he is busy without ever
being in a hurry, enjoying his heritage and taking his ease in the
cooling sunlight of the long drawn-out autumn of Greek life. And he
is little concerned to inquire what may follow when this brilliant,
many-coloured world that surrounds him shall have vanished from his
gaze. This world is all in all to him. The hope or fear of
immortality has little effect upon the educated people of the
age.[3\14] Philosophy to which in one form or another they are all
more or less closely attached teaches them according to its
particular mood to cherish that hope or calmly to set it to one
side: in none of the popular sects {493} had the doctrine of the
eternity or imperishable nature of the soul any serious significance
as the central doctrine of a system. Natural science ruled the day,
while theology remained in the background and could only obtain a
doubtful hearing (if it was even listened to at all) for its
proclamation of the divine origin and everlasting life of the souls.

§ 2

At the outset of this period, and illuminating a long stretch of it
with the light of his genius, stands the figure of Aristotle. In
what this master _di color' che sanno_ had to say of the soul's
nature and destiny two voices are distinctly audible. The soul, he
instructs us, is that which in a living and organic physical body
brings the potentially existing to actual existence. It is the
_form_ to the body's matter, the culmination of the capacities of
independent life residing in the particular body. Bodiless and
immaterial itself, it is not the outcome of the mixture of the
various parts of the body; it is the cause, not the resultant, of
the vital functions of its body which exists for the soul's benefit
as its "instrument".[4\14] It dwells within a natural organism and
though it is itself unmoved it moves that organism as the source of
its growth and nourishment, of its desires and locomotion, of its
feeling and perceiving; while in the higher organisms it acts as the
combination of all these faces. It is as little to be thought of as
separate from the body--its own body--as the power of vision is in
separation from the eye or as its shape from the moulded waxen
image.[5\14] Theoretically, indeed, it is possible to distinguish
between body and soul, but actually and in the animated organism
they cannot be distinguished. When the living creature dies the
matter of which it was composed loses it special adaptation to a
purposeful organism, and this adaptation was its life; without it
there can be no independent "Substance" (~ousi/a~).[6\14] The Form,
the functional power of the once living organism, its "soul", has no
longer any independent existence.

This is the voice of Aristotle the physicist when he is speaking
from the standpoint of a physical doctrine which includes the study
of the soul "in so far as it occurs not without matter".[7\14]
Aristotle the metaphysician takes us further. In the soul of man,
besides the vital powers of the organized individual, there lives a
spiritual being of more than natural character and origin, the
"Mind"--"that in us which thinks and conceives".[8\14] This thinking
mind is not bound to the body and its life.[9\14] It does not come
into being with the creation of the human organism which is
completed by the addition of Mind. It has no beginning and was
uncreated from eternity:[10\14] it enters into man at his creation
"from without".[11\14] Even while it lives within the body it
remains unmingled with the body and its powers and uninfluenced by
them.[12\14] Enclosed within itself it lives its separate life as
something quite other than the "soul" (of which it is nevertheless
called a "part"[13\14]) and separated from it by a gulf. Comparable
with the God of Aristotle's world it transcends what might be called
its "little world",[14\14] the living human organism. It influences
that organism without being influenced in turn. It is akin to God;
it is called the "divine" in man.[15\14] Its activity is the same as
that of God.[16\14] God--pure substance, unlimited, highest,
everlasting actuality--is absolute and perpetually operant
thinking.[17\14] All practical activity, doing and creating, is far
removed from God.[18\14] So, too, the "Mind" is entirely occupied in
thinking (though here there is some alternation perhaps between the
potential and the actual).[19\14] It grasps, in an intuition of the
intellect that is beyond failure and error,[20\14] the "unmediated"
first principles, the first and highest concepts, immediately
certain and not deducible from still higher concepts, from which all
knowledge and philosophy is derived.[21\14]

In its association with the body and its "soul" this thinking Reason
lives as "the ruling"[22\14] element over both--not, however, as the
"realization" of this particular individual creature. The Mind is
indeed said to be that which the individual man "is",[23\14] and
without the addition of Mind the man could not exist, but the
special and personal character belonging to the individual is not to
be found in this reasoning Mind.[24\14] Mind is totally devoid of
distinguishable qualities and is identical in every case where it
appears; it is invariably foreign to the separate and individual
character of the man to whom it is added, and hardly seems to be
_his_ peculiar property.

When death occurs the thinking "Mind" is not involved in the
destruction which overtakes the human organism with which it was
associated. Death does not affect it. Like everything that is
without beginning it is indestructible.[25\14] It returns again to
its separate existence. Like the great World-Mind, God, and in
company with it--for it has not sprung from God and does not merge
again into God--the individual Mind of man continues in unending
life.[26\14] It {495} disappears now into impenetrable darkness. The
separate existence of the Mind is beyond not merely our perception
but our conceiving as well--persisting for itself alone, Mind has no
mental activity, no memory and no consciousness; indeed, it is
impossible to say what special qualities or activity can be
attributed to it beyond the simple predicate of existence, of
being.[27\14]

In the doctrine of this thinking Mind which is associated with the
human soul "from without" and never merges into it, of its
pre-existence from eternity, its kinship with God and its
imperishable life after its separation from the human organism--in
all this Aristotle preserves a mythological element taken from the
dogmatic teaching of Plato.

There was a time when he had been a complete Platonist precisely in
his doctrine of the soul. In his youth, like other members of the
Academy, he had yielded[28\14] to the fascination of clothing in
artistic and perfected language brilliant fantasies about the
origin, nature, and destiny of the soul--the divine daimon[29\14]
inhabiting the mortal frame of man. Later, however, it seemed
inconceivable to him that "any soul may inhabit any body".[30\14] He
could only conceive of the "soul" of the individual man as a
realization of the life of this entirely distinct and physical
organism, to which it is indissolubly bound as the purpose and form
of the particular instrument. All the vital powers as well as
appetite, perception, memory, and reflective thought, appeared to
him merely as the modes of activity manifested by the animated body
which is itself unthinkable apart from its "soul". And yet he still
preserved a relic of the old dualistic opposition between the body
and the independent substantial soul--the same conception of the
soul, in fact, as that which Plato had himself, in the later period
of his philosophical development, alone retained. This was as the
contemplative Mind which is occupied in apprehending the highest
truths in intellectual intuition; and this mind is, according to
Aristotle, not to be included in the "soul", but to be separated
from it as a special being that has descended from the heights of
divinity and has been coupled with the soul from without and for its
limited period of life. The origin of this conception of a
reduplicated soul is plain: it is derived from memories of Plato and
beyond that from theological doctrine which was itself in the last
resort but a spiritualized restatement of primeval popular fancies
of the psyche that dwells in the living body. But though he took
over the doctrine he did not take over the special sense that {496}
the theologians had given to it: he omitted both the conclusions
they drew and the exhortations they based upon it. We hear no more
of the "purification" of the divine Mind within mankind. It has
nothing impure or evil in it nor can any breath of pollution affect
it from without. The effort towards the "other world" of purity, the
denial and rejection of its earthly partner the living body, are
foreign to the "Mind" of Aristotle.[31\14] It has no impulse to
"deliverance" or self-emancipation; it knows of no peculiar task
that points beyond this world. The presence of this "separable" Mind
in the living man is an assured fact, and nothing more: no purpose
in life is deducible from it. The fact itself seemed to be evident
from the power that man possesses of grasping immediately a highest
form of knowledge that is beyond demonstration, not as the result of
the mental activity of his soul, for the apprehension is prior to
the soul, but by means of a higher spiritual faculty, a special
intellectual being that seemed to proclaim its presence and
existence within man in this way. It is thus by way of a theory of
knowledge not of a theological doctrine that we arrive at the
distinction between "Mind" and "Soul". But the doctrine thus
reasserted was in reality nothing but the old doctrine of the
theologians. This "Mind", too, seems to the thinker to be a being
akin to God. The pure contemplative existence, a life consisting in
the contemplation of the final objects of intuition is counted as a
privilege of the divine and of all divine beings, as the true
purpose of vital energy and of its manifestation; and in the
description of this state the sober reserve of his lecture style
seems to be uplifted and almost illuminated with the warmth and
brilliance imparted by a genuine glow of personal experience.[32\14]
This pure activity of contemplation, finding its deepest
satisfaction in itself, belongs to the divine in man--to the Mind;
its whole life lies in this. This activity, however, the Mind
performs and finishes in this life, while it is united with the body
and the body's "soul". There is nothing left that can be thought of
as forming the content of the life and activity of the Mind in its
separate existence after the completion of its period of life on
earth. Mind and the man with whom it is associated can hardly have a
very urgent desire for that emancipation in "another world" which is
thus left blank and without content for our thought. The thought of
immortality cast in this form could no longer possess any real value
or ethical significance for man.[33\14] It arises from a logical
deduction, from metaphysical considerations, not {497} from a demand
of the spirit. It lacks not only the distinctness that might have
appealed to the senses and given direction to the imagination, but
the power (or the intention) of playing a leading part in the
conduct or direction of life on this earth. There is no inspiration
in this doctrine--not even for the philosopher, though it was to him
and his activity and his efforts that the picture and panegyric of
"Mind", the philosopher in man, had really referred.

It was quite possible to abide by the teaching and philosophy of
Aristotle, directed as it was to the observation and interpretation
of the things of this world, while abandoning the advanced post of
the doctrine of Mind--that Being which has sunk to the level of this
world from the other world of divinity, which separates itself, with
the death of man, once more to everlasting divine life though hardly
to a continuation of individual existence. On this point in
particular free discussion of the master's teaching maintained
itself in his school: some, and by no means the weakest, of
Aristotle's successors denied altogether and in every form the
doctrine of immortality.[34\14]

§ 3

The dogmatic teaching of the Stoics on the subject of the human soul
is closely bound up with the materialistic pantheism by means of
which they explained all the phenomena of life, of being and
becoming upon earth. God is All, and divinity is nothing outside
this "all", which forms the world: the Universe is God. God is thus
not only the matter but the form, the life and the power of the
world. Divinity is the original matter, the etherial Fire, the fiery
"breath" which maintains itself or changes and in innumerable
metamorphoses creates the world. God is also what supplies a purpose
to this world and is the purposeful force--the reason and law of the
world. The universal deity which is thus at once matter, mind, and
formative principle sends out from itself at varying periods the
multiplicity of Appearance and then again at another time takes back
the multifarious and the divided into the fiery unity of its own
breath of life. Thus, in everything that has shape, in everything
that lives and moves, the content and the unifying form is God: he
is and works as their "state" in inorganic things, as "nature" in
plants, as "irrational soul" in the other living things, as rational
and thinking soul in man.[35\14] {498}

The soul of man, thus endowed with reason, is a fragment of the
divine,[36\14] and is itself divine like everything else in the
world but in a purer sense than all other things. It has remained
closer to the first and original essence of the divine, conceived as
"creative fire" (~pu=r technikô/n~), than the earthly fire which has
lost much of its original purity and refinement. It is closer[37\14]
than the lower matter that in all its changeful forms degenerates
progressively as it gets farther and farther away from the divine
fire by gradual loss of the tension (~to/nos~) that had once been
living and active in the primeval fire; closer even than the
material of its own body in which it dwells and rules. As something
essentially distinct from the body, then, the individual soul comes
into being among the elements of its body when that body is
conceived, and it develops its full nature after the birth of the
individual.[38\14] But even in its individual, separate existence it
remains incompletely detached from the universal life that is
present in it; it remains subject to the "universal Law" of the
world, which is God, and fast bound by "fate", the "destiny"
(~peprôme/nê, heimarme/ne~) which decrees the course of their
existence for the totality of all Life and the individual
lives.[39\14] Nevertheless, the soul has its special gifts and
special task--it is capable of self-determination and is responsible
for its own decisions and acts. Though it is a pure emanation from
the universal Reason and bound down to no irrational elements, it
has the power of irrational choice and can resolve upon what is
evil. Though they have all sprung from one and the same original
source the individual souls are of very different character,
intellect, and propensity of will. Unreason in thought, will, and
conduct is common in the world; those who have real insight are few;
in fact, the Wise Man, the man who keeps his own will in complete
harmony with the universal and divine direction of the world, is but
a picture of imaginary perfection, _naturæ humanæ exemplar_, never
fully and perfectly realized in actual life.

Ethical interests demanded the freedom and independence of the moral
personality and its will, which can only fulfil the requirements of
duty by self-mastery and the overthrow of base impulses; but this
independence was in conflict with the essential principles of Stoic
metaphysics. The Stoics taught that the world (and the soul included
in it) is only the necessary self-development of a single and
absolute Being that excludes all independent and separate
multiplicity. Nor could they recognize any principle of Evil, an
anti-rational principle answering to the purity of divine power,
working {499} evil and suggesting it, and making the individual
capable of wilful disobedience to the laws of all-embracing
divinity. Pure pantheism, uniting God and the world in indissoluble
unity, cannot imagine a real conflict between humanity and divinity;
it cannot postulate a principle of Evil through the overthrow of
which a lost unity with God is to be restored. Pantheism makes no
claims of an ethical or religious kind. The ingenuity of the Stoic
doctors was exercised in vain in the attempt to find a way out of
this dilemma.[40\14]

From the very origin of the school two tendencies were discernible
in the teaching of the Stoa, derived as that teaching was from such
different sources. On the one hand, the ethical doctrine of the
Cynics, to whom the Stoics owed the greater part of their practical
teaching, threw the individual back upon his own resources and made
everything depend upon the determination of his own will. It thus
pointed in the direction of the most self-sufficient
individualism--to an ethical atomism. The physical doctrine derived
from Herakleitos, on the other hand, merged the individual
completely into the omnipotence and omnipresence of the All-One; and
therefore, as its ethical counterpart, demanded that this relation
of the individual to the universal Logos of the world should find
expression in a life lived completely _ex ductu rationis_, in
unconditional abandonment of the individual will to the Universal
Mind that is the World and God.[41\14] In actual fact it was
Cynicism that had the profounder influence in ethical matters. The
universal Law and order of the world, embracing both universe and
individual in its absolute decrees, threw its net too widely to be
able to answer closely enough to the needs of narrow and individual
existence. No practical ethics could possibly unite this distant and
final aim with the individual man in a single nexus of ordered
self-determination. The intermediate link between the universe and
its laws, on the one hand, and the individual with his private will,
on the other, had formerly been the Greek _polis_ with its law and
custom. But it was a cosmopolitan age, and for the Stoics as well as
for the Cynics before them the city-state had lost most of its
educative force. The individual saw himself more and more left to
his own devices and forced to depend upon his own strength--his life
had to be ordered on self-erected standards and guided by self-found
rules. Individualism, which gave its tone to the age more decisively
than in any past period of Greek life, began to win a footing even
in this pantheistic system. The "Wise Man" who is a law to himself
in perfect {500} self-determination,[42\14] and feels himself bound
only to those like himself,[43\14] is individualism's fairest
flower.

But the soul, thus elevated to a height where it was capable of much
that was impossible for or only incompletely within the reach of its
weaker sisters, began more and more to seem like something rather
different from a mere dependent offshoot of the One divine power
that is the same everywhere. It is, in fact, regarded as an
independent, divine, and self-enclosed creature in those passages
where in Stoic literature, as in the older literature of the
theologians, the soul is called a "daimon"--the daimon dwelling
within the individual man, and given to him as his associate.[44\14]
Death, too, is regarded by this professedly monist system as a
separation of soul from body[45\14] in accordance with what was
really a naive or a conscious spiritualism. In death, then, this
soul-essence whose independence had been so marked even in life,
does not perish with the body--it does not even lose itself again in
the One from which it had taken its origin. An infinitely extended
individual life is indeed not attributed to the individual souls:
only God, the one Soul of the World, is eternally
indestructible.[46\14] But the souls which have arisen by separation
from the one and all-embracing divinity, survive the destruction of
their bodies: until the final dissolution, in the Conflagration that
will make an end of the present period of world-history, they
persist in their independent life; either all of them (as was the
older teaching of the school) or, as Chrysippos, the master of Stoic
orthodoxy, taught the souls of the "Wise" only, while the others
have been lost in the general life of the Whole some time
previously.[47\14] The stronger ethical personality is held together
in itself for a longer time.[48\14]

From the point of view of physical science and materialist
doctrine[49\14] it was also hard to see why the soul, composed of
pure fire-breath, which even in life had held the body together and
had not been held together by the body,[50\14] should disappear at
once when that body was disintegrated. As it had once held the body
together, so it might well and all the more easily hold itself
together now. Its lightness carries it upwards into the pure air
under the moon, where it is fed by the breath that rises upwards and
where there is nothing that can put an end to it.[51\14] An
"underworld" region like that of popular imagination and theological
teaching, was expressly denied by the Stoics.[52\14] Their
imagination preferred to exercise itself in an imaginary extension
of life in the Aether, which was their region of {501} the
souls;[53\14] but as a rule it appears that such flights of fancy
were avoided. The life of the souls after death--that of the wise as
well as of the unwise--remained indistinct and without
content[54\14] in the imagination of those whose life was still upon
earth.

Thus, the doctrine of the soul-personality and its continued
existence (never simply expanded into personal immortality), which
was in reality not required by the metaphysical principles of
Stoicism, and could indeed hardly be reconciled with them, had in
fact no serious significance for the general intention and substance
of Stoicism--least of all for Stoic ethics and conduct of life. The
philosophy of Stoicism is directed to the study of life, not of
death. In this life on earth and only here can the purpose of human
endeavour--the reproduction of divine wisdom and virtue in the human
spirit--be fulfilled in manful contest with contrary impulses,
fulfilled, that is, in so far as such a thing is possible for lonely
and isolated fragments of divinity.[55\14]

But virtue is sufficient in itself for the attainment of
happiness--a happiness which loses nothing through the brevity of
its duration and to which nothing would be added by the prolongation
of its span.[56\14] Nothing in the doctrine of Stoicism points man,
or the Wise Man, to another world beyond the life of the body and
outside this earthly theatre of conflict and duty, for the
fulfilment of his being and his task.

§ 4

The limited doctrine of immortality which, as we have seen, was not
an essential part of the teaching of Stoicism, began to be called in
question as soon as the rigid dogmatism of the school was subjected
to the too-searching criticism of other schools of thought. In the
clash of opinions Stoicism began to be doubtful of the absolute
validity of its own teaching. The boundaries of orthodox doctrine
once so firmly drawn now became more fluid; exchange and even
compromise became common. Panaitios, the first writer among the
pedantic professors of Stoicism to achieve a wider popularity for
his writings, became the teacher and friend of those aristocratic
Romans who found in Greek philosophy the impulse to a humanism that
the barren soil of Rome could never have produced unaided. And
Panaitios differed in more than one point from the strict orthodoxy
of the older Stoicism. For him the soul is formed of two distinct
elements[57\14]--it is no longer simple and undivided, but {502}
compounded of "Nature" and "Soul" (in the narrower sense).[58\14] In
death these two elements separate and change into other forms. The
soul having had its origin at a particular point in past time now
perishes in time. Being capable of grief and subject to the
destructive influence of the emotions it falls a victim at last to
its own pains. Panaitios, while remaining a Stoic, taught the
dissolution of the soul, its death and simultaneous destruction with
the death of the body.[59\14]

His pupil Poseidonios, who as a writer possessed an even greater
influence than Panaitios with the great majority of cultivated
readers who belonged to no special school of thought, returned to
the older Stoic doctrine of the simple and undivided nature of the
soul as fiery breath. He distinguished three faculties but not three
separate and independent elements in the human soul, and as a
consequence of this view had no further need to believe in the
dissolution of the soul into its component parts at death. He also
denied the origin of the individual soul in time, from which the
doctrine of its destruction in time had seemed to follow by a
logical necessity. He returned to the old theological idea of the
pre-existence of the soul, its life since the beginning of the
created world; and could therefore go on to assert its continued
existence after death--at least till the time of the next
destruction of the World at the hands of omnipotent Fire.[60\14]

It was not an inward and private necessity that led to this
transformation of the old teaching of the School. Doubts and
criticisms levelled at it from outside--from the Sceptics in
particular--had necessitated the change. While some gave up the
struggle, others sought refuge in a re-arrangement of the figures of
the dialectical game and by the introduction of fresh
characters.[61\14] Immortality might be abandoned to criticism or
reaffirmed in either case with equal indifference. The Platonic and
poetic version of Stoicism provided by Poseidonios may have found a
wider response among the readers of a highly cultivated society who
felt the need of a doctrine of immortality more as a satisfaction to
the artistic fancy than from any deeper or more temperamental
causes. Cicero, the most eloquent representative of the Hellenized
Roman culture of the time, may perhaps give us a picture of the
refined and æsthetic partiality with which these ideas were taken
up. In the _Dream of Scipio_ and the first book of the _Tusculans_,
he gives an account, mainly based on Poseidonios, of the belief then
held of a continued life of the soul in the divine element of the
Aether.[62\14] {503}

§ 5

Stoicism had a long and vigorous life. More than ever during the
first and second centuries of our era did it fulfil its real task of
acting as a practical guide to conduct, not as a mere museum of dead
erudition. It made good its claim to provide its adherents with the
autonomous freedom and independence of a mind at peace with itself,
whose virtue was proof against the tribulation and failure of life,
and not corrupted by its plenty. It was not always blind imitation
of a literary fashion or the love of displaying virtuous paradoxes
that attracted the noblest of the higher Roman aristocracy to the
doctrines of Stoicism. Not a few of them guided their lives in
accordance with its principles and even died for their convictions.
Not entirely "without tragic emotion", as the Stoic Emperor would
prefer it, but at any rate with conscious and deliberate
purpose--not in mere unreasoning **stubbornness[63\14]--did these
Stoic martyrs go to their death. Nor was it the unquestioned
certainty of a continued life in a higher existence that made them
so ready to give up life upon this earth.[64\14] Each in the special
manner dictated to him by his own temperament and the circumstances
of his life, they still speak to us, these leaders of Roman
Stoicism--Seneca the philosophic director of the world's conscience,
Marcus Aurelius the Emperor, and those instructors and patterns of
the aspiring youth of Rome, Musonius and Epictetus. The eager and
unswerving effort of these wise men to educate themselves to the
attainment of freedom and peace, of purity and goodness of heart,
wins our admiration--not least in the case of Seneca in whom the
struggle for self-mastery and philosophic calm must have been a
continual war with his own too-receptive and imaginative nature. But
just as they looked for no supernatural helper and redeemer but
trusted to the power of their own spirit for the assurance of
success, so they required no promise of a future crowning of their
labours in an after-life of the soul. The whole scope of their
endeavour lies within the limits of this world. The old Stoic belief
in the continued life of the individual soul until the annihilation
of all separate creation in the World Conflagration[65\14] is
regarded at the best as one possibility among many[66\14]--it is
perhaps but a "beautiful dream".[67\14] But whether death is a
transition to another form of being or a complete termination of
individual life--to the wise man it is equally welcome, for he
measures the value of life not by the number {504} of its years but
by the richness of its content. At bottom Seneca is inclined to the
view that death is the end of all things for man, after which
"everlasting peace" awaits the restless spirit.[68\14]

The Stoic Emperor is uncertain whether death is a dissipation of the
elements of the soul (as the atomists teach) or whether the mind
survives in a conscious or an unconscious existence that must yet
disappear eventually in the life of the Whole. All things are in
perpetual flux--so the Law of the universe has willed it--nor shall
the human personality maintain itself untouched and unchanged. But
even supposing that death is a "putting out" of his small individual
candle, the wise man is not afraid: to the melancholy that is the
prevailing mood of his gentle, pure, and high-strung character
Death, the annihilator, seems to beckon like a friend.[69\14]

The tougher spirit of the Phrygian slave and freedman needed no
conviction of personal survival to enable him to face the battle of
earthly life with courage and intrepidity. What has been made must
be unmade: without hesitation and without regret the wise man gives
himself up to the laws of the rationally-ordered universe in which
the present must make way for the future--not indeed to be lost
entirely, but to be changed and to merge its individuality, its
unimportant self in new manifestations of the creative stuff of
Life. The Whole does not perish, but its parts change and alter
their relations among themselves.[70\14] The pantheistic principles
of the school which had been taken over from Herakleitos and which
made it permanently inconceivable that the diminutive individual
spark of life could achieve a lasting separation from the central
fiery mass, had become a settled conviction. The passionate
abandonment of the personal, short-lived self to the everlasting
Whole and One had become a fixed habit of mind. No longer did it
seem intolerable that the individual existence should pass away
after a brief span of life; it was possible to remain a Stoic and
yet assert expressly, like Cornutus the teacher of Persius, that
with the death of its body there is an end, too, of the individual
soul.[71\14]

§ 6

The atomist doctrine renewed by Epicurus demanded in the most
emphatic manner of its adherents that they should abandon the belief
in personal survival.

For the atomist the soul is corporeal, a compound made {505} up of
the most mobile of the atoms which form the plastic elements of air
and fire. It occupies all parts of the body, and is held together by
the body, while at the same time, and in spite of this, holding
itself in essential distinctness from the body.[72\14] Epicurus also
speaks of the "Soul" as a special and enduring substance within the
body, a "part" of the corporeal, not a mere "harmony" resulting from
the association of the parts of the body.[73\14] He even speaks of
two parts or modes of manifestation in the "soul"; the irrational,
which holds the whole body in its sway as its vital force, and the
rational, situated in the breast, which exercises will and
intelligence and is the last and most essential source of life in
living things, without the undivided presence of which death
occurs.[74\14] _Anima_ and _animus_ (as Lucretius calls them),
distinct but not separable from one another,[75\14] come into being
in the embryo of man and grow to maturity, old age and decay,
together with the body.[76\14] If death occurs it means that the
atoms belonging to the body are separated and the soul-atoms
withdrawn--even before the final dissolution of the body, the
separable "soul" disappears. No longer held together by the body, it
is blown away in the wind, it disappears "like smoke" in the
air.[77\14] The soul, this soul that had animated the individual
man, is no more.[78\14] The material elements of which it was
composed are indestructible; it is quite possible that they may at
some future time combine together with the life-stuff to produce new
life and consciousness of exactly the same kind as had once been
joined together in the living man. But, if so, it will be a new
creature that thus comes into being: the original man has been
annihilated by death; there is no bond of continuous consciousness
uniting him with the fresh creation.[79\14] The vital forces of the
world are continuous, undiminished, indestructible, but in the
formation of the individual living creature they are only lent
temporarily, for this occasion and for a brief period, after which
they are withdrawn for ever from the particular creature. _Vitaque
mancipio nulli datur, omnibus usu._

After his death the individual is unaffected by the fate of his
inanimate body;[80\14] nor should he be troubled by the thought of
what may happen to the atoms of his soul. Death does not concern him
at all; for he only is when death is not; where death is, he is no
longer there.[81\14] Sensation and consciousness have left him at
the dissolution of body and soul; what he cannot possibly feel
affects him no longer. Epicurean maxims are never tired of driving
home {506} this proposition: death is nothing to us.[82\14] From
every possible direction, from abstract principle and practical
experience in actual life, Lucretius labours to demonstrate the
truth of this view[83\14] as ardently as other philosophers seek to
prove its opposite. Physical science has no more valuable service to
render than that of convincing us of its truth.[84\14] Just as the
wisdom of Epicurus has no other purpose than to protect man, of all
creatures the one most sensitive to pain, from distress and
anguish--and even pleasure is but the removal of pain--so more
particularly, in putting an end to the fear of death and the craving
after unceasing life, it serves this finite life itself,[85\14] that
is committed to us once and for all and never repeated.[86\14] If a
man has once succeeded in realizing that he will cease to be in the
moment of death's coming, he will neither be oppressed with terror
at the threatened loss of self-consciousness nor will the terrors of
eternity[87\14] or the fabulous monsters of the spirit-world below
the earth[88\14] darken his existence by casting their dark shadow
over all his life.[89\14] He will devote himself to life without
repining, neither fearing death nor seeking it.[90\14]

He alone--the ideal Wise Man of the Epicurean faith--will know how
to live as the true artist of his own life;[91\14] he will not waste
the precious time in vain preparations for the future,[92\14] but
will cram every moment to the full so that his brief span of
existence will have all that a long life could give. Long life, in
fact, even life without an end, would not make him any happier or
any richer. What life has to offer it has already offered--anything
further must only be a repetition of what has gone before: _eadem
sunt omnia semper._[93\14] The Wise Man has no reason even to look
for an eternity of life.[94\14] In his own personality, in this
present "now", he possesses all the conditions necessary to
happiness. The very transience of this supreme happiness to which
mortality can attain makes it seem the more valuable to him. To the
development and the enjoyment of this, the only life that belongs to
him he will devote himself exclusively. In ethical matters, too, the
atomist doctrine holds good. There is no such thing in nature as an
essential community of human beings--still less of humanity--there
are only individuals.[95\14] In associations entered into by free
and unforced choice the individual may attach himself to the
individual as one friend to another; but the political societies
that men have invented and set up among themselves have no
obligations for the Wise Man. He is himself the centre and indeed
the whole circumference of the world surrounding {507} him. State
and society are valuable, and indeed only exist for the protection
of the individual and to make it possible for him under their
enfolding care to develop his own personality in freedom.[96\14] The
individual, on the other hand, does not exist for the state, but for
himself. "It is no longer necessary to save the Hellenes or to win
crowns of victory from them in contests of wisdom."[97\14] Such is
the decision reached with a sigh of relief by a civilization that
has attained the highest point of its development and is now
overcome by a lassitude in which it no longer sets itself new tasks,
but takes its ease as age may be permitted to do. In its lassitude
it no longer hopes, and in all honesty no longer cares, to extend
the period of its existence beyond the limits of this earthly life.
Calm and untroubled it sees this life, dear though it may once have
been, fade away, taking its leave and sinking into nothingness
without a struggle.


NOTES TO CHAPTER XIV

