The Project Gutenberg eBook of Monophysitism Past and Present: A Study in Christology
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Monophysitism Past and Present: A Study in Christology

Author: A. A. Luce


        
Release date: December 1, 2009 [eBook #30219]
                Most recently updated: January 5, 2021

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/30219

Credits: Produced by Al Haines






Produced by Al Haines









MONOPHYSITISM

PAST AND PRESENT


A STUDY IN CHRISTOLOGY



BY

A. A. LUCE, M.C., D.D.


CAPTAIN LATE 12TH ROYAL IRISH RIFLES

FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, DUBLIN





LONDON

SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE

NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN CO.

1920




PRINTED BY

WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED,

LONDON AND BECCLES




CONTENTS


CHAPTER

   I.  THE METAPHYSICAL BASIS OF MONOPHYSITISM
  II.  THE ORIGINS OF MONOPHYSITISM
 III.  MONOPHYSITE DOCTRINE
  IV.  THE ETHOS OF MONOPHYSITISM
   V.  MONOPHYSITISM AND MODERN PSYCHOLOGY
  VI.  MONOPHYSITISM IN THE PRESENT DAY




BOOKS CONSULTED IN THE

PREPARATION OF THIS ESSAY


J. S. ASSEMANI, "Bibliotheca Orientalis," especially the Introductory
Dissertation to Vol. II.

A. HARNACK, "History of Dogma," translated by Speirs and Millar.

J. C. ROBERTSON, "History of the Christian Church."

WINDELBAND, "History of Philosophy," translated by Tufts.

WRIGHT, "Short History of Syriac Literature."

H. BERGSON, "Les données immédiates de la conscience," "Matière et
Mémoire," "L'évolution créatrice."




MONOPHYSITISM PAST AND PRESENT


CHAPTER I

THE METAPHYSICAL BASIS OF MONOPHYSITISM

Monophysitism was a Christological heresy of the fifth century.  It was
condemned by the church in the middle of that century at the council of
Chalcedon.  Surviving its condemnation it flourished in the East for
several centuries.  Its adherents formed themselves into a powerful
church with orders and succession of their own.  Although the
monophysite church has long since lost all influence, it is still in
being.  The Coptic and Jacobite churches of Egypt and Mesopotamia,
respectively, preserve to this day the doctrines and traditions of the
primitive monophysites.

The history of the sect, however, does not concern us here.  The
writer's purpose is to review its doctrine.  Monophysitism is a system
of religious thought, and, as such, its importance is out of all
proportion to the present or even the past position of the churches
that professed it.  Its significance lies in its universality.  It is
grounded in the nature of the human mind.  It is found in West as well
as East, to-day as well as in the early centuries of our era.  Wherever
men bring intellect to bear on the problem of Christ's being, the
tendency to regard Him as monophysite is present.

An examination of the heresy is of practical value.  Our subject-matter
is not an oriental antique or a curiosity of the intellect, but a
present-day problem of vital moment to the Faith.  If we are concerned
with a half-forgotten heresy, it is because a study of that heresy
serves both as a preventive against error and as an introduction to the
truth.  The doctor studies disease to ascertain the conditions of
health; pathological cases are often his surest guide to the normal;
just so the study of heresy is the best guide to orthodox Christology.
It was in conflict with monophysitism that the church of the fifth
century brought to completion her dogmatic utterances about Christ; and
the individual thinker to-day can gain the surest grasp of true
Christology by examining the monophysite perversion.

With this practical purpose in view, we now proceed to an analysis of
the heresy.  Monophysitism is a body of doctrine.  It is a dogmatic
system, in which the individual dogmata are controlled by a principle
or dominant idea.  As all the particular doctrines of monophysitism
depend on this principle, and, as it is not properly a theological
concept, but one borrowed from philosophy, we may call it "the
metaphysical basis of monophysitism."  An intelligent grasp of this
basic principle is necessary to an appreciation of the whole system.
Accordingly, our first concern is to ascertain and exhibit this
metaphysical basis.  In subsequent chapters we shall analyse in detail
the doctrines specifically monophysite and trace the Christological
errors back to their source in metaphysic.



THE _A PRIORI_ AND _A POSTERIORI_ IN CHRISTOLOGY

The following considerations prove the necessity of this procedure.
Two methods of examining the being of Christ can be distinguished.
According to the one method the facts of His life are reviewed as they
are presented in the New Testament, and a formula is then constructed
to fit them.  The other method starts from the concept of a mediator
between God and man.  It supposes that concept actualised, and asks the
question, "Of what nature must such a mediator be?"  These methods may
be distinguished, but they cannot be separated.  No one, however
scientific, can come to a study of the life of Jesus with an absolutely
open mind.  Presuppositions are inevitable.  Similarly, as the _a
priori_ thinker develops his concept of a mediator, he compares the
results of his thinking at every stage with the picture presented in
the Gospel story, and that picture unavoidably modifies his deductions.
Both diphysite and monophysite used a combination of these two methods.
Each party took the recorded facts and interpreted them in accordance
with their notion of what a mediator should be.  Both parties studied
the same facts; but the _a priori_ of their thought differed, and so
their conclusions differed.  In the realm of Christology this _a
priori_ of thought is of paramount importance.  Preconceived opinions
inevitably colour our mental picture of Christ.  Readers of the Gospel
narrative find there the Christ they are prepared to find.  On this
well-recognised fact we base our contention that an examination of any
Christological system must begin with the philosophy on which the
system rests.  That philosophy supplies the _a priori_, or the
presupposition, or the metaphysical basis, whichever name we prefer.

We do not suggest that theologians have consciously adopted a
metaphysical principle as the basis of their beliefs, and then have
applied it to the special problem of Christology.  That is a possible
method but not the usual one.  In most cases the philosophic basis
remains in the background of consciousness; its existence is
unrecognised and its influence undetected.  If Christian thinkers took
the trouble to analyse the basis of their beliefs about Christ, they
would not halt, as they so often do, at the stage of monophysitism.  If
they laid bare to the foundations the structure of their faith, the
danger of error would be reduced to a minimum.  Viewed from the
standpoint of timeless reason, monophysitism is based on a definite
metaphysical idea.  Not all monophysites have consciously adopted that
basis; many, had they recognised its presence, would have rejected it.
But it was present as a tendency.  A tendency may be neutralised by
counteracting causes; but it has its effect, and sooner or later it
will produce positive results.



THE THREE TYPICAL CHRISTOLOGIES

The same truth holds of the other Christological systems.  A different
metaphysical idea lies at the root of each.  Nestorian, monophysite,
catholic, these three were the main types of Christologian in the fifth
century.  Each studied Christ's life.  After studying it, the Nestorian
said of Him, "There are two persons here."  "Not so," said the
monophysite, "I see but one incarnate nature of God the Word."  The
catholic replied, "You are both wrong; there is one person in two
natures."  All three types deserve close study.  The thinkers were
devout and sincere, and, for the most part, able men.  There is no
question here of superficial uninformed thought, nor of moral
obliquity.  The disagreement was due not to their vision but to their
view point, not to the object of their thought or the process of their
thinking, but to their different presuppositions and starting points.

Presented in this way the monophysite and other Christological
controversies of the fifth and sixth centuries become phases of the
cosmic problem.  They thus regain the dignity which is theirs by right,
and which they lose in the ordinary church histories.  The heat of
passion they aroused becomes intelligible.  It was no battle about
words.  The stakes were high.  The controversialists championed
far-reaching principles with a decisive influence on the course of
thought and conduct.  Unfriendly critics usually portray the
Christologians as narrow-minded and audacious.  So, no doubt, they
were, but they were not wrong-headed.  If the matters in dispute
between theist, deist, and pantheist are trivialities, then and then
only can we regard the enterprise of the Christologians as chimerical
and their achievements as futile.  The different formulae represented
attitudes of mind fundamentally opposed.  No peace between catholic and
monophysite was possible.  They had conflicting conceptions of ultimate
truth.



DEPENDENCE OF CHRISTOLOGY ON PHILOSOPHY

We mentioned above the two other chief Christological systems, the
Nestorian and the catholic.  No analysis of monophysitism which omitted
a reference to these systems would be complete.  They were three nearly
contemporary attempts to solve the same problem.  The comparison is of
special interest when, as here, fundamental principles are under
examination.  It demonstrates the closeness of the connection between
the Christological and the cosmic problems.  In each of the three cases
we find that a school of philosophy corresponds to the school of
theology, and that the philosopher's dominant idea about the cosmos
decided the theologian's interpretation of Christ.

This connection between philosophy and Christology is of early date.
From the nature of both disciplines it had to be.  Even in apostolic
days the meaning of the incarnation was realised.  Christ was
apprehended as a being of more than national or terrestrial importance.
The Pauline and Johannine Christologies gave cosmic significance to His
work, and so inevitably to His Person.  Theologians made the tremendous
surmise that Jesus of Nazareth was no other than the Logos of the
Neo-Pythagoreans or the Wise One of the Stoics.  That is to say, He
stands not only between God and man, but between Creator and creation.
He is the embodiment of the cosmic relation.  From early days, then,
philosophy and religion were working at the same problem; their paths
met at the one goal of the Ideal Person who satisfied both head and
heart.  The systematic Christology of the fifth century was, therefore,
a completion of the work begun in the first.



THE CHRISTOLOGICAL AND THE COSMIC PROBLEMS

The essence of the Christological problem is the question as to the
union of natures in Christ.  Are there two natures divine and human in
Him?  Is each distinct from the other and from the person?  Is the
distinction conceptual or actual?  The incarnation is a union.  Is it a
real union?  If so, what did it unite?  We have seen that such
questions cannot be approached without presuppositions.  What these
presuppositions shall be is decided in the sphere of a wider problem.
This wider problem is known as the cosmic problem.  The solution given
to it prescribes the presuppositions of any attempt to solve the
specialised problem.  We shall proceed to sketch the cosmic problem,
and to indicate the three main types of answers given to it.  It will
then be evident that these three answers find their respective
counterparts in the Nestorian, monophysite and the catholic solutions
of the Christological problem.

As man's intellectual powers mature, two supreme generalisations force
themselves on his consciousness.  He conceives his experience as a
whole and calls it the world; he conceives the basis of his experience
as a whole and calls it God.  To some minds the world, to some minds
God, is the greater reality; but both concepts are present in varying
proportions wherever thought becomes self-conscious.  Here we have in
its lowest terms the material for the ontological question, the first
and the last problem of philosophy.  God and the world, at first dimly
conceived and scarcely differentiated, gradually separate and take
shape in the mind as distinct entities.  The concepts become
principles, fixed by language and mental imagery.  The gulf between
them widens until they stand at opposite poles of thought.  In their
isolation they constitute a standing challenge to the mind of man.  If
he thinks the world in terms of time, he must postulate a creator.  If
he thinks the world out of time, he is forced to conceive a ground of
the world's being.  The world cannot be thought without God nor God
without the world.  The one necessitates the other.  Yet when the
thinker tries to define the terms, he can at first only do so by
negatives.  The world is what God is not, and God is what the world is
not.  The two primary concepts thus attract and repel each other.  The
mind's first task is to grasp them in their difference.  It cannot rest
there, but must proceed to attempt to reunite them and grasp them in
their unity.  Thus the main problem of philosophy is to conceive and
find expression for the relation between God and the world.
Christology attacks essentially the same problem.  Christology is an
attempt to define the relation between God and the world in terms of
personality.

This relation has been conceived in three modes.  According to the
level of thought reached, or, as led by their disposition and
education, men have made their choice between three mediating concepts.
Hence derive three divergent types of thought and three outlooks on
life fundamentally opposed.  We shall take them in their logical
sequence for convenience of treatment.  The historical connection is of
no importance for our present purpose, but it is noteworthy that the
time order both of the schools of philosophy and of the corresponding
Christological systems follows approximately the logical order.



THE FIRST SOLUTION OF THE COSMIC PROBLEM--DUALISM

The first attempted solution of the cosmic problem is best expressed in
the concept "co-existence."  God _and_ the world co-exist.  God is, and
the world is; their relation is expressed by an "and."  "God and the
world" is the truth, all that man can and need know.  This solution is
verbal.  It leaves the problem more or less as it finds it.  The two
principles remain ultimates; neither is reduced to the other.  God
still stands outside the world and the world outside God.  Neither can
explain the other.  This dualism is the lowest stage of ontological
thought.  The thinker sees the problem, only to turn away from it.  He
surmises that there is some relation between the two; but he cannot
define it, and it remains ineffectual.  This was Plato's early
standpoint.  He established the idea as the truth of the thing, but he
failed to find expression for the relation between idea and ideate.  He
took refuge in symbolical language, and spoke of the thing as a "copy"
of the idea or as a "participant" in it.  But as there was no causation
on the one side or dependence on the other side, all that the earlier
Platonic philosophy achieved was in its ideal world to duplicate the
real.  Plato's heaven simply co-exists with the world, and the relation
between them is merely verbal.

This metaphysical idea survived Plato and Plato's system, and passed
into common currency.  It found and still finds expression in numerous
speculative and practical systems.  In religious ontology we find it in
deism.  According to the deist there was once at a definite point of
time a relation between God and the world, the relation of creation.
But, creation finished, the relation ceased.  In other words, God
created the world, and then withdrew into Himself, leaving the world to
work out its own salvation.  The deist believes in God; but his is a
self-contained God, who does not interfere in the course of things or
continue creating.  Such a conception of God is useless for religious
purposes, because it represents Him as out of all relation with the
world.



CHRISTOLOGICAL DUALISM--NESTORIANISM

The Christological counterpart of dualism and of deism is Nestorianism.
The Nestorians halt at the lowest stage of Christological thought.
They admit Christ to be the meeting-point of God and man, but they
nullify the admission by introducing dualism into the person of Christ.
They set out to find the solution of the cosmic problem in Christ; they
endeavour to express the relation between God and the world in terms of
His personality.  They bring the two concepts together, but they do not
weld them.  Faith and courage fail them at the critical moment.  They
substitute an association for a union.  They leave God and man
co-existing in Christ, but not united there.

Nestorianism is a halfway house on the road from Arianism to
Christianity.  It is a weak compromise.  The deity in Christ is
admitted, but its unity with humanity denied.  The divine remains
external to the human nature.  According to the doctrine ascribed to
Nestorius two persons, the son of God and the son of Mary, at the
Baptism were mysteriously associated.  The union consists partly in
identity of name, partly in the gradual deepening of the association.
As Jesus grew in spiritual power and knowledge and obedience to the
divine will, the union which at first was relative gradually deepened
towards an absolute union.  Divinity was not His birthright, but
acquired.  Thus throughout His life the two personalities remained
external to one another.  The divine worked miracles; the human
suffered.  The Nestorian could pride himself on having preserved the
reality of the divine and the reality of the human; he could worship
the one and imitate the other.  But his system was non-Christian,
because it excludes the element of mediation.  A dual personality could
never make atonement or redeem humanity.  God and man in Christ were
brought into nominal contact, but there was provided no channel by
which the divine virtue might pass into the human.  The Nestorian
remains content with his solution, because the background of his
thought is dualist.  The thinker's attitude to the cosmic problem
decides his attitude to the Christological problem.  Content to couple
God and the world by an "and," he similarly couples by an "and" the
Logos and Jesus Christ.  Dividing God from the world, he divides
Christ.  Abandoning metaphysical relation between the cosmic
principles, he despairs of finding, or, rather, has no motive for
seeking a personal relation between God and man in the being of Christ.



SECOND SOLUTION OF THE COSMIC PROBLEM--MONISM

The second solution given to the cosmic problem is of special
importance for our thesis.  It had a direct influence on monophysitism,
and may be regarded as supplying the metaphysical basis for that
heresy.  It represents an advance to a higher stage of thought, just as
monophysitism, which depends on it, is an advance on Nestorianism, and
has always been regarded as a more venial heresy.

The mind finding no satisfaction in dualism advances to monism.  The
spectacle of two unrelated ultimate principles impels it to seek and,
if necessary, to invent some mode of reconciling them.  Explain it as
we may, the craving for unity, for synthesis, for mediation is radical
in human thought.  The mind cannot rest at anything short of it.  God
and the world, held asunder conceptually or only nominally united,
constitute a contradiction _in excelsis_, and, as such, provide an
irresistible motive for further and deeper thought.

As is natural, the swing of the pendulum carries the mind to the
opposite extreme.  Co-existence failing to supply the required
solution, the key is sought in identity.  God and the world are thought
as identical.  The terms are connected by the copula.  God _is_ the
world, and the world _is_ God.  This is the truth of being, for the
monist.  The two principles are merged in one, and the contradiction
solved by an assertion of the identity of the contradictories.  Monism
takes two forms.  It may be either materialist or spiritual.  One term
must be selected as the reality, and the other written off as an
illusion.  If the thinker's bent of mind be scientific, he is disposed
to make the material world the only objective reality, and God becomes
simply a working hypothesis or a creation of the subjective mind.  It
would be beside our purpose to do more than mention this phase of
monism.  Spiritual monism, however, requires lengthier treatment; it is
of vital importance to our subject.  In this case the mind takes sides
with God as against the world.  God is the reality and the world the
illusion.  The world is God, in spite of appearances to the contrary.
As world it has no substantive reality; it has no existence for self.
It is the shadow of God, an emanation from Him, or an aspect of Him.
Like dualism, monism is only a sham solution of the cosmic problem.  It
fails to keep prominent the idea of relation.  A relation must relate.
If its terms are merged, the relation falls to the ground.  A relation
must be such that, while the terms are unified, they are preserved as
realities.  It must both unify and keep distinct.  To abandon either
God or the world is a counsel of despair.  To detract from the reality
of either is treason to fact and tantamount to a shelving of the cosmic
problem.



PHILOSOPHICAL AND THEOLOGICAL MONISM

The systems that identify God and the world range from the crude
materialism of Democritus to the lofty spiritualism of Plotinus.  Stoic
cosmology occupies an intermediate position.  The Stoic was nominally a
pantheist, but he seems to have oscillated between a spiritual and a
materialist explanation of the universal being.  The monist system that
prepared the soil for monophysitism and constantly fostered its growth
was Neo-Platonism.  In the hands of Plotinus all the main elements of
spiritual monism were worked up into a speculative philosophy with a
profound bearing on practical life.  The world and the human spirit,
for Plotinus, were simply manifestations of God.  He taught that, as
light issues from the sun and proceeds forth on its way, growing
gradually dimmer till it passes into darkness, so the world of thought
and thing has no true being apart from God, from whom it proceeded and
to whom it returns.  Spiritual monism found in Alexandria a congenial
home.  Blending there with oriental mysticism it produced a crop of
gnostic speculative systems, in all of which Acosmism or a denial of
the world was the keynote.  Whether the problem was conceived in terms
of being or of value, the result was the same.  The world has no true
being.  Its appearance of solidity is a sham.  It has no value.
Compared with God, it is negligible.  It is but the shadow cast by the
eternal sun.

The monophysite tenets traceable to monism will be considered in detail
in later chapters.  Here our concern is to show that monism supplies
the metaphysical principle on which the heresy is based; that, as
dualism provides the _a priori_ of Nestorian thought, monism provides
the _a priori_ of monophysite thought.



CHRISTOLOGICAL MONISM--MONOPHYSITISM

The essential doctrine of monophysitism is the assertion of the
absolute numerical unity of the person of Christ.  It carries to
extremes its denial of the dual personality maintained by the
Nestorians.  All vestiges of duality were banished from His being;
there were not two persons: there were not even two natures.  There was
in Christ only the one nature of God the Word.  The human nature at the
incarnation was absorbed into the divine.  It no more has substantive
existence than has the world in a pantheistic system.  This is monism
in terms of personality.  Its presuppositions are those of a mind
imbued with an all-powerful feeling for unity.  It is faced with the
problem of reconciling God and the world in the person of Jesus Christ.
It brings to that problem a prejudice against the real being and the
real value of the world.  Hence it is led to draw the false conclusion
that humanity, which is part of the world, is not a permanent element
in the highest truth; that even perfect humanity, humanity
representative of all that is noblest in the race, cannot be allowed
true existence in the Ideal.

Monism abandons the universal relation by abandoning one or other of
the terms to be related.  Monophysitism cuts a similar knot in a
similar fashion.  It jettisons redemption by excluding from the
Redeemer all kinship with that which He came to redeem.  Nominally
admitting human nature into union with deity, it destroys the reality
of that transaction at a stroke by making the two natures identical.
So the incarnation, for the monophysite, becomes a myth; no change in
the nature of the Logos took place at it, and, consequently, no change
in the nature of the Man Christ Jesus.

We may trace the likeness between the cosmic and the Christological
problems still further.  Monism is forced to attempt to give some
account of the world's apparent reality.  Similarly monophysitism had
to try to explain those facts of Christ's life which on the face of the
Gospel narrative are human and normal.  The explanation offered is
essentially the same in both systems.  The monist asserts that the
world exists only in the mind of the thinker.  It is an illusion of the
senses.  The duty of the philosopher is to overcome the illusion by
turning away from the world of sense and fixing his mind on true being;
by ascesis and contemplation he endeavours to attain the ecstatic
state, in which the illusion of the world's reality disappears, and the
potential identity of man with the universal spirit becomes actualised
in experience.  Similarly, for the monophysite, the humanity of Christ
was a creation of the senses.  Christ's body was a phantom, and His
human mind simply an aspect of Him.  They were impressions left on the
minds of His contemporaries.  Having no substantive existence, no
reality in fact, they were to be ignored in Christological dogma.  They
were not to be considered as part of the true Christ; they were not to
be worshipped.  No spiritual value attached to them.  They were
hindrances rather than helps to the religion that aimed at entire
abandonment of self and absorption in the divine.



THE THIRD SOLUTION OF THE COSMIC PROBLEM--IDENTITY IN DIFFERENCE

We come now to the third and last solution of the cosmic problem.  As
we develop it, we shall endeavour to show that it supplies that
metaphysical idea which forms the basis of catholic Christology.  The
two previous solutions failed.  They do not satisfy the philosopher and
they mislead the theologian.  The one separates God from the world; the
other merges them.  Thus both, in effect, abandon the original
enterprise.  They destroy the relation instead of expressing it.  The
concepts both of co-existence and of identity have proved fruitless in
the speculative problem, and in Christology have given rise to heresy.
The third school of thought takes as its starting point neither God,
nor the world, nor the two as co-existing, but the relation of the two.
It makes that relation such that the terms related are preserved in the
relation.  Neither identity nor difference is the full truth, but
identity in and through difference.  God is not the world, nor is the
world God.  God is, and the world is.  Each are facts.  In their
separateness they are not true facts.  It is only as we conceive the
two in their oneness, a supra-numerical oneness, that we can give their
full value to each.  The world is God's world; therefore it has being
and value.  The cosmic relation then is expressed not by an "and," nor
by an "is," but by an "of."  The God "_of_" the world is the key
concept that unlocks the doors of the palace of truth.

It was in the prominence given to this concept that Aristotle's system
made a great advance on that of his predecessor.  Plato had established
a world of ideas with the idea of the Good as its centre, but he left
it unrelated to the world of experience.  Aristotle insisted on
relating the ideal and the real.  His concept of relation was that of
form and matter.  The world apart from God is matter apart from form.
It has only potential reality.  When it becomes united to its form, it
becomes actual.  Its form makes it a fact--what it has in it to be.
Aristotle conceives different grades of being.  Unformed matter is the
lowest of these grades, and God the highest.  Each grade supplies the
matter of which the next highest grade is the form.  Ascending the
scale of being at last we reach pure form.  Thus the ladder of
development is constructed by which the world rises to its realisation
in God.  Aristotle gave to humanity the conception of a God who
transcends the world, and yet is immanent in it, as form is in matter.
Thus Greek philosophy in Aristotle attained that spiritual monotheism
which supplied the foundation for the edifice of Christian doctrine.

The effect of Aristotle's teaching was felt by all the ecclesiastical
parties in the fifth century.  As we shall see in a later chapter, some
of the subsidiary elements of his philosophy are reflected in
monophysitism.  The dominant ideas, however, of the system, the
conception of God and the world and the relation between them, were
taken over by the catholic theologians, and incorporated into their
Christology.  We need not here inquire whether Aristotle's influence
was direct or indirect.  No doubt many of the theologians who
constructed Christian doctrine had read his works.  Whether that is so
or not, they must have unconsciously assimilated his central doctrine.
It was common property.  The determination to keep God a reality and
the world a reality and yet relate the two became the controlling
motive of their thinking.

Aristotle in theory and application of theory has always a feeling for
fact.  The individual thing and the world of individual things are, for
him, never negligible.  Realised matter, life, the human spirit, human
nature, are actualities and have their value as such.  They are not all
on the same level of being; they do not occupy the same rank; and it is
the philosopher's business to determine their respective positions in
the scale of being and value.  But he cannot have his head in the
clouds of contemplation, unless he have his feet on the earth of fact.



THE ESSENCE OF CATHOLIC CHRISTOLOGY

Catholic Christology has caught the spirit of Aristotle's teaching.  It
is not primarily speculative.  It is in close touch with fact.  It is
the outcome of a deep-felt want.  Redemption is the first demand of
religious experience; so it is the motive and theme of all Christology.
The soul views itself as a member of a world of souls estranged from
God, and for its own peace and welfare seeks to effect a union between
God and the world.  Such a union, to be effective, must preserve the
being and value of the world.  If there were no world or only a
valueless world, there would be nothing to redeem, or nothing worth
redeeming.  Seeking that union in personality, and in the most
marvellous personality of history, the orthodox theologians by a true
instinct ascribed to Him both divine and human natures.  He is the
cosmic unity of opposites.  His person is the cosmic relation.  In that
person the lower term of the relation has true being and full value.
Thus the Church steered a middle course between the Scylla of
co-existence and the Charybdis of identity.

These _a priori_ deductions as to the being of Christ were verified by
a reference to fact.  The life-story of the historic Christ comprises
two distinct groups of experience.  There are thoughts, deeds, and
words attributed to Him that only God could have thought, done, and
said.  There are as well thoughts, deeds and words of His that only a
man could have thought, done and said.  Hence the diphysite doctrine
was verified _a posteriori_.  Again, in both groups of experience there
is a never-failing connecting link.  There is a unity lying deeper in
His consciousness than the duality.  Christ, the Agent, is the same in
both parts.  Whether as God or man, He is never out of character.
Hence the unity of the person also was established _a posteriori_.
Thus, to the orthodox Christologians, the expectation that the human
Ideal would be a unity, comprising divinity and humanity, was justified
by historical fact.

They found a further verification on applying the test of practice.
Orthodox Christology satisfies the requirements of the soul.  Man's
chief spiritual need is access to God through "a daysman that might lay
his hand upon both."  An exemplar, even though perfect, is not adequate
to his need.  The _unio mystica_ can only be experienced by the
leisured few.  Man demands a religion of redemption, a redemption that
allows value to labour, to endeavour, to human thought, that recognises
the reality of pain and sorrow and sin, a redemption that redeems
humanity in all its phases and in the wealth of its experiences.  An
Agent that has not shared to the full those experiences is useless for
the purpose.  Redemption must be the work of One who knows God and
knows man, of One who has the touch of sympathy; for to such a touch
alone can humanity respond.  The Christology that makes Christ Jesus
consubstantial with God and with man satisfies man's deep-felt need.



SUMMARY OF THE CHAPTER

We have taken a triad of ontologies and a triad of Christological
systems, placed them side by side, and examined them.  The result of
that examination is a triple correspondence.  The metaphysical
principle is found in each case worked out in a corresponding
Christology.  The comparison is of general interest.  It reveals
Christology as intimately connected with the workings of intellect, as
in the main stream of the current of human thought, as capable of
philosophic treatment.  Further than that, the comparison is vital to
the main argument of this essay.  It provides the clue to the heart of
our subject.  The scientist, who wishes to understand a botanical
specimen, pays as much attention to what is in the ground as to what is
above ground.  The seed and roots are as full of scientific interest as
are stem, leaf and flower.  Similarly, to understand the monophysite
heresy, to be able to detect it and expose it, we must take it in the
germ.  We may push the illustration further.  The properties of a
botanical specimen are best studied in connection with organisms of
allied species.  We cannot isolate unless we compare.  By comparison
the essential features, functions and properties of the specimen under
examination are elucidated.

It is by isolating the three germinal ideas of these three
Christological systems and comparing them, that a full comprehension of
monophysitism in all its stages, from seed to flower, is reached.  We
have used this method, and have found that the roots of the heresy lie
in spiritual monism.  In subsequent chapters we shall analyse its
origins as a historical system, its specific tenets and its practical
consequences.  It will then be seen that the spirit of monism pervades
the whole system.




