PART III


Containing prophetic observations relating to the affairs of Europe and
of Great Britain, more particularly from 1720 to 1729.

1.  In the latter end of 1720, an eminent old lady shall bring forth five
sons at a birth; the youngest shall live and grow up to maturity, but the
four eldest shall either die in the nursery, or be all carried off by one
sudden and unexpected accident.

2.  About this time a man with a double head shall arrive in Britain from
the south.  One of these heads shall deliver messages of great importance
to the governing party, and the other to the party that is opposite to
them.  The first shall believe the monster, but the last shall discover
the impostor, and so happily disengage themselves from a snare that was
laid to destroy them and their posterity.  After this the two heads shall
unite, and the monster shall appear in his proper shape.

3.  In the year 1721, a philosopher from Lower Germany shall come, first
to Amsterdam in Holland, and afterwards to London.  He will bring with
him a world of curiosities, and among them a pretended secret for the
transmutation of metals.  Under the umbrage of this mighty secret he
shall pass upon the world for some time; but at length he shall be
detected, and proved to be nothing but an empiric and a cheat, and so
forced to sneak off, and leave the people he has deluded, either to
bemoan their loss, or laugh at their own folly.  N.B.--This will be the
last of his sect that will ever venture in this part of the world upon
the same errand.

4.  In this year great endeavours will be used for procuring a general
peace, which shall be so near a conclusion that public rejoicings shall
be made at the courts of several great potentates upon that account; but
just in the critical juncture, a certain neighbouring prince shall come
to a violent death, which shall occasion new war and commotion all over
Europe; but these shall continue but for a short time, and at last
terminate in the utter destruction of the first aggressors.

5.  Towards the close of this year of mysteries, a person that was born
blind shall have his sight restored, and shall see ravens perch upon the
heads of traitors, among which the head of a notorious prelate shall
stand upon the highest pole.

6.  In the year 1722, there shall be a grand congress, and new overtures
of peace offered by most of the principal parties concerned in the war,
which shall have so good effect that a cessation of arms shall be agreed
upon for six months, which shall be kept inviolable till a certain
general, either through treachery or inadvertency, shall begin
hostilities before the expiration of the term; upon which the injured
prince shall draw his sword, and throw the scabbard into the sea, vowing
never to return it till he shall obtain satisfaction for himself, and
done justice to all that were oppressed.

7.  At the close of this year, a famous bridge shall be broken down, and
the water that runs under it shall be tinctured with the blood of two
notorious malefactors, whose unexpected death shall make mighty
alterations in the present state of affairs, and put a stop to the ruin
of a nation, which must otherwise have been unavoidable.

8.  1723 begins with plots, conspiracies, and intestine commotions in
several countries; nor shall Great Britain itself be free from the
calamity.  These shall continue till a certain young prince shall take
the reins of government into his own hands; and after that, a marriage
shall be proposed, and an alliance concluded between two great
potentates, who shall join their forces, and endeavour, in good earnest,
to set all matters upon a right foundation.

9.  This year several cardinals and prelates shall be publicly censured
for heretical principles, and shall narrowly escape from being torn to
pieces by the common people, who still look upon them as the grand
disturbers of public tranquillity, perfect incendiaries, and the chief
promoters of their former, present, and future calamities.

10.  In 1724-5 there will be many treaties and negociations, and Great
Britain, particularly, will be crowded with foreign ministers and
ambassadors from remote princes and states.  Trade and commerce will
begin to flourish and revive, and everything will have a comfortable
prospect, until some desperadoes, assisted by a monster with many heads,
shall start new difficulties, and put the world again into a flame; but
these shall be but of short duration.

11.  Before the expiration of 1725, an eagle from the north shall fly
directly to the south, and perch upon the palace of a prince, and first
unravel the bloody projects and designs of a wicked set of people, and
then publicly discover the murder of a great king, and the intended
assassination of another greater than he.

12.  In 1726, three princes will be born that will grow up to be men, and
inherit the crowns of three of the greatest monarchies in Europe.

13.  About this time the pope will die, and after a great many intrigues
and struggles, a Spanish cardinal shall be elected, who shall decline the
dignity, and declare his marriage with a great lady, heiress of one of
the chief principalities in Italy, which may occasion new troubles in
Europe, if not timely prevented.

14.  In 1727, new troubles shall break out in the north, occasioned by
the sudden death of a certain prince, and the avarice and ambition of
another.  Poor Poland seems to be pointed at; but the princes of the
south shall enter into a confederacy to preserve her, and shall at length
restore her peace, and prevent the perpetual ruin of her constitution.

15.  Great endeavours will be used about this time for a comprehension in
religion, supported by crafty and designing men, and a party of mistaken
zealots, which they shall artfully draw in to join with them; but as the
project is ill-concerted, and will be worse managed, it will come to
nothing; and soon afterwards an effectual mode will be taken to prevent
the like attempt for the future.

16. 1728 will be a year of inquiry and retrospection.  Many exorbitant
grants will be reassumed, and several persons who thought themselves
secure will be called before the senate, and compelled to disgorge what
they have unjustly pillaged either from the crown or the public.

17.  About this time a new scaffold will be erected upon the confines of
a certain great city, where an old count of a new extraction, that has
been of all parties and true to none, will be doomed by his peers to make
his first appearance.  After this an old lady who has often been exposed
to danger and disgrace, and sometimes brought to the very brink of
destruction, will be brought to bed of three daughters at once, which
they shall call Plenty, Peace, and Union; and these three shall live and
grow up together, be the glory of their mother, and the comfort of
posterity for many generations.

* * * * *

This is the substance of what he either writ or extracted from his papers
in the interval between the loss of his speech and the return of his fit,
which happened exactly at the time he had computed.

Upon the approach of his fit, he made signs to be put to bed, which was
no sooner done but he was seized with extreme agonies, which he bore up
under with the greatest steadfastness, and after a severe conflict, that
lasted near eight hours, he expired.

Thus lived and thus died this extraordinary person; a person, though of
mean extraction and obscure life, yet when his character comes to be
fully and truly known, it will be read with pleasure, profit, and
admiration.

His perfections at large would be the work of a volume, and inconsistent
with the intention of these papers.  I will, therefore, only add, for a
conclusion, that he was a man of uncommon thought and judgment, and
always kept his appetites and inclinations within their just limits.

His reason was strong and manly, his understanding sound and active, and
his temper so easy, equal, and complaisant, that he never fell out,
either with men or accidents.  He bore all things with the highest
affability, and computed justly upon their value and consequence, and
then applied them to their proper uses.




A LETTER FROM OXFORD


Sir,

Being informed that you speedily intend to publish some memoirs relating
to our dumb countryman, Dickory Cronke, I send you herewith a few lines,
in the nature of an elegy, which I leave you to dispose of as you think
fit.  I knew and admired the man; and if I were capable, his character
should be the first thing I would attempt.

Yours. &c.



AN ELEGY,
IN MEMORY OF DICKORY CRONKE,
THE DUMB PHILOSOPHER.


   Vitiis nemo sine nascitur; optimus ille est,
   Qui minimus urgetur.--HORACE.

If virtuous actions emulation raise,
Then this good man deserves immortal praise.
When nature such extensive wisdom lent,
She sure designed him for our precedent.
Such great endowments in a man unknown,
Declare the blessings were not all his own;
But rather granted for a time to show
What the wise hand of Providence can do.
In him we may a bright example see
Of nature, justice, and morality;
A mind not subject to the frowns of fate,
But calm and easy in a servile state.
He always kept a guard upon his will
And feared no harm because he knew no ill.
A decent posture and an humble mien,
In every action of his life were seen.
Through all the different stages that he went,
He still appeared both wise and diligent:
Firm to his word, and punctual to his trust,
Sagacious, frugal, arable, and just.
No gainful views his bounded hopes could sway,
No wanton thought led his chaste soul astray.
In short, his thoughts and actions both declare,
Nature designed him her philosopher;
That all mankind, by his example taught,
Might learn to live, and manage every thought.
Oh! could my muse the wondrous subject grace,
And, from his youth, his virtuous actions trace;
Could I in just and equal numbers tell
How well he lived, and how devoutly fell,
I boldly might your strict attention claim,
And bid you learn, and copy out the man.

J. P.

Exeter College, August 25th, 1719.




EPITAPH


The occasion of this epitaph was briefly thus:--A gentleman, who had
heard much in commendation of this dumb man, going accidentally to the
churchyard where he was buried, and finding his grave without a
tombstone, or any manner of memorandum of his death, he pulled out his
pencil, and writ as follows:--

   PAUPER UBIQUE JACET.

   Near to this lonely unfrequented place,
   Mixed with the common dust, neglected lies
   The man that every muse should strive to grace,
   And all the world should for his virtue prize.
   Stop, gentle passenger, and drop a tear,
   Truth, justice, wisdom, all lie buried here.

   What, though he wants a monumental stone,
   The common pomp of every fool or knave,
   Those virtues which through all his actions shone
   Proclaim his worth, and praise him in the grave.
   His merits will a bright example give,
   Which shall both time and envy too outlive.

   Oh, had I power but equal to my mind,
   A decent tomb should soon this place adorn,
   With this inscription: Lo, here lies confined
   A wondrous man, although obscurely born;
   A man, though dumb, yet he was nature's care,
   Who marked him out her own philosopher.





