CHAPTER VI.

BACON'S "TEMPORIS PARTUS MAXIMUS."


Francis Bacon was at Blois with Sir Amias Paulet in 1577. In the same
year was published the first edition of the first part of "Académie
Francoise par Pierre de la Primaudaye Esceuyer, Seignor dudict lieu et
de la Barrée, Gentilhomme ordinaire de la chambre du Roy." The
dedication, dated February, 1577 (_i.e._, 1578) is addressed, "Au
Tres-chrestien Roy de France et de Polongne Henry III. de ce nom." The
first English translation, by T. B., was "published in 1586[9],
imprinted at London by Edmund Bollifant for G. Bishop and Ralph
Newbery." Other parts of "The Academy" followed at intervals of years,
but the first and only complete edition in English bears date 1618, and
was printed for Thomas Adams. Over the dedication is the well-known
archer emblem. It is a thick folio volume, with 1,038 pages double
columns. It may be termed the first Encyclopædia which appeared in any
language, and is, perhaps, one of the most remarkable productions of the
Elizabethan era. Little is known of Pierre de la Primaudaye. The
particulars for his biography in the "Biographie Nationale" seem to have
been taken from references made to the author in the "French Académie"
itself. In the French Edition, 1580, there is a portrait of a man, and
under it the words "Anag. de L'auth. Par la prierè Dieu m'ayde." The
following is an extract from the dedication:--

     "The dinner of that prince of famous memorie, was a second table of
     Salomon, vnto which resorted from euerie nation such as were best
     learned, that they might reape profit and instruction. Yours, Sir,
     being compassed about with those, who in your presence daily
     discourse of, and heare discoursed many graue and goodly matters,
     seemeth to be a schoole erected to teach men that are borne to
     vertue. And for myselfe, hauing so good hap during the assemblie of
     your Estates at Blois, as to be made partaker of the fruit gathered
     thereof, it came in my mind to offer vnto your Maiestie a dish of
     diuers fruits, which I gathered in a Platonicall garden or orchard,
     otherwise called an ACADEMIE, where I was not long since with
     certaine yoong Gentlemen of Aniou my companions, discoursing
     togither of the institution in good maners, and of the means how
     all estates and conditions may liue well and happily. And although
     a thousand thoughts came then into my mind to hinder my purpose, as
     the small authoritie, which youth may or ought to haue in counsell
     amongst ancient men: the greatnes of the matter subject, propounded
     to be handled by yeeres of so small experience; the forgetfulness
     of the best foundations of their discourses, which for want of a
     rich and happie memorie might be in me: my iudgement not sound
     ynough, and my profession vnfit to set them downe in good order:
     briefly, the consideration of your naturall disposition and rare
     vertue, and of the learning which you receiuve both by reading good
     authors, and by your familiar communication with learned and great
     personages that are neere about your Maiestie (whereby I seemed to
     oppose the light of an obscure day, full of clouds and darkness, to
     the bright beames of a very cleere shining sonne, and to take in
     hand, as we say, to teach Minerua). I say all these reasons being
     but of too great weight to make me change my opinion, yet calling
     to mind manie goodlie and graue sentences taken out of sundry
     Greeke and Latine Philosophers, as also the woorthie examples of
     the liues of ancient Sages and famous men, wherewith these
     discourses were inriched, which might in delighting your noble mind
     renew your memorie with those notable sayings in the praise of
     vertue and dispraise of vice, which you alwaies loued to heare: and
     considering also that the bounty of Artaxerxes that great Monarke
     of the Persians was reuiued in you, who receiued with a cheerfull
     countenance a present of water of a poore laborer, when he had no
     need of it, thinking to be as great an act of magnanimitie to take
     in good part, and to receiue cheerfully small presents offered with
     a hartie and good affection, as to giue great things liberally, I
     ouercame whatsoeuer would haue staied me in mine enterprise."

It appears, therefore, that the author by good hap was a visitor at the
Court of Henry III. when at Blois; that he was there studying with
certain young gentlemen of Anjou, his companions; that he was a youth,
and of years of small experience; that his memory might not be
sufficiently rich and happy, his judgment not enough, and his profession
unfit in recording the discourses of himself and his companions.

"The Author to the Reader" is an essay on Philosophy, every sentence in
which seems to have the same familiar sound as essays which subsequently
appeared under another name. The contents of the several chapters are
enumerated thus: "Of Man," "Of the Body and Soule," etc.

The first chapter contains a description of how the "Academie" came
about. An ancient wise gentleman of great calling having spent the
greater part of his years in the service of two kings, and of his
country, France, for many and good causes had withdrawn himself to his
house. He thought that to content his mind, which always delighted in
honest and vertuous things, he could not bring greater profit to the
Monarchie of France, than to lay open and preserve and keep youth from
the corruption which resulted from the over great license and excessive
liberty granted to them in the Universities. He took unto his house four
young gentlemen, with the consent of their parents who were
distinguished noblemen. After he had shown these young men the first
grounds of true wisdom, and of all necessary things for their salvation,
he brought into his house a tutor of great learning and well reported of
his good life and conversation, to whom he committed their instruction.
After teaching them the Latin tongue and some smattering of Greek he
propounded for their chief studies the moral philosophy of ancient sages
and wise men, together with the understanding and searching out of
histories which are the light of life. The four fathers, desiring to see
what progress their sons had made, decided to visit them. And because
they had small skill in the Latin tongue, they determined to have their
children discourse in their own natural tongue of all matters that might
serve for the instruction and reformation of every estate and calling,
in such order and method as they and their master might think best. It
was arranged that they should meet in a walking place covered over with
a goodly green arbour, and daily, except Sundays, for three weeks,
devote two hours in the morning and two hours after dinner to these
discourses, the fathers being in attendance to listen to their sons. So
interesting did these discussions become that the period was often
extended to three or four hours, and the young men were so intent upon
preparation for them that they would not only bestow the rest of the
days, but oftentimes the whole night, upon the well studying of that
which they proposed to handle. The author goes on to say:--"During which
time it was my good hap to be one of the companie when they began their
discourses, at which I so greatly wondered that I thought them worthy to
be published abroad." From this it would appear that the author was a
visitor, privileged, with the four fathers and the master, to listen to
the discourses of these four young men. But, a little further on the
position is changed; one of the four young men is, without any
explanation, ignored, and his father disappointed! For the author takes
his place, as will be seen from the following extract:--

     "And thus all fower of us followed the same order daily until
     everie one in his course had intreated according to appointment,
     both by the precepts of doctrine, as also by the examples of the
     lives of ancient Sages and famous men, of all things necessary for
     the institution of manners and happie life of all estates and
     callings in this French Monarchie. But because I knowe not whether,
     in naming my companions by their proper names, supposing thereby to
     honour them as indeede they deserve it, I should displease them
     (which thing I would not so much as thinke) I have determined to do
     as they that play on a Theater, who under borrowed maskes and
     disguised apparell, do represent the true personages of those whom
     they have undertaken to bring on the stage. I will therefore call
     them by names very agreeable to their skill and nature: the first
     ASER which signifieth _Felicity_: the second AMANA which is as much
     to say as _Truth_: the third ARAM which noteth to us _Highness_;
     and to agree with them as well in name as in education and
     behaviour. I will name myself ACHITOB[10] which is all one with
     _Brother of goodness_. Further more I will call and honour the
     proceeding and finishing of our sundry treatises and discourses
     with this goodlie and excellent title of Academie, which was the
     ancient and renowned school amongst the Greek Philosophers, who
     were the first that were esteemed, and that the place where Plato,
     Xenophon, Poleman, Xenocrates, and many other excellent personages,
     afterward called Academicks, did propound & discourse of all things
     meet for the instruction and teaching of wisdome: wherein we
     purposed to followe them to our power, as the sequele of our
     discourses shall make good proofe."

And then the discourses commence.

"Love's Labour's Lost" was published in 1598, and was the first quarto
upon which the name of Shakespeare was printed. The title-page states
that it is "newly corrected and augmented," from which it may be
inferred that there was a previous edition, but no copy of such is
known. The commentators are in practical agreement that it was probably
the first play written by the dramatist.

There are differences of opinion as to the probable date when it was
written. Richard Grant White believes this to be not later than 1588,
Knight gives 1589, but all this is conjecture.

The play opens with a speech by Ferdinand:--

  "Let Fame that all hunt after in their lives,
  Live registred upon our brazen Tombes,
  And then grace us, in the disgrace of death:
  When spight of cormorant devouring time,
  Th' endevour of this present breath may buy:
  That honour which shall bate his sythes keene edge,
  And make us heyres of all eternitie.
  Therefore brave Conquerours, for so you are,
  That warre against your own affections,
  And the huge Armie of the worlds desires.
  Our late Edict shall strongly stand in force,
  Navar shall be the wonder of the world.
  Our Court shall be a little Achademe,
  Still and contemplative in living Art.
  You three, Berowne, Doumaine, and Longavill,
  Have sworne for three yeeres terme, to live with me,
  My fellow Schollers, and to keepe those statutes
  That are recorded in this schedule heere.
  Your oathes are past, and now subscribe your names;
  That his owne hand may strike his honour downe,
  That violates the smallest branch heerein:
  If you are arm'd to doe, as sworne to do,
  Subscribe to your deepe oathes, and keepe it to."

Four young men in the French "Academie" associated together, as in
"Love's Labour Lost," to war against their own affections and the whole
army of the world's desires. Dumaine, in giving his acquiescence to
Ferdinand, ends:--

  "To love, to wealth, to pompe, I pine and die
  With all these living in Philosophie."

Philosophie was the subject of study of the four young men to the
"Academie."

Berowne was a visitor, for he says:--

  "I only swore to study with your grace
  And stay heere in your Court for three yeeres' space."

Upon his demurring to subscribe to the oath as drawn, Ferdinand
retorts:--

  Well, sit you out: go home, Berowne: adue."

To which Berowne replies:--

  No, my good lord; I have sworn to stay with you."

Achitob was a visitor at the Academie in France. There are other points
of resemblance, but sufficient has been said to warrant consideration of
the suggestion that the French "Academie" contains the serious studies
of the four young men whose experiences form the subject of the play.

The parallels between passages in the Shakespeare plays and the French
"Academie" are numerous, but they form no part of the present
contention.

One of these may, however, be mentioned. In the third Tome the following
passage occurs[11]:--

     Psal. xix.: "It is not without cause that the Prophet said (The
     heavens declare the glory of God, and the earth sheweth the workes
     of his handes) For thereby he evidently teacheth, as with the
     finger even to our eies, the great and admirable providence of God
     their Creator; even as if the heavens should speake to anyone. In
     another place it is written (Eccles. xliii.): (This high ornament,
     this cleere firmament, the beauty of the heaven so glorious to
     behold, tis a thing full of Majesty)."

On turning to the revised version of the Bible it will be found that the
first verse is thus translated: "The pride of the height, the cleare
firmament the beauty of heaven with his glorious shew." The rendering of
the text in "The French Academy" is strongly suggestive of Hamlet's
famous soliloquy. "This most excellent canopy, this brave o'erhanging
firmament, this majestical roof fritted with golden fire, why it appears
to me no other than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours." The
author has forsaken the common-place rendering of the Apocrypha, and has
adopted the same declamatory style which Shakespeare uses. It is
strongly reminiscent of Hamlet's famous speech, Act II., scene ii.

Only one of the Shakespeare commentators makes any reference to the
work. The Rev. Joseph Hunter, writing in 1844, points out that the
dramatist in "As You Like It," describing the seven ages of man, follows
the division made in the chapter on "The Ages of Man" in the
"Academie."[12]

The suggestion now made is that the French "Academie" was written by
Bacon, who is represented in the dialogues as Achitob--the first part
when he was about 18 years of age, that he continued it until, in 1618,
the complete work was published. In the dedication the author describes
himself as a youth of immature experience, but the contents bear
evidence of a wide knowledge of classical authors and their works, a
close acquaintance with the ancient philosophies, and a store of general
information which it would be impossible for any ordinary youth of such
an age to possess. But was not the boy who at 15 years of age left
Cambridge disagreeing with the teaching there of Aristotle's philosophy,
and whose mental qualities and acquirements provoked as "the natural
ejaculation of the artist's emotion" the significant words, "_Si tabula
daretur digna animum mallem_," altogether abnormal?

Was the "French Academie" Bacon's _temporis partus maximus_? It is only
in a letter written to Father Fulgentio about 1625 that this work is
heard of. Bacon writes: "Equidem memini me, quadraginta abhinc annis,
juvenile opusculum circa has res confecisse, quod magna prorsus fiducia
et magnifico titulo 'Temporis Partum Maximum' inscripsi."[13]

Spedding says: "This was probably the work of which Henry Cuffe (the
great Oxford scholar who was executed in 1601 as one of the chief
accomplices in the Earl of Essex's treason) was speaking when he said
that 'a fool could not have written it and a wise man would not.'
Bacon's intimacy with Essex had begun about thirty-five years before
this letter was written."

Forty years from 1625 would carry back to 1585, the year preceding the
date of publication of the first edition in English. If Cuffe's remark
was intended to apply to the "French Academy," it is just such a
criticism as the book might be expected to provoke.

The first edition of "The French Academie" in English appeared in 1586,
the second in 1589, the third (two parts) in 1594, the fourth (three
parts) in 1602, the fifth in 1614 (all quartos), then, in 1618, the
large folio edition containing the fourth part "never before published
in English." It appears to have been more popular in England than it was
in France. Brunet in his 1838 edition mentions neither the book nor the
author, Primaudaye. The question as to whether there was at this time a
reading public in England sufficiently wide to absorb an edition in
numbers large enough to make the publication of this and similar works
possible at a profit will be dealt with hereafter. In anticipation it
may be said that the balance of probabilities justifies the conjecture
that the issue of each of these editions involved someone in loss, and
the folio edition involved considerable loss.

A comparison between the French and English publications points to both
having been written by an author who was a master of each language
rather than that the latter was a mere translation of the former. The
version is so natural in idiom and style that it appears to be an
original rather than a translation. In 1586 how many men were there who
could write such English? The marginal notes are in the exact style of
Bacon. "A similitude"--"A notable comparison"--occur frequently just as
the writer finds them again and again in Bacon's handwriting in volumes
which he possesses. The book abounds in statements, phrases, and
quotations which are to be found in Bacon's letters and works.

One significant fact must be mentioned. The first letter of the text in
the dedication in the first English translation is the letter S. It is
printed from a wood block (Fig. I.). Thirty-nine years after (in 1625)
when the last edition of Bacon's Essays--and, with the exception of the
small pamphlet containing his versification of certain Psalms, the last
publication during his life--was printed, that identical wood block
(Fig. II.) was again used to print the first letter in the dedication
of that book. Every defect and peculiarity in the one will be found in
the other. A search through many hundreds of books printed during these
thirty-nine years--1586 to 1625--has failed to find it used elsewhere,
except on one occasion, either then, before, or since.

Did Bacon mark his first work on philosophy and his last book by
printing the first letter in each from the same block?[14]

  [Illustration: _Fig. I._

  The first letter in the text of the dedication of the 1st edition of
  the English translation of the "French Academie," =1586=. Printed at
  London by G. Bollifant. The block is also used in a similar manner
  in the 2nd edition, =1589=. Londini Impensis, John Bishop.]

  [Illustration: _Fig. II._

  The first letter in the text of the dedication of the =1625= edition
  of Bacon's Essays, printed in London, by John Haviland.]

  _Both letters were printed from the same block._


FOOTNOTES:

[9] In the "Gesta Grayorum" one of the articles which the Knights of the
Helmet were required to vow to keep, each kissing his helmet as he took
his vow, was "Item--every Knight of this Order shall endeavour to add
conference and experiment to reading; and therefore shall not only read
and peruse 'Guizo,' 'The French Academy,' 'Galiatto the Courtier,'
'Plutarch,' 'The Arcadia,' and the Neoterical writers from time to
time," etc. The "Gesta Grayorum," which was written in 1594, was not
published until 1687. The manuscript was probably incorrectly read as to
the titles of the books. "Galiatto," apparently, should be "Galateo,"
described in a letter of Gabriel Harvey as "The Italian Archbishop brave
Galateo." The "Courtier" is the Italian work by Castiglione which was
Englished by Sir Thomas Hoby. "Guizo" should be "Guazzo." Stefano
Guazzo's "Civil Conversation"--four books--was Englished by G. Pettie
and Young.

[10] "Hit" is used by Chaucer as the past participle of "Hide." The name
thus yields a suggestive anagram, "Bacohit."

[11] 1618 Edition, page 712.

[12] In addition to this and to the "Gesta Grayorum" (1692) I have only
been able to find two references to "The French Academy" in the works of
English writers.

J. Payne Collier, in his "Poetical Decameron," Vol. II., page 271, draws
attention to the epistle "to the Christian reader" prefixed to the
second part, and suggests that the initials T.B. which occur at the end
of the dedicatory epistle stand for Thomas Beard, the author of "Theatre
of God's Judgments." Collier does not appear to have read "The French
Academy." Dibdin, in "Notes on More's Utopia," says, "But I entreat the
reader to examine (if he be fortunate enough to possess the book) "The
French Academy of Primaudaye," a work written in a style of peculiarly
impressive eloquence, and which, not very improbably, was the foundation
of Derham's and Paley's "Natural Theology."

[13] "It being now forty years as I remember, since I composed a
juvenile work on this subject which with great confidence and a
magnificent title I named "The greatest birth of Time."

[14] The block was used on page 626 of the 1594 quarto edition of
William Camden's "Britannia," published in London by George Bishop, who
was the publisher of the 1586, 1589, and 1594 editions of "The French
Academy." There is a marginal note at the foot of the imprint of the
block commencing "R. Bacons." Francis Bacon is known to have assisted
Camden in the preparation of this work. The manuscript bears evidence of
the fact in his handwriting.




