CHAPTER XV.

BURGHLEY AND BACON.


There was published in 1732 "The Life of the Great Statesman William
Cecil, Lord Burghley." The preface signed by Arthur Collins states:--

     The work I have for several years engaged in, of treating of those
     families that have been Barons of this Kingdom, necessarily induced
     me to apply to our Nobility for such helps, as might illustrate the
     memory of their ancestors. And several Noblemen having favour'd me
     with the perusal of their family evidences, and being recommended
     to the Right Honourable the present Earl of Exeter, his Lordship
     out of just regard to the memory of his great Ancestor, was pleased
     to order the manuscript Life of the Lord Burghley to be
     communicated to me.

     Which being very old and decayed and only legible to such who are
     versed in ancient writings it was with great satisfaction that I
     copied it literatim. And that it may not be lost to the world, I
     now offer it to the view of the publick. It fully appears to be
     wrote in the reign of Queen Elizabeth soon after his Lordship's
     death, by one who was intimate with him, and an eye witness of his
     actions for the last twenty-five years. It needs no comment to set
     it off; that truth and sincerity which shines through the whole,
     will, I don't doubt have the same weight with the Readers as it had
     with me and that they will be of opinion it's too valuable to be
     buried in oblivion.

This "Life of Lord Burghley" is referred to by Nares and other of his
biographers as having been written by "a domestic." It contains about
16,000 words and is the most authentic account extant of the great
statesman's life. The narrative is full, but the observations on the
character and habits of Burghley are by far the most important feature.
The method of treatment of the subject is after Bacon's style; the Life
abounds with phrases and with tricks of diction, which enable it to be
identified as his. The concluding sentences could only have been written
with Bacon's pen:--

     And so leaving his soule with God, his fame to the world, and the
     truth to all charitable mynds, I leave the sensure to all judicious
     Christians, who truly practising what they professe, will better
     approve, and more indifferentlie interpret it, than envie or malice
     can disprove it. The best sort will ever doe right, the worst can
     but imagine mischief and doe wrong; yet this is a comfort, the more
     his virtues are troden downe, the more will theire brightnes
     appeare. Virtus vulnerata virescit.

In 1592 the "Responsio ad edictum Reginæ Angliæ" of the Jesuit Parsons
had appeared, attacking the Queen and her advisers (especially
Burghley), to whom were attributed all the evils of England and the
disturbances of Christendom. The reply to this was entrusted to Francis
Bacon, who responded with a pamphlet entitled "Certain observations upon
a libel published this present year, 1592." It was first printed by Dr.
Rawley in the "Resuscitatio" in 1657. At the time it was written it was
circulated largely in manuscript, for at least eight copies, somewhat
varying from each other, have been preserved.[37] It is quite possible
that it was printed at the time, but that no copy has survived.
Throughout the whole work there are continual references to Burghley.
Chapter VI. is entirely devoted to his defence and is headed "Certain
true general notes upon the actions of the Lord Burghley." Either "The
Life" and the "Observations on a Libel" are by the same writer or the
author of the former borrowed the latter very freely.

It is to be regretted that the original manuscript of the "Life" cannot
now be found. In 1732 it was at Burghley House. Application has been
made to the present Marquis of Exeter for permission to inspect it, but
his Lordship's librarian has no knowledge of its existence. If it could
be examined it is probable that if the text was not in Bacon's
handwriting some notes or alterations might be recognised as his. The
writer says he was an eye witness of Burghley's life and actions
twenty-five years together--that would be from 1573 to 1598, which would
well accord with the present contention. If Bacon was the author it
throws considerable light on his relations with Burghley and establishes
the fact that they were of the most cordial and affectionate character.
It is reported that Bacon said that in the time of the Burghleys--father
and son--clever or able men were repressed, and mainly upon this has
been based the impression that Burghley opposed Francis Bacon's
progress.

Burghley's biographer refers to this report. He writes: "He was careful
and desirous to furder and advaunce men of quality and desart to be
Councellors and officers to her Majesty wherein he placed manie and
laboured to bring in more ... yet would envy with her slaunders report
he hindered men from rising; but howe true it is wise men maie judge,
for it was the Queene to take whom she pleased and not in a subject to
preferree whom he listed."

It will eventually be proved that such a report conveys an incorrect
view. In the letter of 1591,[38] addressed to Burghley, Bacon
says:--"Besides I do not find in myself so much self-love, but that the
greater parts of my thoughts are to deserve well (if I were able) of my
friends and namely of your Lordship; who being the Atlas of this
Commonwealth, the honour of my house, and the second founder of my poor
estate, I am tied by all duties, both of a good patriot, and of an
unworthy kinsman, and of an obliged servant, to employ whatsoever I am
to do your service," and later in the letter he employs the phrase,
"And if your Lordship will not carry me on," and then threatens to sell
the inheritance that he has, purchase some quick revenue that may be
executed by another, and become some sorry bookmaker or a pioneer in
that mine of truth which Anaxagoras said lay so deep.

Again, in a letter to Burghley, dated 31st March, 1594, he
says:--"Lastly, that howsoever this matter may go, yet I may enjoy your
lordship's good favour and help as I have done in regard to my private
estate, which as I have not altogether neglected so I have but
negligently attended and which hath been bettered only by yourself (the
Queen except) and not by any other in matter of importance." Further on
he says: "Thus again desiring the continuance of your Lordship's
goodness as I have hitherto found it on my part sought also to deserve,
I commend," etc.

It is very easy, with little information as to Bacon's actions and
little knowledge of the period, to form a definite opinion as to the
relations of Bacon and Burghley. The more information as to the one and
knowledge of the other one gets, the more difficult does it become to
arrive at a satisfactory conclusion. Here was the son of Elizabeth's
great Lord Keeper, the nephew of her trusted minister, himself from his
boyhood a _persona grata_ with the Queen, of brilliant parts and great
wisdom--if he had been a mere place-hunter his desires could have been
satisfied over and over again. There was some condition of circumstance,
of which nothing has hitherto been known, which prevented him from
obtaining the object of his desires. That he had a definite object, and
had mapped out a course by which he hoped to achieve it, is evident from
his letters[39] already quoted. It is equally clear that the course he
sought to pursue entailed his abandoning the law as a profession. Either
he would only have such place as he desired, and on his own terms, or
he was known to be following some course which, although not distasteful
to his close friends, caused him to be held in suspicion, if not
distrust, by the courtiers with whom Elizabeth was surrounded. Every
additional fact that comes to light seems to point to the truth being
that through his life Burghley was Francis Bacon's staunch friend and
supporter. Upon Sir Nicholas Bacon's death Burghley appears with Bodley
to have been maintaining Bacon in his travels abroad. Upon his return to
England Burghley gave him financial support in his great project. In
1591 there was a crisis--someone had been spending money for the past
twelve years freely in making English literature. That cannot be
gainsaid. Burghley appears to have pulled up and remonstrated; hence
Bacon's letter containing the threat before referred to. It is
significant that it was immediately after this letter was written that
Bacon's association with Essex commenced. Bacon would take him and
Southampton into his confidence and seek their help. Essex was just the
man to respond with enthusiasm. Francis introduced Anthony to him. The
services of the brothers were placed at his disposal, and he undertook
to manage the Queen. The office of Attorney-General for Francis would
meet the case. "It was dangerous in a factious age to have my Lord Essex
his favour," says the biographer before quoted.[40]

That Burghley was favourable to his appointment as Attorney-General two
letters written by Francis to Lord Keeper Puckering in 1594 testify. In
the first Bacon writes: "I pray your Lordship to call to remembrance my
Lord Treasurer's kind course, who affirmed directly all the rest to be
unfit. And because _vis unita fortior_ I beg your Lordship to take a
time with the Queen when my Lord Treasurer is present."

In a second letter he writes: "I thought good to remember your good
Lordship and to request you as I touched in my last that if my Lord
Treasurer be absent your Lordship would forbear to fall into my business
with her Majesty lest it mought receive some foil before the time when
it should be resolutely dealt in."

Only Burghley was found to support Essex's advocacy, and on the whole
this was not to be wondered at. Such an appointment, to say the least,
would have been an experiment. Possibly Essex was the stumbling-block,
but it may be that the real objection on the part of the Queen and her
advisers was that Bacon was known to be so amorous of certain learned
arts, so much given over to invention, that the consensus of opinion was
that he was thereby unfitted to hold an important office of the State.
Or it may be that he was discredited by his suspected or known
association with certain printers. There was some reason of which no
explanation can now be traced.

It has been suggested that in 1591 there was a crisis in Bacon's life.
That is evident from the letter to Burghley written in that year. John
Harrington's translation of "Orlando Furioso" was published about this
time. The manuscript, which is in a perfect condition, is in the British
Museum, and has been marked in Bacon's handwriting throughout. The
pagination and the printer's signature are placed at the commencement of
the stanzas to be printed on each page, and there are instructions to
the printer at the end which are not in his hand.

There are good grounds for attributing the notes at the end of each
chapter to Bacon.

It is very improbable that Sir John Harrington had the classical
knowledge which the writer of these notes must have possessed. There is
a letter written by him to Sir Amias Pawlett, dated January, 1606-7. He
is relating an interview with King James, and says: "Then he (the king)
enquyrede muche of lernynge and showede me his owne in such sorte as
made me remember my examiner at Cambridge aforetyme. He soughte muche to
knowe my advances in philosophie and utterede profounde sentences of
Aristotle and such lyke wryters, whiche I had never reade and which some
are bolde enoughe to saye others do not understand." It would be
difficult to mention any classical author with whose works the writer of
these notes was not familiar, or to believe that "Epigrams both Pleasant
and Serious" (1615) came from the pen of that writer.

At the end of the thirty-seventh chapter the following note occurs: "It
was because she (Porcia) wrote some verses in manner of an Epitaph upon
her husband after his decease: In which kind, that honourable Ladie
(widow of the late Lord John Russell) deserveth no lesse commendation,
having done as much for two husbands. And whereas my author maketh so
great bost only of one learned woman in Italie, I may compare (besides
one above all comparison that I have noted in the twentith booke) three
or foure in England out of one family, and namely the sisters of that
learned Ladie, as witness that verse written by the meanest of the foure
to the Ladie Burlie which I doubt if Cambridge or Oxford can mend."

  The  four         Si mihi quem cupio cures Mildreda   She wrote to
  daughters of          remitti                         Lady Burlie
  Sir Anthonie      Tu bona, tu melior, tu mihi sola    to send a
  Cooke--               soror;                          kinsman of
    Ladie Burlie,   Sin mali cessando retines, & trans  hers into
    Ladie Russell,      mare mittis,                    Cornwall,
    Lady Bacon,     Tu mala, tu peior, tu mihi nulla    where she
    Mistress            soror.                          dwelt, and to
      Killygrew.    Is si Cornubiam, tibi pax sit &     stop his going
                        omnia læta,                     beyond sea.
                    Sin mare Ceciliæ nuncio bella.
                        Vale.[41]

The writer of the Latin verse was _not_ Ladie Russell, and it was
written _to_ Ladie Burlie, so she must either be Ladie Bacon or Mistress
Killigrew. It is not an improbable theory that Ladie Bacon was writing
to her sister Mildred, who had, through her husband, power either to
send Francis to Cornwall or permit him to be sent away over the seas.

There is a copy of Machiavelli's "History of Florence," 1595, with
Bacon's notes in the margins.[42]

At the end is a memorandum giving the dates when the book was read "in
Cornwall at," and then follow two words, the second of which is "Lake,"
but the first is undecipherable.

Is it possible that Lady Anne Bacon had a house in Cornwall which
Francis Bacon, inheriting after her death, was in the habit of visiting
for retirement? But this is conjecture.

The following point is of interest. In the "Life of Burghley" (1598) it
is said that: "Bookes weare so pleasing to him, as when he gott libertie
to goe unto his house to take ayre, if he found a book worth the
openinge, he wold rather loose his ridinge than his readinge; and yet
ryding in his garden walks upon his litle moile was his greatest
Disport: But so soone as he came in he fell to his readinge againe or
els to dispatchinge busines."

Rawley, in his "Life of Bacon" (1657), attributes an exactly similar
habit to the philosopher, and almost in identical phrase: "For he would
ever interlace a moderate relaxation of his mind with his studies as
walking, or taking the air abroad in his coach or some other befitting
recreation; and yet he would lose no time, inasmuch as upon his first
and immediate return he would fall to reading again, and so suffer no
moment of time to slip from him without some present improvement."

It is difficult to approach any phase of the life of Bacon without being
confronted with what appears to be evidence of careful preparation to
obscure the facts. This observation does not result from imagination or
prejudice; Bacon's movements are always enshrouded in mystery.
Investigation and research will, however, eventually establish as a fact
that there was a closer connection between Burghley and Bacon than
historians have recognised, and that they had a strong attachment for
each other.


FOOTNOTES:

[37] Harl. MSS., 537, pp. 26 and 71; additional MSS., 4,263, p. 144;
Harl. MSS., 6,401; Harl. MSS., 6,854, p. 203; Cambridge Univ. Lib., Mm.
V. 5; Cotton MSS., Tit., Chap. VII., p. 50 b; Harl. MSS., 859, p. 40;
Cotton MSS., Jul., F. VI., p. 158.

[38] See page 72.

[39] See pages 70, 72.

[40] See Appendix.

[41]  If you, O Mildred, will take care to send back to me him whom
        I desire,
      You will be my good, my more than good, my only sister;
      But if, unfortunately, by doing nothing you keep him back and
        send him across the sea,
      You will be bad, more than bad, nay no sister at all of mine.
      If he comes to Cornwall, peace and all joys be with you,
      But if he goes by sea to Sicily I declare war. Farewell.

[42] One note on this book contains an interesting historical fact
hitherto unknown. On page 279 the text states: "Among the Conspirators
was Nicholo Fedini whom they employed as Chauncellor, he persuaded with
a hope more certaine, revealed to Piero, all the practice argreed by his
enemies, and delivered him a note of all their names." Bacon has made
the following note in the margin: "Ex (_i.e._, Essex) did the like in
England which he burnt at Shirfr Smiths house in fenchurch Street."




