CHAPTER VII.

BACON'S FIRST ALLEGORICAL ROMANCE.


There is another work which it is impossible not to associate with this
period, and that is John Barclay's "Argenis." It is little better known
than is "The French Academy," and yet Cowper pronounced it the most
amusing romance ever written. Cardinal Richelieu is said to have been
extremely fond of reading it, and to have derived thence many of his
political maxims. It is an allegorical novel. It is proposed now only to
mention some evidence connected with the "Argenis" which supports the
contention that the 1625 English edition contains the original
composition, and that its author was young Francis Bacon.

The first edition of the "Argenis" in Latin was published in 1621. The
authority to the publisher, Nicholas Buon, to print and sell the
"Argenis" is dated the 21st July, 1621, and was signed by Barclay at
Rome. The Royal authority is dated on the 31st August following.

Barclay's death took place between these dates, on the 12th of August,
at Rome. It is reported that the cause of death was stone, but in an
appreciation of him, published by his friend, Ralph Thorie, his death is
attributed to poison.

The work is an example of the highest type of Latinity. So impressed was
Cowper with its style that he stated that it would not have dishonoured
Tacitus himself. A translation in Spanish was published in 1624, and in
Italian in 1629. The Latin version was frequently reprinted during the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries--perhaps more frequently than any
other book.

In a letter dated 11th May, 1622, Chamberlain, writing to Carleton,
says: "The King has ordered Ben Jonson to translate the 'Argenis,' but
he will not be able to equal the original." On the 2nd October, 1623,
Ben Jonson entered a translation in Stationers' Hall, but it was never
published. About that time there was a fire in Jonson's house, in which
it is said some manuscripts were destroyed; but it is a pure assumption
that the "Argenis" was one of these.

In 1629 an English translation appeared by Sir Robert Le Grys, Knight,
and the verses by Thomas May, Esquire. The title-page bears the
statement: "The prose upon his Majesty's command." There is a Clavis
appended, also stated to be "published at his Majesties command." It was
printed by Felix Kyngston for Richard Mughten and Henry Seile. In the
address to "The understanding Reader" Le Grys says, "What then should I
say? Except it were to entreate thee, that where my English phrase doth
not please thee, thou wilt compare it with the originall Latin and mend
it. Which I doe not speak as thinking it impossible, but as willing to
have it done, for the saving me a labour, who, if his Majesty had not so
much hastened the publishing it, would have reformed some things in it,
that did not give myselfe very full satisfaction."

In 1622 King James ordered a translation of the "Argenis." In 1629[15]
Charles I. was so impatient to have a translation that he hastened the
publication, thus preventing the translator from revising his work.
Three years previously, however, in 1625--if the date may be relied
on--there was published as printed by G. P. for Henry Seile a
translation by Kingesmill Long. James died on the 25th March, 1625. The
"Argenis" may not have been published in his lifetime; but if the date
be correct, three or four years before Charles hastened the publication
of Le Grys's translation, this far superior one with Kingesmill Long's
name attached to it could have been obtained from H. Seile. Surely the
publisher would have satisfied the King's impatience by supplying him
with a copy of the 1625 edition had it been on sale. The publication of
a translation of the "Argenis" must have attracted attention. Is it
possible that it could have been in existence and not brought to the
notice of the King? There is something here that requires explanation.
The Epistle Dedicatorie of the 1625 edition is written in the familiar
style of another pen, although it bears the name of Kingesmill Long. The
title-page states that it is "faithfully translated out of Latine into
English," but it is not directly in the Epistle Dedicatorie spoken of as
a translation. The following extract implies that the work had been
lying for years waiting publication:--

     "This rude piece, such as it is, hath long lyen by me, since it was
     finished; I not thinking it worthy to see the light. I had always a
     desire and hope to have it undertaken by a more able workman, that
     our Nation might not be deprived of the use of so excellent a
     Story: But finding none in so long time to have done it; and
     knowing that it spake not _English_, though it were a rich jewell
     to the learned Linguist, yet it was close lockt from all those, to
     whom education had not given more languages, than Nature Tongues: I
     have adventured to become the key to this piece of hidden Treasure,
     and have suffered myselfe to be overruled by some of my worthy
     friends, whose judgements I have alwayes esteemed, sending it
     abroad (though coursely done) for the delight and use of others."

Not a word about the author! The translations, said to be by Thomas May,
of the Latin verses in the 1629 are identical with those in the 1625
edition, although Kingesmill Long, on the title-page, appears as the
translator. Nothing can be learnt as to who or what Long was.

Over lines "Authori," signed Ovv: Fell:[16] in the 1625 edition is one
of the well-known light and dark A devices. This work is written in
flowing and majestic English; the 1629 edition in the cramped style of
translation.

The copy bearing date 1628, to which reference has been made, belonged
to John Henry Shorthouse. He has made this note on the front page: "Jno.
Barclay's description of himself under the person of Nicopompus Argenis,
p. 60." This is the description to which he alludes:--

     "Him thus boldly talking, Nicopompus could no longer endure: he was
     a man who from his infancy loved Learning; but who disdaining to be
     nothing but a booke-man had left the schooles very young, that in
     the courts of Kings and Princes, he might serve his apprenticeship
     in publicke affairs; so he grew there with an equall abilitie, both
     in learning and imployment, his descent and disposition fitting him
     for that kind of life: wel esteemed of many Princes, and especially
     of Meleander, whose cause together with the rest of the Princes, he
     had taken upon him to defend."

This description is inaccurate as applied to John Barclay, but in every
detail it describes Francis Bacon.

A comparison has been made between the editions of 1625 and 1629 with
the 1621 Latin edition. It leaves little room for doubting that the 1625
is the original work. Throughout the Latin appears to follow it rather
than to be the leader; whilst the 1629 edition follows the Latin
closely. In some cases the word used in the 1625 edition has been
incorrectly translated into the 1621 edition, and the Latin word
re-translated literally and incorrectly in view of the sense in the 1629
edition. But space forbids this comparison being further followed;
suffice it to say that everything points to the 1625 edition being the
original work.

As to the date of composition much may be said; but the present
contention is that "The French Academie," "The Argenis," and "Love's
Labour's Lost" are productions from the same pen, and that they all
represent the work of Francis Bacon probably between the years 1577 and
1580. At any rate, the first-named was written whilst he was in France,
and the others were founded on the incidents and experience obtained
during his sojourn there.


FOOTNOTES:

[15] One copy of this edition bears the date 1628.

[16] Probably Owen Felltham, author of "Felltham's Resolves."




