CHAPTER XIX.

BACON AND EMBLEMATA.


In "Shakespeare and the Emblem Writers" the Rev. Henry Green endeavours
to show the similarities of thought and expression between the great
poet and the authors of Emblemata, but the line of enquiry which he
there opened does not appear to have been followed by subsequent
writers. To-day the Emblemata literature is a _terra incognita_ except
to a very few students, and yet it is full of interest, romance, and
mystery. Emblem literature may be said to have had its origin with
Andrea Alciat, the celebrated Italian jurisconsult, who was famous for
his great knowledge and power of mind. In 1522 he published at Milan an
"Emblematum Libellus," or Little Book of Emblems. Green says: "It
established, if it did not introduce, a new style of emblem literature,
the classical in the place of the simply grotesque and humorous, or of
the heraldic and mythic." The first edition now known to exist was
published at Augsburg in 1531, a small octavo containing eighty-eight
pages with ninety-seven emblems, and as many woodcuts. It was from time
to time augmented, and passed through many editions. For some years the
Emblemata appears to have been produced chiefly by Italians, with a few
Frenchmen. Until the last half of the sixteenth century the output of
books of this character was not large. Thenceforth for the next hundred
years the creation of emblems became a popular form of literary
exercise. The Italians continued to be prolific, but Dutch, French, and
German scholars were but little behind them. There were a few Englishmen
and Spaniards who also practised the art.

In 1905 was published a book called "Letters from the Dead to the Dead,"
by Oliver Lector. In it attention is drawn to the remarkable features of
some of the books on emblems printed during Bacon's life, and to the
evidence that he was in some manner connected with the publication of
many of these volumes. The author claims this to be especially the case
with the "Emblemata Moralia et Bellica," 1615, of Jacob de Bruck, of
Angermundt, and the "Emblemata Ethic Politica" of J. Bornitius.

The emblem pictures for the most part appear to be picture puzzles. In
the "Critique upon the Mythology of the Ancients" Bacon says:--

     "It may pass for a farther indication of a concealed and secret
     meaning, that some of these fables are so absurd and idle in their
     narration as to proclaim and shew an allegory afar off. A fable
     that carries probability with it may be supposed invented for
     pleasure, or in imitation of history; but, those that would never
     be conceived or related in this way, must surely have a different
     use."

If this line of reasoning be applied to the illustrations in the emblem
books, it is clear that they conceal some hidden meaning, for they are
apparently unintelligible, and the accompanying letterpress does not
afford any illumination.

Jean Baudoin was the translator of Bacon's "Essaies" into the French
language (1626). Baudoin published in 1638-9 "Recueil D'Emblèmes divers
avec des Discours Moraux, Philos. et Polit." In the preface he says:
"Le grand chancelier Bacon m'ayant fait naître l'envie de travailler
à ces emblèmes ... m'en a fourni les principaux que j'ai tirés de
l'explication ingénieuse qu'il a donnée de quelques fables et de ses
autres ouvrages." Here is definite evidence of Bacon's association with
a book of emblems.

The first volume of Emblemata in which traces of Bacon's hand are to
be found is the 1577 edition of Alciat's "Emblems," published by the
Plantin Press, with notes by Claude Mignault. It is in this edition, in
Emblem No. 45, "In dies meliora," that for the first time the light A
and the dark A is to be found. In previous editions this device is
absent. For this volume a new design has been engraved in which it
appears.

In the emblem books written in Italian Bacon does not appear to have
been concerned, unless an exception be made of Ripa's "Iconologia," a
copy of which contains his handwriting and initials. In some way he had
control of a large number of those written in Latin, and bearing names
of Dutch, French, and some Italian authors, and also of several written
in Dutch and of the English writers. The field is a very wide one, and
only a few of the principal examples can be mentioned.

The most important work is the "Emblemata Moralia et Bellica" of Jacob à
Bruck, of Angermundt, 1615. "Argentorati per Jacobum ab Heyden." With
many of the designs in this volume Oliver Lector has dealt fully in
"Letters from the Dead to the Dead,"[46] before referred to. There is
another volume bearing the name of Jacob à Bruck, published in 1598.
Only one copy of this book is known to be in existence, and that is in
the Royal Library of St. Petersburg.

The "Emblemata Ethico Politica of Jacobus Bornitius, 1659, Moguntiæ," is
remarkable because many of the engravings contain portraits of Bacon,
namely, in Sylloge Prima, Plates Nos. vii., xxiii., xliv., xlv., xlvix.;
and in Sylloge II., Plates ix. and xxxvi. Oliver Lector says: "I have
not met with an earlier edition of Bornitius than 1659. My conjecture,
however, is that the manuscript came into the hands of Gruter with other
of Bacon's published by him in the year 1653."

There are two productions of Janus Jacobus Boissardus in which Bacon's
hand may be recognised--"Emblèmes Latines avec l'Interprétation
Françoise du I. Pierre Ioly Messin. Metis, 1588," and "Emblematum liber.
Ipsa Emblemata ab Auctore delineata: a Theodoro de Bry sculpta et nunc
recens in lucem edita," 1593, Frankfort. Two editions of the latter were
printed in the same year. The title-pages are identical, and the same
plates have been used throughout, but the letterpress is in Latin in the
one, and in French in the other. In both, the dedications are addressed
in French to Madame de Clervent, Baronne de Coppet, etc. The dedication
of the former bears the name Jan Jacques Boissard at the head, and
addresses the lady as "que come estes addonnée à la speculation des
choses qui appartiennent à l'instruction de l'âme." The dedication of
the latter is signed Ioly, who explains that he has translated the
verses into French, so that they may be of more service to the
dedicatee.

Otho Van Veen enjoys the distinction of having had Rubens for a
disciple. A considerable number of emblem books emanated from him. In
1608 were published at Antwerp two editions of his "Amorum Emblemata."
In one copy the verses are in Latin, German, and French, and in the
other in Latin, English, and Italian. There are commendatory verses in
the latter, two of which are by Daniel Heinsius and R. V., who was
Robert Verstegen, the author of "A Restitution of Decayed Intelligence
in Antiquities." The dedication is "To the most honourable and worthie
brothers William Earle of Pembroke, and Phillip Earle of Montgomerie,
patrons of learning and chevalrie," who are "the most noble and
incomparable paire of brethren" to whom the 1623 Shakespeare Folio was
dedicated. In this volume Bacon has left his marks.

"Emblemata door Zacharias Heyns," published in Rotterdam in 1625,
comprises four books bound together. The inscriptions over the plates
are in Latin. The letterpress, which is in Dutch and French, apparently
bears very little reference to the illustrations.

Johannis de Brunes I.C. Emblemata of Sinne-Werck, Amsterdam, 1624, is
written in Dutch. Emblem VIII. contains an indication that the number
1623 is a key.

The "Silenus Alcibiades sive Proteus" was published at Middleburgh in
1618. There is no author's name on the title-page, but the Voor-reden,
written in Dutch, is signed J. Cats. Attached to two of the preliminary
complimentary verses are the names of Daniel Heyns and Josuah Sylvester,
the translator of "Du Bartas." The verses are in Latin, Dutch, and
French. Immediately following the title-page is a preface in Latin,
signed by Majores de Baptis. Over this is the familiar emblem containing
the archers, rabbits, and dogs, with the note of query on the right-hand
side, and the message on the arrow. This volume is one of the most
remarkable of the emblem books. The Latin preface is autobiographical.
If the writer can be identified as the author of "Venus and Adonis," it
becomes one of the most important contributions to his biography.

In 1616, the year of Shakespeare's death, was published at Amsterdam a
book bearing on its title-page the inscription: "Cornelii Giselberti
Plempii Amsterodamum Monogrammon." It contains fifty illustrations, with
Latin verses attached. Emblem I. is reproduced (Fig. V.) On reference to
it, it will be seen that Fortune stands on a globe, and with one hand is
pushing off from the pinnacle of fame a man dressed as a player with a
feather in his hat; with the other hand she is raising up a man who is
wearing the Bacon hat, but whose face is hidden. The prophecy expressed
by the emblem is now being fulfilled. It will be seen that the initial
letters of each word in the sentence of the letterpress--Obscænùmque
nimis crepuit, Fortuna Batavis appellanda--yield F. Bacon. Bacon's
portrait is found in several of the illustrations in this book. Other
emblem writers whose works bear traces of Bacon's co-operation are
G. Rollenhagen, J. Camerius, J. Typotius, D. Hensius.

  [Illustration: _Fig. V._

    _En Fortuna: manu quos rupem ducit in altam,
      Præcipites abigit: carnificina Dea est.
    Firma globo imponi voluerunt fata caducam,
      Ipsa quoquè ut posset risus, & esse iocus.
    Olim unctos Salÿ qui præsilière per utres,
      Ridebant caderet si qua puella malè.
    O quàm sæpe sales, plausumque merente ruinâ,
      Erubuit vitium fors inhonest a suum!
    Obscænùmque nimis crepuit, Fortuna Batavis
      Appellanda; sono, quo sua curta vocant.
    Quoque sono veteres olim sua furta Latini:
      Vt nec, Homere, mali nomen odoris ames._

  C. PLEMPII.
  EMBLEMATA
  EMBL. I.]

There yet remain to be mentioned two English emblem writers. A "Choice
of Emblems" by Geffrey Whitney was published in 1586 by Francis
Raphelengius in the house of Christopher Plantin at Leyden. The
dedication is to Robert Earle of Leicester. There are only from fifteen
to twenty original designs out of 166 illustrations. The remainder are
taken from other emblem writers, chiefly from Alciat, Sambucus, Paradin,
and Hadrian Junius. On page 53 is the design headed "In dies meliora"
found in the 1577 edition of Alciat, but the letterpress, which is in
English, is quite different from the Latin verse attached to it in the
Alciat.

The "Minerva Britanna" of Henry Peacham was published in 1612. The
emblem on the title-page[47] represents the great secret of Francis
Bacon's life, and on page ·33 is an emblem in which the name Shakespeare
is represented. The volume is full of devices which will amply repay a
careful study.

Apart from any connection which Bacon may have had with this remarkable
class of books, they are of great interest to the student of the
Elizabethan and Jacobean periods. They contain pictorial representations
full of information as to the habits and customs of the people. With the
exception of Whitney's "Choice of Emblems," a facsimile reprint of which
was published in 1866, edited by the Rev. Henry Green, no reprint of any
of these curious books has been issued. As the original editions of many
of them are very rare, and of none of them plentiful, their study is a
matter of difficulty, and few students find their way to this
fascinating field of research. How close Bacon's connection was with the
writers of these books, or with their publishers, it is difficult to
say, but there is considerable evidence that in some way he was able to
introduce into every one of the books here enumerated, and many others,
some plates illustrative of his inductive philosophy.


FOOTNOTES:

[46] Bernard Quaritch, 1905.

[47] See page 105.




