CHAPTER XVI.

THE 1623 FOLIO EDITION OF SHAKESPEARE'S PLAYS.


Sir Sydney Lee has written[43]:--"As a specimen of typography, the First
Folio is not to be commended. There are a great many contemporary folios
of larger bulk far more neatly and correctly printed. It looks as though
Jaggard's printing office was undermanned. The misprints are numerous,
and are especially conspicuous in the pagination." In the same year was
published "The Theater of Honour and Knighthood," translated from the
French of Andreu Favine. William Jaggard was the printer. It is a large
folio volume containing about 1,200 pages, and is referred to as being
issued by Jaggard as an example of the printer's art to maintain his
reputation, which had suffered from the apparently careless manner in
which the Shakespeare Folio was turned out. Both books contain the same
emblematic head-pieces and tail-pieces. There are, however, some
considerable mispaginations in "The Theater of Honour." Mispaginations
were not infrequent in Elizabethan and Jacobean literature, but it is
quite possible that they were not unintentional. The most glaring
instance is to be found in the first Edition of "The Two Bookes of
Francis Bacon--Of the Proficience and Advancement in Learning, Divine
and Humane," published by Henrie Tomes (1605). Each leaf (not page) is
numbered. The 45 leaves of the first book are correctly numbered. In the
second book there is no number on leaf 6. Leaf 9 is numbered 6, the
right figure being printed upside down; 30 is numbered 33; from 31 to
70 the numbering is correct, and then the leaves are numbered as
follows:--70, 70, 71, 70, 72, 74, 73, 74, 75, 69, 77, 78, 79, 80, 77,
74, 74, 69, 69, 82, 87, 79, 89, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 99, 97, 99, 94, 100,
99, 102, 103, 103, 93, 106, and on correctly until the last page, 118,
except that 115 is numbered 105.

It is impossible to attribute this mispagination to the printer's
carelessness. This was the first work published bearing Bacon's name,
excepting the trifle of essays published in 1597. There does not appear
to have been any hurry in its production. It is quite a small volume,
and yet the foregoing remarkable mispaginations occur. There must be
some purpose in this which has yet to be found out.

The 1623 Shakespeare Folio will be found to be one of the most perfect
examples of the printer's art extant, because no work has been produced
under such difficult conditions for the printer. There are few mistakes
in pagination or spelling which are not intentional. The work is a
masterpiece of enigma and cryptic design. The lines "To the Reader"
opposite to the title-page are a table or code of numbers. The same
lines and the lettering on the title-page form another table. The
ingenuity displayed in this manipulation of words and numbers to create
analogies is almost beyond the comprehension of the human mind. The
mispaginations are all intentional and have cryptic meanings. The acme
of wit is the substitution of 993 for 399 on the last page of the
tragedies; a hundred has been omitted in "Hamlet," 257 following 156,
and other errors made in order to obtain this result on the last page.
The manner in which the printer's signatures have been arranged with the
pages is equally wonderful. The name William Shakespeare must have been
created without reference to him of Stratford, who possibly bore or had
assigned to him a somewhat similar name. A great superstructure is built
up on the exact spelling of the words William Shakespeare. The year
1623 was specially selected for the issue of the complete volume of the
plays, because of the marvellous relations which the numbers composing
it bear to the names William Shakespeare and Francis Bacon, to the year
1560, in which the birth of Bacon is registered, and to 1564 and 1616,
the reputed dates of the birth and death of the Stratford man. Nor do
the wonders end here. The use of numerical analogies has been carried
into the construction of the English language. All this, and much more,
will be made manifest when the work of Mr. E. V. Tanner comes to be
investigated and appreciated. He has made the greatest literary
discovery of all time. The wonder is how it has been possible for anyone
to pierce the veil and reveal the secrets of the volume. The value of
the Shakespeare Folio 1623 will be enhanced. It will stand alone as the
greatest monument of the achievements of the human intellect.

To any literary critic who should honour this book by noticing it,
it is probable the foregoing statements may seem extravagant and
untrustworthy. To such the request is now made that before making any
comment he will inspect the proof of the foregoing statements which are
in the writer's possession. The dramas of Shakespeare are, by universal
consent, placed at the head of all literature. The invitation is now
put forth in explicit terms, and facilities are offered for the
investigation of the truth, or otherwise, of every statement made in
the foregoing paragraph.


FOOTNOTES:

[43] "A Life of Shakespeare," 1589, 2nd Edition, p. 308.




CHAPTER XVII.

THE AUTHORIZED VERSION OF THE BIBLE, 1611.


Is it not strange that there is no mention of any connection of Francis
Bacon with this work? There was a conference held at Hampton Court
Palace before King James on January, 1603, between the Episcopalians and
Puritans. John Rainoldes urged the necessity of providing for his people
a uniform translation of the Bible. Rainoldes was the leader of the
Puritans, a person of prodigious reading and doctrine, and the very
treasury of erudition. Dr. Hall, Bishop of Norwich, reports that "he
alone was a well furnished library, full of all faculties, of all
studies, of all learning--the memory and reading of that man were near a
miracle." The King approved the suggestion and commissioned for that
purpose fifty-four of the most learned men in the universities and other
places. There was a "careful selection of revisers made by some unknown
but very competent authority." The translators were divided into six
bands of nine each, and the work of translation was apportioned out to
them. A set of rules was drawn up for their guidance, which has happily
come down to modern times--almost the only record that remains of this
great undertaking. These concise rules have a homogeneity, breadth and
vigour which point to Bacon as their author. Each reviser was to
translate the whole of the original allocated to his company; then they
were to compare their translations together, and, as soon as a company
had completed its part, it was to communicate the result to the other
companies, that nothing might pass without the general consent. If any
company, upon the review of the translation so sent, differed on any
point, they were to note their objection and state their reasons for
disagreement. If the differences could not be adjusted, there was a
committee of arbitration which met weekly, consisting of a
representative from each company, to whom the matter in dispute was
referred. If any point was found to be very obscure, letters were to be
addressed, by authority, to learned persons throughout the land inviting
their judgment. The work was commenced in 1604. Rainoldes belonged to
the company to whom Isaiah and the prophets were assigned. He died in
1607, before the work was completed. During his illness his colleagues
met in his bedroom so that they might retain the benefit of his
learning. Only forty-seven out of the fifty-four names are known. When
the companies had completed their work, one complete copy was made at
Oxford, one at Cambridge, and one at Westminster. Those were sent to
London. Then two members were selected from each company to form a
committee to review and polish the whole. The members met daily at
Stationers' Hall and occupied nine months in their task. Then a final
revision was entrusted to Dr. Thomas Bilson and Dr. Miles Smith, and in
1609 their labours were completed and the result was handed to the King.
Many of the translators have left specimens of their writing in
theological treatises, sermons, and other works. A careful perusal of
all these available justifies the assertion that amongst the whole body
there was not one man who was so great a literary stylist as to be able
to write certain portions of the Authorised Version, which stamp it as
one of the two greatest examples of the English language. Naturally the
interest centres on Dr. Thomas Bilson and Dr. Miles Smith, to whom the
final revision was entrusted. There are some nine or ten theological
works by the former and two sermons by the latter. Unless the theory of
a special divine inspiration for the occasion be admitted, it is clear
that neither Bilson nor Miles Smith could have given the final touches
to the Bible. And now a curious statement has come down to us. In 1609
the translators handed their work to the King, and in 1610 he returned
it to them completed. James was incapable of writing anything to which
the term beautiful could be applied. What had happened to the
translators' work whilst it was left in his hands?

James had an officer of state at that time of whom a contemporary
biographer wrote that "he had the contrivance of all King James his
Designs, until the match with Spain." It will eventually be proved that
the whole scheme of the Authorised Version of the Bible was Francis
Bacon's. He was an ardent student not only of the Bible, but of the
early manuscripts. St. Augustine, St. Jerome, and writers of theological
works, were studied by him with industry. He has left his annotations in
many copies of the Bible and in scores of theological works. The
translation must have been a work in which he took the deepest interest
and which he would follow from stage to stage. When the last stage came
there was only one writer of the period who was capable of turning the
phrases with that matchless style which is the great charm of the
Shakespeare plays. Whoever that stylist was, it was to him that James
handed over the manuscripts which he received from the translators. That
man then made havoc of much of the translation, but he produced a result
which, on its literary merits, is without an equal.

Thirty years ago another revision took place, but, notwithstanding the
advantages which the revisers of 1880 had over their predecessors of
1611, their version has failed to displace the older version, which is
too precious to the hearts of the people for them to abandon it.

Although not one of the translators has left any literary work which
would justify the belief that he was capable of writing the more
beautiful portions of the Bible, fortunately Bacon has left an example
which would rather add lustre to than decrease the high standard of the
Bible if it were incorporated in it. As to the truth of this statement
the reader must judge from the following prayer, which was written after
his fall, and which was described by Addison as resembling the devotion
of an angel rather than a man:--

     _Remember, O Lord, how Thy servant hath walked before Thee;
     remember what I have first sought, and what been principal in mine
     intentions. I have loved Thy assemblies; I have mourned for the
     divisions of Thy Church; I have delighted in the brightness of Thy
     sanctuary._

     _This vine, which Thy right hand hath planted in this nation, I
     have ever prayed unto Thee that it might have the first and the
     latter rain, and that it might stretch her branches to the seas and
     to the floods._

     _The state and bread of the poor and oppressed have been precious
     in mine eyes. I have hated all cruelty and hardness of heart. I
     have, though in a despised weed, procured the good of all men._

     _If any have been mine enemies, I thought not of them, neither hath
     the sun almost set upon my displeasure; but I have been as a dove,
     free from superfluity of maliciousness._

     _Thy creatures have been my books, but Thy scriptures much more. I
     have sought Thee in the courts, fields, and gardens, but I have
     found Thee in Thy temples._

     _Thousand have been my sins and ten thousand my transgressions, but
     Thy sanctifications have remained with me, and my heart, through
     Thy grace, hath been an unquenched coal upon Thine altar._

     _O Lord, my strength, I have since my youth met with Thee in all my
     ways, by Thy fatherly compassions, by Thy comfortable
     chastisements, and by Thy most visible providence. As Thy favours
     have increased upon me, so have Thy corrections, so that Thou hast
     been ever near me, O Lord; and ever, as Thy worldly blessings were
     exalted, so secret darts from Thee have pierced me, and when I have
     ascended before men, I have descended in humiliation before Thee._

     _And now, when I thought most of peace and honour, Thy hand is
     heavy upon me, and hath humbled me according to Thy former
     lovingkindness, keeping me still in Thy fatherly school, not as a
     bastard but as a child. Just are Thy judgments upon me for my sins,
     which are more in number than the sands of the sea, but have no
     proportion to Thy mercies; for what are the sands of the sea to the
     sea? Earth, heavens, and all these are nothing to Thy mercies._

     _Besides my innumerable sins, I confess before Thee that I am
     debtor to Thee for the gracious talent of Thy gifts and graces,
     which I have neither put into a napkin, nor put it (as I ought) to
     exchangers, where it might have made most profit, but misspent it
     in things for which I was least fit so that I may truly say my soul
     hath been a stranger in the course of my pilgrimage._

     _Be merciful unto me, O Lord, for my Saviour's sake, and receive me
     into Thy bosom or guide me in Thy ways._

There is another feature about the first editions of the Authorised
Version which arrests attention. In 1611 the first folio edition was
published. The design with archers, dogs and rabbits which is to be
found over the address "To the Christian Reader" which introduces the
genealogies is also to be found in the folio edition of Shakespeare over
the dedication to the most noble and Incomparable paire of Brethren,
over the Catalogue and elsewhere. Except that the mark of query which is
on the head of the right hand pillar in the design in the Bible is
missing in the Shakespeare folio, and the arrow which the archer on the
right hand side is shooting contains a message in the design used in
the Bible and is without one in the Shakespeare folio.

In the 1612 quarto edition of the Authorised Version on the title-page
of the Genealogies are two designs; that at the head of the page is
printed from the identical block which was used on the title-page of the
first edition of "Venus and Adonis," 1593, and the first edition of
"Lucrece," 1594. At the bottom is the design with the light A and dark
A, which is over the dedication to Sir William Cecil in the "Arte of
English Poesie," 1589. An octavo edition, which is now very rare, was
also published in 1612. On the title-page of the Genealogies will be
found the design with the light A and dark A which is used on several of
the Shakespeare quartos and elsewhere. (Figure XXI.)

The selection of these designs was not made by chance. They were
deliberately chosen to create similitudes between certain books, and
mark their connection with each other.

The revised translation of the Bible was undertaken as a national work.
It was carried out under the personal supervision of the King, but every
record of the proceedings has disappeared. The British Museum does not
contain a manuscript connected with the proceedings of the translators.
In the Record Office have been preserved the original documents
referring to important proceedings of that period. The parliamentary,
judicial, and municipal records are, on the whole, in a complete
condition, but ask for any records connected with the Authorised Version
of the Bible and the reply is: "We have none." And yet it is reasonable
to suppose that manuscripts and documents of such importance would be
preserved. Where are they to be found?




