CHAPTER XI.

BACON'S SECOND VISIT TO THE CONTINENT AND AFTER.


In the "Reliquiæ Bodleianæ," published in 1703, is a letter written
without date by Thomas Bodley to Francis Bacon. This letter does not
appear to have been known to Mallett, Montague, Dixon, Spedding, or any
of Bacon's biographers. It had been lost sight of until the writer
noticed it and reproduced it in _Baconiana_. This is the letter:--

     MY DEAR COUSIN,--According to your request in your letter (dated
     the 19th October at Orleans, I received here the 18th of December),
     I have sent you by your merchant £30 (the thirty is written thus
     30 l) sterling for your present supply, and had sent you a greater
     sum, but that my extraordinary charge this year _hath utterly
     unfurnished me_. And now, cousin, though I will be no _severe_
     exactor of the account, either of your money or time, yet for the
     love I bear you, I am very desirous, both to satisfy myself, and
     your friends how you prosper in your travels, and how you find
     yourself bettered thereby, either in knowledge of God, or of the
     world; the rather, because the Days you have already spent abroad,
     are now both sufficient to give you Light, how to fix yourself and
     end with counsel, and accordingly to shape your course constantly
     unto it. Besides, it is a vulgar scandal unto the travellers, that
     few return more religious (narrow, _editor_) than they went forth;
     wherein both my hope and Request is to you, that your principal
     care be to hold your Foundation, and to make no other use of
     informing your self in the corruptions and superstitions of other
     nations, than only thereby to engage your own heart more firmly to
     the Truth. You live indeed in a country of two several professions,
     and you shall return a Novice, if you be not able to give an
     account of the Ordinances, strength, and progress of each, in
     Reputation, and Party, and how both are supported, ballanced and
     managed by the state, as being the contrary humours, in the Temper
     of Predominancy whereof, the Health or Disease of that Body doth
     consist. These things you will observe, not only as an
     _English_-man, whom it may concern, to what interest his country
     may expect in the consciences of their Neighbours; but also, as a
     Christian, to consider both the beauties and blemishes, the hopes
     and dangers of the _church_ in all places. Now for the world, I
     know it _too_ well, to persuade you to dive into the practices
     thereof; rather stand upon your own guard, against all that attempt
     you there unto, or may practise upon you in your Conscience,
     Reputation, or your Purse. Resolve, no Man is wise or safe, but he
     that is honest: And let this Persuasion turn your studies and
     observations from the Complement and Impostures of the debased age,
     to more real grounds of wisdom, gathered out of the story of Times
     past, and out of the government of the present state. Your guide to
     this, is the knowledge of the country and the people among whom ye
     live; For the country though you cannot see all places, yet if, as
     you pass along, you enquire carefully, and further help yourself
     with Books that are written of the cosmography of those parts, you
     shall sufficiently gather the strength, Riches, Traffick, Havens,
     Shipping, _commodities_, vent, and the wants and disadvantages of
     places. Wherein also, for your good hereafter, and for your
     friends, it will befit to note their buildings, Furnitures,
     Entertainments; all their Husbandry, and ingenious inventions, in
     whatsoever concerneth either Pleasure or Profit.

     For the people, your traffick among them, while you learn their
     language, will sufficiently instruct you in their Habilities,
     Dispositions, and Humours, if you a little enlarge the Privacy of
     your own Nature, to seek acquaintance with the best sort of
     strangers, and _restrain_ your _Affections_ and Participation, for
     your own countrymen of whatsoever condition.

     In the story of France, you have a _large and pleasant Field_ in
     three lines of their Kings, to observe their alliances and
     successions, their _Conquests_, their wars, _especially with us_;
     their Councils, their treaties; and all Rules and examples of
     experiences and Wisdom, which may be Lights and Remembrances to you
     hereafter, to Judge of all occurants both at home and abroad.

     Lastly, for the Government, your end _must not be like an_
     Intelligencer, to spend all your time in fishing after the present
     News, Humours, Graces, _or_ Disgraces of Court, which happily may
     change before you come home; but your better and more constant
     ground will be, to know the Consanguinities, Alliances, and Estates
     of their Princes; Proportion between the Nobility and Magistracy;
     the Constitutions of their Courts of Justice; the state of the
     Laws, as well for the making as the execution thereof; How the
     Sovereignty of the King infuseth itself into all Acts and
     Ordinances; how many ways they lay Impositions and Taxations, and
     gather Revenues to the _Crown_.

     What be the Liberties and Servitudes of all degrees; what
     Discipline and Preparations for wars; what Invention for increase
     of Traffick at home, for multiplying their commodities, encouraging
     Arts and Manufactures, or of worth in any kind. Also what
     establishment, to prevent the _Necessities_ and _Discontentment_ of
     _People_, To cut off suits at Law, and Duels, to suppress thieves
     and all Disorders.

     To be short, because my purpose is not to bring all your
     Observations to Heads, but only by these few to let you know what
     manner of Return your Friends expect _from you_; let me, for all
     these and all the rest, give you this one Note, which I desire you
     to observe as the Counsels of a Friend, _Not_ to spend your
     Spirits, and the _precious_ time of your Travel, in a Captious
     Prejudice and censuring of all things, nor in an Infectious
     Collection of base Vices and Fashions of Men and Women, or general
     corruption of these times, which will be of use only Among
     Humorists, for Jests and Table-Talk: but rather strain your Wits
     and Industry soundly to instruct your-self in all things between
     _Heaven and Earth_ which may tend to Virtue, Wisdom, and Honour,
     and which may make your life more profitable to your country, and
     yourself more comfortable to your friends, and acceptable to God.
     And to conclude, let all these Riches be treasured up, not only in
     your memory, where time may lessen your stock; but rather in good
     writings, and Books of Account, which will _keept_ them safe for
     your use hereafter.

     And if in this time of your liberal Traffick, you will give me any
     advertizement of your commodities in these kinds, I will make you
     as liberal a Return from my self and your Friends here, as I shall
     be able.

     And so commending all your good Endeavours, to him that must either
     _wither_ or _prosper_ them, I very kindly bid you farewel.

                Your's to be commanded,                 THOMAS BODLEY.

Spedding prints this letter (Vol. II. p. 16) commencing with the words,
"Yet for the love I bear," to the end, with the exception of the last
sentence, as a letter written probably by Bacon for Essex to send to the
Earl of Rutland. He identifies it as "the letter which the compiler of
Stephens' Catalogue took for a letter addressed by Bacon to Buckingham,"
which he says it could not be. The original is at Lambeth (MSS. 936, fo.
218). The seal remains, but the part of the last sheet which contained
the signature on one side, and the superscription on the other, has been
torn off. The letter commences, "_My good Lord_," and ends, "_Your
Lordship's in all duty to serve you_." It would appear, therefore, that
someone had access to Bodley's letter to Bacon, and, approving its
contents, used its contents a second time.

There are two palpable deductions to be drawn from this letter: (1) That
Bacon was on a journey through _several_ countries to obtain knowledge
of their customs, laws, religion, military strength, shipping, and
whatsoever concerneth pleasure or profit. There is a striking
correspondence between Bodley's advice and the description of Bacon's
travels found in the "Life" prefixed to "L'Histoire Naturelle." (2) That
Bacon was being supported by Bodley and other of his friends, who
desired him to keep a record of all that he observed and learnt, and to
report from time to time as he progressed, and in return, said Bodley,
"I will make you as liberal a return from myself and your friends here
as I shall be able." This letter was written from England, and there is
a paragraph in Bodley's "Life," written by himself, which makes it
possible to fix the year:--

     "My resolution fully taken I departed out of England anno 1576 and
     continued very neare foure yeares abroad, and that in sundry parts
     of Italy, France, and Germany. A good while after my return to wit,
     in the yeare 1585 I was employed by the Queen," etc.

If this letter was written between 1576 and 1579 it would appear strange
that Bodley and others should be providing Bacon with money for his
travels, and requiring reports from him, whilst his father, Sir Nicholas
Bacon, was alive and prosperous. No such difficulty, however, arises,
for the letter, being sent from England, could not have been written
between the date of Bacon's first departure for France in 1576 and his
return on his father's death in 1579, for during the whole of that time
Bodley was abroad. It is stated in it that Bacon wrote from Orleans a
