CHAPTER IX.

BACON'S SUIT ON HIS RETURN TO ENGLAND, 1580.


Spedding states that the earliest composition of Bacon which he had been
able to discover is a letter written in his 20th year from Grays Inn.
From that time forward, he continues, compositions succeed each other
without any considerable interval, and in following them we shall
accompany him step by step through his life. What are the compositions
which Spedding places as being written but not published up to the year
1597, when the first small volume of 10 essays containing less than
6,000 words was issued from the press? These are they:--

     Notes on the State of Christendom[19] (date 1580 to 1584).

     Letter of Advice to the Queen (1584-1586).

     An Advertisement touching the Controversies of the Church of
     England (1586-1589).

     Speeches written for some Court device, namely, Mr. Bacon in praise
     of Knowledge, and Mr. Bacon's discourse in praise of his Sovereign
     (1590-1592).

     Certain observations made upon a libel published this present year,
     1592.

     A true report of the Detestable Treason intended by Dr. Roderigo
     Lopez, 1594.

     Gesta Grayorum, 1594, parts of which are printed by Spedding in
     type denoting doubtful authorship.

     Bacon's device, 1594-1598.

     Three letters to the Earl of Rutland on his travels, 1595-1596.

That is all! These are the compositions which follow each other without
considerable interval, and by which we are to accompany him step by step
through those seventeen years which should be the most important years
in a man's life! He could have turned them out in ten days or a
fortnight with ease. We expect from Mr. Spedding bread, and he gives us
a stone!

This brilliant young man, who, when 15 years of age, left Cambridge,
having possessed himself of all the knowledge it could afford to a
student, who had travelled in France, Spain and Italy to "polish his
mind and mould his opinion by intercourse with all kinds of foreigners,"
how was he occupying himself during what should be the most fruitful
years of his life? Following his profession at the Bar? His affections
did not that way tend. Spedding expresses the opinion that he had a
distaste for his profession, and, writing of the circumstances with
which he was surrounded in 1592, says: "I do not find that he was
getting into practice. His main object still was to find ways and means
for prosecuting his great philosophical enterprise." What was this
enterprise? "I confess that I have as vast contemplative ends as I have
moderate means," he says, writing to Burghley, "for I have taken all
knowledge to be my province." This means more than mere academic
philosophy.

In 1593, when Bacon was put forward and upheld for a year as a candidate
for the post of Attorney-General, Spedding writes of him; "He had had
little or no practice in the Courts; what proof he had given of
professional proficiency was confined to his readings and exercises in
Grays Inn.... Law, far from being his only, was not even his favourite
study; ... his head was full of ideas so new and large that to most
about him they must have seemed visionary."

Writing of him in 1594 Spedding says: "The strongest point against
Bacon's pretensions for the Attorneyship was his want of practice. His
opponents said that 'he had never entered the place of battle.'[20]
Whether this was because he could not find clients or did not seek them
I cannot say." In order to meet the objection, Bacon on the 25th
January, 1593-4, made his first pleading, and Burghley sent his
secretary "to congratulate unto him the first fruits of his public
practice."

There is one other misconception to be corrected. It is urged that Bacon
was, during this period, engrossed in Parliamentary life. From 1584 to
1597 five Parliaments were summoned. Bacon sat in each. In his
twenty-fifth year he was elected member for Melcombe, in Dorsetshire. In
the Parliament of 1586 he sat for Taunton, in that of 1588 for
Liverpool, in that of 1592-3 for Middlesex, and in 1597 for Ipswich.

But the sittings of these Parliaments were not of long duration, and the
speeches which he delivered and the meetings of committees upon which he
was appointed would absorb but a small portion of his time. It must be
patent, therefore, that Spedding does not account for his occupations
from his return to England in 1578 until 1597, when the first small
volume of his Essays was published.

During the whole of this period Bacon was in monetary difficulties, and
yet there is no evidence that he was living a life of dissipation or
even of extravagance. On the contrary, all testimony would point to the
conclusion that he was following the path of a strictly moral and
studious young man. On his return to England he took lodgings in Coney
Court, Grays Inn. There Anthony found him when he returned from abroad.

There are no data upon which to form any reliable opinion as to the
amount of his income at this time. Rawley states that Sir Nicholas Bacon
had collected a considerable sum of money which he had separated with
intention to have made a competent purchase of land for the livelihood
of his youngest son, but the purchase being unaccomplished at his death,
Francis received only a fifth portion of the money dividable, by which
means he lived in some straits and necessities in his younger years. It
is not clear whether the "money dividable" was only that separated by
Sir Nicholas, or whether he left other sums which went to augment the
fund divisible amongst the brothers. His other children were well
provided for. Francis was not, however, without income. Sir Nicholas had
left certain manors, etc., in Herts to his sons Anthony and Francis in
tail male, remainder to himself and his heirs. Lady Ann Bacon had vested
an estate called Markes, in Essex, in Francis, and there is a letter,
dated 16th April, 1593, from Anthony to his mother urging her to concur
in its sale, so that the proceeds might be applied to the relief of his
brother's financial position.[21]

Lady Bacon lived at Gorhambury. She was not extravagant, and yet in 1589
she was so impoverished that Captain Allen, in writing to Anthony,
speaking of his mother, Lady Bacon, says she "also saith her jewels be
spent for you, and that she borrowed the last money of seven several
persons." Whatever her resources were, they had by then been exhausted
for her sons. Anthony was apparently a man of considerable means. He was
master of the manor and priory of Redburn, of the manor of Abbotsbury,
Minchinbury and Hores, in the parish of Barley, in the county of
Hertford; of the Brightfirth wood, Merydan-meads, and Pinner-Stoke
farms, in the county of Middlesex.[22]

But within a few years after his return to England Anthony was borrowing
money wherever he could. Mother and brother appear to have exhausted
their resources and their borrowing capabilities. There is an account
showing that in eighteen months, about 1593, Anthony lent Francis £373,
equivalent to nearly £3,000 at to-day's value. In 1597 Francis was
arrested by the sheriff for a debt of £300, for which a money-lender had
obtained judgment against him, and he was cast into the Tower. Where had
all the money gone? There is no adequate explanation.

       *       *       *       *       *

The first letter of Francis Bacon's which Spedding met with, to which
reference has already been made, is dated 11th July, 1580, to Mr.
Doylie, and is of little importance. The six letters which follow--all
there are between 1580 and 1590[23]--relate to one subject, and are of
great significance. The first is dated from Grays Inn, 16th September,
1580, to Lady Burghley. In it young Francis, now 19 years of age, makes
this request: "That it would please your Ladyship in your letters
wherewith you visit my good Lord to vouchsafe the mention and
recommendation of my suit; wherein your Ladyship shall bind me more unto
you than I can look ever to be able to sufficiently acknowledge."

The next letter--written on the same day--is addressed to Lord Burghley.
Its object is thus set forth:--

     "My letter hath no further errand but to commend unto your Lordship
     the remembrance of my suit which then I moved unto you, whereof it
     also pleased your Lordship to give me good hearing so far forth as
     to promise to tender it unto her Majesty, and withal to add in the
     behalf of it that which I may better deliver by letter than by
     speech, which is, that although it must be confessed that the
     request is rare and unaccustomed, yet if it be observed how few
     there be which fall in with the study of the common laws either
     being well left or friended, or at their own free election, or
     forsaking likely success in other studies of more delight and no
     less preferment, or setting hand thereunto early without waste of
     years upon such survey made, it may be my case may not seem
     ordinary, no more than my suit, and so more beseeming unto it. As I
     force myself to say this in excuse of my motion, lest it should
     appear unto your Lordship altogether undiscreet and unadvised, so
     my hope to obtain it resteth only upon your Lordship's good
     affection towards me and grace with her Majesty, who methinks
     needeth never to call for the experience of the thing, where she
     hath so great and so good of the person which recommendeth it."

What was this suit? Spedding cannot suggest any explanation. He says:
"What the particular employment was for which he hoped I cannot say;
something probably connected with the service of the Crown, to which the
memory of his father, an old and valued servant prematurely lost, his
near relationship to the Lord Treasurer, and the personal notice which
he had himself received from the Queen, would naturally lead him to
look.... The proposition, whatever it was, having been explained to
Burghley in conversation, is only alluded to in these letters. It seems
to have been so far out of the common way as to require an apology, and
the terms of the apology imply that it was for some employment as a
lawyer. And this is all the light I can throw upon it." Subsequently
Spedding says the motion was one[24] "which would in some way have made
it unnecessary for him to follow 'a course of practice,' meaning, I
presume, ordinary practice at the Bar."

Another expression in the letter makes it clear that the object of the
suit was an experiment. The Queen could not have "experience of the
thing," and Bacon solicited Burghley's recommendation, because she would
not need the experience if he, so great and so good, vouched for it.

Burghley appears to have tendered the suit to the Queen, for there is a
