letter dated 19th October, the year not being given. This could not be
in 1580, for Bacon wrote to Lord Burghley from Gray's Inn on the 18th
October, 1580. Spedding commences the paragraph immediately following
this letter by saying, "From this time we have no further news of
Francis Bacon till the 5th of April, 1582," and although he does not
reproduce the letter, he relies on a letter from Faunt to Anthony Bacon,
to which that date is attributed in Birch's " Memorials," Vol. I. page
22. In it Faunt refers to having seen Anthony's mother and his brother
Francis. Faunt left Paris for England on the 22nd March, 1582. This
letter was written on the 15th of the following month, so no trace has
been found of Francis being in England between 18th October, 1580, and
5th of April, 1582. Bodley's letter, must, therefore, have been written
in December, 1581, when Bacon was abroad making a journey through
several countries. From the foregoing facts it is impossible to form any
other conclusion. Now for the first time this journey has been made
known. There is a letter amongst the State papers in the Record Office,
dated February, 1581, written by Anthony Bacon to Lord Burghley,
enclosing a note of advice and instructions for his brother Francis.
Anthony was an experienced traveller, and was then abroad. It reads as
though he was sending advice and instructions to his younger brother,
who was about to start on travels through countries with which Anthony
was familiar. If so, Francis would leave England early in March,
1581--that is, if he had not left before this letter was received by
Burghley.

Having established beyond reasonable doubt the fact of this journey, a
new and remarkable suggestion presents itself. Spedding, when dealing
with the year 1582, prints "Notes on the State of Christendom,"[29] with
the following remarks:--

     "If that paper of notes concerning 'The State of Europe' which was
     printed as Bacon's in the supplement to Stephens' second collection
     in 1734, reprinted by Mallet in 1760, and has been placed at the
     beginning of his political writings in all editions since 1563, be
     really of his composition, this is the period of his life to which
     it belongs. I must confess, however, that I am not satisfied with
     the evidence or authority upon which it appears to have been
     ascribed to him."

Robert Stephens, who was Historiographer Royal in the reign of William
and Mary, states that the Earl of Oxford placed in his hands some
neglected manuscripts and loose papers to see whether any of the Lord
Bacon's compositions lay concealed there and were fit for publication.
He found some of them written, and others amended, with his lordship's
own hand. He found certain of the treatises had been published by him,
and that others, certainly genuine, which had not, were fit to be
transcribed if not divulged. Spedding states that he has little doubt
that this paper on the state of Europe was among these manuscripts and
loose papers, for the editor states that the supplementary pieces (of
which this was one) were added from originals found among Stephens'
papers. The original is now among the Harleian MSS. in the British
Museum. Spedding thus describes it:--

     "The Harleian MS. is a copy in an old hand, probably contemporary,
     but not Francis Bacon's. A few sentences have been inserted
     afterwards by the same hand, and two by another which is very like
     Anthony Bacon's; none in Francis's. The blanks have all been filled
     up, but no words have been corrected, though it is obvious that in
     some places they stand in need of correction.

     "Certain allusions to events then passing (which will be pointed
     out in their place) prove that the original paper was written, or
     at least completed, in the summer of 1582, at which time Francis
     Bacon was studying law in Gray's Inn, while Anthony was travelling
     in France in search of political intelligence and was in close
     correspondence with Nicholas Faunt, a secretary of Sir Francis
     Walsingham's, who had spent the previous year in France, Germany,
     Switzerland, and the north of Italy, on the same errand; and was
     now living about the English Court, studying affairs at home, and
     collecting and arranging the observations which he had made abroad,
     'having already recovered all his writings and books which he had
     left behind him in Italy and in Frankfort' (see Birch's 'Memoirs,'
     I. 24), and it is remembered that if this paper belonged to Anthony
     Bacon, it would naturally descend at his death to Francis and so
     remain among his manuscripts, where it is supposed to have been
     found.

     "Thus it appears that the external evidence justifies no inference
     as to the authorship, and the only question is whether the _style_
     can be considered conclusive. To me it certainly is not. But as
     this is a point upon which the reader should be allowed to judge
     for himself, and as the paper is interesting in itself and
     historically valuable and has always passed for Bacon's, it is here
     printed from the original though (to distinguish it from his
     undoubted compositions) in a smaller type."

Spedding's difficulty in accepting this paper as from Bacon's pen really
lay in the fact that from the internal evidence it is obvious that it
was written by one who had himself travelled through, at any rate, some
of the countries described. The results of personal observation are
again and again apparent. According to Spedding, Bacon was in 1581-1582
studying law at Gray's Inn; according to Bodley he was on the Continent
making observations for his future guidance. The reader can judge of the
value of the external evidence. It is not conclusive, but the draft
being found amongst papers which were unquestionably Bacon's writings
and being adopted as Bacon's and published as such by those who found
it, the balance of probabilities is distinctly in favour of its being
his. As to the internal evidence much may be said. It corresponds as
closely as it is possible with Bodley's requirements as set forth in his
letter of December. It is exactly "the manner of return" Bodley wrote to
Francis "your friends expect from you." "And," he added, "if in this
time of your liberal Traffick, you will give me any advertisement of
your commodities in these kinds, I will make you as liberal a return
from myself and your friends here as I shall be able."

The date agrees with that of Bacon's second visit to the Continent. In
Spedding's Life and Letters it occupies twelve and a-half pages, of
which five are occupied by descriptions of Italy, one of Austria, two of
Germany (chiefly a recital of names and places), two of France,
three-quarters of Spain, one and three-quarters of Portugal, Poland,
Denmark, and Sweden. This may have been Bacon's itinerary in 1581-2.

Italy is treated with considerable detail and was undoubtedly described
from personal observation, as were France and Spain. In a less degree
the description of Austria, Poland and Denmark produces this impression;
in a still smaller degree Portugal and Sweden, and it is quite absent
from the description of Germany. Florence, Venice, Mantua, Genoa, Savoy,
are dealt with in most detail. Rawley states that it was Bacon's
intention to have stayed abroad some years longer when he was called
home by the death of his father, to find himself left in straightened
circumstances. Then followed his ineffectual suit, which he still
persisted in. Bodley evidently was, if not the instigator, at any rate
the paymaster for this second journey. Anthony's letter of February,
1581, points to Burghley as a participator in the project. He would
assist not only out of kindly feeling, but the journey would at any rate
get this ambitious, determined young man out of the way for a time, and
possibly the journey might get this unaccustomed suit out of his mind.
Thus it came about.

From Faunt's letters, Spedding says we derive what little information we
have with regard to Francis's proceedings from 1583 to 1584. "From them
we gather little more than that he remained studying at Gray's Inn,
occasionally visiting his mother at Gorhambury, or going with her to
hear Travers at the Temple and occasionally appearing at the Court."

But the suit was not abandoned, for there is the letter of 25th August,
1585, to Walsingham, when Bacon writes: "I think the objection of my
years will wear away with the length of my suit. The very stay doth in
this respect concern me, because I am thereby hindered to take a course
of practice which by the leave of God, if her Majesty like not of my
suit, I must and will follow: not for any necessity of estate, but for
my credit sake, which I know by living out of action will wear."

Again, the old, "rare and unaccustomed suit" of which the Queen could
have had no experience! Either the persuasive powers of Burghley had
failed or he had not exerted them. Probably the latter, because the
troublesome, determined young man is now worrying Walsingham and Hatton
to urge its acceptance with the Queen. The purport of the foregoing
extract effectually precludes the possibility of this suit referring to
his advancement at the bar. For five years it has been proceeding--he
has been indulging in hopes which have been unfulfilled. Now he will
wait no longer, but he will adopt a course which, if her Majesty like
not his suit, by the leave of God he must and will follow, not for any
necessity of making money but because he feels impelled to it by a
sense of responsibility which he must fulfil. Walsingham and Hatton do
not appear to have helped the matter forward. There was little
probability of them succeeding in influencing the Queen where Burghley
had failed. There was still less probability of them attempting to
influence her if Burghley objected. Had this suit referred to
advancement in the law it would have been granted with the aid of
Burghley's influence years before. Had it referred to some ordinary
office of State, friends so powerful as Burghley, Walsingham and Hatton
could and would have obtained anything within reason for this brilliant
young son of Sir Nicholas Bacon, for there was no complication with
Essex until after 1591. But this rare and unaccustomed suit of which
there had been no experience was another matter.

Six more years pass, and although there is now no suit to the Queen
there is the same idea prevailing in the letter to Burghley--a seeking
for help to achieve some great scheme upon which Bacon's mind was so
fixed "as it cannot be removed," "whether it be curiosity, vainglory or
nature, or (if one take it favourably) philanthropia." Still he required
the command of more wits than of a man's own, which is the thing he did
greatly affect. Still his course was not to get. Still the determination
to achieve the object without help, if help could not be obtained--to
achieve it by becoming some sorry bookmaker or a pioneer in that mine of
truth which Anaxagoras said lay so deep. This is emphasised. These are
"thoughts rather than words, being set down without all art, disguising
or reservation."

There are two significant sentences in this letter written to Burghley
when Bacon was 31 years of age. He describes Burghley as "the second
founder of my poor estate," and, further, he uses the expression "And if
your Lordship will not carry me on." What can these allusions mean but
that Burghley had been rendering financial assistance to his nephew? If
the theory here put forward as to the nature of the suit be correct, the
object was one which would have Burghley's cordial support. That he had
expressed approval of it must be deduced from the letter of the 16th of
September, 1580. The object was one which, without doubt, would find
still warmer support from Lady Mildred. But the suit was so
unprecedented that it is not to be wondered at that Burghley did not try
to force it through. The work was going forward all the time--slowly for
lack of means and official recognition. Burghley, generous in his
nature, lavish in private life, might, however, be expected to help a
work which he would be glad to see carried to a successful conclusion.

Had he been less cautious and let young Francis have his head, what
might not have happened! But there was always the fear of letting this
huge intellectual power forge ahead without restraint. It was, however,
working out unseen its scheme and that, too, with Burghley's help and
that of others. The period from 1576 to 1623--only 47 years--sees the
English language developed from a state of almost barbaric crudeness to
the highest pitch which any language, classical or modern, has reached.
There was but one workman living at that period who could have
constructed that wonderful instrument and used it to produce such
magnificent examples of its possibilities. It is as reasonable to take
up a watch keeping perfect time and aver that the parts came together by
accident, as to contend that the English language of the Authorised
Version of the Bible and the works of Shakespeare were the result of a
general up-springing of literary taste which was diffused amongst a few
writers of very mediocre ability. The English Renaissance was conceived
in France and born in England in 1579. It ran its course and in 1623
attained its maturity; but when Francis Bacon was no more--he who had
performed that in our tongue which may be preferred either to insolent
Greece or haughty Rome--"things daily fall, wits grow downward, and
eloquence grows backward: so that he may be named and stand as the mark
and [Greek: achmê] of our language."


FOOTNOTES:

[29] "Life and Letters," Vol. I., page 16.




