CHAPTER XII.

IS IT PROBABLE THAT BACON LEFT MANUSCRIPTS HIDDEN AWAY?


It is difficult to leave this subject without some reference to the
articles which have appeared in the press and magazines referring to the
suggestion that there were left concealed literary remains of Bacon
hitherto undiscovered.

In an article which recently appeared in a Shakespearean journal, a
writer who evidently knows little about the Elizabethan period said:
"But why should Bacon want to bury manuscripts, anyhow? Who does bury
manuscripts? Besides, they had been printed and were, therefore, rubbish
and waste paper merely." The manuscript of John Harrington's translation
of Ariosto's "Orlando Furioso" may be seen in the British Museum. It is
beautifully written on quarto paper. It was, apparently, the fair copy
sent to the printer from which the type was to be set up. Be this as it
may, it was undoubtedly a copy upon which Bacon marked off the verses
which are to go on each page and set out the folio of each page and the
printer's signature which was to appear at the bottom. It also contains
instructions to the printer as to the type to be used. This manuscript
was not considered "rubbish and waste paper merely."

Francis Bacon has again and again insisted upon the value of history. In
the "Advancement of Learning" he points out to the King "the indignity
and unworthiness of the history of England as it now is, in the main
continuation thereof." No man appreciated as did Bacon the importance in
the history of England of the epoch in which he lived. That a truthful
relation of the events of those times would be invaluable to posterity
he knew full well. He of all men living at that time was best qualified
to write such a history. He recognised that there were objections to a
history being written, or, at any rate, published, wherein the actions
of persons living were described, for he said "it must be confessed that
such kind of relations, specially if they be published about the times
of things done, seeing very often that they are written with passion or
partiality, of all other narrations, are most suspected." It is hardly
conceivable that Bacon should have failed to provide a faithful history
of his own times for the benefit of posterity, or, at any rate, that he
should have failed to preserve the materials for such a history. Neither
the history nor such materials are known to be in existence. Supposing
Bacon had prepared either the one or the other, what could he do with
it? Hand it to Rawley with instructions for it to be printed? With a
strong probability, if it were a faithful history, that it would never
be published, but that it would be destroyed, he would never take such a
risk. There would only be one course open to him. To conceal it in some
place where it would not be likely to be disturbed, in which it might
remain in safety, possibly for hundreds of years. And then leave a clue
either in cypher or otherwise by which it might be recovered.

It is by no means outside the range of possibility that Bacon as early
as 1588 had opened a receptacle for books and manuscripts which he
desired should go down to posterity, and fearing their loss from any
cause, he carefully concealed them, adding to the store from time to
time. If he did so he left a problem to be solved, and arranged the
place of concealment so that it could only be found by a solution of the
problem.

The emblems on two title-pages of two books of the period are very
significant. "Truth brought to Light and discovered by Time" is a
narrative history of the first fourteen years of King James' reign. One
portion of the engraved title-page represents a spreading tree growing
up out of a coffin, full fraught with various fruits (manuscripts and
books) most fresh and fair to make succeeding times most rich and rare.
In the Emblem (Fig. III.) now reproduced, which is found on the
title-page of the first edition of "New Atlantis," 1627,[30] Truth
personified by a naked woman is being revealed by Father Time, and the
inscription round the device is "_Tempore patet occulta veritas_--in
time the hidden truth shall be revealed."

Then, in further confirmation of this view, there is the statement of
Rawley in his introduction to the "Manes Verulamiani." Speaking of the
fame of his illustrious master he says, "Be this moreover enough, to
have laid, as it were, the foundations, in the name of the present age.
Every age will, methinks, adorn and amplify this structure, but to what
age it may be vouchsafed to set the finishing hand--this is known only
to God and the Fates."

  [Illustration: _Fig. III._

  _From the Title Page of "New Atlantis," 1627._]

  [Illustration: _Fig. IV._

  _From the Title Page of Peacham's "Minerva Britannia," 1612._]


FOOTNOTES:

[30] There is a copy bearing date 1626.




CHAPTER XIII.

HOW  THE ELIZABETHAN  LITERATURE WAS PRODUCED.


The half century from 1576 to 1625 stands by itself in the history of
the literature of this country. During that period not only was the
English language made, not only were there produced the finest examples
of its capacities, which to-day exist, but the knowledge and wisdom
possessed by the classical writers, the histories of the principal
nations of the world, practically everything that was worth knowing in
the literature which existed in other countries were, for the first
time, made available in the English tongue. And what is still more
remarkable, these translations were printed and published. These works
embraced every art and subject which can be imagined. Further, during
this period there were issued a large number of books crowded with
information upon general subjects. The names on the title-pages of many
of these works are unknown. It is astonishing how many men as to whom
nothing can be learnt, appear about this time to have written one book
and one book only.

These translations were published at a considerable cost. For such
works, being printed in the English language, purchasers were
practically confined to this country, and their number was very limited.
The quantity of copies constituting an edition must have been small. It
is impossible to believe that the sale of these books could realise the
amount of their cost.

Definite information on this point is difficult to obtain, for little is
known as to the prices at which these books were sold.

It appears from the "Transcripts of the Stationers' Registers" that the
maximum number of copies that went to make up an edition was in the
interest of the workman fixed at 1,250 copies, so that if a larger
number were required the type had to be re-set for each additional 1,250
copies. Double impressions of 2,500 were allowed of primers, catechisms,
proclamations, statutes and almanacs. But the solid literature which
came into the language at this period would not be required in such
quantities. The printer was not usually the vendor of the books. The
publisher and bookseller or stationer carried on in most cases a
distinct business.

Pamphlets, sermons, plays, books of poems, formed the staple ware of the
stationer. The style of the book out of which the stationer made his
money may be gathered from the following extract from _The Return from
Parnassus_, Act I, scene 3:--

  _Ingenioso._--Danter thou art deceived, wit is dearer than thou
                takest it to bee. I tell thee this libel of Cambridge
                has much salt and pepper in the nose: it will
                sell sheerely underhand when all those bookes of
                exhortations and catechisms lie moulding on thy
                shopboard.

     _Danter._--It's true, but good fayth, M. Ingenioso, I lost by your
                last booke; and you know there is many a one that pays
                me largely for the printing of their inventions, but
                for all this you shall have 40 shillings and an odde
                pottle of wine.

  _Ingenioso._--40 shillings? a fit reward for one of your reumatick
                poets, that beslavers all the paper he comes by, and
                furnishes the Chaundlers with wast papers to wrap
                candles in: ... it's the gallantest Child my invention
                was ever delivered off. The title is, a Chronicle of
                Cambridge Cuckolds; here a man may see, what day of
                the moneth such a man's commons were inclosed, and when
                throwne open, and when any entayled some odde crownes
                upon the heires of their bodies unlawfully begotten;
                speake quickly, ells I am gone.

     _Danter._--Oh this will sell gallantly. Ile have it whatsoever it
                cost, will you walk on, M. Ingenioso, weele sit over a
                cup of wine and agree on it.

The publication of such works as Hollingshed's "Chronicles," North's
"Plutarch's Lives," Grimston's "History of France," and "The French
Academy," could not have been produced with profit as the object. A
large body of evidence may be brought forward to support this view, but
space will only permit two examples to be here set forth.

In the dedication to Sir William Cecil, of Hollingshed's "Chronicles,"
1587, the writer says:

     Yet when the volume grew so great as they that were to defraie the
     charges for the impression were not willing to go through with the
     whole, they resolved first to publish the histories of England,
     Scotland, and Ireland with their descriptions.

John Dee spent most of the year 1576 in writing a series of volumes to
be entitled "General and Rare Memorials pertayning to the perfect Art of
Navigation." In 1577 the first volume was ready for the press. In June
he had to borrow £40 from one friend, £20 from another, and £27 upon
"the chayn of gold." In the following August John Day commenced printing
it at his press in Aldersgate. The title was "The British Monarchy or
Hexameron Brytannicum," and the edition consisted of 100 copies.

The second volume, "The British Complement," was ready in the following
December. It was never published. Dee states in his Diary that the
printing would cost many hundreds of pounds, as it contained tables and
figures, and he must first have "a comfortable and sufficient
opportunity or supply thereto." This he was unable to procure, so the
book remained in manuscript.[31]

Books of this class were never produced with the object of making
profit. The proceeds of sale would not cover the cost of printing and
publishing, without any provision for the remuneration of the translator
or author. Why were they published, and how was the cost provided?

There was, however, another source of revenue open to the author of a
book. Henry Peacham, in "The Truth of our Time," says:--

     "But then you may say, the Dedication will bee worth a great
     matter, either in present reward of money, or preferment by your
     Patrones Letter, or other means. And for this purpose you prefixe a
     learned and as Panegyricall Epistle as can," etc.

It is beyond question that an author usually obtained a considerable
contribution towards the cost of the production of a book from the
person to whom the dedication was addressed. A number of books published
during the period from 1576 to 1598 are dedicated to the Queen, to the
Earl of Leicester, and to Lord Burghley. One can only offer a suggestion
on this point which may or may not be correct. If Francis Bacon was
concerned in the issue of these translations and other works, and
Burghley was assisting him financially, it is probable that Burghley
would procure grants from the Queen in respect of books which were
dedicated to her, and would provide funds towards the cost of such books
as were dedicated to himself. "The Arte of English Poesie" was written
with the intention that it should be dedicated to the Queen, but there
was a change in the plans, and Burghley's name was substituted. When
Bacon, in 1591, is threatening to become "a sorry bookmaker," he
describes Burghley as the second founder of his poor estate, and uses
the expression, "If your Lordship will not carry me on," which can only
mean that as to the matter which is the subject of the letter, Burghley
had not merely been assisting but carrying him. The evidence which
exists is strong enough to warrant putting forward this theory as to the
frequency of the names of the Queen and Burghley on the dedications.

The Earl of Leicester desired to have the reputation of being a patron
of the arts, and was willing to pay for advertisement. He was the
Chancellor of Oxford University, and evidently recognised the value of
printing, for in 1585 he erected, at his own expense, a new printing
press for the use of the University. If he paid at all for dedications
he would pay liberally. But, of course, the Queen, Burghley, and
Leicester were accessible to others besides Bacon, and the argument goes
no further than that towards the production of certain books upon which
their names appear the patrons provided part of the cost. The
recognition of this fact, however, does not detract from the importance
of the expressions used by Bacon in his letter to Burghley.

There is abundant testimony to the fact that it was the custom, during
the Elizabethan age, for an author to suppress his own name, and on the
title-page[32] substitute either the initials or name of some other
person. The title-pages of this period are as unreliable as are the
names or initials affixed to the dedications and epistles "To the
Reader."

In 1624 was published "The Historie of the Life and Death of Mary Stuart
Queene of Scotland." The dedication is signed Wil Stranguage. In 1636 it
was reprinted, the same dedication being signed W. Vdall. There are
numerous similar instances.


FOOTNOTES:

[31] "John Dee," by Charlotte Fell Smith, 1909. Constable and Co., Ltd.

[32] See page 31.




