CHAPTER XXV.

THE PHILOSOPHY OF BACON.


To attempt anything of the nature of a review of Bacon's acknowledged
works is a task far too great for the scope of the present volume. To
attempt a survey of the whole of his works would require years of
diligent study, and would necessitate a perusal of nearly every book
published in England between 1576 and 1630. Not that it is suggested
that all the literature of this period was the product of his pen or was
produced under his supervision, but each book published should be read
and considered with attention to arrive at a selection.

There has been no abler judgment of the acknowledged works than that
which will be found in William Hazlitt's "Lectures on the Literature of
the Age of Elizabeth." Lecture VII. commences with an account of the
"Character of Bacon's Works."

It may not, however, be out of place here to try and make plain in what
sense Bacon was a philosopher.

In Chapter CXVI. of the "Novum Organum" he makes his position clear in
the following words:--

     "First then I must request men not to suppose that after the
     fashion of ancient Greeks, and of certain moderns, as Telesius,
     Patricius, Severinus, I wish to found a new sect in philosophy. For
     this is not what I am about; nor do I think that it matters much to
     the fortunes of men what abstract notions one may entertain
     concerning nature and the principles of things; and no doubt many
     old theories of this kind can be revived, and many new ones
     introduced; just as many theories of the heavens may be supposed
     which agree well enough with the phenomena and yet differ with
     each other.

     "For my part, I do not trouble myself with any such speculative and
     withal unprofitable matters. My purpose on the contrary, is to try
     whether I cannot in very fact lay more firmly the foundations and
     extend more widely the limits of the power and greatness of man ...
     I have no entire or universal theory to propound."

So the idea that there was what is termed a system of philosophy
constructed by Bacon must be abandoned. What justification is there for
calling him the father of the Inductive Philosophy?

It is difficult to answer this question. Spedding admits that Bacon was
not the first to break down the dominion of Aristotle. That followed the
awakening throughout the intellectual world which was brought about by
the Reformation and the revival of learning. Sir John Herschel justifies
the application to Bacon of the term "The great Reformer of Philosophy"
not on the ground that he introduced inductive reasoning, but because of
his "keen perception and his broad and spirit-stirring, almost
enthusiastic announcement of its paramount importance, as the Alpha and
Omega of science, as the grand and only chain for linking together of
physical truths and the eventual key to every discovery and
application."

Bacon was 60 years of age when his "Novum Organum" was published. It was
founded on a tract he had written in 1607, which he called "Cogitata et
Visa," not printed until long after his death. He had previously
published a portion of his Essays, the two books on "The Advancement of
Learning" and "The Wisdom of the Ancients." Just at the end of his life
he gave to the world the "Novum Organum," accompanied by "The
Parasceve." Certainly it was not understood in his time. Coke described
it as only fit to freight the Ship of Fools, and the King likened it
"to the peace of God which passeth all understanding." It is admittedly
incomplete, and Bacon made no attempt in subsequent years to complete
it. It is a book that if read and re-read becomes fascinating. Taine
describes it as "a string of aphorisms, a collection as it were of
scientific decrees as of an oracle who foresees the future and reveals
the truth." "It is intuition not reasoning," he adds. The wisdom
contained in its pages is profound. An understanding of the
interpretation of the Idols and the Instances has so far evaded all
commentators. Who can explain the "Latent Process"? But the book
contains no scheme of arrangement. Therein is found a series of
desultory discourses--full of wisdom, rich in analogies, abundant in
observation and profound in comprehension. From here and there in it
with the help of the "Parasceve" one can grasp the intention of the
great philosopher.

In Chapter LXI. he says:--"But the course I propose for the discovery of
sciences is such as leaves but little to the acuteness and strength of
wits, but places all wits and understandings on a level." How was this
to be accomplished? By the systemization of labour expended on
scientific research. A catalogue of the particulars of histories which
were to be prepared is appended to the "Parasceve." It embraces every
subject conceivable. In Chapter CXI. he says, "I plainly confess that a
collection of history, natural and experimental, such as I conceive it,
and as it ought to be, is a great, I may say a royal work, and of much
labour and expense."

In the "Parasceve" he says:--"If all the wits of all the ages had met or
shall hereafter meet together; if the whole human race had applied or
shall hereafter apply themselves to philosophy, and the whole earth had
been or shall be nothing but academies and colleges and schools of
learned men; still without a natural and experimental history such as I
am going to prescribe, no progress worthy of the human race could have
been made or can be made in philosophy and the sciences. Whereas on the
other hand let such a history be once provided and well set forth and
let there be added to it such auxiliary and light-giving experiments as
in the very course of interpretation will present themselves or will
have to be found out; and the investigation of nature and of all
sciences will be the work of a few years. This therefore must be done or
the business given up."

To carry out this work an army of workers was required. In the
preparation of each history some were to make a rough and general
collection of facts. Their work was to be handed over to others who
would arrange the facts in order for reference. This accomplished,
others would examine to get rid of superfluities. Then would be brought
in those who would re-arrange that which was left and the history would
be completed.

From Chapter CIII. it is clear that Bacon contemplated that eventually
all the experiments of all the arts, collected and digested, _should be
brought within one man's knowledge and judgment_. This man, having a
supreme view of the whole range of subjects, would transfer experiments
of one art to another and so lead "to the discovery of many new things
of service to the life and state of man."

Nearly three hundred years have passed since Bacon propounded his
scheme. The arts and sciences have been greatly advanced. They might
have proceeded more rapidly had the histories been prepared, but since
his time there has arisen no man who has taken "all knowledge to be his
province"--no man who could occupy the position Bacon contemplated.

The method by which the induction was to be followed is described in
