CHAPTER XX.

SHAKESPEARE'S SONNETS.


"Shakespeare's Sonnets never before Imprinted," have afforded
commentators material for many volumes filled with theories which to the
ordinary critical mind appear to have no foundation in fact. Chapters
have been written to prove that Mr. W. H., the only begetter of the
Sonnets, was Henry Wriothesley, Earl of Southampton, and chapters have
been written to prove that he was no such person, but that William
Herbert, Earl of Pembroke, was the man intended to be designated.
Theories have been elaborated to identify the individuals represented by
the Rival Poet and the dark Lady. Not one of these theories is supported
by the vestige of a shred of testimony that would stand investigation.
There has not come down any evidence that Shakspur, of Stratford, knew
either the Earl of Southampton, the Earl of Pembroke or Marie Fitton.
The truth is that Mr. W. H. was _Shakespeare_, who _was_ the only
begetter of the Sonnets, and the proof of this statement will in due
time be forthcoming. It may be well to try and read some of the Sonnets
as they stand and endeavour to realise what is the obvious meaning of
the printed words.

The key to the Sonnets will be found in No. 62. The language in which it
is written is explicit and capable of being understood by any ordinary
intellect.

  "Sinne of selfe-love possesseth al mine eie
  And all my soule, and al my every part;
  And for this sinne there is no remedie,
  It is so grounded inward in my heart.
  Me thinkes no face so gratious is as mine,
  No shape so true, no truth of such account,
  And for my selfe mine owne worth do define,
  As I all other in all worth's surmount
  But when my glasse shewes me my selfe indeed
  Beated and chopt with tand antiquitie,
  Mine own selfe love quite contrary I read
  Selfe, so selfe loving were iniquity.
      Tis thee (my-selfe) that for myself I praise
      Painting my age with beauty of thy daies."

The writer here states definitely that he is dominated by the sin of
self-love; it possesseth his eye, his soul, and every part of him. There
can be found no remedy for it; it is so grounded in his heart. No face
is so gracious as is his, no shape so true, no truth of such account. He
defines his worth as surmounting that of all others. This is the frank
expression of a man who not only believed that he was, but knew that he
was superior to all his contemporaries, not only in intellectual power,
but in personal appearance. Then comes an arrest in the thought, and he
realises that time has been at work. He has been picturing himself as he
was when a young man. He turns to his glass and sees himself beated and
chopt with tanned antiquity; forty summers have passed over his
brow.[48]

Francis Bacon at forty years of age, or thereabouts, unmarried,
childless, sits down to his table, Hilliard's portrait before him, with
pen in hand, full of self-love, full of admiration for that beautiful
youth on whose counterfeit presentment he is gazing. His intellectual
triumphs pass in review before him, most of them known only to himself
and that youth--his companion through life. That was the Francis Bacon
who controlled him in all his comings and goings--his ideal whom he
worshipped. If he could have a son like that boy! His pen begins to move
on the paper--

  "From fairest creatures we desire increase
  That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
  But as the riper should by time decrease
  His tender heire might bear his memory."

The pen stops and the writer's eye wanders to the miniature:--

  "But _thou_[49] contracted to thine own bright eyes."

And so the Sonnets flow on, without effort, without the need of
reference to authorities, for the great, fixed and methodical memory
needs none.

How natural are the allusions--

  "Thou art thy mother's glasse and she in thee
  Calls backe the lovely Aprill of her prime."

       *       *       *       *       *

  "Be as thy presence is, gracious and kind,
  Or to thyselfe at least kind hearted prove.
  Make thee another self, for love of me
  That beauty may still live in thine or thee."

       *       *       *       *       *

  "Let those whom nature hath not made for store,
  Harsh, featureless and rude, barrenly perish;
  Look, whom she best indow'd she gave the more;
  Which bountious guift thou shouldst in bounty cherrish;
      She carv'd thee for her seale, and ment therby
      Thou shouldst print more, not let that coppy die."

       *       *       *       *       *

  "O that you were yourselfe, but love you are
  No longer yours, then you yourselfe here live,
  Against this cunning end you should prepare,
  And your sweet semblance to some other give
          ·        ·        ·        ·
  Who lets so faire a house fall to decay
          ·        ·        ·        ·
      O none but unthrifts, deare my love you know
      You had a Father, let your Son say so."

       *       *       *       *       *

  "But wherefore do not you a mightier waie
  Make warre uppon this bloodie tirant Time?
  And fortifie your selfe in your decay
  With meanes more blessed, then my barren rime?
  Now stand you on the top of happie houres
  And many maiden gardens, yet onset,
  With virtuous wish would beare you living flowers
  Much liker than your painted counterfeit:

       *       *       *       *       *

  Who will beleeve my verses in time to come
  If it were fil'd with your most high deserts?
  Though yet heaven knows, it is but as a tombe
  _Which hides your life_, and shewes not halfe your parts:
  If I could write the beauty of your eyes
  And in fresh numbers number all your graces,
  The age to come would say this Poet lies,
  Such heavenly touches nere toucht earthly faces.
  So should my papers (yellowed with their age)
  Be scorn'd, like old men of lesse truth than tongue,
  And your true rights be termd a Poets rage
  And stretched miter of an Antique song.
      But were some childe of yours alive that time,
      You should live twise, in it and in my rime."

       *       *       *       *       *

  "Yet doe thy worst, ould Time, dispight thy wrong
  My love shall in my verse ever live young."

He realises that he no longer answers Ophelia's description:

  "The courtier's, soldier's, scholar's eye, tongue, sword:
  The expectancy and rose of the fair state
  The glass of fashion and the mould of form,
  The observed of all observers....
  That unmatch'd form and feature of blown youth."

But he cannot forget what he has been, he cannot realise that he is no
longer the brilliant youth whose miniature he has before him, with the
words inscribed around, "Si tabula daretur digna animum mallem"--If
materials could be found worthy to paint his mind ("O could he but have
drawn his wit") and then with a burst of poetic enthusiasm he
exclaims:--

  "Tis thee (myselfe) that for myselfe I praise,
  Painting my age with beauty of thy daies."

This is the common experience of a man as he advances in life. So long
as he does not see his reflection in a glass, if he tries to visualize
himself, he sees the youth or young man. Only in his most pessimistic
moments does he realise his age.

There is no longer any difficulty in understanding Shakespeare's
Sonnets. They were addressed by "Shakespeare," the poet, to the
marvellous youth who was known under the name of Francis Bacon, and they
were written, with Hilliard's portrait placed on his table before him.

In that age (please God it may be the present age), which is known only
to God and to the fates when the finishing touch shall be given to
Bacon's fame,[50] it will be found that the period of his life from
twelve to thirty-five years of age surpassed all others, not only in
brilliant intellectual achievements, but for the enduring wealth with
which he endowed his countrymen. And yet it was part of his scheme of
life that his connection with the great renaissance in English
literature should lie hidden until posterity should recognise that work
as the fruit of his brain:--"Mente Videbor"--"by the mind I shall be
seen."

How lacking all his modern biographers have been in perception!

Every difficulty in those which are termed the procreation Sonnets
disappears with the application of this key. Only by it can Sonnet 22 be
made intelligible:--

  "My glass shall not persuade me I am old,
  As long as youth and thou are of one date;
  But when in thee time's furrow I behold,
  Then look, I death my days would expirate
  For all that beauty that doth cover thee
  Is but the steady raiment of my heart.
  Which in my breast doth live, as thine in me.
  How can I then be older than thou art?
  O, therefore, love, be of thyself so wary
  As I, not for myself, but for thee will;
  Bearing thy heart, which I will keep so chary
  As tender nurse her babe from faring ill.
    Presume not on thy heart when mine is slain;
    Thou gavest me thine, not to give back again."

But nearly every Sonnet might be quoted in support of this view.
Especially is it of value in bringing an intelligent and allowable
explanation to Sonnets 40, 41, and 42, which now no longer have an
unsavoury flavour.

Sonnet No. 59 is most noteworthy, because it implies a belief in
re-incarnation. Shakespeare expresses his longing to know what the
ancients would have said of his marvellous intellect. If he could find
his picture in some antique book over 500 years old, see an image of
himself as he then was, and learn what men thought of him!

  "If their bee nothing new, but that which is
  Hath beene before, how are our braines begulld,
  Which laboring for invention, beare amisse
  The second burthen of a former child?
  Oh that record could with a back-ward looke,
  Even of five hundredth courses of the Sunne,
  Show me your image in some antique booke,
  Since minde at first in carrecter was done,
  That I might see what the old world could say
  To this composed wonder of your frame;
  Whether we are mended, or where better they,
  Or whether revolution be the same.
    Oh sure I am, the wits of former daies,
    To subjects worse have given admiring praise."

There is the same idea in Sonnet 71, which suggests that in some future
re-incarnation Bacon might read Shakespeare's praises of him.

Conjectures as to who was the rival poet may be dispensed with. The
following rendering of Sonnet No. 80 makes this perfectly clear:--

  "O how I (_the poet_) faint when I of you (_F.B._) do write,
  Knowing a better spirit (_that of the philosopher_) doth use your name
  And in the praise thereof spends all his might
  To make me tongue tied, speaking of your fame!
      (_Shakespeare never refers to Bacon or vice-versa_)
  But since your (_F.B.'s_) worth wide as the ocean is,
  The humble as the proudest sail doth bear,
  My saucy bark (_that of the poet_) inferior far to his (_that of the
    philosopher_),
  On your broad main doth wilfully appear.
  Your shallowest help will hold me (_the poet_) up afloat
  Whilst he (_the philosopher_) upon your soundless deep doth ride."

It is impossible to do justice to this subject in the space here
available. By the aid of this key every line becomes intelligible. The
charm and beauty of the Sonnets are increased tenfold. Every unpleasant
association of them is removed. No longer need Browning say, "If so the
less Shakespeare he."

These are not "Shakespeare's sug'rd[51] Sonnets amongst his private
friends" to which Meres makes reference. They are to be found elsewhere.

If there had been an intelligent study of Elizabethan literature from
original sources the authorship of the Sonnets would have been revealed
long ago. It was a habit of Bacon to speak of himself as some one apart
from the speaker. The opening sentence of _Filum Labyrinthi, Sivo Forma
Inquisitiones_ is an example. _Ad Filios_--"Francis Bacon thought in
this manner." Prefixed to the preface to Gilbert Wats' interpretation of
the "Advancement of Learning" is a chapter commencing, "Francis Lo
Verulam consulted thus: and thus concluded with himselfe. The
publication whereof he conceived did concern the present and future
age."

Nothing that has been written is more perfectly Baconian in style and
temperament than are the Sonnets. They breathe out his hopes, his
aspirations, his ideals, his fears, in every line. He knew he was not
for his time. He knew future generations only would render him the fame
to which his incomparable powers entitled him. He knew how far he
towered above his contemporaries, aye, and his predecessors, in
intellectual power. His hopes were fixed on that day in the distant
future--to-day--when for the first time the meshes which he wove, behind
which his life's work is obscured, are beginning to be unravelled.

The most sanguine Baconian, in his most enthusiastic moments, must fail
adequately to appreciate the achievements of Francis Bacon and the
obligations under which he has placed posterity. But Bacon knew--and he
alone knew--their full value. It was fitting that the greatest poet
which the world had produced should in matchless verse do honour to the
world's greatest intellect. It was a pretty conceit. Only a master mind
would dare to make the attempt. The result has afforded another example
of how his great wit, in being concealed, was revealed.


FOOTNOTES:

[48] Sonnet No. 2.

[49] _'Tis thee myselfe_, Sonnet 62.

[50] See Rawley's Introduction to "Manes Verulamiana."

[51] The expression "sugr'd Sonnets" refers to verses which were written
with coloured ink to which sugar had been added. When dry the writing
shone brightly.




