Chapter CV. There must be an analysis of nature by proper rejections
and exclusions, and then, after a sufficient number of negatives, a
conclusion should be arrived at from the affirmative instances. "It is
in this induction," Bacon adds, "that our chief hope lies."

Bacon's new organ has never been constructed, and all wits and
understandings have not yet been placed on a level.

We come back to the mystery of Francis Bacon, the possessor of the most
exquisite intellect that was ever bestowed on any of the children of
men. As an historian, he gives us a taste of his quality in "Henry VII."
In the Essays and the "Novum Organum," sayings which have the effect of
axioms are at once striking and self-evident. But he is always
desultory. In perceiving analogies between things which have nothing in
common he never had an equal, and this characteristic, to quote
Macaulay, "occasionally obtained the mastery over all his other
faculties and led him into absurdities into which no dull man could have
fallen." His memory was so stored with materials, and these so diverse,
that in similitude or with comparison he passed from subject to subject.
In the "Advancement of Learning" are enumerated the deficiencies which
Bacon observed, _nearly the whole of which were supplied during his
lifetime_.

The "Sylva Sylvarum" is the most extraordinary jumble of facts and
observations that has ever been brought together. It is a literary
curiosity. The "New Atlantis" and other short works in quantity amount
to very little. Bacon's life has hitherto remained unaccounted for. In
the foregoing pages an attempt has been made to offer an intelligible
explanation of the work to which he devoted his life, namely, to supply
the deficiencies which he had himself pointed out and which retarded the
advancement of learning.

Hallam has said of Bacon: "If we compare what may be found in the sixth,
seventh, and eighth books of the 'De Augmentis,' and the various short
treatises contained in his works on moral and political wisdom and on
human nature, with the rhetoric, ethics, and politics of Aristotle, or
with the historians most celebrated for their deep insight into civil
society and human character--with Thucydides, Tacitus, Phillipe de
Comines, Machiavel, David Hume--we shall, I think, find that one man may
almost be compared with all of these together."

Pope wrote: "Lord Bacon was the greatest genius that England, or perhaps
any other country, ever produced." If an examination, more thorough than
has hitherto been made, of the records and literature of his age
establishes beyond doubt the truth of the suggestions which have now
been put forward, what more can be said? This at any rate, that to him
shall be given that title to which he aspired and for which he was
willing to renounce his own name. He shall be called "The Benefactor of
Mankind."




APPENDIX.


Sir Thomas Bodley left behind him a short history of his life which is
of a fragmentary description. One-fourth of it is devoted to a record of
how much he suffered in permitting Essex to urge his advancement in the
State. The following is the passage:--

     "Now here I can not choose but in making report of the principall
     accidents that have fallen unto me in the course of my life, but
     record among the rest, that from the very first day I had no man
     more to friend among the Lords of the Councell, than was the Lord
     Treasurer Burleigh: for when occasion had beene offered of
     declaring his conceit as touching my service, he would alwaies tell
     the Queen (which I received from her selfe and some other
     ear-witnesses) that there was not any man in _England_ so meet as
     myselfe to undergoe the office of the Secretary. And sithence his
     sonne, the present Lord Treasurer, hath signified unto me in
     private conference, that when his father first intended to advance
     him to that place, his purpose was withall to make me his
     Colleague. But the case stood thus in my behalf: before such time
     as I returned from the Provinces united, which was in the yeare
     1597, and likewise after my returne, the then Earle of _Essex_ did
     use me so kindly both by letters and messages, and other great
     tokens of his inward favours to me, that although I had no meaning,
     but to settle in my mind my chiefest desire and dependance upon the
     Lord _Burleigh_, as one that I reputed to be both the best able,
     and therewithall the most willing to worke my advancement with the
     Queene, yet I know not how, the Earle, who fought by all devices to
     divert her love and liking both from the Father and the Son (but
     from the Sonne in speciall) to withdraw my affection from the one
     and the other, and to winne mee altogether to depend upon himselfe,
     did so often take occasion to entertaine the Queene with some
     prodigall speeches of my sufficiency for a Secretary, which were
     ever accompanied with words of disgrace against the present Lord
     Treasurer, as neither she her selfe, of whose favour before I was
     thoroughly assured, took any great pleasure to preferre me the
     sooner, (for she hated his ambition, and would give little
     countenance to any of his followers) and both the Lord _Burleigh_
     and his Sonne waxed jealous of my courses, as if under hand I had
     beene induced by the cunning and kindnesse of the Earle of _Essex_,
     to oppose my selfe against their dealings. And though in very truth
     they had no solid ground at all of the least alteration in my
     disposition towards either of them both, (for I did greatly respect
     their persons and places, with a settled resolution to doe them any
     service, as also in my heart I detested to be held of any faction
     whatsoever) yet the now Lord Treasurer, upon occasion of some
     talke, that I have since had with him, of the Earle and his
     actions, hath freely confessed of his owne accord unto me, that his
     daily provocations were so bitter and sharpe against him, and his
     comparisons so odious, when he put us in a ballance, as he thought
     thereupon he had very great reason to use his best meanes, to put
     any man out of hope of raising his fortune, whom the Earle with
     such violence, to his extreame prejudice, had endeavoured to
     dignifie. And this, as he affirmed, was all the motive he had to
     set himselfe against me, in whatsoever might redound to the
     bettering of my estate, or increasing of my credit and countenance
     with the Queene. When I hae thoroughly now bethought me, first in
     the Earle, of the slender hold-fast that he had in the favour of
     the Queene, of an endlesse opposition of the cheifest of our
     Statesmen like still to waite upon him, of his perillous, and
     feeble, and uncertain advice, as well in his owne, as in all the
     causes of his friends: and when moreover for my selfe I had fully
     considered how very untowardly these two Counsellours were affected
     unto me, (upon whom before in cogitation I had framed all the
     fabrique of my future prosperity) how ill it did concurre with my
     naturall disposition, to become, or to be counted either a stickler
     or partaker in any publique faction, how well I was able, by God's
     good blessing, to live of my selfe, if I could be content with a
     competent livelyhood; how short time of further life I was then to
     expect by the common course of nature: when I had, I say, in this
     manner represented to my thoughts my particular estate, together
     with the Earles, I resolved thereupon to possesse my soule in peace
     all the residue of my daies, to take my full farewell of State
     imployments, to satisfie my mind with that mediocrity of worldly
     living that I had of my owne, and so to retire me from the Court,
     which was the epilogue and end of all my actions and endeavours of
     any important note, till I came to the age of fifty-three."

The experience of Bodley and Bacon appears to have been identical. It
certainly materially strengthens the case of those who contend that
Bacon's conduct to Essex was not deserving of censure on the ground of
ingratitude for favours received from him.

The words which Robert Cecil addressed to Bodley, namely, that "he had
very great reason to use his best meanes, to put any man out of hope of
raising his fortune whom the Earle with such violence, to his extreame
prejudice had endeavoured to dignifie," would with equal force have been
applied to Bacon's case. The drift of Bodley's account of the matter
points to his feeling that Essex's conduct had not been of a
disinterested character, and suggests that he felt the Earle had been
making a tool of him.

The effect of this was that Bodley adopted the course which Bacon
threatened to adopt when refused the office of Attorney-General,
solicited for him by Essex--he took a farewell of State employments and
retired from the Court to devote himself to the service of his "Reverend
Mother, the University of Oxford," and to the advancement of her good.
To this end he became a collector of books, whereas Bacon would have
become "some sorry book-maker or a true pioner in that mine of truth
which Anaxagoras said lay so deep."


ROBERT BANKS AND SON, RACQUET COURT, FLEET STREET.


  [Illustration:_ Figure VI._]

  [Illustration: _Figure VII._]

  [Illustration: _Figure VIII._]

  [Illustration: _Figure IX._]

  [Illustration: _Figure XX._]

  [Illustration: THE XXXVIII. BOOKE.

  THE ARGVMENT

     _Marfisa doth present herselfe before
     King Charles, and in his presence is baptized:
     Astolfo doth Senapos sight restore,
     By whom such hardie feats are enterprised,
     That Agramant therewith molested sore
     Is by Sobrino finally aduised,
     To make a challenge on Rogeros hed,
     To end the troubles that the warre had bred._

  _Figure XIII._

  _Figure XIV._]

  [Illustration: _Figure X._]

  [Illustration: _Figure XV._]

  [Illustration: _Figure XI._]

  [Illustration: _Figure XII._]

  [Illustration: _Figure XXI._

  THE GENEALOGIES RECORDED IN THE SACRED SCRIPTVRES,
  ACcording to euery FAMILY and TRIBE.

  WITH

  The Line of our Sauiour IESVS CHRIST obserued from _Adam_
  to the blessed VIRGIN MARY.

  _By_
  I. S.

  CVM PRIVILEGIO.]

  [Illustration: _Figure XVI._]

  [Illustration: _Figure XVII._]

  [Illustration: _Figure XVIII._]

  [Illustration: _Figure XIX._]


       *       *       *       *       *




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES


1. Passages in italics are surrounded by _underscores_.

2. Passages in bold are indicated by =bold=.

3. Long "s" has been modernized.

4. Images have been moved from the middle of a paragraph to the closest
paragraph break.

5. Footnotes have been renumbered and moved to the end of the chapters
in which they are referenced.

6. The original text includes Greek characters. For this text version
these letters have been replaced with transliterations.

7. Certain words use oe ligature in the original.

8. The following misprints have been corrected:
    "obain" corrected to "obtain" (page 27)
    "Shakespere" corrected to "Shakespeare" (page 39)
    "Bodly" corrected to "Bodley" (page 85)
    "Shakepeare's" corrected to "Shakespeare's" (page 107)
    "commenceed" corrected to "commenced" (page 108)
    "Proecepta" corrected to "Præcepta" (page 135)
    "deficiences" corrected to "deficiencies" (page 191)
    "numercial" corrected to "numerical" (footnote 35)

9. Other than the corrections listed above, printer's inconsistencies in
spelling, hyphenation, and ligature usage have been retained.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Mystery of Francis Bacon, by William T. Smedley



