CHAPTER X.

THE RARE AND UNACCUSTOMED SUIT.


What was this rare and unaccustomed suit of which the Queen could have
had no experience and which, according to Spedding, would make it
unnecessary for Bacon to follow "ordinary practice at the bar"?
Historians and biographers have founded on this suit the allegation that
from his earliest years Bacon was a place hunter, entirely ignoring the
fact, which is made clear from the letter to Walsingham written four
years after the application was first made, that he had resolved on a
course of action which, if her Majesty liked not his suit, by the leave
of God he must and would follow, not for any necessity of estate, but
for his credit sake. Here was a young man of twenty years of age,
earnestly urging the adoption of a scheme which he had conceived, and
which he feared Burghley might consider indiscreet and unadvised.
Failing in obtaining his object, as will be proved by definite evidence,
undertaking at the cost of Thomas Bodley and other friends a course of
travel to better fit him for the task he had mapped out as his life's
work--returning to England and, four years after his first request had
been made, renewing his suit--grimly in earnest and determined to carry
the scheme through at all costs, with or without the Queen's aid. This
is not the conduct of a mere place hunter. If these letters be read
aright and the reasonable theory which will be advanced of the nature of
the suit be accepted--all efforts to suggest any explanation having
hitherto, as Spedding admits, proved futile--a fresh light will be
thrown upon the character of Francis Bacon, and the heavy obligation
under which he has placed his countrymen for all ages will for the
first time be recognised.

In the seven volumes of "Bacon's Life and Letters" there is nothing to
justify the eulogy on his character to which Spedding gave utterance in
the following words:--"But in him the gift of seeing in prophetic vision
what might be and ought to be was united with the practical talent of
devising means and handling minute details. He could at once imagine
like a poet and execute like a clerk of the works. Upon the conviction
_This must be done_ followed at once _How_ may it be done? Upon that
question answered followed the resolution to try and do it." But
although Spedding fails to produce any evidence to justify his
statement, it is nevertheless correct. More than that, the actual
achievement followed with unerring certainty, but Spedding restricts
Bacon's life's work to the establishment of a system of inductive
philosophy, and records the failure of the system.

William Cecil was a man of considerable classical attainments, although
these were probably not superior to those of Mildred Cooke, the lady who
became his second wife. He was initiated into the methods of
statesmanship at an early age by his father, Richard Cecil, Master of
the Robes to Henry VIII. Having found favour with Somerset, the
Protector of Edward VI., he was, when 27 years of age, made Master of
Requests. When Somerset fell from power in 1549 young Cecil, with other
adherents of the Protector, was committed to the Tower. But he was soon
released and was rapidly advanced by Northumberland. He became Secretary
of State, was knighted and made a member of the Privy Council. Mary
would have continued his employment in office had he not refused her
offers on account of his adhesion to the Protestant faith. He mingled
during her reign with men of all parties and his moderation and cautious
conduct carried him through that period without mishap. On Elizabeth's
accession he was the first member sworn upon the Privy Council, and he
continued during the remainder of his life her principal Minister of
State. Sagacious, deliberate in thought and character, tolerant, a man
of peace and compromise, he became the mainstay of the Queen's
government and the most influential man in State affairs. Whilst he
maintained a princely magnificence in his affairs, his private life was
pure, gentle and generous. This was the man to whom the brilliant young
nephew of his wife and the son of his old friend, Sir Nicholas Bacon,
disclosed, some time during the summer of 1580, his scheme, of which
there had been no experience, and entrusted his suit, which was rare and
unaccustomed. The arguments in its favour at this interview may have
followed the following outline:--

I need not remind you of my devotion to learning. You know that from my
earliest boyhood I have followed a course of study which has embraced
all subjects. I have made myself acquainted with all knowledge which the
world possesses. To enable me to do this I mastered all languages in
which books are written. During my recent visit to foreign lands, I have
recognized how far my country falls behind others in language, and
consequently in literature. I would draw your special attention to the
remarkable advance which has been made in these matters in France during
your lordship's lifetime. When I arrived there in 1576 I made myself
acquainted with the principles of the movement which had been carried
through by Du Bellay, Ronsard, and their confrères. They recognized that
their native language was crude and lacking in gravity and art. First by
obtaining a complete mastery of the Greek and Latin languages, as also
of those of Italy and Spain, they prepared themselves for a study of the
literatures of which those languages, with their idioms and
peculiarities, form the basis. Having obtained this mastery they
reconstructed their native language and gave their country a medium by
which her writers might express their thoughts and emotions. They have
made it possible for their countrymen to rival the poets of ancient
Greece and Rome. They and others of their countrymen have translated the
literary treasures of those ancient nations into their own tongue, and
thereby enabled those speaking their language, who are not skilled in
classical languages, to enjoy and profit by the works of antiquity. Your
lordship knows well the deficiencies of the language of our England, the
absence of any literature worthy of the name. In these respects the
condition of affairs is far behind that which prevailed in France even
before the great movement which Ronsard and Du Bellay initiated. I do
not speak of Italy, which possesses a language melodious, facile, and
rich, and a literature which can never die.

I know my own powers. I possess every qualification which will enable me
to do for my native tongue what the Pléiade have done for theirs. I ask
to be permitted to give to my country this great heritage. Others may
serve her in the law, others may serve her in affairs of state, but your
Lordship knows full well that there are none who could serve her in this
respect as could I. You are not unmindful of the poorness of my estate.
This work will not only entail a large outlay of money but it
necessitates command of the ablest wits of the nation. This is my suit:
that her Majesty will graciously confer on me some office which will
enable me to control such literary resources and the services of such
men as may be necessary for the accomplishment of this work; further,
that she may be pleased from time to time to make grants from the civil
list to cover the cost of the work. I need not remind your Lordship what
fame will ever attach to her Majesty and how glorious will be the
memory of her reign if this great project be effected in it. Your
Lordship must realise this because you and her Ladyship, my aunt, are by
your attainments qualified to appreciate its full value. My youth may be
urged as an objection to my fitness for such a task, but your Lordship
knows full well--none better--that my powers are not to be measured by
my years. This I will say, I am no vain promiser, but I am assured that
I can accomplish all that I contemplate. The Queen hath such confidence
in the soundness of your judgment that she will listen to your advice.
My prayer to you therefore is that it may please your Lordship both
herein and elsewhere to be my patron and urge my suit, which, although
rare and unaccustomed, may be granted if it receives your powerful
support.

The suit was submitted to the Queen, but without result. Probably it was
not urged with a determination to obtain its acceptance in spite of any
objections which might be raised by the Queen. Five years after, Bacon,
still a suppliant, wrote to Walsingham: "I think the objection to my
years will wear away with the length of my suit." Cautious Lord Burghley
would give full weight to the force of this objection if it were
advanced by the Queen. He loved this boy, with his extraordinary
abilities, but he had such novel and far-reaching ideas. He appeared to
have no adequate reverence for his inferior superiors. On leaving
Cambridge he had arrogantly condemned its cherished methods of imparting
knowledge. Before power was placed in his hands the use he might make of
it must be well weighed and considered. What effect might the
advancement of Francis Bacon have on Robert Cecil's career? Granted that
the contentions of the former were sound, and the object desirable,
should not this work be carried out by the Universities? Never leap
until you know where you are going to alight was a proverb the
soundness of which had been proved in Lord Burghley's experience. What
might be the outcome if this rare and unaccustomed suit were granted?
Better for the Queen, who, though slow to bestow favours, was always
ready to encourage hopes, to follow her usual course. She might
entertain the motion graciously and return a favourable answer and let
it rest there. And so it did.

Then there was a happening which has remained unknown until now.




