CHAPTER XVIII.

HOW BACON MARKED BOOKS WITH THE PUBLICATION OF WHICH HE WAS CONNECTED.


At a very early period in the history of printing, the custom was
introduced of placing on title-pages, at the heads and ends of the
chapters, emblematical designs. In English printed books these are
seldom to be found until the latter half of the 16th century.

An investigation of the books of the period reveals the fact that the
same blocks were used by different printers. Articles have been written
on the migration of printer's blocks, but, so far, no explanation has
been offered as to any object other than decoration for which these
blocks were used.

Among other designs in use between 1576 and 1640 are a number of
variants of a device in which a light A and a dark A form the most
conspicuous points. Camden, in his "Remaines Concerning Britaine," 1614,
commences a chapter on "Impresses," at the head of which the device is
found, thus:--"An Imprese (as the Italians call it) is a device in
picture with his Motto, or Word, borne by noble and learned personages,
to notifie some particular conceit of their owne: as Emblemes (that we
may omitte other differences) doe propound some general instructions to
all." Then follow a number of examples, and amongst them this:--

   "Variete and vicissitude of humane things he seemed to shew which
   parted his shield, Per Pale, Argent & Sables and counter-changeably
   writte in the Argent, Ater and in the Sables Albus."

   But even if the light A and dark A are used in the design of the
   head-piece to represent Albus and Ater it does not afford any
   satisfactory explanation as to why they are so used.

In MDCXVI. was published "Les Emblemes Moraulx et Militaires du Sieur
Jacob De Bruck Angermundt Nouvellement mis en Lumiere A Strasbourg, Par
Jacob de Heyden Graveur."

In Emblem No. 18, now reproduced, the light A and the dark A will be
found in the branch of the tree which the man is about to cut off.
(Figure VI.)[44]

Another Emblem does not contain the light A and dark A, but the bark of
the trunk and branches of the tree on the design exhibit a strong
contrast between the dark and light, which feature is represented in
most of the title-pages of books in which the device is found. (Figure
VII.)

Mr. Charles T. Jacob, Chiswick Press, London, who is the author of
"Books and Printing" (London, 1902), and several works on typography,
referring to an article on the migration of woodblocks, said:--

     It is a well-known fact to Bibliographers that the same blocks were
     sometimes used by different printers in two places quite far apart,
     and at various intervals during the seventeenth and eighteenth
     centuries. That the same blocks were employed is apparent from a
     comparison of technical defects of impressions taken at different
     places, and at two periods. There was no method of duplication in
     existence until stereotyping was first invented in 1725; even then
     the details were somewhat crude, and the process being new, it met
     with much opposition and was practically not adopted until the
     early part of the nineteenth century. Electrotyping, which is the
     ideal method of reproducing woodblocks, was not introduced until
     1836 or thereabouts. Of course, it was quite possible to re-engrave
     the same design, but absolute fidelity could not be relied on by
     these means, even if executed by the same hand.

The earliest date which appears on a book in which the head-piece,
containing the device of the light A and dark A is found, is 1563. The
book is "De Furtivis Literarum Notis Vulgo. De Ziferis," Ioan. Baptista
Porta Neapolitano Authore. Cum Privilegio Neapoli, apud Ioa. Mariam
Scotum. MDLXIII. (Figure VIII.)

It is only used once--over the dedication Ioanni Soto Philippi Regis.
There is no other head-piece in the book. John Baptist Porta was, with
the exception of Trithemius, whom he quotes, the first writer on
cyphers. At the time at which he wrote cypher-writing was studied in
every Court in Europe. It is significant that this emblematic device is
used in the earliest period in which head-pieces were adopted, in a book
which is descriptive and is in fact a text-book of the art of
concealment. This has, however, now been proved to be a falsely dated
book.

The first edition of this work was published in Naples in 1563 by Ioa.
Marius Scotus, but this does not contain the A A design. In 1591 the
book was published in London by John Wolfe; this reprint was dedicated
to Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland. After the edition had been
printed off, the title-page was altered to correspond with the 1563
Naples publication. The dedication was taken out, and a reprint of the
original dedication was substituted, and over this was placed the A A
head-piece; then an edition was struck off, and, until to-day, it has
been sold and re-sold as the first edition of Baptista Porta's work. It
is difficult to offer any explanation as to why this fraud was
committed.

The first occasion upon which this device was used appears to be in a
book so rare that no copy of it can be found, either in the British
Museum or the Bodleian Library. Unfortunately, in the copy belonging to
the writer, the title-page and the two first pages are missing. The work
is called "Hebraicum Alphabethum Jo. Bovlaese." It is a Hebrew Grammar,
with proof-sheets added. It is interleaved with sheets of English-made
paper, containing Bacon's handwriting. Bound up with it is another
Hebrew Grammar, similarly interleaved, called "Sive compendium,
quintacunque Ratione fieri potuit amplessimum, Totius linguæ," published
in Paris in 1566. The book ends with the sentence: "Ex collegio
Montis--Acuti 20 Decembris 1576"; then follow two pages in Hebrew, with
the Latin translation over it, headed "Decem Præcepta decalogi Exod."
Over this is the design containing the light A and the dark A, and the
squirrel and rabbits. (Figure IX.) One thing is certain, that the copy
now referred to was in the possession of Bacon, and that the interleaved
sheets of paper contain his handwriting, in which have been added page
by page the equivalents of the Hebrew in Greek, Chaldæic, Syriac and
Arabic.

In 1577 Christophor Plantin published an edition of Andrea Alciat's
"Emblemata." On page 104 is Emblem No. 45, "In dies meliora." This has
been re-designed for the 1577 edition. It contains at the back the
pillars of Hercules, with a scroll around bearing the motto: "Plus
oltre." These pillars stand on some arches, immediately in front of
which is a mound or pyramid, two sides of which are seen. On one is to
be found the light A and on the other the dark A. The design was
appropriated by Whitney, and appears on page 53 in the 1586 edition of
his Emblems. From this time forth, A A devices are to be found in
numbers of books published in England, and on some published on the
Continent. Amongst the former are the first editions of "Venus and
Adonis," "Lucrece," the "Sonnets," the quarto editions of Shakespeare's
plays, the folio edition (1623) of his works, and the first quarto and
octavo editions (1612) of the Authorised Version of the Bible.

There are fourteen distinct designs, in all of which, varying widely in
other respects, the light A and the dark A constitute the outstanding
figure. The use of the two letters so shaded must have had a special
significance. In nearly every case it will be observed that the letter A
is so drawn as to make the letter C on the inside. Was its significance
of general knowledge amongst printers and readers, or was it an
earmarking device used by one person, or by a Society?

A possible interpretation of the use of the light and dark shading, is
that the book in which it is used contains more than is revealed; that
is to say, the overt and the concealed.

A copy of "Æsopiphrygis vita et fabellæ cum latina interpretatione"
exists, date 1517. The book is annotated by Bacon. On one side is the
Greek text and on the opposite page the Latin translation. On pages 102
and 103 are two initial letters printed from blocks of the letter A.
These are coloured so that the one on the left hand side is a light A,
and that on the opposite page a dark A.

There are other designs which are used apparently as part of a scheme.
The identical block (Figure X.) which was used at the top of the title
page of "Venus and Adonis" (1593) and "Lucrece" (1594) did service on
the title page of the Genealogies in the quarto edition of the
Authorised Version of the Bible, 1612. This design was, so far as can be
traced, only used twice in the intervening nineteen years--on "An
Apologie of the Earl of Essex to Master Anthony Bacon," penned by
himself in 1598, and printed by Richard Bradocke in 1603, and in 1607,
on the "World of Wonders," printed by Richard Field. It was of this book
that Caldecott, the bibliophile and Shakespearean scholar, wrote: "The
phraseology of Shakespeare is better illustrated in this work than in
any other book existing." The design which is found on the title page of
the "Sonnets of Shakespeare," 1609, is found also in the first edition
of Napier's "Mirifici Logarithmorum," 1611, but printed from a
different block. The design with archers shooting at the base of the
central figure is to be found in a large number of the folio editions of
the period. Amongst these are the Authorised Version of the Bible, 1611,
the "Novum Organum," 1620, and the 1623 edition of Shakespeare's works.

There are other designs which are usually found accompanying the light A
and dark A and the other devices before referred to.

These designs were first brought into use from 1576 and practically
cease to appear about 1626. Afterwards they are seldom seen except in
books bearing Bacon's name, and eventually they lapse. The last use of
an A A device is over the life of the author in the second volume of an
edition of Bacon's Essays edited by Dr. William Willymott, published by
Henry Parson in 1720. After an interval of about 60 years a new design
is made, which is not one of those employed by Bacon.

By means of these devices a certain number of books may be identified as
forming a class by themselves.

There is another feature connected with them which is of special
interest. One man appears to have contributed to all the books thus
marked--either the dedication, the preface,[45] or the lines "To the
Reader"; in some cases all three. It may be urged in opposition to this
view that in those days there was a form in which dedications and
prefaces were written, and that this was more or less followed by many
writers, but this contention will not stand investigation. There are
tricks of phrasing and other peculiarities which enable certain literary
productions to be identified as the work of one man. Some of the finest
Elizabethan literature is to be found in the prefaces and dedications
in these books.

The theory now put forth is that Francis Bacon was directing the
production of a great quantity of the Elizabethan literature, and in
every book in the production of which he was interested, he caused to be
inserted one of these devices. He kept the blocks in his own custody; he
sent them out to a printer when a book was approved by him for printing.
On the completion of the work, the printer returned the blocks to Bacon
so that they could be sent elsewhere by him as occasion required.

The most elaborate of the AA designs is Figure XII., and the writer has
only found it in one volume. It is "Le Historie della Citta Di
Fiorenza," by M. Jacopo, published in Lyons by Theobald Ancelin in 1582.

"Exact was his correspondence abroad and at home, constant his Letters,
frequent his Visits, great his obligations," states the contemporary
biographer, speaking of Francis Bacon. It is difficult to arrive at the
exact meaning of these words. There is little correspondence with those
abroad remaining, no record of visits, no particulars of the great
obligations into which he entered. In the dedication of the 1631 edition
of the "Histoire Naturelle" to Monseigneur de Chasteauneuf, the author
speaking of Bacon writes:--"Le Chancelier, qu'on a fait venir tant de
fois en France, n'a point encore quitté l'Angleterre avec tant de
passion de nous découvrir ses merveilles que depuis qu'il a sceu le rang
dont on avoit reconnu vos vertus."

These frequent visits to France are unrecorded elsewhere, but here is
definite testimony that they were made.

There are good grounds for believing that Bacon was throughout his life,
until their deaths, in constant communication with Christophor Plantin
(1514-1589), Aldus Manutius, Henry Stephen (1528-1598), and also with
Robert Stephens the third (1563-1640). All these men were not only
printers, but brilliant scholars and writers. If search be made, it is
quite possible that correspondence or other evidence of their friendship
may come to light. Be that as it may, there were undoubtedly a number of
books published on the continent between 1576 and 1630 which in the
sparta upon them bear testimony to Bacon's association with their
publication.

The following are instances of where the several designs which are
reproduced may be found. They however occur in many other volumes.

  Figure   IX.--"The Arte of English Poesie," 1589.
     "   XIII.--"Orlando Furioso," 1607.
     "    XIV.--Spencer's "Fairie Queen."
     "     XV.--"Florentine History translation," 1595, and 1636 edition
                    of Barclay's "Argenis."
     "     XI.--"Sonnets."
     "    XVI.--Simon Pateriche's translation of "Discourse against
                    Machiavel."
     "   XVII.--Lodge's translation of "Seneca," 1614.
     "  XVIII.--Shakespeare Folio, 1623.
     "    XIX.--"Dæmonologie," 1603.
     "     XX.--Alciat's "Emblems," published in Paris, 1584.


FOOTNOTES:

[44] Plates Nos. VI. to XXI. will be found after the Appendix.

[45] In the "Advancement of Learning" Bacon says that Demosthenes
went so far in regard to the great force that the entrance
and access into a cause had to make a good impression that he
kept in readiness a stock of prefaces.




