CHAPTER XXI.

BACON'S LIBRARY.


In the "Advancement of Learning" Bacon refers to the annotations of
books as being deficient. There was living at the end of the sixteenth
and beginning of the seventeenth century a scholar through whose hands
at least several thousand books passed. He appears to have made a
practice of annotating in the margins every book he read. The chief
purpose, however, of the notes, apparently, was to aid the memory, for
in some books nearly every name occurring in the text is carried into
the margin without comment. The notes are also accompanied by scrolls,
marks, and brackets, which support the contention that they are the work
of one man. The annotation of books was not a common practice then, nor
has it been since. If a reader takes up a hundred books in a second-hand
book shop he will probably not find more than one containing manuscript
notes, and not one in five hundred in which the annotations have been
systematically carried through. There does not appear to have been any
other scholar living at that time, with the exception of this one, who
was persistently making marginal notes on the books he read.

Spedding writes: "What became of his (Bacon's) books, which were left to
Sir John Constable and must have contained traces of his reading, we do
not know; but very few appear to have survived."

Mrs. Pott, in "Francis Bacon and his Secret Society," draws attention to
the mystery as to the disappearance of Bacon's library. "Which is a
mystery," she adds, "although the world has been content to take it
very apathetically. Where is Bacon's library? Undoubtedly the books
exist and are traceable. We should expect them to be recognisable by
marginal notes; yet those notes, whether in pencil or in ink, may have
been effaced. If annotated, Bacon and his friends would not wish his
books to attract public attention." And further on: "It is probable that
the latter (_i.e._, the books) will seldom or never be found to bear his
name or signature." And again: "Yet it may reasonably be anticipated
that some at least are 'noted in the margin,' or that some will be found
with traces of marks which were guides to the transcriber or amanuensis
as to the portions which were to be copied for future use in Bacon's
collections or book of commonplaces." Mrs. Pott's words were written in
a spirit of true prophecy.

The collecting together of these books originated with that
distinguished Baconian scholar, Mr. W. M. Safford. For years past he has
been steadily engaged in reconstituting Bacon's Library. The writer has
had the privilege of being associated with him in this work during the
past three years. A collection of nearly two thousand volumes has been
gathered together. The annotations on the margins of these books are
unquestionably the work of one man, and that man, or rather boy and man,
was undoubtedly Francis Bacon. The books bear date from 1470 to 1620. It
is impossible to enumerate them all here, but they include the works of
Seneca, Aristotle, Plato, Horace, Alciat, Lucanus, Dionysius, Catullus,
Lactinius, Plutarch, Pliny, Aristophanes, Plautus, Cornelius Agrippa,
Cicero, Vitruvius, Euclid, Virgil, Ovid, Lucretius, Apuleius, Salust,
Tibullus, Isocrates, and hundreds of other classical writers; St.
Augustine, St. Jerome, Calvin, Beza, Beda, Erasmus, Martin Luther, J.
Cammerarius, Sir Thomas Moore, Machiavelli, and other more modern
writers.

The handwriting varies,[52] but there is a particular hand which is
found accompanied by a boy's sketches. There are drawings of full-length
figures, heads of men and women, animals, birds, reptiles, ships,
castles, cathedrals, cities, battles, storms, etc. The writing is a
strong, clerkly student's hand. There is a passage in "Hamlet," Act V.,
scene ii., which is noteworthy. Hamlet, speaking to Horatio, says:--

                    "I sat me down
  Devised a new commission; wrote it fair;
  I once did hold it, as our statists do,
  A baseness to write fair, and labour'd much
  How to forget that learning; but, Sir, now
  It did me yeomans service."

The nature of this statement is so personal that it could only have been
written as the result of experience. Hamlet had been taught, when young,
to write a hand so fair that he was capable of producing a fresh
commission which would pass muster as the work of a Court copyist. The
annotation of these books possessed the same qualification. In the
margins of these books are abundant references in handwriting to the
whole range of classical authors.

A copy of the "Grammatice Compendium" of Lactus Pomponius, a very rare
book printed by De Fortis in Venice in 1484, contains on the margins the
boy's scribble and drawings, besides a number of manuscript notes. It
bears traces of his reading probably at eight years of age. A large
folio volume entitled "T. Livii Palvini Latinæ Historiæ Principis
Decades Tres," published by Frobenius in 1535, is a treasure. It is most
copiously annotated and embellished with sketches. The notes are usually
in Latin, but interspersed with Greek and sometimes with English.
Obviously the writer thought in Latin, and the character of the
drawings justifies the assumption that, at the time, his age would be
from ten to fourteen years.

The most remarkable reference to these annotations is to be found in the
"Rape of Lucrece." The fifteenth stanza is as follows:--

  "But she that never cop't with straunger eies,
  Could picke no meaning from their parling lookes,
  _Nor read the subtle shining secrecies
  Writ in the glassie margents of such bookes_,
  Shee toucht no unknown baits, nor feared no hooks,
      Nor could shee moralize his wanton sight
      More than his eies were opend to the light."

It would be difficult to conceive a more inappropriate simile for the
lustful looks in Tarquin's eyes than "the subtle shining secrecies, writ
in the glassie margents of such books." That this is lugged in for a
purpose outside the object of the poem is manifest. How many readers of
"Lucrece" would know of such a practice? Nay. If it did exist, was not
its use very rare?

But the margin of the verse itself yields a subtle shining secret! The
initial letters of the lines are B, C, N, W, Sh, N, M. It is only
necessary to supply the vowels--BACoN, W. Sh., NaMe. Sh is on line 103,
which is the numerical value of the word Shakespeare. The numerical
value of Bacon is 33. In view of this the line 33 is significant:--"Why
is Colatine the publisher?" The use of the word _publisher_ here is
quite inappropriate. It is introduced for some reason outside the
purpose of the text.

The "Rape of Lucrece" commences with Bacon's monogram and, as the late
Rev. Walter Begley pointed out, ends with his signature.

The theory now advanced is that when Bacon read a book he made marginal
notes in it--the object being mainly to assist his memory, but the
critical notes are numerous. It does not follow that all these books
constituted his library. He would read a book and it having served his
purpose he would dispose of it. Some books no doubt he would retain and
these would form his library.

The annotations are chiefly in Latin, but some are in Greek, some in
Hebrew, French and Spanish. When these have been examined and translated
the meaning of the phrase that he had taken all knowledge to be his
province will be better understood. Rawley says: "He read much and that
with great judgment and rejection of impertinences incident to many
authors."

The writer having examined annotations, many and varied, of books in his
library, and having enjoyed the privilege of free access to those
collected by Mr. Safford, ventures to assert that much of the ripe
learning of the Shakespeare plays can be traced therein to its proper
origin. Amongst the former is a copy of Alciat's Emblems, 1577, in the
early part profusely annotated. Ben Jonson in his "Discoveries" has
incorporated the translation of a portion of one of the Emblems and _has
also incorporated a portion of the annotations from this very book_.


FOOTNOTES:

[52] Edwin A. Abbot, in his work, "Francis Bacon," p. 447, writes,
"Bacon's style (as a writer) varied almost as much as his handwriting."




