CHAPTER XXII.

TWO GERMAN OPINIONS ON SHAKESPEARE AND BACON.


Dr. G. G. Gervinus, the eminent German Historian and Professor
Extraordinary at Heidelberg, published in 1849 his work, "Shakespeare
Commentaries." This was years before any suggestion had been made that
Bacon was in any way connected with the authorship of the Shakespearean
dramas.

In the Prospectus of "The New Shakespeare Society," written in 1873, Dr.
F. J. Furnivall says:--

     "The profound and generous 'Commentaries' of Gervinus--an honour to
     a German to have written, a pleasure to an Englishman to read--is
     still the only book known to me that comes near the true treatment
     and the dignity of its subject, or can be put into the hands of the
     student who wants to know the mind of Shakespeare."

The book abounds with references to Bacon. From the Preface to the last
chapter Gervinus appears to have Bacon continually suggested to him by
the thoughts and words of Shakespeare.

In the Preface, after speaking of the value accruing to German
literature by naturalizing Shakespeare "even at the risk of casting
our own poets still further in the shade," he says:--

     "A similar benefit would it be to our intellectual life if his
     famed contemporary, Bacon, were revived in a suitable manner, in
     order to counterbalance the idealistic philosophy of Germany. For
     both these, the poet as well as the philosopher, having looked
     deeply into the history and politics of their people, stand upon
     the level ground of reality, notwithstanding the high art of the
     one and the speculative notions of the other. By the healthfulness
     of their own mind they influence the healthfulness of others, while
     in their most ideal and most abstract representations they aim at a
     preparation for life _as it is_--for _that_ life which forms the
     exclusive subject of all political action."

In the chapter on "His Age," written prior to 1849, the Professor pours
out the results of a profound study of the writings attributed to both
men in the following remarkable sentences:--

     "Judge then how natural it was that England, if not the birthplace
     of the drama, should be that of dramatic legislature. Yet even this
     instance of favourable concentration is not the last. Both in
     philosophy and poetry everything conspired, as it were, throughout
     this prosperous period, in favour of two great minds, Shakespeare
     and Bacon; all competitors vanished from their side, and they could
     give forth laws for art and science which it is incumbent even upon
     present ages to fulfil. As the revived philosophy, which in the
     former century in Germany was divided among many, but in England at
     that time was the possession of a single man, so poetry also found
     one exclusive heir, compared with whom those later born could claim
     but little.

     "That Shakespeare's appearance upon a soil so admirably prepared
     was neither marvellous nor accidental is evidenced even by the
     corresponding appearance of such a contemporary as Bacon. Scarcely
     can anything be said of Shakespeare's position generally with
     regard to mediæval poetry which does not also bear upon the
     position of the renovator Bacon with regard to mediæval philosophy.
     Neither knew nor mentioned the other, although Bacon was almost
     called upon to have done so in his remarks upon the theatre of his
     day. It may be presumed that Shakespeare liked Bacon but little, if
     he knew his writings and life; that he liked not his ostentation,
     which, without on the whole interfering with his modesty, recurred
     too often in many instances; that he liked not the fault-finding
     which his ill-health might have caused, nor the narrow-mindedness
     with which he pronounced the histrionic art to be infamous,
     although he allowed that the ancients regarded the drama as a
     school for virtue; nor the theoretic precepts of worldly wisdom
     which he gave forth; nor, lastly, the practical career which he
     lived. Before his mind, however, if he had fathomed it, he must
     have bent in reverence. For just as Shakespeare was an interpreter
     of the secrets of history and of human nature, Bacon was an
     interpreter of lifeless nature. Just as Shakespeare went from
     instance to instance in his judgment of moral actions, and never
     founded a law on single experience, so did Bacon in natural science
     avoid leaping from one experience of the senses to general
     principles; he spoke of this with blame as anticipating nature; and
     Shakespeare, in the same way, would have called the
     conventionalities in the poetry of the Southern races an
     anticipation of human nature. In the scholastic science of the
     middle ages, as in the chivalric poetry of the romantic period,
     approbation and not truth was sought for, and with one accord
     Shakespeare's poetry and Bacon's science were equally opposed to
     this. As Shakespeare balanced the one-sided errors of the
     imagination by reason, reality, and nature, so Bacon led philosophy
     away from the one-sided errors of reason to experience; both with
     one stroke, renovated the two branches of science and poetry by
     this renewed bond with nature; both, disregarding all by-ways,
     staked everything upon this 'victory in the race between art and
     nature.' Just as Bacon with his new philosophy is linked with the
     natural science of Greece and Rome, and then with the latter period
     of philosophy in western Europe, so Shakespeare's drama stands in
     relation to the comedies of Plautus and to the stage of his own
     day; between the two there lay a vast wilderness of time, as
     unfruitful for the drama as for philosophy. But while they thus led
     back to nature, Bacon was yet as little of an empiric, in the
     common sense, as Shakespeare was a poet of nature. Bacon prophesied
     that if hereafter his commendation of experience should prevail,
     great danger to science would arise from the other extreme, and
     Shakespeare even in his own day could perceive the same with
     respect to his poetry; Bacon, therefore, insisted on the closest
     union between experience and reason, just as Shakespeare effected
     that between reality and imagination. While they thus bid adieu to
     the formalities of ancient art and science, Shakespeare to conceits
     and taffeta-phrases, Bacon to logic and syllogisms, yet at times it
     occurred that the one fell back into the subtleties of the old
     school, and the other into the constrained wit of the Italian
     style. Bacon felt himself quite an original in that which was his
     peculiar merit, and so was Shakespeare; the one in the method of
     science he had laid down, and in his suggestions for its execution,
     the other in the poetical works he had executed, and in the
     suggestions of their new law. Bacon, looking back to the waymarks
     he had left for others, said with pride that his words required a
     century for their demonstration and several for their execution;
     and so too it has demanded two centuries to understand Shakespeare,
     but very little has ever been executed in his sense. And at the
     same time we have mentioned what deep modesty was interwoven in
     both with their self-reliance, so that the words which Bacon liked
     to quote hold good for the two works:--'The kingdom of God cometh
     not with observation.' Both reached this height from the one
     starting point, that Shakespeare despised the million, and Bacon
     feared with Phocion the applause of the multitude. Both are alike
     in the rare impartiality with which they avoided everything
     one-sided; in Bacon we find, indeed, youthful exercises in which he
     endeavoured in severe contrasts to contemplate a series of things
     from two points of view. Both, therefore, have an equal hatred of
     sects and parties; Bacon of sophists and dogmatic philosophers,
     Shakespeare of Puritans and zealots. Both, therefore, are equally
     free from prejudices, and from astrological superstition in dreams
     and omens. Bacon says of the alchemists and magicians in natural
     science that they stand in similar relation to true knowledge as
     the deeds of Amadis to those of Cæsar, and so does Shakespeare's
     true poetry stand in relation to the fantastic romance of Amadis.
     Just as Bacon banished religion from science, so did Shakespeare
     from Art; and when the former complained that the teachers of
     religion were against natural philosophy, they were equally against
     the stage. From Bacon's example it seems clear that Shakespeare
     left religious matters unnoticed on the same grounds as himself,
     and took the path of morality in worldly things; in both this has
     been equally misconstrued, and Le Maistre has proved Bacon's lack
     of Christianity, as Birch has done that of Shakespeare. Shakespeare
     would, perhaps, have looked down just as contemptuously on the
     ancients and their arts as Bacon did on their philosophy and
     natural science, and both on the same grounds; they boasted of the
     greater age of the world, of more enlarged knowledge of heaven,
     earth, and mankind. Neither stooped before authorities, and an
     injustice similar to that which Bacon committed against Aristotle,
     Shakespeare _perhaps_ has done to Homer. In both a similar
     combination of different mental powers was at work; and as
     Shakespeare was often involuntarily philosophical in his
     profoundness, Bacon was not seldom surprised into the imagination
     of the poet. Just as Bacon, although he declared knowledge in
     itself to be much more valuable than the use of invention, insisted
     throughout generally and dispassionately upon the practical use of
     philosophy, so Shakespeare's poetry, independent as was his sense
     of art, aimed throughout at bearing upon the moral life. Bacon
     himself was of the same opinion; he was not far from declaring
     history to be the best teacher of politics, and poetry the best
     instructor in morals. Both were alike deeply moved by the picture
     of a ruling Nemesis, whom they saw, grand and powerful, striding
     through history and life, dragging the mightiest and most
     prosperous as a sacrifice to her altar, as the victims of their own
     inward nature and destiny. In Bacon's works we find a multitude of
     moral sayings and maxims of experience, from which the most
     striking mottoes might be drawn for every Shakespearian play, aye,
     for every one of his principal characters (we have already brought
     forward not a few proofs of this), testifying to a remarkable
     harmony in their mutual comprehension of human nature. Both, in
     their systems of morality rendering homage to Aristotle, whose
     ethics Shakespeare, from a passage in Troilus, may have read,
     arrived at the same end as he did--that virtue lies in a just
     medium between two extremes. Shakespeare would also have agreed
     with _him_ in this, that Bacon declared excess to be 'the fault of
     youth, as defect is of age;' he accounted 'defect the worst,
     because excess contains some sparks of magnanimity, and, like a
     bird, claims kindred of the heavens, while defect, only like a base
     worm, crawls upon the earth.' In these maxims lie at once, as it
     were, the whole theory of Shakespeare's dramatic forms and of his
     moral philosophy."

DR. KUNO FISCHER, the distinguished German critic and historian of
philosophy, in a volume on Bacon, published in 1856, writes:--

The same affinity for the Roman mind, and the same want of sympathy with
the Greek, we again find in Bacon's greatest contemporary, whose
imagination took as broad and comprehensive a view as Bacon's intellect.
Indeed, how could a Bacon attain that position with respect to Greek
poetry that was unattainable by the mighty imagination of a Shakspeare?
For in Shakspeare, at any rate, the imagination of the Greek antiquity
could be met by a homogeneous power of the same rank as itself; and, as
the old adage says, "like comes to like." But the age, the spirit of the
nation--in a word, all those forces of which the genius of an individual
man is composed, and which, moreover, genius is least able to
resist--had here placed an obstacle, impenetrable both to the poet and
the philosopher. Shakspeare was no more able to exhibit Greek characters
than Bacon to expound Greek poetry. Like Bacon, Shakspeare had in his
turn of mind something that was Roman, and not at all akin to the Greek.
He could appropriate to himself a Coriolanus and a Brutus, a Cæsar and
an Antony; he could succeed with the Roman heroes of Plutarch, but not
with the Greek heroes of Homer. The latter he could only parody, but his
parody was as infelicitous as Bacon's explanation of the "Wisdom of the
Ancients." Those must be dazzled critics indeed who can persuade
themselves that the heroes of the Iliad are excelled by the caricatures
in "Troilus and Cressida." The success of such a parody was poetically
impossible; indeed, he that attempts to parody Homer shows thereby that
he has not understood him. For the simple and the naïve do not admit of
a parody, and these have found in Homer their eternal and inimitable
expression. Just as well might caricatures be made of the statues of
Phidias. Where the creative imagination never ceases to be simple and
naïve, where it never distorts itself by the affected or the unnatural,
there is the consecrated land of poetry, in which there is no place for
the parodist. On the other hand, where there is a palpable want of
simplicity and nature, parody is perfectly conceivable; nay, may even be
felt as a poetical necessity. Thus Euripides, who, often enough, was
neither simple nor naïve, could be parodied, and Aristophanes has shown
us with what felicity. Even Æschylus, who was not always as simple as he
was grand, does not completely escape the parodising test. But Homer is
safe. To parody Homer is to mistake him, and to stand so far beyond his
scope that the truth and magic of his poetry can no longer be felt; and
this is the position of Shakespeare and Bacon. The imagination of Homer,
and all that could be contemplated and felt by that imagination, namely,
the classical antiquity of the Greeks, are to them utterly foreign. We
cannot understand Aristotle without Plato; nay, I maintain that we
cannot contemplate with a sympathetic mind the Platonic world of ideas,
if we have not previously sympathised with the world of the Homeric
gods. Be it understood, I speak of the _form_ of the Platonic mind, not
of its logical matter; in point of doctrine, the Homeric faith was no
more that of Plato than of Phidias. But these doctrinal or logical
differences are far less than the formal and æsthetical affinity. The
conceptions of Plato are of Homeric origin.

This want of ability to take an historical survey of the world is to be
found alike in Bacon and Shakspeare, together with many excellencies
likewise common to them both. To the parallel between them--which
Gervinus, with his peculiar talent for combination, has drawn in the
concluding remarks to his "Shakespeare," and has illustrated by a series
of appropriate instances--belongs the similar relation of both to
antiquity, their affinity to the Roman mind, and their diversity from
the Greek. Both possessed to an eminent degree that faculty for a
knowledge of human nature that at once pre-supposes and calls forth an
interest in practical life and historical reality. To this interest
corresponds the stage, on which the Roman characters moved; and here
Bacon and Shakspeare met, brought together by a common interest in these
objects, and the attempt to depict and copy them. This point of
agreement, more than any other argument, explains their affinity. At the
same time there is no evidence that one ever came into actual contact
with the other. Bacon does not even mention Shakspeare when he
discourses of dramatic poetry, but passes over this department of poetry
with a general and superficial remark that relates less to the subject
itself than to the stage and its uses. As far as his own age is
concerned, he sets down the moral value of the stage as exceedingly
trifling. But the affinity of Bacon to Shakspeare is to be sought in his
moral and psychological, not in his æsthetical views, which are too much
regulated by material interests and utilitarian prepossessions to be
applicable to art itself, considered with reference to its own
independent value. However, even in these there is nothing to prevent
Bacon's manner of judging mankind, and apprehending characters from
agreeing perfectly with that of Shakspeare; so that human life, the
subject-matter of all dramatic art, appeared to him much as it appeared
to the great artist himself, who, in giving form to this matter,
excelled all others. Is not the inexhaustible theme of Shakspeare's
poetry the history and course of human passion? In the treatment of this
especial theme is not Shakspeare the greatest of all poets--nay, is he
not unique among them all? And it is this very theme that is proposed by
Bacon as the chief problem of moral philosophy. He blames Aristotle for
treating of the passions in his rhetoric rather than his ethics; for
regarding the artificial means of exciting them rather than their
natural history. It is to the natural history of the human passions that
Bacon directs the attention of philosophy. He does not find any
knowledge of them among the sciences of his time. "The poets and writers
of histories," he says, "are the best doctors of this knowledge; where
we may find painted forth with great life how passions are kindled and
incited; and how pacified and refrained; and how again contained from
act and further degree; how they disclose themselves; how they work; how
they vary; how they gather and fortify; how they are inwrapped one
within another; and how they do fight and encounter one with another;
and other the like particularities."[53] Such a lively description is
required by Bacon from moral philosophy. That is to say, he desired
nothing less than a natural history of the passions--the very thing that
Shakspeare has produced. Indeed, what poet could have excelled
Shakspeare in this respect? Who, to use a Baconian expression, could
have depicted man and all his passions more _ad vivum_? According to
Bacon, the poets and historians give us copies of characters; and the
outlines of these images--the simple strokes that determine
characters--are the proper objects of ethical science. Just as physical
science requires a dissection of bodies, that their hidden qualities and
parts may be discovered, so should ethics penetrate the various minds of
men, in order to find out the eternal basis of them all. And not only
this foundation, but likewise those external conditions which give a
stamp to human character--all those peculiarities that "are imposed upon
the mind by the sex, by the age, by the region, by health and sickness,
by beauty and deformity, and the like, which are inherent and not
external; and, again, those which are caused by external
fortune"[54]--should come within the scope of ethical philosophy. In a
word, Bacon would have man studied in his individuality as a product of
nature and history, in every respect determined by natural and
historical influences, by internal and external conditions. And exactly
in the same spirit has Shakespeare understood man and his destiny;
regarding character as the result of a certain natural temperament and a
certain historical position, and destiny as a result of character.


FOOTNOTES:

[53] "Advancement of Learning," II. "De Augment. Scient.," VII. 3.

[54] "Advancement of Learning," II. For the whole passage compare "De
Augment. Scient.," VII. 3.




