CHAPTER LXVII

It would indeed have been strange if with such barren data as they
possessed, those men could have read the handwriting on the river's
bank.

For there on that spot an event had just occurred, which, take it
altogether, was perhaps without a parallel in the history of mankind,
and may remain so to the end of time.

But it shall be told in a very few words, partly by me, partly by an
actor in the scene.

Gerard, then, after writing his brief adieu to Pietro and Andrea, had
stolen down to the river at nightfall.

He had taken his measures with a dogged resolution not uncommon in those
who are bent on self-destruction. He filled his pockets with all the
silver and copper he possessed, that he might sink the surer; and so
provided, hurried to a part of the stream that he had seen was little
frequented.

There are some, especially women, who look about to make sure there is
somebody at hand.

But this resolute wretch looked about him to make sure there was nobody.

And to his annoyance, he observed a single figure leaning against
the corner of an alley. So he affected to stroll carelessly away; but
returned to the spot.

Lo! the same figure emerged from a side street and loitered about.

“Can he be watching me? Can he know what I am here for?” thought Gerard.
“Impossible.”

He went briskly off, walked along a street or two, made a detour and
came back.

The man had vanished. But lo! on Gerard looking all round, to make sure,
there he was a few yards behind, apparently fastening his shoe.

Gerard saw he was watched, and at this moment observed in the moonlight
a steel gauntlet in his sentinel's hand.

Then he knew it was an assassin.

Strange to say, it never occurred to him that his was the life aimed at.
To be sure he was not aware he had an enemy in the world.

He turned and walked up to the bravo. “My good friend,” said he eagerly,
“sell me thine arm! a single stroke! See, here is all I have;” and he
forced his money into the bravo's hands.

“Oh, prithee! prithee! do one good deed, and rid me of my hateful life!”
 and even while speaking he undid his doublet and bared his bosom.

The man stared in his face.

“Why do ye hesitate?” shrieked Gerard. “Have ye no bowels? Is it so much
pains to lift your arm and fall it? Is it because I am poor, and can't
give ye gold? Useless wretch, canst only strike a man behind; not look
one in the face. There, then, do but turn thy head and hold thy tongue!”

And with a snarl of contempt he ran from him, and flung himself into the
water.

“Margaret!”

At the heavy plunge of his body in the stream the bravo seemed to
recover from a stupor. He ran to the bank, and with a strange cry the
assassin plunged in after the self-destroyer.

What followed will be related by the assassin.



CHAPTER LXVIII

A woman has her own troubles, as a man has his. And we male writers
seldom do more than indicate the griefs of the other sex. The
intelligence of the female reader must come to our aid, and fill up our
cold outlines. So have I indicated, rather than described, what Margaret
Brandt went through up to that eventful day, when she entered Eli's
house an enemy, read her sweetheart's letter, and remained a friend.

And now a woman's greatest trial drew near, and Gerard far away.

She availed herself but little of Eli's sudden favour; for this reserve
she had always a plausible reason ready; and never hinted at the true
one, which was this; there were two men in that house at sight of
whom she shuddered with instinctive antipathy and dread. She had read
wickedness and hatred in their faces, and mysterious signals of secret
intelligence. She preferred to receive Catherine and her daughter at
home. The former went to see her every day, and was wrapped up in the
expected event.

Catherine was one of those females whose office is to multiply, and rear
the multiplied: who, when at last they consent to leave off pelting
one out of every room in the house with babies, hover about the fair
scourges that are still in full swing, and do so cluck, they seem to
multiply by proxy. It was in this spirit she entreated Eli to let her
stay at Rotterdam, while he went back to Tergou.

“The poor lass hath not a soul about her, that knows anything about
anything. What avail a pair o' soldiers? Why, that sort o' cattle should
be putten out o' doors the first, at such an a time.”

Need I say that this was a great comfort to Margaret.

Poor soul, she was full of anxiety as the time drew near.

She should die; and Gerard away.

But things balance themselves. Her poverty, and her father's
helplessness, which had cost her such a struggle, stood her in good
stead now.

Adversity's iron hand had forced her to battle the lassitude that
overpowers the rich of her sex, and to be for ever on her feet, working.
She kept this up to the last by Catherine's advice.

And so it was, that one fine evening, just at sunset, she lay weak
as water, but safe; with a little face by her side, and the heaven of
maternity opening on her.

“Why dost weep, sweetheart? All of a sudden?”

“He is not here to see it.”

“Ah, well, lass, he will be here ere 'tis weaned. Meantime God hath
been as good to thee as to e'er a woman born; and do but bethink thee
it might have been a girl; didn't my very own Kate threaten me with one;
and here we have got the bonniest boy in Holland, and a rare heavy one,
the saints be praised for't.”

“Ay, mother, I am but a sorry, ungrateful wretch to weep. If only Gerard
were here to see it. 'Tis strange; I bore him well enow to be away from
me in my sorrow; but oh, it does seem so hard he should not share my
joy. Prithee, prithee, come to me, Gerard! dear, dear Gerard!” And she
stretched out her feeble arms.

Catherine hustled about, but avoided Margaret's eyes; for she could not
restrain her own tears at hearing her own absent child thus earnestly
addressed.

Presently, turning round, she found Margaret looking at her with a
singular expression. “Heard you nought?”

“No, my lamb. What?”

“I did cry on Gerard, but now.”

“Ay, ay, sure I heard that.”

“Well, he answered me.”

“Tush, girl: say not that.”

“Mother, as sure as I lie here, with his boy by my side, his voice came
back to me, 'Margaret!' So. Yet methought 'twas not his happy voice. But
that might be the distance. All voices go off sad like at a distance.
Why art not happy, sweetheart? and I so happy this night? Mother, I seem
never to have felt a pain or known a care.” And her sweet eyes turned
and gloated on the little face in silence.

That very night Gerard flung himself into the Tiber. And that very
hour she heard him speak her name, he cried aloud in death's jaws and
despair's.

“Margaret!”

Account for it those who can. I cannot.



