CHAPTER LXV

It happened, two days after the scene I have endeavoured to describe,
that Gerard, wandering through one of the meanest streets in Rome, was
overtaken by a thunderstorm, and entered a low hostelry. He called for
wine, and the rain continuing, soon drank himself into a half stupid
condition, and dozed with his head on his hands and his hands upon the
table.

In course of time the room began to fill and the noise of the rude
guests to wake him.

Then it was he became conscious of two figures near him conversing in a
low voice.

One was a pardoner. The other by his dress, clean but modest, might have
passed for a decent tradesman; but the way he had slouched his hat over
his brows, so as to hide all his face except his beard, showed he was
one of those who shun the eye of honest men, and of the law. The pair
were driving a bargain in the sin market. And by an arrangement
not uncommon at that date, the crime to be forgiven was yet to be
committed--under the celestial contract.

He of the slouched hat was complaining of the price pardons had reached.
“If they go up any higher we poor fellows shall be shut out of heaven
altogether.”

The pardoner denied the charge flatly. “Indulgences were never cheaper
to good husbandmen.”

The other inquired, “Who were they?”

“Why, such as sin by the market, like reasonable creatures. But if you
will be so perverse as go and pick out a crime the Pope hath set his
face against, blame yourself, not me!”

Then, to prove that crime of one sort or another was within the means of
all but the very scum of society, he read out the scale from a written
parchment.

It was a curious list; but not one that could be printed in this book.
And to mutilate it would be to misrepresent it. It is to be found in
any great library. Suffice it to say that murder of a layman was much
cheaper than many crimes my lay readers would deem light by comparison.

This told; and by a little trifling concession on each side, the bargain
was closed, the money handed over, and the aspirant to heaven's favour
forgiven beforehand for removing one layman. The price for disposing of
a clerk bore no proportion.

The word assassination was never once uttered by either merchant.

All this buzzed in Gerard's ear. But he never lifted his head from the
table; only listened stupidly.

However, when the parties rose and separated, he half raised his head,
and eyed with a scowl the retiring figure of the purchaser.

“If Margaret was alive,” muttered he, “I'd take thee by the throat and
throttle thee, thou cowardly stabber. But she is dead; dead; dead. Die
all the world; 'tis nought to me: so that I die among the first.”

When he got home there was a man in a slouched hat walking briskly to
and fro on the opposite side of the way.

“Why, there is that cur again,” thought Gerard.

But in this state of mind, the circumstance made no impression whatever
on him.



CHAPTER LXVI

Two nights after this Pietro Vanucci and Andrea sat waiting supper for
Gerard.

The former grew peevish. It was past nine o'clock. At last he sent
Andrea to Gerard's room on the desperate chance of his having come in
unobserved. Andrea shrugged his shoulders and went.

He returned without Gerard, but with a slip of paper. Andrea could not
read, as scholars in his day and charity boys in ours understand the
art; but he had a quick eye, and had learned how the words Pietro
Vanucci looked on paper.

“That is for you, I trow,” said he, proud of his intelligence.

Pietro snatched it, and read it to Andrea, with his satirical comments.

“'Dear Pietro, dear Andrea, life is too great a burden.'

“So 'tis, my lad,' but that is no reason for being abroad at
supper-time. Supper is not a burden.”

“'Wear my habits!'

“Said the poplar to the juniper bush.”

“'And thou, Andrea, mine amethyst ring; and me in both your hearts a
month or two.'

“Why, Andrea?”

“'For my body, ere this ye read, it will lie in Tiber. Trouble not to
look for it. 'Tis not worth the pains. Oh unhappy day that it was born
oh happy night that rids me of it.

“'Adieu! adieu!

“'The broken-hearted Gerard.'

“Here is a sorry jest of the peevish rogue,” said Pietro. But his pale
cheek and chattering teeth belied his words. Andrea filled the house
with his cries.

“O, miserable day! O, calamity of calamities! Gerard, my friend, my
sweet patron! Help! help! He is killing himself! Oh, good people, help
me save him!” And after alarming all the house he ran into the street,
bareheaded, imploring all good Christians to help him save his friend.

A number of persons soon collected.

But poor Andrea could not animate their sluggishness. Go down to the
river? No. It was not their business. What part of the river? It was a
wild goose chase.

It was not lucky to go down to the river after sunset. Too many ghosts
walked those banks all night.

A lackey, however, who had been standing some time opposite the house,
said he would go with Andrea; and this turned three or four of the
younger ones.

The little band took the way to the river.

The lackey questioned Andrea.

Andrea, sobbing, told him about the letter, and Gerard's moody ways of
late.

That lackey was a spy of the Princess Claelia.

Their Italian tongues went fast till they neared the Tiber.

But the moment they felt the air from the river, and the smell of the
stream in the calm spring night, they were dead silent.

The moon shone calm and clear in a cloudless sky. Their feet sounded
loud and ominous. Their tongues were hushed.

Presently hurrying round a corner they met a man. He stopped irresolute
at sight of them.

The man was bareheaded, and his dripping hair glistened in the
moonlight; and at the next step they saw his clothes were drenched with
water.

“Here he is,” cried one of the young men, unacquainted with Gerard's
face and figure.

The stranger turned instantly and fled.

They ran after him might and main, Andrea leading, and the princess's
lackey next.

Andrea gained on him; but in a moment he twisted up a narrow alley.
Andrea shot by, unable to check himself; and the pursuers soon found
themselves in a labyrinth in which it was vain to pursue a quickfooted
fugitive who knew every inch of it, and could now only be followed by
the ear.

They returned to their companions, and found them standing on the spot
where the man had stood, and utterly confounded. For Pietro had assured
them that the fugitive had neither the features nor the stature of
Gerard.

“Are ye verily sure?” said they. “He had been in the river. Why, in the
saints' names, fled he at our approach?”

Then said Vanucci, “Friends, methinks this has nought to do with him we
seek. What shall we do, Andrea?”

Here the lackey put in his word. “Let us track him to the water's side,
to make sure. See, he hath come dripping all the way.”

This advice was approved, and with very little difficulty they tracked
the man's course.

But soon they encountered a new enigma.

They had gone scarcely fifty yards ere the drops turned away from the
river, and took them to the gate of a large gloomy building. It was a
monastery.

They stood irresolute before it, and gazed at the dark pile.

It seemed to them to hide some horrible mystery.

But presently Andrea gave a shout. “Here be the drops again,” cried he.
“And this road leadeth to the river.”

They resumed the chase; and soon it became clear the drops were now
leading them home. The track became wetter and wetter, and took them
to the Tiber's edge. And there on the bank a bucketful appeared to have
been discharged from the stream.

At first they shouted, and thought they had made a discovery: but
reflection showed them it amounted to nothing. Certainly a man had been
in the water, and had got out of it in safety; but that man was not
Gerard. One said he knew a fisherman hard by that had nets and drags.
They found the fisherman and paid him liberally to sink nets in the
river below the place, and to drag it above and below; and promised him
gold should he find the body. Then they ran vainly up and down the river
which flowed so calm and voiceless, holding this and a thousand more
strange secrets. Suddenly Andrea, with a cry of hope, ran back to the
house.

He returned in less than half an hour.

“No,” he groaned, and wrung his hands.

“What is the hour?” asked the lackey.

“Four hours past midnight.”

“My pretty lad,” said the lackey solemnly, “say a mass for thy friend's
soul: for he is not among living men.”

The morning broke. Worn out with fatigue, Andrea and Pietro went home,
heart sick.

The days rolled on, mute as the Tiber as to Gerard's fate.



