CHAPTER IX

TWO CROOKS AND A KNAVE


The bullet wound along the side of his head and just above his ear would
have been a very awkward thing indeed, in more ways than one, for Jimmie
Dale, the millionaire, to have explained at his club, in his social set,
or even to his servants, and of these latter to Jason the Solicitous
in particular; but for Jimmie Dale as Larry the Bat it was a matter of
little moment. There was none to question Larry the Bat, save in a most
casual and indifferent way; and a bandage of any description, primarily
and above all one that he could arrange himself, with only himself to
take note of the incongruous hues of skin where the stain, the grease
paint, and the make-up was washed off, would excite little attention
in that world where daily affrays were common-place happenings, and a
wound, for whatever reason, had long since lost the tang of novelty. Why
then should it arouse even a passing interest if Larry the Bat, credited
as the most confirmed of dope fiends, should have fallen down the
dark, rickety stairs of the tenement in one of his orgies, and, in the
expressive language of the Bad Lands, cracked his bean!

And so Jimmie Dale had been forced to maintain the role of Larry the Bat
for a far longer period than he had anticipated when, ten days before,
he had assumed it for the night's work that had so nearly resulted
fatally for himself, though it had placed Roessle's murderers behind
the bars. For, the next day, unwilling to court the risk of remaining
in that neighbourhood, he had left Hanson's, the farmer's, house on
Long Island where the Tocsin had carried him in an unconscious state,
telephoned Jason that he had been unexpectedly called out of town for
a few days, and returned to the Sanctuary in New York. And here, to his
grim dismay, he had found the underworld in a state of furious, angry
unrest, like a nest of hornets, stirred up, seeking to wreak vengeance
on an unseen assailant.

For years, as the Gray Seal, Jimmie Dale had lived with the slogan of
the police, “The Gray Seal dead or alive--but the Gray Seal!” sounding
in his ears; with the newspapers screaming their diatribes, arousing
the people against him, nagging the authorities into sleepless, frenzied
efforts to trap him; with a price upon his head that was large enough to
make a man, not too pretentious, rich for life--but in the underworld,
until then, the name of the Gray Seal had been one to conjure with, for
the underworld had sworn by the unknown master criminal, and had
spoken his name with a reverence that was none the less genuine even if
pungently tainted with unholiness. But now it was different. Up and down
through the Bad Lands, in gambling hells, in vicious resorts, in the
hiding places where thugs and crooks burrowed themselves away from
the daylight, through the heart and the outskirts of the underworld
travelled the fiat, whispered out of mouths crooked to one side--DEATH
TO THE GRAY SEAL!

Gangland differences were forgotten in the larger issue of the common
weal. The gang spirit became the spirit of a united whole, and the crime
fraternity buzzed and hummed poisonously, spurred on by hatred, thirst
for revenge, fear, and, perhaps most potent of all, a hideous suspicion
now of each other.

The underworld had received a shock at which it stood aghast, and which,
with its terrifying possibilities, struck consternation into the soul
of every individual of that brotherhood whose bond was crime, who was
already “wanted” for some offence or other, whether it ranged from
murder in the first degree to some petty piece of sneak thievery.
Stangeist, the Indian chief, the lawyer whose cunning brain had stood as
a rampart between the underworld and a prison cell, was himself now in
the Tombs with the certainty of the electric chair before him; and with
him, the same fate equally assured, were Australian Ike, The Mope, and
Clarie Deane! Aristocrats of the Bad Lands, peers of that inglorious
realm were those four--and the blow had fallen with stunning force,
a blow that in itself would have been enough to have stirred the
underworld to its depths. But that was not all--from the cells in the
Tombs, from the four came the word, and passed from mouth to mouth in
that strange underground exchange until all had heard it, that the Gray
Seal had “SQUEALED.” The Gray Seal who, though unknown, they had counted
the most eminent among themselves, had squealed! Who was the Gray Seal?
It he had held the secrets of Stangeist and his band, what else might
he not know? Who else might not fall next? The Gray Seal had become
a snitch, a menace, a source of danger that stalked among them like a
ghastly spectre. Who was the Gray Seal? None knew.

“Death to the Gray Seal! Run him to earth!” went the whisper from lip
to lip; and with the whisper men stared uncertainly into each other's
faces, fearful that the one to whom they spoke might even be--the Gray
Seal!

Jimmie Dale's lips twisted queerly as he looked around him at the
squalid appointments of the Sanctuary. The police were bad enough, the
papers were worse; but this was a still graver peril. With every denizen
of the underworld below the dead line suspicious of each other, their
lives, the penitentiary, or a prison sentence the stakes against which
each one played, the role of Larry the Bat, clever as was the make-up
and disguise, was fraught now more than ever before with danger and
peril. It seemed as though slowly the net was beginning at last to
tighten around him.

The murky, yellow flame of the gas jet flickered suddenly, as though
in acquiescence with the quick, impulsive shrug of Jimmie Dale's
shoulders--and Jimmie Dale, bending to peer into the cracked mirror that
was propped up on the broken-legged table, knotted his dress tie almost
fastidiously. The hair, if just a trifle too long, covered the scar on
his head now, the wound no longer required a bandage, and Larry the Bat,
for the time being at least, had disappeared. Across the foot of the
bed, neatly folded, lay his dress coat and overcoat, but little creased
for all that they had lain in that hiding-place under the flooring since
the night when, hurrying from the club, he had placed them there to
assume instead the tatters of Larry the Bat. It was Jimmie Dale in his
own person again who stood there now in Larry the Bat's disreputable
den, an incongruous figure enough against the background of his
miserable surroundings, in perfect-fitting shoes and trousers, the
broad expanse of spotless white shirt bosom glistening even in the
poverty-stricken flare from the single, sputtering gas jet.

Jimmie Dale took the watch from his pocket that had not been wound for
many days, wound it mechanically, set it by guesswork--it was not far
from eight o'clock--and replaced it in his pocket. Carefully then, one
at a time, he examined his fingers, long, slim, sensitive, tapering
fingers, magical masters of safes and locks and vaults of the most
intricate and modern mechanism--no single trace of grime remained,
they were metamorphosed hands from the filthy paws of Larry the Bat. He
nodded in satisfaction; and picked up the mirror for a final inspection
of himself, that, this time, did not miss a single line in his face or
neck. Again Jimmie Dale nodded. As though he had vanished into thin
air, as though he had never existed, not a trace of Larry the Bat
remained--except the heap of rags upon the floor, the battered slouch
hat, the frayed trousers, the patched boots with their broken laces, the
mismated socks, the grimy flannel shirt, and the old coat that he had
just discarded.

The mirror was replaced on the table; and, pushing the heap of clothes
before him with his foot, Jimmie Dale knelt down in the corner of the
room where the oilcloth had been turned up and the loose planking of the
floor removed, and began to pack the articles away in the hole. Jimmie
Dale rolled the trousers of Larry the Bat into a compact little bundle,
and stuffed them under the flooring. The gas jet seemed to blink again
in a sort of confidential approval, as though the secret lay inviolate
between itself and Jimmie Dale. Through the closed window, shade tightly
drawn, came, low and muffled, the sound of distant life from the Bowery,
a few blocks away. The gas jet, suffering from air somewhere within the
pipes, hissed angrily, the yellow flame died to a little blue, forked
spurt--and Jimmie Dale was on his feet, his face suddenly hard and white
as marble.

SOME ONE WAS KNOCKING AT THE DOOR!

For the fraction of a second Jimmie Dale stood motionless. Found as
Jimmie Dale in the den of Larry the Bat, and the consequences required
no effort of the imagination to picture them; police or denizen of the
underworld who was knocking there, it was all the same, the method of
death would be a little different, that was all--one legalised, the
other not. Jimmie Dale, Larry the Bat, the Gray Seal, once uncovered,
could expect as much quarter as would be given to a cornered rat. His
eyes swept the room with a swift, critical glance--evidences of Larry
the Bat, the clothes, were still about, even if he in the person of
Jimmie Dale, alone damning enough, were not standing there himself.
And he was even weaponless--the Tocsin had taken the revolver from
his pocket, together with those other telltale articles, the mask, the
flashlight, the little blued-steel tools, before she had intrusted him
that night, wounded and unconscious, to Hanson's care.

Jimmie Dale slipped his feet out of his low evening pumps, snatched up
the old coat and hat from the pile, put them on, and, without a
sound, reached the gas jet and turned it off. A second had gone by--no
more--the knocking still sounded insistently on the door. It was dark
now, perfectly black. He started across the room, his tread absolutely
silent as the trained muscles, relaxing, threw the body weight gradually
upon one foot before the next step was taken. It was like a shadow,
a little blacker in outline than the surrounding blackness, stealing
across the floor.

Halfway to the door he paused. The knocking had ceased. He listened
intently. It was not repeated. Instead, his ear caught a guarded step
retreating outside in the hall. Jimmie Dale drew a breath of relief.
He went on again to the door, still listening. Was it a trap--that step
outside?

At the door now, tense, alert, he lowered his ear to the keyhole. There
came the faintest creak from the stairs. Jimmie Dale's brows gathered.
It was strange! The knocking had not lasted long. Whoever it was was
going away--but it required the utmost caution to descend those stairs,
rickety and tumble-down as they were, with no more sound than that!
Why such caution? Why not a more determined and prolonged effort at his
door--the visitor had been easily satisfied that Larry the Bat was not
within. TOO easily satisfied! Jimmie Dale turned the key noiselessly in
the lock. He opened the door cautiously--half inch--an inch, there was
no sound of footsteps now. Occasionally a lodger moved about on the
floor above; occasionally from somewhere in the tenement came the murmur
of voices as from behind closed door--that was all. All else was silence
and darkness now.

The door, on its well-oiled hinges, swung wide open. Jimmie Dale thrust
out his head into the hall--and something fell upon the threshold with
a little thud--but for a moment Jimmie Dale did not move. Listening,
trying to pierce the darkness, he was as still as the silence around
him; then he stooped and groped along the threshold. His hand closed
upon what seemed like a small box wrapped in paper. He picked it up,
closed and locked the door again, and retreated back across the room. It
was strange--unpleasantly strange--a box propped stealthily against the
door so that it would fall to the threshold when the door was opened!
And why the stealth? What did it mean? Had the underworld with its
thousand eyes and ears already succeeded in a few days where the police
had failed signally for years--had they sent him this, whatever it was,
as some grim token that they had run Larry the Bat to earth? He shook
his head. No; gangland struck more swiftly, with less finesse than
that--the “cat-and-mouse” act was never one it favoured, for the mouse
had been known to get away.

Jimmie Dale lighted the gas again, and turned the package over in his
hands. It was, as he had surmised, a small cardboard box; and it was
wrapped in plain paper and tied with a string. He untied the string,
and still suspicious, as a man is suspicious in the knowledge that he is
stalked by peril at every turn, removed the wrapper a little gingerly.
It was still without sign or marking upon it, just an ordinary cardboard
box. He lifted off the cover, and, with a short, sudden laugh, stared, a
little out of countenance, at the contents.

On the top lay a white, unaddressed envelope. HERS! Beneath--he emptied
the box on the table--his black silk mask, his automatic revolver, the
kit of fine, small blued-steel burglar's tools, his pocket flashlight,
and the thin metal insignia case. The Tocsin! Impulsively Jimmie Dale
turned toward the door--and stopped. His shoulders lifted in a shrug
that, meant to be philosophical, was far from philosophical. He could
not, dared not venture far through the tenement dressed as he was; and
even if he could there were three exits to the Sanctuary, a fact that
now for the first time was not wholly a source of unmixed satisfaction
to him; and besides--she was gone!

Jimmie Dale opened the letter, a grim smile playing on his lips. He had
forgotten for the moment that the illusion he had cherished for years
in the belief that she did not know Larry the Bat as an alias of
Jimmie Dale was no more than--an illusion. Well, it had been a piece of
consummate egotism on his part, that was all. But, after all, what did
it matter? He had had his innings, tried in the role of Larry the Bat
to solve her identity, devoted weeks on end to the attempt--and failed.
Some day, perhaps, his turn would come; some day, perhaps, she would no
longer be able to elude him, unless--the letter crackled suddenly in
his fingers--unless the house that they had built on such strange
and perilous foundations crashed at some moment, without an instant's
warning, in disaster and ruin to the ground. Who knew but that this
letter now, another call to the Gray Seal to act, another peril invited,
would be the LAST? There must be an end some day; luck and nerve had
their limitations--it had almost ended last week!


“Dear Philanthropic Crook”--it was the same inevitable beginning. “You
are well enough again, aren't you, Jimmie?--I am sending these little
things back to you, for you will need them to-night.”--Jimmie Dale read
on, muttering snatches of the letter aloud: “Michael Breen prospecting
in Alaska--map of location of rich mining claim--Hamvert, his former
partner, had previously fleeced him of fifteen thousand dollars--his
share of a deal together--Breen was always a very poor man--Breen later
struck a claim alone; but, taking sick, came back home--died on
arrival in New York after giving map to his wife--wife in very
needy circumstances--lives with little daughter of seven in New
Rochelle--works out by the day at Henry Mittel's house on the
Sound near-by--wife intrusted map for safe-keeping and advice to
Mittel--Hamvert after map--telephone wires cut--room one hundred
and forty-eight, corner, right, first floor, Palais-Metropole
Hotel, unoccupied--connecting doors--quarter past nine to-night--the
Weasel--Mittel's house later--the police--look out for both the Weasel
and the police, Jimmie--”


There was more, several pages of it, explanations, specific details down
to a minute description of the locality and plan of the house on the
Sound. Jimmie Dale, too intent now to mutter, read on silently. At the
end he shuffled the sheets a little abstractedly, as his face hardened.
Then his fingers began to tear the letter into little shreds, tearing it
over and over again, tearing the shreds into tiny particles. He had not
been far wrong. From what the night promised now, this might well be the
last letter. Who knew? There would be need of all the wit and luck and
nerve to-night that the Gray Seal had ever had before.

With a jerk, Jimmie Dale roused himself from the momentary reverie into
which he had fallen; and, all action now, stuffed the torn pieces of the
