letter in the dead man's hand, proof enough that some one else had been
there. What was in that part of the letter that was still clutched in
that death grip upstairs? A sentence from it, that he had heard Connie
Myers read, seemed to burn itself into his brain. “IF YOU WANT TO KNOW
WHO DID IT, LOOK IN MIKE HAGAN'S ROOM ON THE FLOOR ABOVE.” And then,
suddenly, like light through the darkness, came a ray of hope. He pulled
Hagan to the cellarway, and stealthily lifted one side of the double
trapdoor. There was a chance, desperate enough, one in a thousand--but
still a chance!

Voices from the house came plainly now, but there was no one in sight.
The police, to a man, were evidently all inside. From the road in front
showed the lamp glare of their automobile.

“Run for the car!” Jimmie Dale jerked out from between set teeth--and
with Hagan beside him, steadying the man by the arm, dashed across the
intervening fifty yards.

They had not been seen. A minute more, and the car, evidently belonging
to the local police, for it was headed in the direction of New York, and
as though it had come from Pelham, swept down the road, swept around a
turn, and Jimmie Dale, with a gasp of relief, straightened up a little
from the wheel.

How much time had he? The police must have heard the car; but, equally,
occupied as they were, they might well give it no thought other than
that it was but another car passing by. There was no telephone in the
house; the nearest house was a quarter of a mile away, and that might or
might not have a telephone. Could he count on half an hour? He glanced
anxiously at the crouched figure beside him. He would have to! It was
the only chance. They would telephone the contents of the dead man's
half of the letter to the New York police. Could he get to Hagan's room
FIRST! “Look in Hagan's room,” their part of the letter read--but it
did not say for WHAT, or exactly WHERE! If they found nothing, Hagan was
safe. Connie Myers' reputation, the fact that he was found in disguise
at Doyle's house, was, barring any incriminating evidence, quite enough
to let Hagan out. There would only remain in the minds of the police the
question of who, beside Connie Myers, had been in old Doyle's house that
night? And now Jimmie Dale smiled a little whimsically. Well, perhaps he
could answer that--and, if not quite to the satisfaction of the police,
at least to the complete vindication of Mike Hagan.

But he could not drive through towns and villages with a mask on his
face; and there, ahead now, lights were beginning to show. And more than
ever now, with what was before him, it was imperative that Mike Hagan
should not recognise Larry the Bat. Jimmie Dale glanced again at
Hagan--and slowed down the car. They were on the outskirts of a town,
and off to the right he caught the twinkling lights of a street car.

“Hagan,” he said sharply, “pull yourself together, and listen to me! If
you keep your mouth shut, you've nothing to fear; if you let out a word
of what's happened to-night, you'll probably go to the chair for a crime
you know nothing about. Do you understand?--keep your mouth shut!”

The car had stopped. Hagan nodded his head.

“All right, then. You get out here, and take a street car into New
York,” continued Jimmie Dale crisply. “But when you get there, keep away
from your home for the next two or three hours. Hang around with some of
the boys you know, and if you're asked anything afterward, say you were
batting around town all evening. Don't worry--you'll find you're out of
this when you read the morning papers. Now get out--hurry!” He pushed
Hagan from the car. “I've got to make my own get-away.”

Hagan, standing in the road, brushed his hand bewilderingly across his
eyes.

“Yes--but you--I--”

“Never mind about that!” Jimmie Dale leaned out, and gripped Hagan's
arm impressively. “There's only one thing you've got to think of, or
remember. Keep your mouth shut! No matter what happens, keep your mouth
shut--if you want to save your neck! Good-night, Hagan!”

The car was racing forward again. It shot streaking through the streets
of the town ahead, and, dully, over its own inferno, echoed shouts,
cries, and execrations of an outraged populace--then out into the night
again, roaring its way toward New York.

He had half an hour--perhaps! It was a good thing Hagan did not know, or
had not grasped the significance of that torn letter--the man would have
been unmanageable with fear and excitement. It would puzzle Hagan to
find no paper stuck under his table when he came to look for it! But
that was a minor consideration, that mattered not at all.

Half an hour! On roared the car--towns, black roads, villages, wooded
lands were kaleidoscopic in their passing. Half an hour! Had he done it?
Had he come anywhere near doing it? He did not know. He was in the city
at last--and now he had to moderate his speed; but, by keeping to the
less frequented streets, he could still drive at a fast pace. One piece
of good fortune had been his--the long motor coat he had found in the
car with which to cover the rags of Larry the Bat, and without which he
would have been obliged to leave the car somewhere on the outskirts of
the city, and to trust, like Mike Hagan, to other and slower means of
transportation.

Blocks away from Hagan's tenement, he ran the car into a lane, slipped
off the motor coat, and from his pocket whipped out the little metal
insignia case--and in another moment a diamond-shaped gray seal was
neatly affixed to the black ebony rim of the steering wheel. He smiled
ironically. It was necessary, quite necessary that the police should
have no doubt as to who had been in Doyle's house with Connie Myers that
night, or to whom they had so considerately loaned their automobile!

He was running now--through lanes, dodging down side streets, taking
every short cut he knew. Had he beaten the police to Mike Hagan's room?
It would be easy then. If they were ahead of him, then, by some means or
other, he must still get that paper first.

He was at the tenement now--shuffling leisurely up the steps. The front
door was open. He entered, and went up the first flight of stairs, then
along the hall, and up the next flight. He had half expected the place
to be bustling with excitement over the crime; but the police evidently
had kept the affair quiet, for he had seen no one since he had
entered. But now, as he began to mount the third flight, he went more
slowly--some one was ahead of him. It was very dark--he could not see.
The steps above died away. He reached the landing, started along for
Hagan's room--and a light blazed suddenly in his face, and a hard,
quick grip on his shoulder forced him back against the wall. Then the
flashlight wavered, glistened on brass buttons went out, and a voice
laughed roughly:

“It's only Larry the Bat!”

“Larry the Bat, eh?” It was another voice, harsh and curt. “What are you
doing here?”

He was not first, after all! The telephone message from Pelham--it was
almost certainly that--had beaten him! They were ahead of him, just
ahead of him, they had only been a few steps ahead of him going up the
stairs, just a second ahead of him on their way to Hagan's room! Jimmie
Dale was thinking fast now. He must go, too--to Hagan's room with
them--somehow--there was no other way--there was Hagan's life at stake.

“Aw, I ain't done nothin'!” he whined. “I was just goin' ter borrow the
price of a feed from Mike Hagan--lemme go!”

“Hagan, eh!” snapped the questioner. “Are you a friend of his?”

“Sure, I am!”

The officers whispered for a moment together.

“We'll try it,” decided the one who appeared to be in command. “We're
in the dark, anyhow, and the thing may be only a steer. Mabbe it'll
work--anyway, it won't do any harm.” His hand fell heavily on Jimmie
Dale's shoulder. “Mrs. Hagan know you?” brusquely.

“Sure she does!” sniffled Larry the Bat.

“Good!” rasped the officer. “Well, we'll make the visit with you. And
you do what you're told, or we'll put the screws on you--see? We're
after something here, and you've blown the whole game--savvy? You've
spilled the gravy--understand?”

In the darkness, Jimmie Dale smiled grimly. It was far more than he had
dared to hope for--they were playing into his hands!

“But I don't know 'bout any game,” grovelled Larry the Bat piteously.

“Who in hell said you did!” growled the officer. “You're supposed to
have snitched the lay to us, that's all--and mind you play your part!
Come on!”

It was two doors down the hall to Mike Hagan's room, and there one of
the officers, putting his shoulder to the door, burst it open and sprang
in. The other shoved Jimmie Dale forward. It was quickly done. The three
were in the room. The door was closed again.

Came a cry of terror out of the darkness, a movement as of some one
rising up hurriedly in bed; and then Mrs. Hagan's voice:

“What is it! Who is it! Mike!”

The table--it was against the right-hand wall, Jimmie Date remembered.
He sidled quickly toward it.

“Strike a light!” ordered the officer in charge.

Jimmie Dale's fingers were feeling under the edge of the table--a quick
sweep along it--NOTHING! He stooped, reaching farther in--another sweep
of his arm--and his fingers closed on a sheet of paper and a piece of
hard gum. In an instant they were in his pocket.

A match crackled and flared up. A lamp was lighted. Larry the Bat sulked
sullenly against the wall.

Terror-stricken, wide-eyed, Mrs. Hagan had clutched the child lying
beside her to her arms, and was sitting bolt upright in bed.

“Now then, no fuss about it!” said the officer in charge, with brutal
directness. “You might as well make a clean breast of Mike's share in
that murder downstairs--Larry the Bat, here, has already told us the
whole story. Come on, now--out with it!”

“Murder!”--her face went white. “My Mike--MURDER!” She seemed for an
instant stunned--and then down the worn, thin, haggard face gushed the
tears. “I don't believe it!” she cried. “I don't believe it!”

“Come on now, cut that out!” prodded the officer roughly. “I tell you
Larry the Bat, here, has opened everything up wide. You're only making
it worse for yourself.”

“Him!” She was staring now at Jimmie Dale. “Oh, God!” she cried.
“So that's what you are, are you--a stool-pigeon for the cops? Well,
whatever you told them, you lie! You're the curse of this neighbourhood,
you are, and if my Mike is bad at all, it's you that's helped to make
him bad. But murder--you LIE!”

She had risen slowly from the bed--a gaunt, pitiful figure, pitifully
clothed, the black hair, gray-streaked, streaming thinly over her
shoulders, still clutching the baby that, too, was crying now.

The officers looked at one another and nodded.

“Guess she's handing it straight--we'll have a look on our own hook,”
 the leader muttered.

She paid no attention to them--she was walking straight to Jimmie Dale.

“It's you, is it,” she whispered fiercely through her sobs “that would
bring more shame and ruin here--you that's selling my man's life away
with your filthy lies for what they're paying you--it's you, is it,
that--” Her voice broke.

There was a frightened, uneasy look in Larry the Bat's eyes, his lips
were twitching weakly, he drew far back against the wall--and then,
glancing miserably at the officers, as though entreating their
permission, began to edge toward the door.

For a moment she watched him, her face white with outrage, her hand
clenched at her side--and then she found her voice again.

“Get out of here!” she said, in a choked, strained way pointing to the
door. “Get out of here--you dirty skate!”

“Sure!” mumbled Larry the Bat, his eyes on the floor. “Sure!” he
mumbled--and the door closed behind him.



PART TWO: THE WOMAN IN THE CASE


