CHAPTER VIII

THE MAN HIGHER UP


The Tocsin! By neither act, sign, nor word had she evidenced the
slightest interest in that ring--and yet she must know, she certainly
must know that it was now in his possession. Jimmie Dale was
disappointed. Somehow, he had counted more than he had cared to admit on
developments from that ring.

He pulled a little viciously at his cigarette, as he stared out of the
St. James Club window. That was how long ago? Ten days? Yes; this would
be the eleventh. Eleven days now and no word from her--eleven days since
that night at old Isaac's, since she had last called him, the Gray Seal,
to arms. It was a long while--so long a while even that what had come
to be his prerogative in the newspapers, the front page with three-inch
type recounting some new exploit of that mysterious criminal the Gray
Seal, was being usurped. The papers were howling now about what they,
for the lack of a better term, were pleased to call a wave of crime that
had inundated New York, and of which, for once, the Gray Seal was not
the storm centre, but rather, for the moment, forgotten.

He drew back from the window, and, settling himself again in the big
leather lounging chair, resumed the perusal of the evening paper. His
eye fell on what was common to every edition now, a crime editorial--and
the paper crackled suddenly under the long, slim, tapering fingers,
so carefully nurtured, whose sensitive tips a hundred times had made
mockery of the human ingenuity squandered on the intricate mechanism
of safes and vaults. No; he was wrong--the Gray Seal had not been
forgotten.

“We should not be surprised,” wrote the editor virulently, “to discover
at the bottom of these abominable atrocities that the guiding spirit,
in fact, was the Gray Seal--they are quite worthy even of his diabolical
disregard for the laws of God and man.”

Jimmie Dale's lips straightened ominously, and an angry glint crept into
his dark, steady eyes. There was nothing then, nothing too vile that,
in the public's eyes, could not logically be associated with the Gray
Seal--even this! A series of the most cold-blooded, callous murders
and robberies, the work, on the face of it, of a well-organized band
of thugs, brutal, insensate, little better than fiends, though clever
enough so far to have evaded capture, clever enough, indeed, to have
kept the police still staggering and gasping after a clew for one
murder--while another was in the very act of being committed! The Gray
Seal! What exquisite irony! And yet, after all, the papers were not
wholly to blame for what they said; he had invited much of it. Seeming
crimes of the Gray Seal had apparently been genuine beyond any question
of doubt, as he had intended them to appear, as in the very essence of
their purpose they had to be.

Yes; he had invited much--he and she together--the Tocsin and himself.
He, Jimmie Dale, millionaire, clubman, whose name for generations in
New York had been the family pride, was “wanted” as the Gray Seal for so
many “crimes” that he had lost track of them himself--but from any one
of which, let the identity of the Gray Seal be once solved, there was
and could be no escape! What exquisite irony--yet full, too, of the most
deadly consequences!

Once more Jimmie Dale's eyes sought the paper, and this time scanned the
headlines of the first page:


BRUTAL MURDER OF MILL PAYMASTER.

THE CRIME WAVE STILL AT ITS HEIGHT.

HERMAN ROESSLE FOUND DEAD NEAR HIS CAR.

ASSASSINS ESCAPE WITH $20,000.


Jimmie Dale read on--and as he read there came again that angry set to
his lips. The details were not pleasant. Herman Roessle, the paymaster
of the Martindale-Kensington Mills, whose plant was on the Hudson, had
gone that morning in his runabout to the nearest town, three miles away,
for the monthly pay roll; had secured the money from the bank, a sum of
twenty-odd thousand dollars; and had started back with it for the
mill. At first, it being broad daylight and a well-frequented road, his
nonappearance caused no apprehension; but as early afternoon came and
there was still no sign of Roessle the mill management took alarm.
Discovering that he had left the bank for the return journey at a few
minutes before eleven, and that nothing had been seen of him at his
home, the police were notified. Followed then several hours of fruitless
search, until finally, with the whole countryside aroused and the
efforts of the police augumented by private search parties, the car was
found in a thicket at the edge of a crossroad some four miles back from
the river, and, a little way from the car, the body of Roessle, dead,
the man's head crushed in where it had been fiendishly battered by some
blunt, heavy object. There was no clew--no one could be found who had
seen the car on the crossroad--the murderer, or murderers, and the
twenty-odd thousand dollars in cash had disappeared leaving no trace
behind.

There were several columns of this, which Jimmie Dale skimmed through
quickly; but at the end he stared for a long time at the last paragraph.
Somehow, strange, to relate, the paper had neglected to turn its “sob”
 artist loose, and the few words, added almost as though they were
an afterthought, for once rang true and full of pathos in their very
simplicity--at the Roessle home, where Mrs. Roessle was prostrated,
two little tots of five and seven, too young to understand, had gravely
received the reporter and told him that some bad man had hurt their
daddy.

“Mr. Dale, sir!”

Jimmie Dale lowered his paper. A club attendant was standing before him,
respectfully extending a silver card tray. From the man, Jimmie Dale's
eyes fixed on a white envelope on the tray. One glance was enough--it
was HERS, that letter. The Tocsin again! His brain seemed suddenly to be
afire, and he could feel his pulse quicken, the blood begin to pound
in fierce throbs at his heart. Life and death lay in that white,
innocent-looking, unaddressed envelope, danger, peril--it was always
life and death, for those were the stakes for which the Tocsin played.
But, master of many things, Jimmie Dale was most of all master of
himself. Not a muscle of his face moved. He reached nonchalantly for the
letter.

“Thank you,” said Jimmie Dale.

The man bowed and started away. Jimmie Dale laid the envelope on the
arm of the lounging chair. The man had reached the door when Jimmie Dale
stopped him.

“Oh, by the way,” said Jimmie Dale languidly, “where did this come
from?”

“Your chauffeur, sir,” replied the other. “Your chauffeur gave it to the
hall porter a moment ago, sir.”

“Thank you,” said Jimmie Dale again.

The door closed.

Jimmie Dale glanced around the room. It was the caution of habit, that
glance; the habit of years in which his life had hung on little things.
He was alone in one of the club's private library rooms. He picked up
the envelope, tore it open, took out the folded sheets inside, and began
to read. At the first words he leaned forward, suddenly tense in his
chair. He read on, turning the pages hurriedly, incredulity, amazement,
and, finally, a strange menace mirroring itself in turn upon his face.

He stood up--the letter in his hand.

“My God!” whispered Jimmie Dale.

It was a call to arms such as the Gray Seal had never received
before--such as the Tocsin had never made before. And if it were true
it--True! He laughed aloud a little gratingly. True! Had the Tocsin,
astounding, unbelievable, mystifying as were the means by which she
acquired her knowledge not only of this, but of countless other affairs,
ever by so much as the smallest detail been astray. If it were true!

He pulled out his watch. It was half-past nine. Benson, his chauffeur,
had sent the letter into the club. Benson had been waiting outside
there ever since dinner. Jimmie Dale, for the first time since the
first communication that he had ever received from the Tocsin, did not
immediately destroy her letter now. He slipped it into his pocket--and
stepped quickly from the room.

In the cloakroom downstairs he secured his hat and overcoat, and,
though it was a warm evening, put on the latter since he was in evening
clothes, then walked leisurely out of the club.

At the curb, Benson, the chauffeur, sprang from his seat, and, touching
his cap, opened the door of a luxurious limousine.

Jimmie Dale shook his head.

“I shall not keep you waiting any longer, Benson,” he said. “You may
take the car home, and put it up. I shall probably be late to-night.”

“Very good, sir,” replied the chauffeur.

“You sent in a letter a moment or so ago, Benson?” observed Jimmie Dale
casually, opening his cigarette case.

“Yes, sir,” said Benson. “I hope I didn't do wrong, sir. He said it was
important, and that you were to have it at once.”

“He?” Jimmie Dale was lighting his cigarette now.

“A boy, sir,” Benson amplified. “I couldn't get anything out of him. He
just said he'd been told to give it to me, and tell me to see that you
got it at once. I hope, sir, I haven't--”

“Not at all, Benson,” said Jimmie Dale pleasantly. “It's quite all
right. Good-night, Benson.”

“Good-night, sir,” Benson answered, climbing back to his seat.

There was a queer little smile on Jimmie Dale's lips, as he watched the
great car swing around in the street and glide noiselessly away--a queer
little smile that still held there even after he himself had started
briskly along the avenue in a downtown direction. It was invariably the
same, always the same--the letters came unexpectedly, when least
looked for, now by this means, now by that, but always in a manner that
precluded the slightest possibility of tracing them to their source. Was
there anything, in his intimate surroundings, in his intimate life,
that she did not know about him--who knew absolutely nothing about her!
Benson, for instance--that the man was absolutely trustworthy--or else
she would never for an instant have risked the letter in his possession.
Was there anything that she did not--yes, one thing--she did not know
him in the role he was going to play to-night. That at least was one
thing that surely she did not know about him; the role in which, many
times, for weeks on end, he had devoted himself body and soul in an
attempt to solve the mystery with which she surrounded herself; the
role, too, that often enough had been a bulwark of safety to him when
hard pressed by the police; the role out of which he had so carefully,
so painstakingly created a now recognised and well-known character of
the underworld--the role of Larry the Bat.

Jimmie Dale turned from Fifth Avenue into Broadway, continued on down
Broadway, across to the Bowery, kept along the Bowery for several more
blocks--and finally headed east into the dimly lighted cross street on
which the Sanctuary was located.

And now Jimmie Dale became cautious in his movements. As he approached
the black alleyway that flanked the miserable tenement, he glanced
sharply behind and about him; and, at the alleyway itself, without
pause, but with a curious lightning-like side step, no longer Jimmie
Dale now, but the Gray Seal, he disappeared from the street, and was
lost in the deep shadows of the building.

In a moment he was at the side door, listening for any sound from
within--none had ever seen or met the lodger or the first floor either
ascending or descending, except in the familiar character of Larry
the Bat. He opened the door, closed it behind him, and in the utter
blackness went noiselessly up the stairs--stairs so rickety that it
seemed a mouse's tread alone would have set them creaking. There seemed
an art in the play of Jimmie Dale's every muscle; in the movements,
lithe, balanced, quick, absolutely silent. On the first landing he
stopped before another door, there was the faint click of a key turning
in the lock; and then this door, too, closed behind him. Sounded the
faint click of the key as it turned again, and Jimmie Dale drew a long
breath, stepped across the room to assure himself that the window blind
was down, and lighted the gas jet.

A yellow, murky flame spurted up, pitifully weak, almost as though it
were ashamed of its disreputable surroundings. Dirt, disorder, squalour,
the evidence of low living testified eloquently enough to any one,
the police, for instance, in times past inquisitive until they were
fatuously content with the belief that they knew the occupant for what
he was, that the place was quite in keeping with its tenant, a mute
prototype, as it were, of Larry the Bat, the dope fiend.

For a little space, Jimmie Dale, immaculate in his evening clothes,
stood in the centre of the miserable room, his dark eyes, keen, alert,
critical, sweeping comprehensively over every object about him--the
position of a chair, of a cracked drinking glass on the broken-legged
table, of an old coat thrown with apparent carelessness on the floor at
the foot of the bed, of a broken bottle that had innocently strewn some
sort of white powder close to the threshold, inviting unwary foot tracks
across the floor. And then, taking out the Tocsin's letter, he laid it
upon the table, placed what money he had in his pockets beside it, and
began rapidly to remove his clothes. The Sanctuary had not been invaded
since his last visit there.

He turned back the oilcloth in the far corner of the room, took up the
piece of loose flooring, which, however, strangely enough, fitted
so closely as to give no sign of its existence even should it
inadvertently, by some curious visitor again be trod upon; and from the
aperture beneath lifted out a bundle of clothes and a small box.

Undressed now, he carefully folded the clothes he had taken off, laid
them under the flooring, and began to dress again, his wardrobe supplied
by the bundle he had taken out in exchange--an old pair of shoes, the
laces broken; mismated socks; patched trousers, frayed at the bottoms; a
soiled shirt, collarless, open at the neck. Attired to his satisfaction,
he placed the box upon the table, propped up a cracked mirror, sat down
in front of it, and, with a deft, artist's touch, began to apply stain
to his hands, wrists, neck, throat, and face--but the hardness, the grim
menace that now grew into the dominant characteristic of his features
was not due to the stain alone.

“Dear Philanthropic Crook”--his eyes were on the Tocsin's letter that
lay before him. He read on--for once, even to Jimmie Dale's keen, facile
mind, a first reading had failed to convey the full significance of what
she had written. It was too amazing, almost beyond belief--the series of
crimes, rampant for the past few weeks, at which the community had
stood aghast, the brutal murder of Roessle but a few hours old, lay bare
before his eyes. It was all there, all of it, the details, the hellish
cleverness, the personnel even of the thugs, all, everything--except the
proof.

“Get him, Jimmie--the man higher up. Get him, Jimmie--before another
pays forfeit with his life”--the words seemed to leap out at him from
the white page in red, dancing lines--“Get him--Jimmie--the man higher
up.”

Jimmie Dale finished the second reading of the letter, read it again
for the third time, then tore it into tiny fragments. His fingers delved
into the box again, and the transformation of Jimmie Dale, member of New
York's most exclusive social set, into a low, vicious-featured denizen
of the underworld went on--a little wax applied skilfully behind the
ears, in the nostrils and under the upper lip.

It was all there--all except the proof. And the proof--he laughed aloud
suddenly, unpleasantly. There seemed something sardonic in it; ay, more
than that, all that was grim in irony. The proof, in Stangeist's own
writing, sworn to before witnesses in the presence of a notary, the
text of the document, of course, unknown to both witnesses and notary,
evidence, absolute and final, that would be admitted in any court, for
Stangeist was a lawyer, and would see to that, was in Stangeist's own
safe, for Stangeist's own protection--Stangeist, who was himself the
head and brains of this murder gang--Stangeist, who was the man higher
up!

It was amazing, without parallel in the history of crime--and yet
ingenious, clever, full of the craft and cunning that had built up the
shyster lawyer's reputation below the dead line.

Jimmie Dale's lips were curiously thin now. So it was Stangeist! A
Doctor Jekyll and Mr. Hyde with a vengeance! He knew Stangeist--not
personally; not by the reputation Stangeist held, low even as that was,
among his brother members of the profession; but as the man was known
for what he really was among the crooks and criminals of the underworld,
where, in that strange underground exchange, whispered confidences
passed between those whose common enemy was the law, where Larry the Bat
himself was trusted in the innermost circles.

Stangeist was a power in the Bad Lands. There were few among that unholy
community that Stangeist, at one time or another, in one way or another,
had not rescued from the clutches of the law, resorting to any trick or
cunning, but with perjury, that he could handle like the master of
it that he was, employed as the most common weapon of defence for his
clients--provided he were paid well enough for it. The man had become
more than the attorney for the crime world--he had become part of
it. Cunning, shrewd, crafty, conscienceless, cold-blooded--that was
Stangeist.

The form and features of the man pictured themselves in Jimmie Dale's
mind--the six-foot muscular frame, that was invariably clothed in attire
of the most fashionable cut; the thin lips with their oily, plausible
smile, the straight black hair that straggled into pin point, little
black eyes, the dark face with its high cheek bones, which, with the
pronounced aquiline nose and the persistent rumour that he was a
quarter caste, had led the underworld, prejudiced always in favour of a
“monaker,” to dub the man the “Indian Chief.”

Jimmie Dale laughed again--still unpleasantly. So Stangeist had taken
the plunge at last and branched out into a wider field, had he? Well,
there was nothing surprising in that--except that he had not done it
before! The irony of it lay in the fact that at last he had been TOO
clever, overstepped himself in his own cleverness, that was all. It was
Australian Ike, The Mope, and Clarie Deane that Stangeist had gathered
around him, the Tocsin had said--and there were none worse in Larry the
Bat's wide range of acquaintanceship than those three. Stangeist had
made himself master of Australian Ike, The Mope, and Clarie Deane--and
he had driven them a little too hard on the division of the spoils--and
laughed at them, and cracked the whip much after the fashion that the
trainer in the cage handles the growling beasts around him.

A dozen of the crimes that had appalled and staggered New York they had
committed under his leadership; and then, it seemed, they had quarrelled
furiously, the three pitted against Stangeist, threatening him,
demanding a more equitable share of the proceeds. None was better aware
than Stangeist that threats from men of their calibre were likely to
result in a grim aftermath--and Stangeist, yesterday, the Tocsin said,
had answered them as no other man than Stangeist would either have
thought of or have dared to do. One by one, at separate times, covering
the other with a revolver, Stangeist had permitted them to read
a document that was addressed to the district attorney. It was a
confession, complete in every detail, of every crime the four together
had committed, implicating Stangeist as fully and unreservedly as it
did the other three. It required no commentary! If anything happened
to Stangeist, a stab in the dark, for instance, a bullet from some dark
alleyway, a blackjack deftly wielded, as only Australian Ike, The Mope
or Clarie Deane knew how to wield it--the document automatically became
a DEATH SENTENCE for Australian Ike, The Mope, and Clarie Deane!

It was very simple--and, evidently, it had been effective, as witness
the renewal of their operations in the murder of Roessle that afternoon.
Fear and avarice had both probably played their part; fear of the man
who would with such consummate nerve fling his life into the balance
to turn the tables upon them, while he jeered at them; avarice that
prompted them to get what they could out of Stangeist's brains and
leadership, and to be satisfied with what they COULD get--since they
could get no more!

Satisfied? Jimmie Dale shook his head. No; that was hardly the
word--cowed, perhaps, for the moment, would be better. But afterward,
with a document like that in existence, when they would never be safe
for an instant--well, beasts in the cages had been known to get the
better of the man with the whip, and beasts were gentle things compared
with Australian Ike, The Mope, and Clarie Deane! Some day they would
reverse the tables on the Indian Chief--if they could. And if they
couldn't it would not be for the lack of trying.

There would be another act in that drama of the House Divided before the
curtain fell! And there would be a sort of grim, poetic justice in it, a
temptation almost to let the play work itself out to its own inevitable
conclusion, only--Jimmie Dale, the final touches given to his features,
stood up, and his hands clenched suddenly, fiercely--it was not just the
man higher up alone, there were the other three as well, the whole
four of them, all of them, crimes without number at their door, brutal,
fiendish acts, damnable outrages, murder to answer for, with which the
public now was beginning to connect the name of the Gray Seal! The Gray
Seal!

Jimmie Dale's hands, whose delicate fingers were artfully grimed and
blackened now beneath the nails, clenched still tighter--and then, with
a quick shrug of his shoulders, a thinning of the firmly compressed
lips, he picked up the coat from where it lay upon the floor, put it on,
put the money that was on the table in his pocket, and replaced the box
under the flooring.

In quick succession, from the same hiding place, an automatic, a black
silk mask, an electric flashlight, that thin metal box like a cigarette
case, and a half dozen vicious-looking little blued-steel burglar's
tools were stowed away in his pockets, the flooring carefully replaced,
the oilcloth spread back again; and then, pulling a slouch hat well down
over his eyes, he reached up to turn off the gas.

For an instant his hand held there, while his eyes, sweeping around the
apartment, took in every single detail about him in that same alert,
comprehensive way as when he had entered--then the room was in darkness,
and the Gray Seal, as Larry the Bat, a shuffling, unkempt creature
of the underworld, alias Jimmie Dale, the lionised of clubs, the
matrimonial target of exclusive drawing-rooms, closed the door of the
Sanctuary behind him, shuffled down the stairs, shuffled out into the
lane, and shuffled along the street toward the Bowery.

A policeman on the corner accosted him familiarly.

“Hello, Larry!” grinned the officer.

“'Ello!” returned Jimmie Dale affably through the side of his mouth.
“Fine night, ain't it?”--and shuffled on along the street.

And now Jimmie Dale began to hurry--still with that shuffling tread, but
covering the ground nevertheless with amazing celerity. He had lost
no time since receiving the Tocsin's letter, it was true, but, for all
that, it was now after ten o'clock. Stangeist's house was “dark” that
evening, she had said, meaning that the occupants, Stangeist as well
as whatever servants there might be, for Stangeist had no family, were
out--the servants in town for a theatre or picture show probably--and
Stangeist himself as yet not back, presumably from that Roessle affair.
The stub of an old cigar, unlighted, shifted with a sudden, savage twist
of the lips from one side of Jimmie Dale's mouth to the other. There was
need for haste. There was no telling when Stangeist might get back--as
for the servants, that did not matter so much; servants in suburban
homes had a marked affinity for “last trains!”

Jimmie Dale boarded a cross-town car, effected a transfer, and in
a quarter of an hour after leaving the Sanctuary was huddled, an
inoffensive heap, like a tired-out workingman, in a corner seat of a
Long Island train. From here, there was only a short run ahead of him,
and, twenty minutes later, descending from the train at Forest Hills, he
had passed through the more thickly settled portion of the little place,
and was walking briskly out along the country road.

Stangeist's house lay, approximately, a mile and a half from the
station, quite by itself, and set well back from the road. Jimmie Dale
could have found it with his eyes blindfolded--the Tocsin's directions
had lacked none of their usual explicit minuteness. The road was quite
deserted. Jimmie Dale met no one. Even in the houses that he passed the
lights were in nearly every instance already out.

Something, merciless in its rage, swept suddenly over Jimmie Dale, as,
unbidden, of its own volition, the last paragraph he had read in that
evening's paper began to repeat itself over and over again in his mind.
The two little kiddies--it seemed as though he could see them standing
there--and from Jimmie Dale's lips, not given to profanity, there came
a bitter oath. It might possibly be that, even if he were successful in
what was before him to-night, the authors of the Roessle murder would
never be known. That confession of Stangeist's was written prior to what
had happened that afternoon, and there would be no mention, naturally,
of Roessle. And, for a moment, that seemed to Jimmie Dale the one thing
paramount to all others, the one thing that was vital; then he shook
his head, and laughed out shortly. After all, it did not matter--whether
Stangeist and the blood wolves he had gathered around him paid the
penalty specifically for one particular crime or for another could make
little difference--they would PAY, just as surely, just as certainly,
once that paper was in his possession!

Jimmie Dale was counting the houses as he passed--they were more
infrequent now, farther apart. Stangeist was no fool--not the fool that
he would appear to be for keeping a document like that, once he had had
the temerity to execute it, in his own safe; for, in a day or two, the
Tocsin had hinted at this, after holding it over the heads of Australian
Ike, The Mope, and Clarie Deane again to drive the force of it a little
deeper home, he would undoubtedly destroy it--and the SUPPOSITION that
it was still in existence would have equally the same effect on the
minds of the other three! Stangeist was certainly alive to the peril
that he ran with such a thing in his possession, only the peril had not
appealed to him as imminent either from the three thugs with whom he had
allied himself, or, much less, from any one else, that was all.

Jimmie Dale halted by a low, ornamental stone fence, some three feet
high, and stood there for a moment, glancing about him. This was
Stangeist's house--he could just make out the building as it loomed up a
shadowy, irregular shape, perhaps two hundred yards back from the fence.
The house was quite dark, not a light showed in any window. Jimmie Dale
sat down casually on the fence, looked carefully again up and down
the road--then, swinging his legs over, quick now in every action, he
dropped to the other side, and stole silently across the grass to the
rear of the house.

Here he stopped again, reached up to a window that was about on a level
with his shoulders, and tested its fastenings. The window--it was the
window of Stangeist's private sanctum, according to the plan in
her letter--was securely locked. Jimmie Dale's hands went into his
pocket--and the black silk mask was slipped over his face. He listened
intently--then a little steel instrument began to gnaw like a rat.

A minute passed--two of them. Again Jimmie Dale listened. There was not
a sound save the night sounds--the light breeze whispering through
the branches of the trees; the far-off rumble of a train; the whir of
insects; the hoarse croaking of a frog from some near-by creek or pond.
The window sash was raised an inch, another, and gradually to the top.
Like a shadow, Jimmie Dale pulled himself up to the sill, and, poised
there, his hand parted the heavy portieres that hung within. It was too
dark to distinguish even a single object in the room. He lowered himself
to the floor, and slipped cautiously between the portieres.

From somewhere in the house, a clock began to strike. Jimmie Dale
counted the strokes. Eleven o'clock. It was getting late--TOO late!
Stangeist was likely to be back at any moment. The flashlight, in Jimmie
Dale's hand now, circled the room with its little round white ray,
lingering an instant in a queer, inquisitive sort of way here and there
on this object and that--and went out. Jimmie Dale nodded--the flat desk
in the centre of the floor, the safe in the corner by the rear wall, the
position of everything in the room, even to the chairs, was photographed
on his mind.

He stepped from the portieres to the safe, and the flashlight played
again--this time reflecting back from the glistening nickelled knobs.
Jimmie Dale's lips tightened. It was a small safe, almost ludicrously
small; but to such height as the art of safe design had been carried,
that design was embodied in the one before him.

“Type K-four-two-eight-Colby,” muttered Jimmie Dale. “A nasty little
beggar--and it's eleven o'clock now! I'd use 'soup' for once, if it
weren't that it would put Stangeist wise, and give him a chance to make
his get-away before the district attorney got the nippers on the four of
them.”

The light went out. Jimmie Dale dropped to his knees; and, while his
left hand passed swiftly, tentatively over dials and handle, he rubbed
the fingers of his right hand rapidly to and fro over the carpet.
Wonderful finger tips were those of Jimmie Dale, sensitive to an
abnormal degree; and now, tingling with the friction, the nerves
throbbing at the skin surface, they closed in a light, delicate touch
upon the knob of the dial--and Jimmie Dale's ear pressed close against
the face of the safe.

Time passed. The silence grew heavy--seemed to palpitate through the
room. Then a deep breath, half like a sigh, half like a fluttering sob
as of a strong man taxed to the uttermost of his endurance, came from
Jimmie Dale, and his left hand swept away the sweat beads that had
spurted to his forehead.

“Eight--thirteen--twenty-two,” whispered Jimmie Dale.

There was a click, a low metallic thud as the bolts slid back, and the
door swung open.

And now the flashlight again, searching the mechanism of the inner
door--then darkness once more.

Five minutes, ten minutes went by. The clock struck again--and the
single stroke seemed to boom out through the house in a weird, raucous,
threatening note, and seemed to linger, throbbing in the air.

The inner door was open--the flashlight's ray was flooding a nest
of pigeonholes and little drawers. The pigeonholes were crammed with
papers, as, presumably, too, were the drawers. Jimmie Dale sucked in his
breath. He had already been there well over half an hour--every minute
now, every second was counting against him, and to search that mass of
papers before Stangeist returned was--

“Ah!”--it came in a fierce little ejaculation from Jimmie Dale. From
the centre pigeonhole, almost the first paper he had touched, he drew
a long, sealed envelope and at a single swift glance had read the
inscription upon it, written in longhand:


TO THE DISTRICT ATTORNEY, NEW YORK CITY.

IMPORTANT. URGENT.


The words in the corners were underscored three times.

Swiftly, deftly, Jimmie Dale's hands rolled the rounded end of one of
his collection of the legal instruments under the flap of the envelope,
turned the sheets over and drew out the folded document inside. There
were eight sheets of legal foolscap, neatly fastened together at the top
left-hand corner with green tape. He opened them out, read a few words
here and there, and turned the pages hurriedly over to scrutinise
the last one--and nodded grimly. Three witnesses had testified to the
signature of Stangeist, and a notary's seal, accompanied by the usual
legal formula, was duly affixed.

Jimmie Dale slipped the document into his pocket, and, with the envelope
in his hand, moved to the desk. He opened first one drawer and then
another, and finally discovering a pile of blank foolscap, took out four
sheets, folded them, and placed them in the envelope, sealing the
flap of the latter again. That it did not seal very well now brought a
quizzical twitch to Jimmie Dale's lips. Sealed or unsealed, perhaps, it
made little difference; but, for all that, he was not through with it
yet. Apart from bringing the four to justice, there was, after all, a
chance to vindicate the Gray Seal in this matter at least, and repudiate
the newspaper theory which the public, to whom the Gray Seal was already
a monster of iniquity, would seize upon with avidity.

There was no further need of light now. Jimmie Dale replaced the
flashlight in his pocket, took out the thin, metal case, opened it, and
with the tiny pair of tweezers that likewise nestled there, lifted out
one of the gray, diamond-shaped paper seals. There was no question but
that, once under arrest, Stangeist's effects would be immediately
and thoroughly searched by the authorities! Jimmie Dale's smile from
quizzical became ironic. It would afford the police another little,
bewildering reminder of the Gray Seal, and give Carruthers, good old
Carruthers of the MORNING NEWS-ARGUS, so innocently ignorant that the
Gray Seal was his old college pal, yet the one editor of them all who
was not forever barking and yelping at the Gray Seal's heels, a chance
to vindicate himself a little, too! Jimmie Dale moistened the adhesive
side of the gray seal, and, still mindful of tell-tale finger prints,
laid it with the tweezers on the flap of the envelope, and pressed it
firmly into place with his elbow.

And then, suddenly, every faculty instantly on the alert, he snatched up
the envelope from the desk, and listened. Was it imagination, a trick
of nerves, or--no, there it was again!--a footfall on the gravel walk at
the front of the house. The sound became louder, clearer--two footfalls
instead of one. It was Stangeist, and somebody was with him.

In an instant Jimmie Dale was across the room and kneeling again before
the safe. His fingers were flying now. The envelope shot back into the
pigeonhole from which he had taken it--the inner door of the safe closed
silently and swiftly.

A dry chuckle came from Jimmie Dale's lips. It was just like fiction,
just precisely time enough to have accomplished what he had come for
before he was interrupted, not a second more or less, the villain foiled
at the psychological moment! The key was rattling in the front door
now--they were in the hall--he could hear Stangeist's voice--there came
a dull glow from the hallway, following the click of an electric-light
switch. The outer door of the safe swung shut, the bolts slid into
place, the dial whirled under Jimmie Dale's fingers. It was only a
step to the portieres, the open window--and escape. He straightened up,
stepped back, the portieres closed behind him--and the chuckle died on
Jimmie Dale's lips.

He was trapped--caught without so much as a corner in which to turn!
Stangeist was even then coming into the room--and OUTSIDE, darkly
outlined, two forms stood just beneath the window. Instinctively, quick
as a flash, Jimmie Dale crouched below the sill. Who were they? What did
it mean? Questions swept in swift sequence through his brain. Had they
seen him? It would be very dark against the background of the portieres,
but yet if they were watching--he drew a breath of relief. He had not
been seen. Their voices reached him in low, guarded whispers.

“Say, youse, Ike, pipe it! Dere's a window open in the snitch's room.
Come on, we'll get in dere. It'll make the hair stand up on the back of
his neck fer a starter.”

“Aw, ferget it!” replied another voice. “Can the tee-ayter stunt!
Clarie leaves the front door unfastened, don't he? An' dey'll be in dere
in a minute now. Wotcher want ter do? Crab the game? He might hear us
an' fix Clarie before we had a chanst, the skinny old fox! An' dere's
the light now--see! Beat it on yer toes fer the front of the house!”

The room was flooded with light. Through the portieres, that Jimmie Dale
parted by the barest fraction of an inch, he could see Stangeist and
another man, a thick-set, ugly-faced-looking customer--Clarie Deane,
according to that brief, whispered colloquy that he had heard outside.
He looked again through the window. The two dark forms had disappeared
now, but they had disappeared just a few seconds too late--with the two
other men now in the room, and one of them so close that Jimmie Dale
could almost have reached out and touched him, it was impossible to
get through the window without being detected, when the slightest sound
would attract instant attention and equally instant suspicion. It was a
chance to be taken only as a last resort.

Jimmie Dale's face grew hard, as his fingers closed around his automatic
and drew the weapon from his pocket. It was all plain enough. That last
act in the drama which he had speculatively anticipated was being staged
with little loss of time--and in a grim sort of way the thought flashed
across his mind that, perilous as his own position was, Stangeist at
that moment was in even greater peril than himself. Australian Ike, The
Mope, and Clarie Deane, given the chance, and they seemed to have made
that chance now, were not likely to deal in half measures--Clarie Deane
had dropped into a chair beside the desk; and The Mope and Australian
Ike were creeping around to the front door!

The parting in the portieres widened a little more, a very little more,
slowly, imperceptibly, until Jimmie Dale, by the simple expedient of
moving his head, could obtain an unobstructed view of the entire room.

Stangeist tossed a bag he had been carrying on the desk, pulled up a
chair opposite to Clarie Deane, and sat down. Both men were side face to
Jimmie Dale.

“You tell the boys,” said Stangeist abruptly, “to fade away after this
for a while. Things are getting too hot. And you tell The Mope I dock
him five hundred for that extra crunch on Roessle's skull. That sort
of thing isn't necessary. That's the kind of stunt that gets the public
sore--the man was dead enough as it was. See?”

“Sure!” Clarie Deane's ejaculation was a grunt.

Stangeist opened the bag, and dumped the contents on the desk--pile
after pile of banknotes, the pay roll of the Martindale-Kensington
Mills.

“Some haul!” observed Clarie Deane, with a hoarse chuckle. “The papers
said over twenty thousand.”

“You can't always believe what the papers say,” returned Stangeist
curtly; and, taking a scribbling pad from the desk, began to check up
the packages.

Clarie Deane's cigar had gone out. He rolled the short stub in his
mouth, and leaned forward.

The bills were evidently just as they had been delivered to the murdered
paymaster at the bank, done up with little narrow paper bands in
packages of one hundred notes each, save for a small bundle of loose
bills which latter, with the rolls of silver, Stangeist swept to one
side of the desk.

Package by package, Stangeist went on jotting the amounts down on the
pad.

“Nix!” growled Clarie Deane suddenly. “Cut that out! Them's fivers in
that wad. Make that five hundred instead of one--I'm onter yer!”

“Mistake,” said Stangeist suavely, changing the figures with his pencil.
“You're pretty wide awake for this time of night, aren't you, Clarie?”

“Oh, I dunno!” responded Clarie Deane gruffly. “Not so very!”

Stangeist, finished with the packages, picked up the loose bills, and,
with a short laugh, tossed them into the bag and followed them with the
rolls of silver. He pushed the bag toward Clarie Deane.

“That's a little extra for you,” he said. “The trouble with you fellows
is that you don't know when you're well off--but the sooner you find it
out the better, unless you want another lesson like yesterday.” He made
the addition on the pad. “Fifteen thousand, eight hundred dollars,” he
announced softly. “That's seven thousand, nine hundred for the three of
you to divide, less five hundred from The Mope.”

Clarie Deane's eyes narrowed. His hands were on his knees, hidden by the
desk.

“There's more'n twenty there,” he said sullenly--and drew a match across
the under edge of the desk with a long, crackling noise.

Stangeist's face lost its suavity, a snarl curled his lips; but, about
to reply, he sprang suddenly to his feet instead, his head turned
sharply toward the door.

“What's that!” he said hoarsely. “It's not the servants, they wouldn't
dare to--”

Stangeist's words ended in a gulp. He was staring into the muzzle of a
heavy-calibered revolver that Clarie Deane had jerked up from under the
desk.

“You sit down, or I'll blow your block off!” said Clarie Deane, with a
sudden leer.

It happened then almost before Jimmie Dale could grasp the details;
before even Clarie Deane himself could interfere. The door burst open,
two men rushed in--and one, with a bound, flung himself at Stangeist.
The man's hand, grasping a clubbed revolver, rose in the air, descended
on Stangeist's head--and Stangeist went down in a limp heap, crashed
into the chair, and slid from the chair with a thud to the floor.

There was an oath from Clarie Deane. He jumped from his seat, and with a
violent shove sent the man reeling half across the room.

“Blast you, Mope!” he snarled. “You're too blamed fly! D'ye wanter queer
the whole biz?”

“Aw, wot's the matter wid youse!” The Mope, purple-faced with rage,
little black eyes glittering, mouth working under a flattened nose that
some previous encounter had broken and bent over the side of his face,
advanced belligerently.

Australian Ike, who had entered the room with him, pulled him back.

“Ferget it!” he flung out. “Clarie's dealin' the deck. Ferget it!”

The Mope glared from one to the other; then shook his fist at Stangeist
on the floor.

“Youse two make me sick!” he sneered. “Wot's the use of waitin' all
night? We was to bump him off, anyway, wasn't we? Dat's wot youse said
yerselves, 'cause wot was ter stop him writin' out another paper if we
didn't fix him fer keeps?”

“That's all right,” rejoined Clarie Deane; “but that's the second act,
you bonehead, see! We ain't got the paper yet, have we? Say, take a look
at that safe! It's easier ter scare him inter openin' it than ter crack
it, ain't it?”

Jimmie Dale, from his crouched position, began to rise to his feet
slowly, making but the slightest movement at a time, cautious of the
least sound. His lips were like a thin line, his fingers tightly pressed
over the automatic in his hand. There was not room for him between the
portieres and the window; and, do what he could, the hangings bulged a
little. Let one of the three notice that, or inadvertently brush against
the portieres, and his life would not be worth an instant's purchase.

They were lifting Stangeist up now, propping him up in the chair.
Stangeist moaned, opened his eyes, stared in a dazed way at the three
faces that leered into his, then dawning intelligence came, and his
face, that had been white before, took on a pasty, grayish pallor.

“You--the three of you!” he mumbled. “What's this mean?”

And then Clarie Deane laughed in a low, brutal way.

“Wot d'ye think it means? We want that paper, an' we want it damn
quick--see! D'ye think we was goin' ter stand fer havin' a trip ter Sing
Sing an' the wire chair danglin' over our heads!”

Stangeist closed his eyes. When he opened them again, something of the
old-time craftiness was in his face.

“Well, what are you going to do about it?” he inquired, almost sharply.
“You know what will happen to you, if anything happens to me.”

“Don't youse kid yerself!” retorted Clarie Deane. “D'ye think we're
fools? This ain't like it was yesterday--see! We GETS the paper this
time--so there won't nothin' happen to us. You come across with it
blasted quick now, or The Mope'll give you another on the bean that'll
put you to sleep fer keeps!”

The blood was running down Stangeist's face. He wiped it away from his
eyes.

“It's not here,” he said innocently. “It's in my box in the
safety-deposit vaults.”

“Aw,” blurted out Australian Ike, pushing suddenly forward, “youse can't
work dat crawl on--”

“Cut it out, Ike!” snapped Clarie Dane. “I'm runnin' this! So it's in
the vaults, eh?” He shoved his face toward Stangeist's.

“Yes,” said Stangeist easily. “You see--I was looking for something like
this.”

Clarie Deane's fist clenched.

“You lie!” he choked. “The Mope, here, was the last of us you showed
the paper to yesterday afternoon, an' the vaults was closed then--an' you
ain't been there to-day, 'cause you've been watched. That's why we fixed
it fer to-night after the divvy that you've just tried ter do us on
again, 'cause we knew you had it here.”

“I tell you, it's not here,” said Stangeist evenly.

“You lie!” said Clarie Deane again. “It's in that safe. The Mope heard
you tell the girl in yer office that if anything happened to you she was
ter wise up the district attorney that there was a paper in your safe
at home fer him that was important. Now then, you beat it over ter that
safe, an' open it up--we'll give you a minute ter do it in.”

“The paper's not there, I tell you,” said Stangeist once more.

“That's all right,” submitted Clarle Deane grimly. “There's a quarter of
that minute gone.”

“I won't!” Stangeist flashed out violently.

“That's all right,” repeated Clarie Deane. “There's half of that minute
gone.”

Jimmie Dale's eyes, in a fascinated sort of way, were on Stangeist. The
man's face was twitching now, moisture began to ooze from his forehead,
as the callous brutality of the scowling faces seemed to get him--and
then he lurched suddenly forward in his chair.

“My God!” he cried out, a ring of terror in his voice “What do you mean
to do? You'll pay for it! They'll get you! The servants will be back in
a minute.”

“Two skirts!” jeered Clarie Deane. “We ain't goin' ter run away from
them. If they comes before we goes, we'll fix 'em. That minute's up!”

Stangeist licked his lips with his tongue.

“Suppose--suppose I refuse?” he said hoarsely.

“You can suit yerself,” said Clarie Deane, with a vicious grin. “We know
the paper's there, an' we gets it before we leaves here--see? You can
take yer choice. Either you goes over ter the safe an' opens it yerself,
or else”--he paused and produced a small bottle from his pocket--“this
is nitro-glycerin', an' we opens it fer you with this. Only if we does
the job we does it proper. We ties you up and sets you against the door
of the safe before we touches off the 'soup,' an' mabbe if yer a good
guesser you can guess the rest.”

There was a short, raucous guffaw from The Mope.

Stangeist turned a drawn face toward the man, stared at him, and
stared in a miserable way at the other two in turn. He licked his lips
again--none was in a better position than himself to know that there
would be neither scruples nor hesitancy to interfere with carrying out
the threat.

“Suppose,” he said, trying to keep his voice steady, “suppose I open the
safe--what then--afterward?”

“We ain't got the safe open yet,” countered Clarie Deane
uncompromisingly. “An' we ain't got no more time ter fool over it,
either. You get a move on before I counts five, or The Mope an' Ike ties
you up! One--”

Stangeist staggered to his feet, wiped the blood out of his eyes for the
second time, and, with lips working, went unsteadily across the room to
the safe.

He knelt before it, and began to manipulate the dial; while the others
crowded around behind him. The Mope was fingering his revolver again
club fashion. Australian Ike's elbow just grazed the portieres, and
Jimmie Dale flattened himself against the window, holding his breath--a
smile on his lips that was mirthless, deadly, cold. The end was not far
off now; and then--WHAT?

Stangeist had the outer door of the safe open now--and now the inner
door swung back. He reached in his hand to the pigeonhole, drew out the
envelope--and with a sudden, wild cry, reeled to his feet.

“My God!” he screamed out. “What's--what's this!”

Clarie Deane snatched the envelope from him.

“THE GRAY SEAL!”--the words came with a jerk from his lips. He ripped
the envelope open frantically--and like a man stunned gazed at the four
blank sheets, while the colour left his face. “IT'S GONE!” he cried out
hoarsely.

“Gone!” There was a burst of oaths from Australian Ike. “Gone! Den we're
nipped--de lot of us!”

The Mope's face was like a maniac's as he whirled on Stangeist.

“Sure!” he croaked. “But youse gets yers first, youse--”

With a cry, Stangeist, to elude the blow, ducked blindly backward--into
the portieres--and with a rip and tear the hangings were wrenched apart.

It came instantaneously--a yell of mingled surprise and fury from the
three--the crash and spit of Jimmie Dale's revolver as he fired one shot
at the floor to stop their rush--then he flung himself at the window,
through it, and dropped sprawling to the ground.

A stream of flame cut the darkness above him, a bullet whistled by his
head--another--and another. He was on his feet, quick as a cat, and
running close alongside of the wall of the house. He heard a thud behind
him, still another, and yet a third--they were dropping through the
window after him. Came another shot, an angry hum of the bullet closer
than before--then the pound of racing feet.

Jimmie Dale swung around the corner of the house, running at top speed.
Something that was like a hot iron suddenly burned and seared along the
side of his head just above the ear. He reeled, staggered, recovered
himself, and dashed on. It nauseated him, that stinging in his head,
and all at once seemed to be draining his strength away. The shouts, the
shots, the running feet became like a curious buzzing in his ears. It
seemed strange that they should have hit him, that he should be wounded!
If he could only reach the low stone wall by the road, he could at least
make a fight for his life on the other side!

Red streaks swam before Jimmie Dale's eyes. The wall was such a long way
off--a yard or two was a very long way more to go--the weakness
seemed to be creeping up now even to numb his brain. No, here was the
wall--they hadn't hit him again--he laughed in a demented way--and
rolled his body over, and fell to the other side.

“JIMMIE!”

The cry seemed to reach some inner consciousness, revive him, send the
blood whipping through his veins. That voice! It was her--HERS! The
Tocsin! There was an automobile, engine racing, standing there in the
road. He won to his feet--dark, rushing forms were almost at the wall.
He fired--once--twice--fired again--and turned, staggering for the car.

“Jimmie! Jimmie--QUICK!”

Panting, gasping, he half fell into the tonneau. The car leaped forward,
yells filled the air--but only one thing was dominant in Jimmie Dale's
reeling brain now. He pulled himself up to his feet, and leaned over the
back of the seat, reaching for the slim figure that was bent over the
wheel.

“It's you--you at last!” he cried. “Your face--let me lee your face!”

A bullet split the back panel of the car--little spurting flames were
dancing out from the roadway behind.

“Are you mad!” she shouted back at him. “Let me steer--do you want them
to hit me!”

“No-o,” said Jimmie Dale, in a queer singsong sort of way, and his
head seemed to spin dizzily around. “No--I guess--” He choked. “The
paper--it's in--my pocket”--and he went down unconscious on the floor of
the car.

When he recovered his senses he was lying on a couch in a plainly
furnished room, and a man, a stranger, red, jovial-faced, farmerish
looking, was bending over him.

“Where am I?” he demanded finally, propping himself up on his elbow.

“You're all right,” replied the man. “She said you'd come around in a
little while.”

“Who said so?” inquired Jimmie Dale.

“She did. The woman who brought you here about five minutes ago. She
said she ran you down with her car.”

“Oh!” said Jimmie Dale. He felt his head--it was bandaged, and it was
bandaged, he was quite sure, with a piece of torn underskirt. He looked
at the man again. “You haven't told me yet where I am.”

“Long Island,” the other answered. “My name's Hanson. I keep a bit of a
truck garden here.”

“Oh,” said Jimmie Dale again.

The man crossed the room, picked up an envelope from the table, and came
back to Jimmie Dale.

“She said to give you this as soon as you got your senses, and asked us
to put you up for a while, as long as you wanted to stay, and paid
us for it, too. She's all right, she is. You don't want to hold the
accident up against her, she was mighty sorry about it. And now I'll go
and see if the old lady's got your room ready while you're readin' your
letter.”

The man left the room.

Jimmie Dale sat up on the couch, and tore the envelope open. The note,
scrawled in pencil, began abruptly:


“You were quite a problem. I couldn't take you HOME--could I? I couldn't
take you to what you call the Sanctuary could I? I couldn't take you to
a hospital, nor call in a doctor--the stain you use wouldn't stand it.
But, thank God! I know it's only a flesh wound, and you are all right
where you are for the day or two that you must keep quiet and take care
of yourself. By the time you read this the paper will be on the way to
the proper hands, and by morning the four where they should be. There
were a few articles in your clothes I thought it better to take charge
of in case--well, in case of ACCIDENT.”


Jimmie Dale tore the note up, and smiled wryly at the door. He felt
in his pockets. Mask, revolver, burglar's tools, and the thin metal
insignia case were gone.

“And I had the sublime optimism,” murmured Jimmie Dale, “to spend months
trying to find her as Larry the Bat!”



