The Project Gutenberg eBook, Prince Otto, by Robert Louis Stevenson


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Prince Otto
       a Romance


Author: Robert Louis Stevenson



Release Date: September 3, 2010  [eBook #372]
First Posted: November 25, 1995

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRINCE OTTO***


Transcribed from the 1905 edition by David Price, email ccx074@pglaf.org





                          PRINCE OTTO—A ROMANCE


                                A ROMANCE

                                    BY

                          ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]

                              A NEW EDITION

                                * * * * *

                                  LONDON
                             CHATTO & WINDUS
                                   1905




TO NELLY VAN DE GRIFT
(MRS. ADULFO SANCHEZ, OF MONTEREY)


At last, after so many years, I have the pleasure of re-introducing you
to ‘Prince Otto,’ whom you will remember a very little fellow, no bigger
in fact than a few sheets of memoranda written for me by your kind hand.
The sight of his name will carry you back to an old wooden house
embowered in creepers; a house that was far gone in the respectable
stages of antiquity and seemed indissoluble from the green garden in
which it stood, and that yet was a sea-traveller in its younger days, and
had come round the Horn piecemeal in the belly of a ship, and might have
heard the seamen stamping and shouting and the note of the boatswain’s
whistle.  It will recall to you the nondescript inhabitants now so widely
scattered:—the two horses, the dog, and the four cats, some of them still
looking in your face as you read these lines;—the poor lady, so
unfortunately married to an author;—the China boy, by this time, perhaps,
baiting his line by the banks of a river in the Flowery Land;—and in
particular the Scot who was then sick apparently unto death, and whom you
did so much to cheer and keep in good behaviour.

You may remember that he was full of ambitions and designs: so soon as he
had his health again completely, you may remember the fortune he was to
earn, the journeys he was to go upon, the delights he was to enjoy and
confer, and (among other matters) the masterpiece he was to make of
‘Prince Otto’!

Well, we will not give in that we are finally beaten.  We read together
in those days the story of Braddock, and how, as he was carried dying
from the scene of his defeat, he promised himself to do better another
time: a story that will always touch a brave heart, and a dying speech
worthy of a more fortunate commander.  I try to be of Braddock’s mind.  I
still mean to get my health again; I still purpose, by hook or crook,
this book or the next, to launch a masterpiece; and I still
intend—somehow, some time or other—to see your face and to hold your
hand.

Meanwhile, this little paper traveller goes forth instead, crosses the
great seas and the long plains and the dark mountains, and comes at last
to your door in Monterey, charged with tender greetings.  Pray you, take
him in.  He comes from a house where (even as in your own) there are
gathered together some of the waifs of our company at Oakland: a
house—for all its outlandish Gaelic name and distant station—where you
are well-beloved.

                                                                  R. L. S.

_Skerryvore_,
      Bournemouth.




BOOK I—PRINCE ERRANT


CHAPTER I—IN WHICH THE PRINCE DEPARTS ON AN ADVENTURE


You shall seek in vain upon the map of Europe for the bygone state of
Grünewald.  An independent principality, an infinitesimal member of the
German Empire, she played, for several centuries, her part in the discord
of Europe; and, at last, in the ripeness of time and at the spiriting of
several bald diplomatists, vanished like a morning ghost.  Less fortunate
than Poland, she left not a regret behind her; and the very memory of her
boundaries has faded.

It was a patch of hilly country covered with thick wood.  Many streams
took their beginning in the glens of Grünewald, turning mills for the
inhabitants.  There was one town, Mittwalden, and many brown, wooden
hamlets, climbing roof above roof, along the steep bottom of dells, and
communicating by covered bridges over the larger of the torrents.  The
hum of watermills, the splash of running water, the clean odour of pine
sawdust, the sound and smell of the pleasant wind among the innumerable
army of the mountain pines, the dropping fire of huntsmen, the dull
stroke of the wood-axe, intolerable roads, fresh trout for supper in the
clean bare chamber of an inn, and the song of birds and the music of the
village-bells—these were the recollections of the Grünewald tourist.

North and east the foothills of Grünewald sank with varying profile into
a vast plain.  On these sides many small states bordered with the
principality, Gerolstein, an extinct grand duchy, among the number.  On
the south it marched with the comparatively powerful kingdom of Seaboard
Bohemia, celebrated for its flowers and mountain bears, and inhabited by
a people of singular simplicity and tenderness of heart.  Several
intermarriages had, in the course of centuries, united the crowned
families of Grünewald and Maritime Bohemia; and the last Prince of
Grünewald, whose history I purpose to relate, drew his descent through
Perdita, the only daughter of King Florizel the First of Bohemia.  That
these intermarriages had in some degree mitigated the rough, manly stock
of the first Grünewalds, was an opinion widely held within the borders of
the principality.  The charcoal burner, the mountain sawyer, the wielder
of the broad axe among the congregated pines of Grünewald, proud of their
hard hands, proud of their shrewd ignorance and almost savage lore,
looked with an unfeigned contempt on the soft character and manners of
the sovereign race.

The precise year of grace in which this tale begins shall be left to the
conjecture of the reader.  But for the season of the year (which, in such
a story, is the more important of the two) it was already so far forward
in the spring, that when mountain people heard horns echoing all day
about the north-west corner of the principality, they told themselves
that Prince Otto and his hunt were up and out for the last time till the
return of autumn.

At this point the borders of Grünewald descend somewhat steeply, here and
there breaking into crags; and this shaggy and trackless country stands
in a bold contrast to the cultivated plain below.  It was traversed at
that period by two roads alone; one, the imperial highway, bound to
Brandenau in Gerolstein, descended the slope obliquely and by the easiest
gradients.  The other ran like a fillet across the very forehead of the
hills, dipping into savage gorges, and wetted by the spray of tiny
waterfalls.  Once it passed beside a certain tower or castle, built sheer
upon the margin of a formidable cliff, and commanding a vast prospect of
the skirts of Grünewald and the busy plains of Gerolstein.  The
Felsenburg (so this tower was called) served now as a prison, now as a
hunting-seat; and for all it stood so lonesome to the naked eye, with the
aid of a good glass the burghers of Brandenau could count its windows
from the lime-tree terrace where they walked at night.

In the wedge of forest hillside enclosed between the roads, the horns
continued all day long to scatter tumult; and at length, as the sun began
to draw near to the horizon of the plain, a rousing triumph announced the
slaughter of the quarry.  The first and second huntsman had drawn
somewhat aside, and from the summit of a knoll gazed down before them on
the drooping shoulders of the hill and across the expanse of plain.  They
covered their eyes, for the sun was in their faces.  The glory of its
going down was somewhat pale.  Through the confused tracery of many
thousands of naked poplars, the smoke of so many houses, and the evening
steam ascending from the fields, the sails of a windmill on a gentle
eminence moved very conspicuously, like a donkey’s ears.  And hard by,
like an open gash, the imperial high-road ran straight sun-ward, an
artery of travel.

There is one of nature’s spiritual ditties, that has not yet been set to
words or human music: ‘The Invitation to the Road’; an air continually
sounding in the ears of gipsies, and to whose inspiration our nomadic
fathers journeyed all their days.  The hour, the season, and the scene,
all were in delicate accordance.  The air was full of birds of passage,
steering westward and northward over Grünewald, an army of specks to the
up-looking eye.  And below, the great practicable road was bound for the
same quarter.

But to the two horsemen on the knoll this spiritual ditty was unheard.
They were, indeed, in some concern of mind, scanning every fold of the
subjacent forest, and betraying both anger and dismay in their impatient
gestures.

‘I do not see him, Kuno,’ said the first huntsman, ‘nowhere—not a trace,
not a hair of the mare’s tail!  No, sir, he’s off; broke cover and got
away.  Why, for twopence I would hunt him with the dogs!’

‘Mayhap, he’s gone home,’ said Kuno, but without conviction.

‘Home!’ sneered the other.  ‘I give him twelve days to get home.  No,
it’s begun again; it’s as it was three years ago, before he married; a
disgrace!  Hereditary prince, hereditary fool!  There goes the government
over the borders on a grey mare.  What’s that?  No, nothing—no, I tell
you, on my word, I set more store by a good gelding or an English dog.
That for your Otto!’

‘He’s not my Otto,’ growled Kuno.

‘Then I don’t know whose he is,’ was the retort.

‘You would put your hand in the fire for him to-morrow,’ said Kuno,
facing round.

‘Me!’ cried the huntsman.  ‘I would see him hanged!  I’m a Grünewald
patriot—enrolled, and have my medal, too; and I would help a prince!  I’m
for liberty and Gondremark.’

‘Well, it’s all one,’ said Kuno.  ‘If anybody said what you said, you
would have his blood, and you know it.’

‘You have him on the brain,’ retorted his companion.  ‘There he goes!’ he
cried, the next moment.

And sure enough, about a mile down the mountain, a rider on a white horse
was seen to flit rapidly across a heathy open and vanish among the trees
on the farther side.

‘In ten minutes he’ll be over the border into Gerolstein,’ said Kuno.
‘It’s past cure.’

‘Well, if he founders that mare, I’ll never forgive him,’ added the
other, gathering his reins.

And as they turned down from the knoll to rejoin their comrades, the sun
dipped and disappeared, and the woods fell instantly into the gravity and
greyness of the early night.



