CHAPTER XII.

_Of LIGHT and SHADE, and the manner in which objects are explained to
the eye by them_.


Although both this and the next chapter may seem more particularly
relative to the art of painting, than any of the foregoing; yet, as
hitherto, I have endeavour'd to be understood by every reader, so here
also I shall avoid, as much as the subject will permit, speaking of
what would only be well-conceived by painters.

There is such a subtile variety in the nature of appearances, that
probably we shall not be able to gain much ground by this enquiry,
unless we exert and apply the full use of every sense, that will convey
to us any information concerning them.

So far as we have already gone, the sense of feeling, as well as that
of seeing, hath been apply'd to; so that perhaps a man born blind,
may, by his better touch than is common to those who have their sight,
together with the regular process that has been here given of lines, so
feel out the nature of forms, as to make a tolerable judgment of what
is beautiful to sight.

Here again our other senses must assist us, notwithstanding in this
chapter we shall be more confined to what is communicated to the eye by
rays of light; and tho' things must now be consider'd as appearances
only; produced and made out merely by means of _lights, shades,_ and
_colours_.

By the various circumstances of which, every one knows we have
represented on the flat surface of the looking-glass, pictures equal to
the originals reflected by it. The painter too, by proper dispositions
of lights, shades, and colours, on his canvas, will raise the like
ideas. Even prints, by means of lights and shades alone, will perfectly
inform the eye of every shape and distance whatsoever, in which even
lines must be consider'd as narrow parts of shade, a number of them,
drawn or engrav'd neatly side by side, called _hatching_, serve as
shades in prints, and when they are artfully managed, are a kind of
pleasing _succedaneum_ to the delicacy of nature's.

Could mezzo-tinto prints be wrought as accurately as those with the
graver, they would come nearest to nature, because they are done
without strokes or lines.

I have often thought that a landskip, in the process of this way of
representing it, doth a little resemble the first coming on of day.
The copper-plate it is done upon, when the artist first takes it into
hand, is wrought all over with an edg'd-tool, so as to make it print
one even black, like night: and his whole work after this, is merely
introducing the lights into it; which he does by scraping off the rough
grain according to his design, artfully smoothing it most where light
is most required: but as he proceeds in burnishing the lights, and
clearing up the shades, he is obliged to take off frequent impressions
to prove the progress of the work, so that each proof appears like the
different times of a foggy morning, till one becomes so finish'd as to
be distinct and clear enough to imitate a day-light piece. I have given
this description because I think the whole operation, in the simplest
manner, shews what lights and shades alone will do.

As light must always be supposed, I need only speak of such privations
of it as are called shades or shadows, wherein I shall endeavour to
point out and regularly describe a certain order and arrangement in
their appearance, in which order we may conceive different kinds of
softnings and modulations of the rays of light which are said to fall
upon the eye from every object it sees, and to cause those more or
less-pleasing vibrations of the optic nerves, which serve to inform the
mind concerning every different shape or figure that presents itself.

The best light for seeing the shadows of objects truly, is, that which
comes in at a common sized window, where the sun doth not shine; I
shall therefore speak of their order as seen by this kind of light:
and shall take the liberty in the present and following chapter, to
consider colours but as variegated shades, which together with common
shades, will now be divided into two general parts or branches.

The first we shall call PRIME TINTS, by which is meant any colour or
colours on the surfaces of objects; and the use we shall make of these
different hues will be to consider them as shades to one another. Thus
gold is a shade to silver, &c. exclusive of those additional shades
which may be made in any degree by the privation of light.

The second branch may be called RETIRING SHADES, which gradate or go
off by degrees, as figs. [84 and 85 T p. II]. These shades, as they vary
more or less, produce beauty, whether they are occasioned by the
privation of light, or made by the pencilings of art or nature.

[Illustration: Figs. 84 and 85]

When I come to treat of colouring, I shall particularly shew in what
manner the gradating of prime tints serve to the making a beautiful
complexion; in this place we shall only observe how nature hath by
these gradating shades ornamented the surfaces of animals; fish
generally have this kind of shade from their backs downward; birds have
their feathers enriched with it; and many flowers, particularly the
rose, shew it by the gradually-increasing colours of their leaves.

The sky always gradates one way or other, and the rising or setting
sun exhibits it in great perfection, the imitating of which was Claud.
de Loraine's peculiar excellence, and is now Mr. Lambert's: there is so
much of what is called harmony to the eye to be produced by this shade,
that I believe we may venture to say, in art it is the painter's gamut,
which nature has sweetly pointed out to us in what we call the eyes of
a peacock's tail: and the nicest needle-workers are taught to weave it
into every flower and leaf, right or wrong, as if it was as constantly
to be observed as it is seen in flames of fire; because it is always
found to entertain the eye. There is a sort of needle-work called
Irish-stitch, done in these shades only; which pleases still, tho' it
has long been out of fashion.

There is so strict an analogy between shade and sound, that they
may well serve to illustrate each other's qualities: for as sounds
gradually decreasing and increasing give the idea of progression from,
or to the ear, just so do retiring shades shew progression, by figuring
it to the eye. Thus, as by objects growing still fainter, we judge
of distances in prospects, so by the decreasing noise of thunder, we
form the idea of its moving further from us. And with regard to their
similitude in beauty, like as the gradating shade pleases the eye, so
the increasing, or swelling note, delights the ear.

I have call'd it the retiring shade, because by the successive,
or continual change in its appearance, it is equally instrumental
with converging lines[13], in shewing how much objects, or any parts
of them, retire or recede from the eye; without which, a floor, or
horizontal-plane, would often seem to stand upright like a wall. And
notwithstanding all the other ways by which we learn to know at what
distances things are from us, frequent deceptions happen to the eye on
account of deficiencies in this shade: for if the light chances to be
so disposed on objects as not to give this shade its true gradating
appearance, not only spaces are confounded, but round things appear
flat, and flat ones round.

[13] See p. 17. The two converging lines from the ship, to the point C,
under fig. 47, plate I.

[Illustration: Fig. 94]

But although the retiring shade hath this property, when seen with
converging lines, yet if it describes no particular form, as none
of those do in fig. 94, on top of plate II, it can only appear as a
flat-pencil'd shade; but being inclosed within some known boundary or
out-line, such as may signify a wall, a road, a globe, or any other
form in perspective where the parts retire, it will then shew its
retiring quality: as for example, the retiring shade on the floor, in
plate II, which gradates from the dog's feet to those of the dancer's,
shews, that by this means a level appearance is given to the ground:
so when a cube is put into true perspective on paper, with lines only,
which do but barely hint the directions every face of it is meant to
take, these shades make them seem to retire just as the perspective
lines direct; thus mutually compleating the idea of those recessions
which neither of them alone could do.

[Illustration: gradated shade]

Moreover, the out-line of a globe is but a circle on the paper; yet,
according to the manner of filling up the space within it, with this
shade, it may be made to appear either flat, globular, or concave, in
any of its positions with the eye; and as each manner of filling up the
circle for those purposes must be very different, it evidently shews
the necessity of distinguishing this shade into as many species or
kinds, as there are classes or species of lines, with which they may
have a correspondence.

In doing which, it will be found, that, by their correspondency with,
and conformity to objects, either composed of straight, curved, waving,
or serpentine lines, they of course take such appearances of variety as
are adequate to the variety made by those lines; and by this conformity
of shades we have the same ideas of any of the objects composed of
the above lines in their front aspects, as we have of them by their
profiles; which otherwise could not be without feeling them.

Now instead of giving engraved examples of each species of shade, as I
have done of lines, I have found that they may be more satisfactorily
pointed out and described by having recourse to the life.

But in order to the better and more precisely fixing upon what may be
there seen, as the distinct species, of which all the shades of the
retiring kind in nature partake, in some degree or other, the following
scheme is offered, and intended as an additional means of making such
simple impressions in the mind, as may be thought adequate to the four
species of lines described in Chapter VII. Wherein we are to suppose
imperceptible degrees of shade gradating from one figure to another.

The first species to be represented by, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
the second by, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
and the third by, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
gradating from the dots underneath, repeated either way.

As the first species varies or gradates but one way, it is therefore
least ornamental, and equal only to straight lines.

The second gradating contrary ways, doubling the others variety, is
consequently twice as pleasing, and thereby equal to curved lines.

The third species gradating doubly contrary ways, is thereby still
more pleasing in proportion to that quadruple variety which makes it
become capable of conveying to the mind an equivalent in shade, which
expresses the beauty of the waving line, when it cannot be seen as a
line.

The retiring shade, adequate to the serpentine line, now should follow;
but as the line itself could not be expressed on paper, without the
figure of a cone [Fig. 26 p. I], so neither can this shade be described
without the assistance of a proper form, and therefore must be deferred
a little longer.

[Illustration: Fig. 26]

When only the ornamental quality of shades is spoken of, for the sake
of distinguishing them from retiring shades, let them be considered as
pencilings only; whence another advantage will arise, which is, that
then all the intervening mixtures, with their degrees of beauty between
each species, may be as easily conceived, as those have been between
each class of lines.

And now let us have recourse to the experiments in life, for such
examples as may explain the retiring power of each species; since, as
has been before observed, they must be considered together with their
proper forms, or else their properties cannot be well distinguished.

All the degrees of obliquity that planes, or flat surfaces are capable
of moving into, have their appearances of recession perfected by the
first species of retiring shades, which may evidently be seen by
setting opposite a door, as it is opening outwards from the eye, and
fronting one light.

But it will be proper to premise, that when it is quite shut, and
flat or parallel to the eye and window, it will have only a penciling
shade gradating upon it, and spreading all around from the middle, but
which will not have the power of giving the idea of recession any way,
as when it opens, and the lines run in perspective to a point; because
the square figure or parallel lines of the door, do not correspond with
such shade; but let a door be circular in the same situation, and all
without side, or round about it, painted of any other colour, to make
its figure more distinctly seen, and it will immediately appear concave
like a bason, the shade continually retiring; because this circular
species of shade would then be accompanied by its corresponding form, a
circle[14].

[14] Note, if the light were to come in at a very little hole not far
from the door, so as to make the gradation sudden and strong, like what
may be made with a small candle held near a wall or a wainscot, the
bason would appear the deeper for it.

Note also, that when planes are seen parallel to the eye in open
day-light, they have scarce any round gradating or penciling shade
at all, but appear merely as uniform prime tints, because the rays
of light are equally diffused upon them. Nevertheless, give them but
obliquity, they will more or less exhibit the retiring shade.

But to return; we observ'd that all the degrees of obliquity in the
moving of planes or flat surfaces, have the appearances of their
recession perfected to the eye by the first species of retiring shade.
For example, then; when the door opens, and goes from its parallel
situation with the eye, the shade last spoken of, may be observed to
alter and change its round gradating appearance, into that of gradating
one way only; as when a standing water takes a current upon the least
power given it to descend.

Note, if the light should come in at the door-way, instead of the
window, the gradation then would be reversed but still the effect of
recession would be just the same, as this shade ever complies with the
perspective lines.

In the next place, let us observe the _ovolo_, or quarter-round in
a cornice, fronting the eye in like manner, by which may be seen an
example of the second species; where, on its most projecting part, a
line of light is seen, from whence these shades retire contrary ways,
by which the curvature is understood.

And, perhaps, in the very same cornice may be seen an example of the
third species, in that ornamental member called by the architects _cyma
recta_, or talon, which indeed is no more than a larger sort of waving
or ogee moulding; wherein, by the convex parts gently gliding into the
concave, you may see four contrasted gradating shades, shewing so many
varied recessions from the eye; by which we are made as sensible of its
waving form as if we saw the profile out-line of some corner of it,
where it is miter'd, as the joiners term it. Note, when these objects
have a little gloss on them these appearances are most distinct.

Lastly, the serpentine shade may be seen (light and situation as
before) by the help of the following figure, as thus; imagine the horn,
figure 57, plate II, to be of so soft a nature, that with the fingers
only, it might be pressed into any shape; then beginning gently from
the middle of the dotted line, but pressing harder and harder all the
way up the lesser end, by such pressure there would be as much concave
above, as would remain convex below, which would bring it equal in
variety or beauty to the ogee moulding; but after this, by giving the
whole a twist, like figure 58, these shades must unavoidably change
their appearances, and in some measure, twist about as the concave and
convex parts are twisted, and consequently thereby add that variety,
which of course will give this species of shade, as much the preference
to the foregoing, as forms composed of serpentine lines have, to those
composed only of the waving. See Chapter IX and Chapter X.

[Illustration: Figs. 57 and 58]

I should not have given my reader the trouble of compleating, by the
help of his imagination, the foregoing figure, but as it may contribute
to the more ready and particular conception of that intricate variety
which twisted figures give to this species of shade, and to facilitate
his understanding the cause of its beauty, wherever it may be seen on
surfaces of ornament, when it will be found no where more conspicuous
than in a fine face, as will be seen upon further enquiry.

The dotted line [Fig. 97 B p. I], which begins from the concave part,
under the arch of the brow, near the nose, and from thence winding
down by the corner of the eye, and there turning obliquely with the
round of the cheek, shews the course of that twist of shades in a face,
which was before described by the horn; and which may be most perfectly
seen in the life, or in a marble busto, together with the following
additional circumstances still remaining to be described.

[Illustration: Fig. 97]

As a face is for the most part round, it is therefore apt to receive
reflected light on its shadowy side[15], which not only adds more
beauty by another pleasing tender gradation, but also serves to
distinguish the roundness of the cheeks, &c. from such parts as sink
and fall in: because concavities do not admit of reflections, as convex
forms do[16].

[15] Note, though I have advised the observing objects by a front
light, for the sake of the better distinguishing our four fundamental
species of shades, yet objects in general are more advantagiously,
and agreeably seen by light coming side-ways upon them, and therefore
generally chose in paintings; as it gives an additional reflected
softness, not unlike the gentle tone of an echo in music.

[16] As an instance that convex and concave would appear the same, if
the former were to have no reflection thrown upon, observe the ovolo
and cavetto, or channel, in a cornice, placed near together, and seen
by a front light, when they will each of them, by turns, appear either
concave, or convex, as fancy shall direct.

I have now only to add, that as before observed, Chapter IV, page 23,
that the oval hath a noble simplicity in it, more equal to its variety
than any other object in nature; and of which the general form of a
face is composed; therefore, from what has been now shewn, the general
gradation-shade belonging to it, must consequently be adequate thereto,
and which evidently gives a delicate softness to the whole composition
of a face; insomuch that every little dent, crack, or scratch, the
form receives, its shadows also suffer with it, and help to shew the
blemish. Even the least roughness interrupts and damages that soft
gradating play of shades which fall upon it. Mr. Dryden, describing the
light and shades of a face, in his epistle to Sir Godfrey Kneller the
portrait painter, seems, by the penetration of his incomparable genius,
to have understood that language in the works of nature, which the
latter, by means of an exact eye and a strict obeying hand, could only
faithfully transcribe; when he says,

    Where light to shades descending, plays, not strives,
    Dies by degrees, and by degrees revives.




