CHAPTER XV.

_Of the FACE_.


Having thus spoken briefly of light, shade, and colour, we now return
to our lineal account of form, as proposed (page 91) with regard to
the face. It is an observation, that, out of the great number of faces
that have been form'd since the creation of the world, no two have
been so exactly alike, but that the usual and common discernment of
the eye would discover a difference between them: therefore it is not
unreasonable to suppose, that this discernment is still capable of
further improvements by instructions from a methodical enquiry; which
the ingenious Mr. Richardson, in his treatise on painting, terms _the
art of seeing_.

[Illustration: Fig. 97]

1. I shall begin with a description of such lines as compose the
features of a face of the highest taste, and the reverse. See fig. [97,
B p. I], taken from an antique head, which stands in the first rank of
estimation: in proof of this, Raphael Urbin, and other great painters
and sculptors, have imitated it for the characters of their heroes
and other great men; and the old man's head, fig. [98, L p. I] was
model'd in clay, by Fiamingo (and not inferior in its taste of lines,
to the best antique) for the use of Andrea Sacchi, after which model he
painted all the heads in his famous picture of St. Romoaldo's dream;
and this picture hath the reputation of being one of the best pictures
in the world[21].

[21] Note, I must refer the reader to the casts of both these pieces
of sculpture, which are to be found in the hands of the curious;
because it is impossible to express all that I intend, with sufficient
accuracy, in a print of this size, whatever pains might have been taken
with it; or indeed in any print were it ever so large.

[Illustration: Fig. 98]

These examples are here chosen to exemplify and confirm the force
of serpentine lines in a face; and let it also be observed, that in
these master-pieces of art, all the parts are otherwise consistent
with the rules heretofore laid down: I shall therefore only shew the
effects and use of the line of beauty. One way of proving in what
manner the serpentine line appears to operate in this respect, may be
by pressing several pieces of wire close up and down the different
parts of the face and features of those casts; which wires will all
come off so many serpentine lines, as is partly marked in figure 97, by
the dotted lines. The beard and hair of the head, fig. 98, being a set
of loose lines naturally, and therefore disposable at the painter's or
sculptor's pleasure, are remarkably composed in this head of nothing
else but a varied play of serpentine lines, twisting together in a
flame-like manner.

But as imperfections are easier to be imitated than perfections, we
shall now have it in our power to explain the latter more fully; by
shewing the reverse in several degrees, down to the most contemptible
meanness that lines can be form'd into.

[Illustration: Figs. 99-105]

Figure 99, is the first degree of deviation from figure 97; where the
lines are made straighter, and reduced in quantity; deviating still
more in figure 100, more yet in figure 101, and yet more visibly in
102; figure 103, still more so; figure 104 is totally divested of all
lines of elegance, like a barber's block; and 105 is composed merely
of such plain lines as children make, when of themselves they begin to
imitate in drawing a human face. It is evident, the inimitable Butler
was sensible of the mean and ridiculous effect of such kind of lines,
by the description he gives of the shape of Hudibras's beard, fig. [106
L p. I],

    In cut and dye so like a tile,
    A sudden view it would beguile.

[Illustration: Fig. 106]

2. With regard to character and expression; we have daily many
instances which confirm the common received opinion, that the face is
the index of the mind; and this maxim is so rooted in us, we can scarce
help (if our attention is a little raised) forming some particular
conception of the person's mind whose face we are observing, even
before we receive information by any other means. How often is it
said, on the slightest view, that such a one looks like a good-natur'd
man, that he hath an honest open countenance, or looks like a cunning
rogue; a man of sense, or a fool, &c. And how are our eyes riveted
to the aspects of kings and heroes, murderers and saints; and as we
contemplate their deeds, seldom fail making application to their looks.
It is reasonable to believe that aspect to be a true and legible
representation of the mind, which gives everyone the same idea at first
sight; and is afterwards confirm'd in fact: for instance, all concur in
the same opinion, at first sight, of a down-right idiot.

There is but little to be seen by childrens faces, more than that
they are heavy or lively; and scarcely that unless they are in motion.
Very handsom faces of almost any age, will hide a foolish or a wicked
mind till they betray themselves by their actions or their words: yet
the frequent aukward movements of the muscles of the fool's face, tho'
ever so handsom, is apt in time to leave such traces up and down it,
as will distinguish a defect of mind upon examination: but the bad
man, if he be a hypocrite, may so manage his muscles, by teaching them
to contradict his heart, that little of his mind can be gather'd from
his countenance, so that the character of an hypocrite is entirely out
of the power of the pencil, without some adjoining circumstance to
discover him, as smiling and stabbing at the same time, or the like.

It is by the natural and unaffected movements of the muscles, caused
by the passions of the mind, that every man's character would in some
measure be written in his face, by the time he arrives at forty years
of age, were it not for certain accidents which often, tho' not always
prevent it. For the ill-natur'd man, by frequently frowning, and
pouting out the muscles of his mouth, doth in time bring those parts to
a constant state of the appearance of ill-nature, which might have been
prevented by the constant affectation of a smile; and so of the other
passions: tho' there are some that do not affect the muscles at all
simply of themselves, as love and hope.

But least I should be thought to lay too great a stress on outward
shew, like a physiognomist, take this with you, that it is acknowledg'd
there are so many different causes which produce the same kind of
movements and appearances of the features, and so many thwartings by
accidental shapes in the make of faces, that the old adage, fronti
nulla fides, will ever stand its ground upon the whole; and for very
wise reasons nature hath thought fit it should. But, on the other
hand, as in many particular cases, we receive information from the
expressions of the countenance, what follows is meant to give a lineal
description of the language written therein.

It may not be amiss just to look over the passions of the mind, from
tranquillity to extreme despair; as they are in order described in the
common drawing-book, called, Le Brun's passions of the mind; selected
from that great master's works for the use of learners; where you may
have a compendious view of all the common expressions at once. And
altho' these are but imperfect copies, they will answer our purpose in
this place better than any other thing I can refer you to; because the
passions are there ranged in succession, and distinctly marked with
lines only, the shadows being omitted.

Some features are formed so as to make this or that expression
of a passion more or less legible; for example, the little narrow
chinese eye suits a loving or laughing expression best, as a large
full eye doth those of fierceness and astonishment; and round-rising
muscles will appear with some degree of chearfulness even in sorrow:
the features thus suiting with the expressions that have been often
repeated in the face, at length mark it with such lines as sufficiently
distinguish the character of the mind.

The ancients in their lowest characters have shewn as much judgment,
and as great a degree of taste in the management and twisting of the
lines of them, as in their statues of a sublimer kind; in the former
varying only from the precise line of grace in some parts where the
character or action required it. The dying gladiator and the dancing
fawn, the former a slave, the latter a wild clown, are sculptored in
as high a taste of lines as the Antinous or the Apollo; with this
difference, that the precise line of grace abounds more in the two
last: notwithstanding which it is generally allow'd there is equal
merit in the former, as there is near as much judgment required for
the execution of them. Human nature can hardly be represented more
debased than in the character of the Silenus, fig. [107 p. I], where
the bulging-line figure 49, No. 7, runs through all the features of the
face, as well as the other parts of his swinish body: whereas in the
satyr of the wood, tho' the ancients have joined the brute with the
man, we still see preserved an elegant display of serpentine lines,
that make it a graceful figure.

[Illustration: Figs. 107 and 49]

Indeed the works of art have need of the whole advantage of this line
to make up for its other deficiencies: for tho' in nature's works the
line of beauty is often neglected, or mixt with plain lines, yet so
far are they from being defective on this account, that by this means
there is exhibited that infinite variety of human forms which always
distinguishes the hand of nature from the limited and insufficient
one of art; and as thus she for the sake of variety upon the whole,
deviates sometimes into plain and inelegant lines, if the poor artist
is but able now and then to correct and give a better taste to some
particular part of what he imitates, by having learnt so to do from
her more perfect works, or copying from those that have, ten to one
he grows vain upon it, and fancies himself a nature-mender; not
considering, that even in these, the meanest of her works, she is never
wholly destitute of such lines of beauty and other delicacies, as are
not only beyond his narrow reach, but are seen wanting even in the most
celebrated attempts to rival her. But to return,

As to what we call plain lines, there is this remarkable effect
constantly produced by them, that being more or less conspicuous in any
kind of character or expression of the face, they bring along with them
certain degrees of a foolish or ridiculous aspect.

It is the inelegance of these lines which more properly belonging to
inanimate bodies, and being seen where lines of more beauty and taste
are expected, that renders the face silly and ridiculous. See Chapter
VI, p. 31.

Children in infancy have movements in the muscles of their faces
peculiar to their age, as an uninformed and unmeaning stare, an open
mouth, and simple grin: all which expressions are chiefly formed of
plain curves, and these movements and expressions ideots are apt to
retain; so that in time they mark their faces with these uncouth lines;
and when the lines coincide and agree with the natural forms of the
features, it becomes a more apparent and confirmed character of an
ideot. These plain shapes last mentioned, sometimes happen to people of
the best sense, to some when the features are at rest, to others when
they are put into motion; which a variety of constant regular movements
proceeding from a good understanding, and fashioned by a genteel
education, will often by degrees correct into lines of more elegance.

That particular expression likewise of the face, or movement of a
feature which becomes one person, shall be disagreeable in another,
just as such expressions or turns chance to fall in with lines of
beauty, or the reverse; for this reason there are pretty frowns and
disagreeable smiles: the lines that form a pleasing smile about the
corners of the mouth have gentle windings, as fig. [108 L p. II],
but lose their beauty in the full laugh, as fig. [109 L p. II], the
expression of excessive laughter, oftener than any other, gives a
sensible face a silly or disagreeable look, as it is apt to form
regular plain lines about the mouth, like a parenthesis, which
sometimes appears like crying; as, on the contrary, I remember to
have seen a beggar who had clouted up his head very artfully, and
whose visage was thin and pale enough to excite pity, but his features
were otherwise so unfortunately form'd for his purpose, that what he
intended for a grin of pain and misery, was rather a joyous laugh.

[Illustration: Figs. 108 and 109]

It is strange that nature hath afforded us so many lines and shapes to
indicate the deficiencies and blemishes of the mind, whilst there are
none at all that point out the perfections of it beyond the appearance
of common sense and placidity. Deportment, words, and actions, must
speak the good, the wise, the witty, the humane, the generous, the
merciful, and the brave. Nor are gravity and solemn looks always signs
of wisdom: the mind much occupied with trifles will occasion as grave
and sagacious an aspect, as if it were charged with matters of the
utmost moment; the balance-master's attention to a single point, in
order to preserve his balance, may look as wise at that time as the
greatest philosopher in the depth of his studies. All that the ancient
sculptors could do, notwithstanding their enthusiastic endeavours to
raise the characters of their deities to aspects of sagacity above
human, was to give them features of beauty. Their god of wisdom
hath no more in his look than a handsom manliness; the Jupiter is
carried somewhat higher, by giving it a little more severity than
the Apollo, by a larger prominency of brow gently bending in seeming
thoughtfulness, with an ample beard, which being added to the noble
quantity of its other lines, invests that capital piece of sculpture
with uncommon dignity, which, in the mysterious language of a profound
connoisseur, is stiled a divine idea, inconceivably great, and above
nature.

3dly and lastly, I shall shew in what manner the lines of the face
alter from infancy upwards, and specify the different ages. We are now
to pay most attention to _simplicity_, as the difference of ages we are
about to speak of, turn chiefly upon the use made of this principle in
a greater or less degree, in the form of the lines.

From infancy till the body has done growing, the contents both of the
body and the face, and every part of their surface, are daily changing
into more variety, till they obtain a certain medium (see page 78 on
proportion) from which medium, as fig. [113 B p. II], if we return back
to infancy, we shall see the variety decreasing, till by degrees that
simplicity in the form, which gave variety its due limits, deviates
into sameness; so that all the parts of the face may be circumscribed
in several circles, as fig. [116 L p. II].

[Illustration: Figs. 113 and 116]

But there is another very extraordinary circumstance, (perhaps never
taken notice of before in this light) which nature hath given us to
distinguish one age from another by; which is, that tho' every feature
grows larger and longer, till the whole person has done growing, the
sight of the eye still keeps its original size; I mean the pupil, with
its iris or ring; for the diameter of this circle continues still the
same, and so becomes a fixt measure by which we, as it were, insensibly
compare the daily perceiv'd growings of the other parts of the face,
and thereby determine a young person's age. You may sometimes find this
part of the eye in a new-born infant, full as large as in a man of six
foot; nay, sometimes larger, see fig. [110 B p. II], [114 B p. II] and
[115 T p. I] which represents three different sizes of the pupil of the
eye; the least, was exactly taken from the eye of a large-featur'd man,
aged 105, the biggest, from one of twenty, who had this part larger
than ordinary, and the other is the common size. If this part of the
eye in the pictures of Charles II. and James II. painted by Vandyke at
Kensington, were to be measured with a pair of compasses, and compared
with their pictures painted by Lilly when they were men, the diameters
would be found in both pictures respectively the same.

[Illustration: Figs. 110, 114 and 115]

In infancy the faces of boys and girls have no visible difference, but
as they grow up the features of the boy get the start, and grow faster
in proportion to the ring of the eye, than those of the girl, which
shews the distinction of the sex in the face. Boys who have larger
features than ordinary, in proportion to the rings of their eyes, are
what we call manly-featured children; as those who have the contrary,
look more childish and younger than they really are. It is this
proportion of the features with the eyes, that makes women, when they
are dressed in mens-cloaths, look so young and boyish: but as nature
doth not always stick close to these particulars, we may be mistaken
both in sexes and ages.

By these obvious appearances, and the differences of the whole size,
we easily judge of ages till twenty, but not with such certainty
afterwards; for the alterations from that age are of a different kind,
subject to other changes by growing fatter or leaner, which it is well
known, often give a different turn to the look of the person, with
regard to his age.

The hair of the head, which encompasses a face as a frame doth a
picture, and contrasts with its uniform colour, the variegated inclosed
composition, adding more or less beauty thereto, according as it is
disposed by the rules of art, is another indication of advanced age.

What remains to be said on the different appearances of ages, being
less pleasing than what has gone before, shall be described with more
brevity. In the age from twenty to thirty, barring accidents, there
appears but little change, either in the colours or the lines of the
face; for tho' the bloom tints may go off a little, yet on the other
hand, the make of the features often attain a sort of settled firmness
in them, aided by an air of acquired sensibility; which makes ample
amends for that loss, and keeps beauty till thirty pretty much upon a
par; after this time, as the alterations grow more and more visible,
we perceive the sweet simplicity of many rounding parts of the face,
begin to break into dented shapes, with more sudden turns about the
muscles, occasioned by their many repeated movements; as also by
dividing the broad parts, and thereby taking off the large sweeps of
the serpentine lines; the shades of beauty also consequently suffering
in their softnesses. Something of what is here meant between the two
ages of thirty and fifty, see in figures [117 and 118 B p. II], and
what further havock time continues to make after the age of fifty, is
too remarkable to need describing: the strokes and cuts he then lays on
are plain enough; however, in spite of all his malice, those lineaments
that have once been elegant, retain their flowing turns in venerable
age, leaving to the last a comely piece of ruins.

[Illustration: Figs. 117 and 118]




