CHAPTER VII.

_Of LINES_.


It may be remember'd that in the introduction, the reader is desired to
consider the surfaces of objects as so many shells of lines, closely
connected together, which idea of them it will now be proper to call to
mind, for the better comprehending not only this, but all the following
chapters on composition.

The constant use made of lines by mathematicians, as well as painters,
in describing things upon paper, hath establish'd a conception of them,
as if actually existing on the real forms themselves. This likewise
we suppose, and shall set out with saying in general--That _the
straight line_, and _the circular line_, together with their different
combinations, and variations, &c. bound, and circumscribe all visible
objects whatsoever, thereby producing such endless variety of forms, as
lays us under the necessity of dividing, and distinguishing them into
general classes; leaving the intervening mixtures of appearances to the
reader's own farther observation.

First, [Fig. 23 T p. I] objects composed of straight lines only, as
the cube, or of circular lines, as the sphere, or of both together, as
cylinders and cones, &c.

[Illustration: Fig. 23]

Secondly, [Fig. 24 T p. I] those composed of straight lines, circular
lines, and of lines partly straight, and partly circular, as the
capitals of columns, and vases, &c.

[Illustration: Fig. 24]

Thirdly, [Fig. 25 T p. I] those composed of all the former together
with an addition of the waving line, which is a line more productive of
beauty than any of the former, as in flowers, and other forms of the
ornamental kind: for which reason we shall call it the line of beauty.

[Illustration: Fig. 25]

Fourthly, [Fig. 26 T p. I] those composed of all the former together
with the serpentine line, as the human form, which line hath the power
of super-adding grace to beauty. Note, forms of most grace have least
of the straight line in them.

[Illustration: Fig. 26]

It is to be observed, that straight lines vary only in length, and
therefore are least ornamental.

That curved lines as they can be varied in their degrees of curvature
as well as in their lengths, begin on that account to be ornamental.

That straight and curv'd lines join'd, being a compound line, vary more
than curves alone, and so become somewhat more ornamental.

That the waving line, or line of beauty, varying still more, being
composed of two curves contrasted, becomes still more ornamental and
pleasing, insomuch that the hand takes a lively movement in making it
with pen or pencil.

And that the serpentine line, by its waving and winding at the same
time different ways, leads the eye in a pleasing manner along the
continuity of its variety, if I may be allowed the expression; and
which by its twisting so many different ways, may be said to inclose
(tho' but a single line) varied contents; and therefore all its
variety cannot be express'd on paper by one continued line, without
the assistance of the imagination, or the help of a figure; see [Fig.
26 T p. I] where that sort of proportion'd, winding line, which will
hereafter be call'd the precise serpentine line, or _line of grace_,
is represented by a fine wire, properly twisted round the elegant and
varied figure of a cone.




CHAPTER VIII.

_Of what sort of PARTS, and how PLEASING FORMS are composed_.


Thus far having endeavoured to open as large an idea as possible of the
power of variety, by having partly shewn that those lines which have
most variety in themselves, contribute most towards the production of
beauty; we will next shew how lines may be put together, so as to make
pleasing figures or compositions.

In order to be as clear as possible, we will give a few examples of
the most familiar and easy sort, and let them serve as a clue to be
pursued in the imagination: I say in the imagination chiefly, for the
following method is not meant always to be put in practice, or follow'd
in every case, for indeed that could hardly be, and in some it would be
ridiculously losing time if it could----Yet there may be cases where
it may be necessary to follow this method minutely; as for example, in
architecture.

I am thoroughly convinc'd in myself, however it may startle some, that
a completely new and harmonious order of architecture in all its parts,
might be produced by the following method of composing, but hardly with
certainty without it; and this I am the more apt to believe, as upon
the strictest examination, those four orders of the ancients, which are
so well established for beauty and true proportion, perfectly agree
with the scheme we shall now lay down.

This way of composing pleasing forms, is to be accomplished by making
choice of variety of lines, as to their shapes and dimensions; and then
again by varying their situations with each other, by all the different
ways that can be conceived: and at the same time (if a solid figure be
the subject of the composition) the contents or space that is to be
inclosed within those lines, must be duly consider'd and vary'd too, as
much as possible, with propriety. In a word, it may be said, the art of
composing well is the art of varying well. It is not expected that this
should at first be perfectly comprehended, yet I believe it will be
made sufficiently clear by the help of the examples following.

[Illustration: Fig. 29]

The figure [Fig. 29 T p. I], represents the simple and pleasing figure
of a bell; this shell, as we may call it, is composed of waving lines,
encompassing, or bounding within it, the varied space marked with
dotted lines: here you see the variety of the space within is equal to
the beauty of its form without, and if the space, or contents, were to
be more varied, the outward form would have still more beauty.

[Illustration: Figs. 30, 31 and 32]

As a proof, see a composition of more parts, and a way by which those
parts may be put together by a certain method of varying: i. e. how the
one half of the socket of the candlestick A [Fig. 30 T p. I], may be
varied as the other half B. Let a convenient and fit height be first
given for a candlestick, as [Fig. 31 T p. I], then let the necessary
size of the socket be determined, as at (a) [Fig. 32] after which,
in order to give it a better form, let every _distance_ or length of
divisions differ from the length of the socket, as also vary in their
distances from each other, as is seen by the points on the line under
the socket (a); that is let any two points, _signifying distance_, be
plac'd farthest from any other two near points, observing always that
there should be one distance or part larger than all the rest; and you
will readily see that variety could not be so complete without it.--In
like manner, let the horizontal distances (always keeping within the
bounds of fitness) be varied both as to distances and situations, as
on the opposite side of the same figure (b); then unite and join all
the several distances into a complete shell, by applying several parts
of curves and straight lines; varying them also by making them of
different sizes, as (c): and apply them as at (d) in the same figure,
and you have the candlestick [Fig. 33 T p. I], and with still more
variations on the other side. If you divide the candlestick into many
more parts, it will appear crouded, as [Fig. 34 T p. I] it will want
distinctness of form on a near view, and lose the effect of variety at
a distance: this the eye will easily distinguish on removing pretty far
from it.

[Illustration: Figs. 33 and 34]

Simplicity in composition, or distinctness of parts, is ever to be
attended to, as it is one part of beauty, as has been already said: but
that what I mean by distinctness of parts in this place, may be better
understood, it will be proper to explain it by an example.

When you would compose an object of a great variety of parts, let
several of those parts be distinguish'd by themselves, by their
remarkable difference from the next adjoining, so as to make each of
them, as it were, one well-shap'd quantity or part, as is marked by
the dotted lines in figure [35 T p. I] (these are like what they call
passages in music, and in writing paragraphs) by which means, not only
the whole, but even every part, will be better understood by the eye:
for confusion will hereby be avoided when the object is seen near, and
the shapes will seem well varied, tho' fewer in number, at a distance;
as figure [36 p. I] supposed to be the same as the former, but removed
so far off that the eye loses sight of the smaller members.

[Illustration: Figs. 35 and 36]

The parsley-leaf [Fig. 37 T p. I], in like manner, from whence a
beautiful foliage in ornament was originally taken, is divided into
three distinct passages; which are again divided into other odd
numbers; and this method is observ'd, for the generality, in the leaves
of all plants and flowers, the most simple of which are the trefoil and
cinquefoil.

[Illustration: Fig. 37]

Light and shade, and colours, also must have their distinctness to
make objects completely beautiful: but of these in their proper
places----only I will give you a general idea of what is here meant by
the beauty of distinctness of forms, lights, shades, and colours, by
putting you in mind of the reverse effects in all them together.

Observe the well-composed nosegay how it loses all its distinctness
when it dies; each leaf and flower then shrivels and loses its distinct
shape; and the firm colours fade into a kind of sameness: so that the
whole gradually becomes a confused heap.

If the general parts of objects are preserv'd large at first, they will
always admit of farther enrichments of a small kind, but then they must
be so small as not to confound the general masses or quantities.--thus
you see variety is a check upon itself when overdone, which of course
begets what is call'd a _petit taste_ and a confusion to the eye.

[Illustration: Figs. 38 and 39]

It will not be amiss next to shew what effects an object or two
will have that are put together without, or contrary to these rules
of composing variety. Figure [38 L p. I], is taken from one of those
branches fixt to the sides of common old-fashion'd stove-grates by way
of ornament, wherein you see how the parts have been varied by fancy
only, and yet pretty well: close to which [Fig. 39 L p. I] is another,
with about the like number of parts; but as the shapes, neither are
enough varied as to their contents, nor in their situations with each
other, but one shape follows its exact likeness: it is therefore
a disagreeable and tasteless figure, and for the same reason the
candlestick, fig. [40 T p. I] is still worse, as there is less variety
in it. Nay, it would be better to be quite plain, as figure [41 T p.
I], than with such poor attempts at ornament.

[Illustration: Figs. 40, 41 and 42]

These few examples, well understood, will, I imagine, be sufficient
to put what was said at the beginning of this chapter out of all
doubt, viz. that _the art of composing well_ is no more than the _art
of varying well_; and to shew, that the method which has been here
explain'd, must consequently produce a pleasing proportion amongst
the parts; as well as that all deviations from it will produce the
contrary. Yet to strengthen this latter assertion, let the following
figures, taken from the life, be examin'd by the above rules for
composing, and it will be found that the Indian-fig or torch-thistle,
figure [42 T p. I], as well as all that tribe of uncouth shaped
exotics, have the same reasons for being ugly, as the candlestick, fig.
40; as also that the beauties of the Lily [Fig. 43 T p. I] and the
calcidonian Iris [Fig. 44 T p. I] proceeds from their being composed
with great variety, and that the loss of variety, to a certain degree,
in the imitations of those flowers underneath them (fig. 45 and 46) is
the cause of the meanness of their shapes, tho' they retain enough to
be call'd by the same names.

[Illustration: Figs. 43 and 44]

[Illustration: Figs. 45 and 46]

Hitherto, with regard to composition, little else but forms made up of
straight and curv'd lines have been spoken of, and though these lines
have but little variety in themselves, yet by reason of the great
diversifications that they are capable of in being join'd with one
another; great variety of beauty of the more useful sort is produced
by them, as in necessary utensils and building: but in my opinion,
buildings as I before hinted, might be much more varied than they are,
for after _fitness_ hath been strictly and mechanically complied with,
any additional ornamental members, or parts, may, by the foregoing
rules, be varied with equal elegance; nor can I help thinking, but that
churches, palaces, hospitals, prisons, common houses and summer houses,
might be built more in distinct characters than they are, by contriving
orders suitable to each; whereas were a modern architect to build a
palace in Lapland, or the West-Indies, Paladio must be his guide, nor
would he dare to stir a step without his book.

Have not many gothic buildings a great deal of consistent beauty
in them? perhaps acquired by a series of improvements made from
time to time by the natural persuasion of the eye, which often very
near answers the end of working by principles; and sometimes begets
them. There is at present such a thirst after variety, that even
paltry imitations of Chinese buildings have a kind of vogue, chiefly
on account of their novelty: but not only these, but any other
new-invented characters of building might be regulated by proper
principles. The mere ornaments of buildings, to be sure, at least might
be allow'd a greater latitude than they are at present; as capitals,
frizes, &c. in order to increase the beauty of variety.

Nature, in shells and flowers, &c. affords an infinite choice of
elegant hints for this purpose; as the original of the Corinthian
capital was taken from nothing more, as is said, than some dock-leaves
growing up against a basket. Even a capital composed of the aukward and
confin'd forms of hats and periwigs, as fig. [48 p. I] in a skilful
hand might be made to have some beauty.

[Illustration: Fig. 48]

However, tho' the moderns have not made many additions to the art of
building, with respect to mere beauty or ornament, yet it must be
confess'd, they have carried simplicity, convenience, and neatness of
workmanship, to a very great degree of perfection, particularly in
England; where plain good sense hath prefer'd these more necessary
parts of beauty, which every body can understand, to that richness of
taste which is so much to be seen in other countries, and so often
substituted in their room.

St. Paul's cathedral is one of the noblest instances that can be
produced of the most judicious application of every principle that
has been spoken of. There you may see the utmost variety without
confusion, simplicity without nakedness, richness without taudriness,
distinctness without hardness, and quantity without excess. Whence the
eye is entertain'd throughout with the charming variety of all its
parts together; the noble projecting quantity of a certain number of
them, which presents bold and distinct parts at a distance, when the
lesser parts within them disappear; and the grand few, but remarkably
well-varied parts that continue to please the eye as long as the
object is discernable, are evident proofs of the superior skill of Sir
Christopher Wren, so justly esteem'd the prince of architects.

It will scarcely admit of a dispute, that the outside of this building
is much more perfect than that of St. Peter's at Rome: but the inside,
though as fine and noble, as the space it stands on, and our religion
will allow of, must give way to the splendor, shew, and magnificence
of that of St. Peter's, on account of the sculptures and paintings, as
well as the greater magnitude of the whole, which makes it excel as to
quantity.

There are many other churches of great beauty, the work of the same
architect, which are hid in the heart of the city, whose steeples
and spires are raised higher than ordinary, that they may be seen at
a distance above the other buildings; and the great number of them
dispers'd about the whole city, adorn the prospect of it, and give it
an air of opulence and magnificence: on which account their shapes will
be found to be particularly beautiful. Of these, and perhaps of any in
Europe, St. Mary-le-Bow is the most elegantly varied. St. Bride's in
Fleet-street diminishes sweetly by elegant degrees, but its variations,
tho' very curious when you are near them, not being quite so bold, and
distinct, as those of Bow, it too soon looses variety at a distance.
Some gothic spires are finely and artfully varied, particularly the
famous steeple of Strasburg.

Westminster-Abbey is a good contrast to St. Paul's, with regard to
simplicity and distinctness, the great number of its filligrean
ornaments, and small divided and subdivided parts appear confused
when nigh, and are totally lost at a moderate distance; yet there is
nevertheless such a consistency of parts altogether in a good gothic
taste, and such propriety relative to the gloomy ideas, they were then
calculated to convey, that they have at length acquir'd an establish'd
and distinct character in building. It would be look'd upon as an
impropriety and as a kind of profanation to build places for mirth and
entertainment in the same taste.




