CHAPTER XIII.

_Of COMPOSITION with regard to LIGHT, SHADE and COLOURS_.


Under this head I shall attempt shewing what it is that gives the
appearance of that hollow or vacant space in which all things move so
freely; and in what manner light, shade and colours, mark or point out
the distances of one object from another, and occasion an agreeable
play upon the eye, called by the painters a fine keeping, and pleasing
composition of light and shade. Herein my design is to consider this
matter as a performance of nature _without_, or before the eye; I mean,
as if the objects with their shades, &c. were in fact circumstanced
as they appear, and as the unskill'd in optics take them to be. And
let it be remarked throughout this chapter, that the pleasure arising
from composition, as in a fine landskip, &c. is chiefly owing to the
dispositions and assemblages of light and shades, which are so order'd
by the principles called OPPOSITION, BREADTH and SIMPLICITY, as to
produce a just and distinct perception of the objects before us.

Experience teaches us that the eye may be subdued and forced into
forming and disposing of objects even quite contrary to what it would
naturally see them, by the prejudgment of the mind from the better
authority of feeling, or some other persuasive motive. But surely this
extraordinary perversion of the sight would not have been suffer'd,
did it not tend to great and necessary purposes, in rectifying some
deficiencies which it would otherwise be subject to (tho' we must own
at the same time, that the mind itself may be so imposed upon as to
make the eye see falsely as well as truly) for example, were it not
for this controul over the sight, it is well known, that we should not
only see things double, but upside down, as they are painted upon the
retina, and as each eye has a distinct sight. And then as to distances;
a fly upon a pane of glass is sometimes imagined a crow, or larger
bird afar off, till some circumstance hath rectified the mistake, and
convinced us of its real size and place.

Hence I would infer, that the eye generally gives its assent to such
space and distances as have been first measured by the feeling, or
otherwise calculated in the mind: which measurements and calculations
are equally, if not more, in the power of a blind man, as was fully
experienced by that incomparable mathematician and wonder of his age,
the late professor Sanderson.

By pursuing this observation on the faculties of the mind, an idea
may be formed of the means by which we attain to the perception or
appearance of an immense space surrounding us; which cavity, being
subject to divisions and subdivisions in the mind, is afterwards
fashioned by the limited power of the eye, first into a hemisphere, and
then into the appearance of different distances, which are pictured to
it by means of such dispositions of light and shade as shall next be
described. And these I now desire may be looked upon, but as so many
_marks_ or _types_ set upon these distances, and which are remember'd
and learnt by degrees, and when learnt, are recurred to upon all
occasions.

If permitted then to consider light and shades as _types of
distinction_, they become, as it were, our materials, of which _prime
tints_ are the principal; by these, I mean the fixed and permanent
colours of each object, as the green of trees, &c. which serve the
purposes of separating and relieving the several objects by the
different strengths or shades of them being opposed to each other [Fig.
86 T p. II].

[Illustration: Fig. 86]

The other shades that have been before spoken of, serve and help to
the like purposes when properly opposed; but as in nature they are
continually fleeting and changing their appearances, either by our or
their situations, they sometimes oppose and relieve, and sometimes not,
as for instance; I once observed the tower-part of a steeple so exactly
the colour of a light cloud behind it, that, at the distance I stood,
there was not the least distinction to be made, so that the spire (of a
lead-colour) seemed suspended in the air; but had a cloud of the like
tint with the steeple, supplied the place of the white one, the tower
would then have been relieved and distinct, when the spire would have
been lost to the view.

Nor is it sufficient that objects are of different colours or shades,
to shew their distances from the eye, if one does not in part hide or
lay over the other, as in fig. 86.

[Illustration: Fig. 90]

For as fig. [90 T p. II] the two equal balls, tho' one were black and
the other white, placed on the separate walls, supposed distant from
each other twenty or thirty feet, nevertheless, may seem both to rest
upon one, if the tops of the walls are level with the eye; but when
one ball hides part of the other, as in the same figure, we begin
to apprehend they are upon different walls, which is determin'd by
the perspective[17]: hence you will see the reason, why the steeple
of Bloomsbury-church, in coming from Hampstead, seems to stand upon
Montague-house, tho' it is several hundred yards distant from it.

[17] The knowledge of perspective is no small help to the seeing
objects truly, for which purpose Dr. Brook Taylor's Linear perspective
made easy to those who are unacquainted with geometry, proposed to be
publish'd soon by Mr. Kirby of Ipswich, may be of most service.

Since then the opposition of one prime tint or shade to another,
hath so great a share in marking out the recessions, or distances in
a prospect, by which the eye is led onward step by step, it becomes a
principle of consequence enough to be further discussed, with regard to
the management of it in compositions of nature, as well as art. As to
the management of it, when seen only from one point, the artist hath
the advantage over nature, because such fix'd dispositions of shades as
he hath artfully put together, cannot be displaced by the alteration
of light, for which reason, designs done in two prime tints only, will
sufficiently represent all those recessions, and give a just keeping to
the representation of a prospect, in a print; whereas, the oppositions
in nature, depending, as has been before hinted, on accidental
situations and uncertain incidents, do not always make such pleasing
composition, and would therefore have been very often deficient, had
nature worked in two colours only; for which reason she hath provided
an infinite number of materials, not only by way of prevention, but to
add lustre and beauty to her works.

By an infinite number of materials, I mean colours and shades of
all kinds and degrees; some notion of which variety may be formed by
supposing a piece of white silk by several dippings gradually dyed to
a black; and carrying it in like manner through the prime tints of
yellow, red, and blue; and then again, by making the like progress
through all the mixtures that are to be made of these three original
colours. So that when we survey this infinite and immense variety, it
is no wonder, that, let the light or objects be situated or changed
how they will, oppositions seldom miss; nor that even every incident
of shade should sometimes be so completely disposed as to admit of no
further beauty, as to composition; and from whence the artist hath by
observation taken his principles of imitation, as in the following
respect.

[Illustration: Fig. 89]

Those objects which are intended most to affect the eye, and come
forwardest to the view, must have large, strong, and smart oppositions,
like the fore-ground in fig. [89 p. II], and what are designed to be
thrown further off, must be made still weaker and weaker, as expressed
in figures 86, 92, and 93, which receding in order make a kind of
gradation of oppositions; to which, and all the other circumstances
already described, both for recession, and beauty, nature hath
added what is known by the name of aerial perspective; being that
interposition of air, which throws a general soft retiring tint over
the whole prospect; to be seen in excess at the rising of a fog. All
which again receives still more distinctness, as well as a greater
degree of variety, when the sun shines bright, and casts broad shadows
of one object upon another; which gives the skilful designer such hints
for shewing broad and fine oppositions of shades, as give life and
spirit to his performances.

[Illustration: Figs. 92 and 93]

BREADTH of SHADE is a principle that assists in making distinction
more conspicuous; thus fig. [87 p. I], is better distinguish'd by its
breadth or quantity of shade, and view'd with more ease and pleasure
at any distance, than fig. [88 p. I], which hath many, and these but
narrow shades between the folds. And for one of the noblest instances
of this, let Windsor-castle be viewed at the rising or setting of the
sun.

[Illustration: Figs. 87 and 88]

Let breadth be introduced how it will, it always gives great repose to
the eye; as on the contrary, when lights and shades in a composition
are scattered about in little spots, the eye is constantly disturbed,
and the mind is uneasy, especially if you are eager to understand every
object in the composition, as it is painful to the ear when any one is
anxious to know what is said in company, where many are talking at the
same time.

SIMPLICITY (which I am last to speak of) in the disposition of a great
variety, is best accomplished by following nature's constant rule,
of dividing composition into three or five parts, or parcels, see
