CHAPTER XVI.

_Of ATTITUDE_.


Such dispositions of the body and limbs as appear most graceful when
seen at rest, depend upon gentle winding contrasts, mostly govern'd
by the precise serpentine line, which in attitudes of authority, are
more extended and spreading than ordinary, but reduced somewhat below
the medium of grace, in those of negligence and ease: and as much
exaggerated in insolent and proud carriage, or in distortions of pain
(see figure 9, plate I) as lessen'd and contracted into plain and
parallel lines, to express meanness, aukwardness, and submission.

[Illustration: Fig. 9]

The general idea of an action, as well as of an attitude, may be given
with a pencil in very few lines. It is easy to conceive that the
attitude of a person upon the cross, may be fully signified by the two
straight lines of the cross; so the extended manner of St. Andrew's
crucifixion is wholly understood by the X-like cross.

Thus, as two or three lines at first are sufficient to shew the
intention of an attitude, I will take this opportunity of presenting
my reader (who may have been at the trouble of following me thus far)
with the sketch of a country-dance, in the manner I began to set out
the design; in order to shew how few lines are necessary to express the
first thoughts, as to different attitudes; see fig. [71 T p. II], which
describe in some measure, the several figures and actions, mostly of
the ridiculous kind, that are represented in the chief part of plate II.

[Illustration: Fig. 71]

The most amiable person may deform his general appearance by throwing
his body and limbs into plain lines, but such lines appear still in
a more disagreeable light in people of a particular make, I have
therefore chose such figures as I thought would agree best with my
first score of lines, fig. 71.

[Illustration: The dancers]

The two parts of curves next to 71, served for the figures of the old
woman and her partner at the farther end of the room. The curve and
two straight lines at right angles, gave the hint for the fat man's
sprawling posture. I next resolved to keep a figure within the bounds
of a circle, which produced the upper part of the fat woman, between
the fat man and the aukward one in the bag wig, for whom I had made
a sort of an X. The prim lady, his partner, in the riding-habit, by
pecking back her elbows, as they call it, from the waste upwards, made
a tolerable D, with a straight line under it, to signify the scanty
stiffness of her peticoat; and a Z stood for the angular position the
body makes with the legs and thighs of the affected fellow in the
tye-wig; the upper part of his plump partner was confin'd to an O, and
this chang'd into a P, served as a hint for the straight lines behind.
The uniform diamond of a card, was filled up by the flying dress, &c.
of the little capering figure in the spencer-wig; whilst a double L
mark'd the parallel position of his poking partner's hands and arms:
and lastly, the two waving lines were drawn for the more genteel turns
of the two figures at the hither end.

The best representation in a picture, of even the most elegant dancing,
as every figure is rather a suspended action in it than an attitude,
must be always somewhat unnatural and ridiculous; for were it possible
in a real dance to fix every person at one instant of time, as in a
picture, not one in twenty would appear to be graceful, tho' each were
ever so much so in their movements; nor could the figure of the dance
itself be at all understood.

[Illustration: The statues and pictures]

The dancing-room is also ornamented purposely with such statues and
pictures as may serve to a farther illustration. Henry viii. fig. [72
p. II], makes a perfect X with his legs and arms; and the position of
Charles the first, fig. [51 p. II], is composed of less-varied lines
than the statue of Edward the sixth, fig. [73 p. II]; and the medal
over his head is in the like kind of lines; but that over Q. Elizabeth,
as well as her figure, is in the contrary; so are also the two other
wooden figures at the end. Likewise the comical posture of astonishment
(expressed by following the direction of one plain curve, as the dotted
line in a french print of Sancho, where Don Quixote demolishes the
puppet shew, fig. [75 R p. II])is a good contrast to the effect of the
serpentine lines in the fine turn of the Samaritan woman, fig. [74 L p.
II], taken from one of the best pictures Annibal Carrache ever painted.

[Illustration: Figs. 75 and 74]




CHAPTER XVII.

_Of ACTION_.


To the amazing variety of forms made still infinitely more various in
appearance by light, shade and colour, nature hath added another way
of increasing that variety, still more to enhance the value of all her
compositions. This is accomplished by means of action; the fullest
display of which is put into the power of the human species, and which
is equally subject to the same principles with regard to the effects of
beauty, or the reverse, as govern all the former compositions; as is
partly seen in Chapter XI on proportion. My business here shall be, in
as concise a manner as possible, to particularise the application of
these principles to the movement of the body, and therewith finish this
_system_ of variety in forms and actions.

There is no one but would wish to have it in his power to be genteel
and graceful in the carriage of his person, could it be attained with
little trouble and expence of time. The usual methods relied on for
this purpose among well-bred people, takes up a considerable part of
their time: nay even those of the first rank have no other resource in
these matters, than to dancing-masters, and fencing-masters: dancing
and fencing are undoubtedly proper, and very necessary accomplishments;
yet are they frequently very imperfect in bringing about the business
of graceful deportment. For altho' the muscles of the body may
attain a pliancy by these exercises, and the limbs, by the elegant
movement in dancing, acquire a facility in moving gracefully, yet for
want of knowing the meaning of every grace, and whereon it depends,
affectations and misapplications often follow.

Action is a sort of language which perhaps one time or other, may
come to be taught by a kind of grammar-rules; but, at present, is only
got by rote and imitation: and contrary to most other copyings or
imitations, people of rank and fortune generally excel their originals,
the dancing-masters, in easy behaviour and unaffected grace; as a sense
of superiority makes them act without constraint; especially when their
persons are well turn'd. If so, what can be more conducive to that
freedom and necessary courage which make acquired grace seem easy and
natural, than the being able to demonstrate _when_ we are actually just
and proper in the least movement we perform; whereas, for want of such
certainty in the mind, if one of the most finish'd gentlemen at court
was to appear as an actor on the public stage, he would find himself
at a loss how to move properly, and be stiff, narrow, and aukward, in
representing even his own character: the uncertainty of being right
would naturally give him some of that restraint which the uneducated
common people generally have when they appear before their betters.

It is known that bodies in motion always describe some line or other
in the air, as the whirling round of a fire-brand apparently makes a
circle, the water-fall part of a curve, the arrow and bullet, by the
swiftness of their motions, nearly a straight line; waving lines are
formed by the pleasing movement of a ship on the waves. Now in order
to obtain a just idea of action at the same time to be judiciously
satisfied of being in the right in what we do, let us begin with
imagining a line formed in the air by any supposed point at the end
of a limb or part that is moved, or made by the whole part, or limb;
or by the whole body together. And that thus much of movements may be
conceived at once is evident, on the least recollection, for whoever
has seen a fine arabian war-horse, unback'd and at liberty, and in a
wanton trot, cannot but remember what a large waving line his rising,
and at the same time pressing forward, cuts through the air; the equal
continuation of which, is varied by his curveting from side to side;
whilst his long mane and tail play about in serpentine movements.

After thus having form'd the idea of all movements being as lines, it
will not be difficult to conceive, that grace in action depends upon
the same principles as have been shewn to produce it in forms.

The next thing that offers itself to our consideration is the force of
_habit_ and custom in action; for a great deal depends thereon.

The peculiar movements of each person, as the gate in walking, are
particularised in such lines as each part describes by the habits they
have contracted. The nature and power of habit may be fully conceived
by the following familiar instance, as the motions of one part of the
body may serve to explain those of the whole.

Observe that whatever habit the fingers get in the use of the pen,
you see exactly delineated to the eye by the shapes of the letters.
Were the movements of every writer's fingers to be precisely the same,
one hand-writing would not be known from another, but as the fingers
naturally fall into, or acquire different habits of moving, every
hand-writing is visibly different. Which movements must tally with
the letters, tho' they are too quick and too small to be as perfectly
traced by the eye; but this shews what nice differences are caused, and
constantly retained by habitual movements.

It may be remark'd, that all useful habitual motions, such as are
readiest to serve the necessary purposes of life, are those made up of
plain lines, i. e. straight and circular lines, which most animals have
in common with mankind, tho' not in so extensive a degree: the monkey
from his make hath it sufficiently in his power to be graceful, but as
reason is required for this purpose, it would be impossible to bring
him to move genteelly.

Though I have said that the ordinary actions of the body are performed
in plain lines, I mean only comparatively so with those of studied
movements in the serpentine line, for as all our muscles are ever ready
to act, when one part is moved, (as an hand, or arm, by its proper
movers, for raising up or drawing down) the adjacent muscles act in
some degree in correspondence with them: therefore our most common
movements are but seldom performed in such absolutely mean lines, as
those of jointed dolls and puppets. A man must have a good deal of
practice to be able to mimic such very straight or round motions, which
being incompatible with the human form, are therefore ridiculous.

Let it be observed, that graceful movements in serpentine lines,
are used but occasionally, and rather at times of leisure, than
constantly applied to every action we make. The whole business of life
may be carried on without them, they being properly speaking, only
the ornamental part of gesture; and therefore not being naturally
familiarised by necessity, must be acquired by precept or imitation,
and reduced to habit by frequent repetitions. _Precept_ is the means I
should recommend as the most expeditious and effectual way. But before
we proceed to the method I have to propose, for the more ready and sure
way of accustoming the limbs to a facility in the ornamental way of
moving; I should observe, that quick time gives it spirit and vivacity,
as slow time, gravity, and solemnity, and further, that the latter of
these allows the eye an opportunity of seeing the line of grace to
advantage, as in the address of heroes on the stage, or in any solemn
act of ceremony; and that although time in movement is reduced to
certain rules for dancing, it is left more at large and at discretion
for deportment.

We come now to offer an odd, but perhaps efficacious method of
acquiring a habit of moving in the lines of grace and beauty.

[Illustration: Figs. 119 and 120]

1. Let any one chalk the line fig. [119 L p. II], on a flat surface,
beginning at either end, and he will move his hand and arm in a
beautiful direction, but if he chalks the same sort of line on an
ogee-moulding of a foot or two in breadth, as the dotted line on figure
[120 L p. II], his hand must move in that more beautiful direction,
which is distinguished by the name of grace; and according to the
quantity given to those lines, greatness will be added to grace, and
the movement will be more or less noble.

Gentle movements of this sort thus understood, may be made at any time
and any where, which by frequent repetitions will become so familiar to
the parts so exercised, that on proper occasion they make them as it
were of their own accord.

The pleasing effect of this manner of moving the hand, is seen when a
snuff-box, or fan is presented gracefully or genteely to a lady, both
in the hand moving forward and in its return, but care must be taken
that the line of movement be but gentle, as No. 3, fig. 49, plate I,
and not too S-like and twirling, as No. 7 in the same figure: which
excess would be affected and ridiculous.

[Illustration: Fig. 49]

Daily practising these movements with the hands and arms, as also with
such other parts of the body as are capable of them, will in a short
time render the whole person graceful and easy at pleasure.

2. As to the motions of the _head_; the awe most children are in
before strangers, till they come to a certain age, is the cause of
their dropping and drawing their chins down into their breasts, and
looking under their foreheads, as if conscious of their weakness,
or of something wrong about them. To prevent this aukward shyness,
parents and tutors are continually teasing them to hold up their heads,
which if they get them to do it is with difficulty, and of course
in so constrain'd a manner that it gives the children pain, so that
they naturally take all opportunities of easing themselves by holding
down their heads; which posture would be full as uneasy to them were
it not a relief from restraint: and there is another misfortune in
holding down the head, that it is apt to make them bend too much in
the back; when this happens to be the case, they then have recourse
to steel-collars, and other iron-machines; all which shacklings are
repugnant to nature, and may make the body grow crooked. This daily
fatigue both to the children and the parents may be avoided, and an
ugly habit prevented, by only (at a proper age) fastening a ribbon to a
quantity of platted hair, or to the cap, so as it may be kept fast in
its place, and the other end to the back of the coat, as fig. [121 L
p. II], of such a length as may prevent them drawing their chins into
their necks; which ribbon will always leave the head at liberty to move
in any direction but this aukward one they are so apt to fall into.

[Illustration: Fig. 121]

But till children arrive at a reasoning age it will be difficult by any
means to teach them more grace than what is natural to every well made
child at liberty.

The grace of the upper parts of the body is most engaging, and
sensible well made people in any station naturally have it in a great
degree, therefore rules unless they are simple and easily retain'd and
practis'd, are of little use; nay, rather are of disservice.

Holding the head erect is but occasionally right, a proper recline of
it may be as graceful, but true elegance is mostly seen in the moving
it from one position to another.

And this may be attain'd by a sensibility within yourself, tho' you
have not a sight of what you do by looking in the glass, when with your
head assisted by a sway of the body in order to give it more scope, you
endeavour to make that very serpentine line in the air, which the hands
have been before taught to do by the help of the ogee-moulding: and I
will venture to say, a few careful repetitions at first setting out
will make this movement as easy to the head as to the hands and arms.

The most graceful bow is got by the head's moving in this direction,
as it goes downward and rises up again. Some aukward imitators of this
elegant way of bowing, for want of knowing what they were about, have
seem'd to bow with wry necks. The low solemn bow to majesty should
have but a very little twist, if any, as more becoming gravity and
submission. The clownish nod in a sudden straight line is quite the
reverse of these spoken of.

The most elegant and respectful curtesy hath a gentle, or small degree
of the above graceful bowing of the head as the person sinks, and
rises, and retreats. If it should be said, that a fine curtesy consists
in no more than in being erect in person at the time of sinking and
rising; Madam Catherine in clock-work, or the dancing bears led about
the streets for a shew, must be allow'd to make as good a curtesy as
anybody.

N. B. It is necessary in bowing and curtesying to shun an exact
sameness at all times; for however graceful it may be on some
occasions, at other times it may seem formal and improper. Shakespear
seems to have meant the above spoken of ornamental manner of bowing, in
Enobarbus's description of Cleopatra's waiting-women.----

    ----And made their bends adornings.    Act 2.

3. Of _Dancing_. The minuet is allowed by the dancing-masters
themselves to be the perfection of all dancing. I once heard an
eminent dancing-master say, that the minuet had been the study of
his whole life, and that he had been indefatigable in the pursuit of
its beauties, yet at last he could only say with Socrates, _he knew
nothing_: adding, that I was happy in my profession as a painter, in
that some bounds might be set to the study of it. No doubt, as the
minuet contains in it a composed variety of as many movements in the
serpentine lines as can well be put together in distinct quantities, it
is a fine composition of movements.

[Illustration: Fig. 122]

The ordinary undulating motion of the body in common walking (as may
be plainly seen by the waving line, which the shadow a man's head
makes against a wall as he is walking between it and the afternoon
sun) is augmented in dancing into a larger quantity of _waving_ by
means of the minuet-step, which is so contrived as to raise the body
by gentle degrees somewhat higher than ordinary, and sink it again in
the same manner lower in the going on of the dance. The figure of the
minuet-path on the floor is also composed of serpentine lines, as fig.
[122 T p. II], varying a little with the fashion: when the parties by
means of this step rise and fall most smoothly in time, and free from
sudden starting and dropping, they come nearest to Shakespear's idea of
the beauty of dancing, in the following lines,

    ----What you do,
    Still betters what is done,----
    ----When you do dance, I wish you
    A wave o' th' sea, that you might ever do
    Nothing but that; move still, still so,
    And own no other function.        WINTER'S TALE.

The other beauties belonging to this dance, are the turns of the head,
and twist of the body in passing each other, as also gentle bowing and
presenting hands in the manner before described, all which together,
displays the greatest variety of movements in serpentine lines
imaginable, keeping equal pace with musical time.

There are other dances that entertain merely because they are composed
of variety of movements and performed in proper time, but the less
they consist of serpentine or waving lines, the lower they are in the
estimation of dancing-masters: for, as has been shewn, when the form of
the body is divested of its serpentine lines it becomes ridiculous as a
human figure, so likewise when all movements in such lines are excluded
in a dance, it becomes low, grotesque and comical; but however, being
as was said composed of variety, made consistent with some character,
and executed with agility, it nevertheless is very entertaining. Such
are Italian peasant-dances, &c. But such uncouth contortions of the
body as are allowable in a man would disgust in a woman; as the extreme
graceful, so very alluring in this sex, is nauseous in the other; even
the minuet-grace in a man would hardly be approved, but as the main
drift of it represents repeated addresses to the lady.

There is a much greater consistency in the dances of the Italian
theatre than of the French, notwithstanding dancing seems to be the
genius of that nation; the following distinctly marked characters were
originally from Italy; and if we consider them lineally as to their
particular movements, we shall see wherein their humour consists.

The attitudes of the harlequin are ingeniously composed of certain
little, quick movements of the head, hands, and feet, some of which
shoot out as it were from the body in straight lines, or are twirled
about in little circles.

Scaramouch is gravely absurd as the character is intended, in
over-stretch'd tedious movements of unnatural lengths of lines: these
two characters seem to have been contrived by conceiving a direct
opposition of movements.

Pierrott's movements and attitudes, are chiefly in perpendiculars and
parallels, so is his figure and dress.

Punchinello is droll by being the reverse of all elegance, both as to
movement, and figure, the beauty of variety is totally, and comically
excluded from this character in every respect; his limbs are raised and
let fall almost altogether at one time, in parallel directions, as if
his seeming fewer joints than ordinary, were no better than the hinges
of a door.

Dances that represent provincial characters, as these above do,
or very low people, such as gardeners, sailors, &c. in merriment,
are generally most entertaining on the stage: the Italians have
lately added great pleasantry and humour to several french dances,
particularly the wooden-shoe dance, in which there is a continual
shifting from one attitude in plain lines to another; both the man
and the woman often comically fix themselves in uniform positions,
and frequently start in equal time, into angular forms, one of which
remarkably represents two W's in a line, as over figure 122, plate II,
these sort of dances a little raised, especially on the woman's side,
in expressing elegant wantonness (which is the true spirit of dancing)
have of late years been most delightfully done, and seem at present to
have got the better of pompous unmeaning grand ballets; serious dancing
being even a contradiction in terms.

[Illustration: Fig. over Fig. 122]

4thly, Of _Country Dancing_. The lines which a number of people
together form in country or figure dancing, make a delightful play
upon the eye, especially when the whole figure is to be seen at one
view, as at the playhouse from the gallery; the beauty of this kind of
mystic dancing, as the poets term it, depends upon moving in a composed
variety of lines, chiefly serpentine, govern'd by the principles of
intricacy, &c. The dances of barbarians are always represented without
these movements, being only composed of wild skiping, jumping, and
turning round, or running backward and forward, with convulsive shrugs,
and distorted gestures.

One of the most pleasing movements in country dancing, and which
answers to all the principles of varying at once, is what they call the
hay; the figure of it altogether, is a cypher of S's, or a number of
serpentine lines interlacing, or intervolving each other, which suppose
traced on the floor, the lines would appear as fig. [123 T p. II].
Milton in his Paradise lost, describing the angels dancing about the
sacred hill, pictures the whole idea in words;

    Mystical dance!----
    ----Mazes intricate,
    Eccentric, intervolv'd, yet regular
    Then most, when most irregular they seem.

[Illustration: Fig. 123]

I shall venture, lastly, to say a word or two of stage-action. From
what has been said of habitually moving in waving lines, it may
possibly be found that if stage-action, particularly the graceful,
were to be studied lineally, it might be more speedily and accurately
acquired by the help of the foregoing principles than the methods
hitherto taken. It is known that common deportment, such as may
pass for elegant and proper off the stage, would no more be thought
sufficient upon it than the dialogue of common polite conversation,
would be accurate or spirited enough for the language of a play. So
that trusting to chance only will not do. The actions of every scene
ought to be as much as possible a compleat composition of well varied
movements, considered as such abstractedly, and apart from what may
be merely relative to the sense of the words. Action consider'd with
regard to assisting the authors meaning, by enforcing the sentiments
or raising the passions, must be left entirely to the judgment of the
performer, we only pretend to shew how the limbs may be made to have an
equal readiness to move in all such directions as may be acquired.

What I would have understood by action, abstractedly and apart from
its giving force to the meaning of the words, may be better conceived
by supposing a foreigner, who is a thorough master of all the effects
of action, at one of our theatres, but quite ignorant of the language
of the play; it is evident his sentiments under such limitations,
would chiefly arise from what he might distinguish by the lines of the
movements belonging to each character; the actions of an old man, if
proper, or not, would be visible to him at once, and he would judge of
low and odd characters, by the inelegant lines which we have already
shewn to belong to the characters of punch, harlequin, pierrott, or
the clown; so he would also form his judgment of the graceful acting
of a fine gentleman, or hero, by the elegance of their movements in
such lines of grace and beauty as have been sufficiently described. See
chapters V, VI, VII, VIII, on the composition of forms. Where note,
that as the whole of beauty depends upon _continually varying_ the same
must be observed with regard to genteel and elegant acting: and as
plain space makes a considerable part of beauty in form, so cessation
of movement in acting is as absolutely necessary; and in my opinion
much wanted on most stages, to relieve the eye from what Shakespear
calls, _continually sawing the air_.

The actress hath sufficient grace with fewer actions, and those in
less extended lines than the actor; for as the lines that compose the
Venus are simpler and more gently flowing, than those that compose the
Apollo, so must her movements be in like proportion.

And here it may not be improper to take notice of a mischief that
attends copied actions on the stage; they are often confin'd to certain
sets and numbers, which being repeated, and growing stale to the
audience, become at last subject to mimickry and ridicule, which would
hardly be the case, if an actor were possest of such general principles
as include a knowledge of the effects of all the movements that the
body is capable of.

The comedian, whose business it is to imitate the actions belonging
to particular characters in nature, may also find his account in the
knowledge of lines; for whatever he copies from the life, by these
principles may be strengthened, altered, and adjusted as his judgment
shall direct, and the part the author has given him shall require.


FINIS.




_Prints Publish'd by_ W. HOGARTH, _and are to be had at his House in_
Leicester Fields.

                                             l. s. d.

Marriage a-la-mode, in six prints            1  11 6

Harlot's Progress, in six prints             1  1  0

Rake's Progress, in eight prints             2  2  0

Four Times of the Day, in four prints        1  0  0

Strolling Actresses dressing in a Barn.      0  5  0

Midnight Conversation                        0  5  0

Southwark Fair                               0  5  0

Bishop of Winchester                         0  3  0

Calais, or the Roast Beef of Old England     0  5  0

Before and After, two prints                 0  5  0

Distress'd Poet                              0  3  0

Enraged Musician                             0  3  0

Various Characters of Heads, in five groups  0  2  6

Beer Street and Gin Lane, two prints         0  3  0

Four Stages of Cruelty, four prints          0  6  0

Moses brought to Pharoah's Daughter          0  7  6

Paul before Felix                            0  7  6

Paul before Felix in the manner of Rembrant  0  0  0

The Effects of Idleness and Industry,
exemplified in the Conduct of two
Fellow-Prentices, in twelve prints           0  12 0

Lord Lovat                                   0  1  0

Country-Inn Yard                             0  1  0

Sleeping Congregation                        0  1  0

March to Finchley                            0  10 6

Mr. Garrick in the Character of King
Richard the third                            0  7  6

Columbus breaking the Egg                    0  1  0

Frontispiece                                 0  3  0


N. B. If any one purchases the whole together, they will have them
deliver'd bound, at the Price of ten Guineas, and a sufficient Margin
will be left for Framing.




FIGURES _referr'd to in the_ BOOK.

PLATE I.

Figure               Page
1,                   3
2,                   10, 77
3-4,                 15
Fig. over Fig. 4,    xix
6,                   vi, viii, 20, 81, 82, 83, 86, 88, 128
7,                   viii, 20
9,                   22, 135
10-11,               23
12,                  66, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 128, 153
13,                  66, 152
14,                  25, 26
15,                  27
16,                  31
17-18,               31, 87
19-20,               31
21,                  36
22,                  33
Fig. bet'n 22 & 105  viii
23,                  37
24-25,               38
26,                  38, 39, 100
29,                  40
30-32,               41
33-37,               42
38,                  43
39-42                44
43,                  xix, 44
44-46                44
47,                  xix, 19
Fig. bet'n 47 & 88,  17, 97
48,                  46
49,                  49, 128, 143
Fig. under 49,       4
50,                  49
53,                  49, 50
54,                  v, 20, 64
55,                  20, 76
65,                  56, 60
66-67,               57
Fig. near 67,        68
68,                  58, 76
87-88,               111
97,                  104, 123, 124
98,                  123, 124
99-105,              124
106,                 125
107,                 128
115,                 133


PLATE II.

Figure               Page
51,                  137
52,                  x
56,                  51
57,                  51, 103
58,                  51, 55, 103
59,                  53
60-63,               55
64,                  56
69-70,               78
71,                  136
72,                  20, 137
73,                  137
74,                  138
75,                  137
76,                  62, 64
77,                  62, 63, 64
78,                  63, 64
79-80,               63
81,                  64
82-83,               65
84-85,               96
86,                  108, 109, 111
89,                  111
90,                  109
91,                  112
92,                  111
93,                  111
94,                  98, 116, 117, 118
95,                  115
96,                  117
108-109,             130
110,                 133
113,                 132
114,                 133
116,                 132
117-118,             134
119-120,             143
121,                 144
122,                 147
123,                 151








End of Project Gutenberg's The Analysis of Beauty, by William Hogarth


