CHAPTER IX.

_Of COMPOSITION with the WAVING-LINE_.


There is scarce a room in any house whatever, where one does not see
the waving-line employ'd in some way or other. How inelegant would
the shapes of all our moveables be without it? how very plain and
unornamental the mouldings of cornices, and chimney-pieces, without the
variety introduced by the _ogee_ member, which is entirely composed of
waving-lines.

[Illustration: Figs. 49 and 50]

Though all sorts of waving-lines are ornamental, when properly applied;
yet, strictly speaking, there is but one precise line, properly to be
called the line of _beauty_, which in the scale of them [Fig. 49 T p.
I] is number 4: the lines 5, 6, 7, by their bulging too much in their
curvature becoming gross and clumsy; and, on the contrary, 3, 2, 1, as
they straighten, becoming mean and poor; as will appear in the next
figure [50 T p. I] where they are applied to the legs of chairs.

[Illustration: Fig. 53]

A still more perfect idea of the effects of the precise waving-line,
and of those lines that deviate from it, may be conceived by the row
of stays, figure [53 B p. I], where number 4 is composed of precise
waving-lines, and is therefore the best shaped stay. Every whale-bone
of a good stay must be made to bend in this manner: for the whole
stay, when put close together behind, is truly a shell of well-varied
contents, and its surface of course a fine form; so that if a line, or
the lace were to be drawn, or brought from the top of the lacing of
the stay behind, round the body, and down to the bottom peak of the
stomacher; it would form such a perfect, precise, serpentine-line,
as has been shewn, round the cone, figure 26 in plate I.----For this
reason all ornaments obliquely contrasting the body in this manner,
as the ribbons worn by the knights of the garter, are both genteel
and graceful. The numbers 5, 6, 7 and 3, 2, 1, are deviations into
stiffness and meanness on one hand, and clumsiness and deformity on the
other. The reasons for which disagreeable effects, after what has been
already said, will be evident to the meanest capacity.

[Illustration: Fig. 26]

It may be worth our notice however, that the stay, number 2, would
better fit a well-shaped man than number 4; and that number 4, would
better fit a well-form'd woman, than number 2; and when on considering
them, merely as to their forms, and comparing them together as you
would two vases, it has been shewn by our principles, how much finer
and more beautiful number 4 is, than number 2: does not this our
determination enhance the merit of these principles, as it proves at
the same time how much the form of a woman's body surpasses in beauty
that of a man?

From the examples that have been given, enough may be gathered to carry
on our observations from them to any other objects that may chance to
come in our way, either animate or inanimate; so that we may not only
_lineally_ account for the ugliness of the toad, the hog, the bear, and
the spider, which are totally void of this waving-line, but also for
the different degrees of beauty belonging to those objects that possess
it.




CHAPTER X.

_Of COMPOSITIONS with the SERPENTINE-LINE_.


The very great difficulty there is in describing this line, either in
words, or by the pencil (as was hinted before, when I first mention'd
it) will make it necessary for me to proceed very slowly in what I have
to say in this chapter, and to beg the reader's patience whilst I lead
him step by step into the knowledge of what I think the sublime in
form, so remarkably display'd in the human body; in which, I believe,
when he is once acquainted with the idea of them, he will find this
species of lines to be principally concern'd.

First, then, let him consider fig. [56 B p. II], which represents a
straight horn, with its contents, and he will find, as it varies like
the cone, it is a form of some beauty, merely on that account.

[Illustration: Fig. 56]

Next let him observe in what manner, and in what degree the beauty of
this horn is increas'd, in fig. [57 B p. II], where it is supposed to
be bent two different ways.

[Illustration: Fig. 57]

And lastly, let him attend to the vast increase of beauty, even to
grace and elegance, in the same horn, fig. [58 B p. II], where it is
supposed to have been twisted round, at the same time, that it was bent
two different ways, (as in the last figure).

[Illustration: Fig. 58]

In the first of these figures, the dotted line down the middle
expresses the straight lines of which it is composed; which, without
the assistance of curve lines, or light and shade, would hardly shew it
to have contents.

The same is true of the second, tho' by the bending of the horn, the
straight dotted line is changed into the beautiful waving-line.

But in the last, this dotted line, by the twisting as well as
the bending of the horn, is changed from the waving into the
serpentine-line; which, as it dips out of sight behind the horn in the
middle, and returns again at the smaller end, not only gives play to
the imagination, and delights the eye, on that account; but informs it
likewise of the quantity and variety of the contents.

I have chosen this simple example, as the easiest way of giving a plain
and general idea of the peculiar qualities of these serpentine-lines,
and the advantages of bringing them into compositions, where the
contents you are to express, admit of grace and elegance.

And I beg the same things may be understood of these serpentine-lines,
that I have said before of the waving-lines. For as among the vast
variety of waving-lines that may be conceiv'd, there is but one that
truly deserves the name of _the line of beauty_, so there is only one
precise serpentine-line that I call _the line of grace_. Yet, even when
they are made too bulging, or too tapering, though they certainly lose
of their beauty and grace, they do not become so wholly void of it,
as not to be of excellent service in compositions, where beauty and
grace are not particularly design'd to be express'd in their greatest
perfection.

Though I have distinguish'd these lines so particularly as to give
them the titles of _the lines of beauty and grace_, I mean that the
use and application of them should still be confined by the principles
I have laid down for composition in general; and that they should be
judiciously mixt and combined with one another, and even with those
I may term _plain_ lines, (in opposition to these) as the subject in
hand requires. Thus the cornu-copia, fig. [59 B p. II], is twisted
and bent after the same manner, as the last figure of the horn; but
more ornamented, and with a greater number of other lines of the same
twisted kind, winding round it with as quick returns as those of a
screw.

[Illustration: Fig. 59]

This sort of form may be seen with yet more variations, (and therefore
more beautiful) in the goat's horn, from which, in all probability, the
ancients originally took the extremely elegant forms they have given
their cornu-copias.

There is another way of considering this last figure of the horn I
would recommend to my reader, in order to give him a clearer idea of
the use both of the waving and serpentine-lines in composition.

This is to imagine the horn, thus bent and twisted, to be cut
length-ways by a very fine saw into two equal parts; and to observe
one of these in the same position the whole horn is represented in;
and these two observations will naturally occur to him. First, that
the edge of the saw must run from one end to the other of the horn
in the line of beauty; so that the edges of this half of the horn
will have a beautiful shape: and, secondly, that wherever the dotted
serpentine-line on the surface of the whole horn dips behind, and is
lost to the eye, it immediately comes into sight on the hollow surface
of the divided horn.

The use I shall make of these observations will appear very
considerable in the application of them to the human form, which we are
next to attempt.

It will be sufficient, therefore, at present only to observe, first,
that the whole horn acquires a beauty by its being thus genteely bent
two different ways; secondly, that whatever lines are drawn on its
external surface become graceful, as they must all of them, from the
twist that is given the horn, partake in some degree or other, of the
shape of the serpentine-line: and, lastly, when the horn is split, and
the inner, as well as the outward surface of its shell-like form is
exposed, the eye is peculiarly entertained and relieved in the pursuit
of these serpentine-lines, as in their twistings their concavities
and convexities are alternately offer'd to its view. Hollow forms,
therefore, composed of such lines are extremely beautiful and pleasing
to the eye; in many cases more so, than those of solid bodies.

Almost all the muscles, and bones, of which the human form is
composed, have more, or less of these kind of twists in them; and give
in a less degree, the same kind of appearance to the parts which cover
them, and are the immediate object of the eye: and for this reason it
is that I have been so particular in describing these forms of the
bent, and twisted, and ornamented horn.

There is scarce a straight bone in the whole body. Almost all of
them are not only bent different ways, but have a kind of twist,
which in some of them is very graceful; and the muscles annex'd
to them, tho' they are of various shapes, appropriated to their
particular uses, generally have their component fibres running in
these serpentine-lines, surrounding and conforming themselves to the
varied shape of the bones they belong to: more especially in the limbs.
Anatomists are so satisfied of this, that they take a pleasure in
distinguishing their several beauties. I shall only instance in the
thigh-bone, and those about the hips.

[Illustration: Figs. 64 and 62]

The thigh-bone fig. [62 R p. II], has the waving and twisted turn
of the horn, 58: but the beautiful bones adjoining, call'd the ossa
innominata [Fig. 60 B p. II], have, with greater variety, the same
turns and twists of that horn when it is cut; and its inner and outward
surfaces are exposed to the eye.

[Illustration: Figs. 60, 61 and 63]

How ornamental these bones appear, when the prejudice we conceive
against them, as being part of a skeleton, is taken off, by adding
a little foliage to them, may be seen in fig. [61 B p. II]----such
shell-like winding forms, mixt with foliage, twisting about them, are
made use of in all ornaments; a kind of composition calculated merely
to please the eye. Divest these of their serpentine twinings, and they
immediately lose all grace, and return to the poor gothic taste they
were in an hundred years ago [Fig. 63 B p. II].

[Illustration: Figs. 64 and 62]

Fig. [64 B p. II] is meant to represent the manner, in which most of
the muscles, (those of the limbs in particular) are twisted round the
bones, and conform themselves to their length and shape; but with
no anatomical exactness. As to the running of their fibres, some
anatomists have compared them to skains of thread, loose in the middle,
and tight at each end, which, when they are thus consider'd as twisted
contrary ways round the bone, gives the strongest idea possible of a
composition of serpentine-lines.

[Illustration: Figs. 65, 66 and 67]

Of these fine winding forms then are the muscles and bones composed,
and which, by their varied situations with each other, become more
intricately pleasing, and form a continued waving of winding forms from
one into the other, as may be best seen by examining a good anatomical
figure, part of which you have here represented, in the muscular leg
and thigh, fig. [65 p. I]: which shews the serpentine forms and varied
situations of the muscles, as they appear when the skin is taken off.
It was drawn from a plaster of paris figure cast off nature, the
original of which was prepared for the mould by Cowper, the famous
anatomist. In this last figure, as the skin is taken off the parts are
too distinctly traced by the eye, for that intricate delicacy which is
necessary to the utmost beauty; yet the winding figures of the muscles,
with the variety of their situations, must always be allow'd elegant
forms: however, they lose in the imagination some of the beauty, which
they really have, by the idea of their being flayed; nevertheless,
by what has already been shewn both of them and the bones, the human
frame hath more of its parts composed of serpentine-lines than any
other object in nature; which is a proof both of its superior beauty
to all others, and, at the same time, that its beauty proceeds from
those lines: for although they may be required sometimes to be bulging
in their twists, as in the thick swelling muscles of the Hercules, yet
elegance and greatness of taste is still preserved; but when these
lines lose so much of their twists as to become almost straight, all
elegance of taste vanishes.

Thus fig. [66 p. I], was also taken from nature, and drawn in the same
position, but treated in a more dry, stiff, and what the painters call,
_sticky manner_, than the nature of flesh is ever capable of appearing
in, unless when its moisture is dryed away: it must be allowed, that
the parts of this figure are of as right dimensions, and as truly
situated, as in the former; it wants only the true twist of the lines
to give it taste.

To prove this further, and to put the mean effect of these plain or
unvaried lines in a stronger light, see fig. [67 p. I], where, by the
uniform, unvaried shapes and situation of the muscles, without so much
as a waving-line in them, it becomes so wooden a form, that he that
can fashion the leg of a joint-stool may carve this figure as well as
the best sculptor. In the same manner, divest one of the best antique
statues of all its serpentine winding parts, and it becomes from an
exquisite piece of art, a figure of such ordinary lines and unvaried
contents, that a common stone-mason or carpenter, with the help of his
rule, calipers, and compasses, might carve out an exact imitation of
it: and were it not for these lines a turner, in his lathe, might turn
a much finer neck than that of the grecian Venus, as according to the
common notion of a beautiful neck, it would be more truly round. For
the same reason, legs much swoln with disease, are as easy to imitate
as a post, having lost their _drawing_, as the painters call it; that
is, having their serpentine-lines all effaced, by the skin's being
equally puffed up, as figure [68].

[Illustration: Fig. 68]

If in comparing these three figures one with another, the reader,
notwithstanding the prejudice his imagination may have conceiv'd
against them, as anatomical figures, has been enabled only to perceive
that one of them is not so disagreeable as the others; he will easily
be led to see further, that this tendency to beauty in one, is not
owing to any greater degree of exactness in the _proportions_ of its
parts, but merely to the more _pleasing turns, and intertwistings of
the lines,_ which compose its external form; for in all the three
figures the same proportions have been observ'd, and, on that account,
they have all an equal claim to beauty.

And if he pursues this anatomical enquiry but a very little further,
just to form a true idea of the elegant use that is made of the
skin and fat beneath it, to conceal from the eye all that is hard
and disagreeable, and at the same time to preserve to it whatever
is necessary in the shapes of the parts beneath, to give grace and
beauty to the whole limb: he will find himself insensibly led into the
principles of that grace and beauty which is to be found in well-turn'd
limbs, in fine, elegant, healthy life, or in those of the best
antique statues; as well as into the reason why his eye has so often
unknowingly been pleased and delighted with them.

Thus, in all other parts of the body, as well as these, wherever, for
the sake of the necessary motion of the parts, with proper strength
and agility, the insertions of the muscles are too hard and sudden,
their swellings too bold, or the hollows between them too deep, for
their out-lines to be beautiful; nature most judiciously softens these
hardnesses, and plumps up these vacancies with a proper supply of fat,
and covers the whole with the soft, smooth, springy, and, in delicate
life, almost transparent skin, which, conforming itself to the external
shape of all the parts beneath, expresses to the eye the idea of its
contents with the utmost delicacy of beauty and grace.

The skin, therefore, thus tenderly embracing, and gently conforming
itself to the varied shapes of every one of the outward muscles of the
body, soften'd underneath by the fat, where, otherwise, the same hard
lines and furrows would appear, as we find come on with age in the
face, and with labour, in the limbs, is evidently a shell-like surface
(to keep up the idea I set out with) form'd with the utmost delicacy
in nature; and therefore the most proper subject of the study of every
one, who desires to imitate the works of nature, _as a master should
do_, or to judge of the performances of others _as a real connoisseur
ought_.

I cannot be too long, I think, on this subject, as so much will be
found to depend upon it; and therefore shall endeavour to give a clear
idea of the different effect such anatomical figures have on the eye,
from what the same parts have, when cover'd by the fat and skin; by
supposing a small wire (that has lost its spring and so will retain
every shape it is twisted into) to be held fast to the out-side of the
hip (fig. 65. plate I) and thence brought down the other side of the
thigh obliquely over the calf of the leg, down to the outward ancle
(all the while press'd so close as to touch and conform itself to the
shape of every muscle it passes over) and then to be taken off. If this
wire be now examined it will be found that the general uninterrupted
flowing twist, which the winding round the limbs would otherwise have
given to it, is broken into little better than so many separate plain
curves, by the sharp indentures it every where has receiv'd on being
closely press'd in between the muscles.

[Illustration: Figs. 65, 66 and 67]

Suppose, in the next place, such a wire was in the same manner twisted
round a living well-shaped leg and thigh, or those of a fine statue;
when you take it off you will find no such sharp indentures, nor any of
those regular _engralings_ (as the heralds express it) which displeased
the eye before. On the contrary, you will see how _gradually_ the
changes in its shape are produced; how imperceptibly the different
curvatures run into each other, and how easily the eye glides along
the varied wavings of its sweep. To enforce this still further, if
a line were to be drawn by a pencil exactly where these wires have
been supposed to pass, the point of the pencil, in the muscular leg
and thigh, would perpetually meet with stops and rubs, whilst in the
others it would flow from muscle to muscle along the elastic skin, as
pleasantly as the lightest skiff dances over the gentlest wave.

This idea of the wire, retaining thus the shape of the parts it passes
over, seems of so much consequence, that I would by no means have it
forgot; as it may properly be consider'd as one of the threads (or
outlines) of the shell (or external surface) of the human form: and
the frequently recurring to it will assist the imagination in its
conceptions of those parts of it, whose shapes are most intricately
varied: for the same sort of observations may be made, with equal
justice, on the shapes of ever so many such wires twisted in the same
manner in ever so many directions over every part of a well made man,
woman, or statue.

And if the reader will follow in his imagination the most exquisite
turns of the chisel in the hands of a master, when he is putting the
finishing touches to a statue; he will soon be led to understand what
it is the real judges expect from the hand of such a master, which
the Italians call, the little more, Il poco piu, and which in reality
distinguishes the original master-pieces at Rome from even the best
copies of them.

An example or two will sufficiently explain what is here meant; for
as these exquisite turns are to be found, in some degree of beauty
or other, all over the whole surface of the body and limbs: we may
by taking any one part of a fine figure (though so small a one that
only a few muscles are express'd in it) explain the manner in which so
much beauty and grace has been given to them, as to convince a skilful
artist, almost at sight, that it must have been the work of a master.

[Illustration: Fig. 76]

I have chosen, for this purpose, a small piece of the body of a statue,
fig. [76 T p. II], representing part of the left side under the arm,
together with a little of the breast, (including a very particular
muscle, which, from the likeness its edges bear to the teeth of a saw,
is, if consider'd by itself, void of beauty) as most proper to the
point in hand, because this its regular shape more peculiarly requires
the skill of the artist to give it a little more variety than it
generally has, even in nature.

[Illustration: Fig. 77]

First, then, I will give you a representation of this part of the
body, from an anatomical figure [Fig. 77 T p. II], to show what a
sameness there is in the shapes of all the teeth-like insertions of
this muscle; and how regularly the fibres, which compose it, follow the
almost parallel out-lines of the ribs they partly cover.

[Illustration: Fig. 78]

From what has been said before of the use of the natural covering of
the skin, &c. the next figure [78 T p. II] will easily be understood to
mean so tame a representation of the same part of the body, that tho'
the hard and stiff appearance of the edges of this muscle is taken off
by that covering, yet enough of its regularity and sameness remains to
render it disagreeable.

Now as regularity and sameness, according to our doctrine, is want of
elegance and true taste, we shall endeavour in the next place to show
how this very part (in which the muscles take so very regular a form)
may be brought to have as much variety as any other part of the body
whatever. In order to this, though some alteration must be made in
almost every part of it, yet it should be so inconsiderable in each,
that no remarkable change may appear in the shape and situation of any.

[Illustration: Figs. 79, 80 and 81]

Thus, let the parts mark'd 1, 2, 3, 4, (which appear so exactly
similar in shape, and parallel in situation in the muscular figure
77) and not much mended in fig. 78, be first varied in their sizes,
but not gradually from the uppermost to the lowest, as in fig. [79 T
p. II], nor alternately one long and one short, as in fig. [80 T p.
II], for in either of these cases there would still remain too great
a formality. We should therefore endeavour, in the next place, to
vary them every way in our power, without losing entirely the true
idea of the parts themselves. Suppose them then to have changed their
situations a little, and slip'd beside each other irregularly, (some
how as is represented in fig. [81 T p. II], merely with regard to their
situation) and the external appearance of the whole piece of the body,
now under our consideration, will assume the more varied and pleasing
form, represented in fig. 76, easily to be discern'd by comparing the
three figures, 76, 77, 78, one with another; and it will as easily be
seen, that were lines to be drawn, or wires to be bent, over these
muscles, from one to the other, and so on to the adjoining parts; they
would have a continued waving flow, let them pass in any direction
whatever.

The unskilful, in drawing these parts after the life, as their
regularities are much more easily seen and copied than their fine
variations, seldom fail of making them more regular and poor than they
really appear even in a consumptive person.

The difference will appear evident by comparing fig. 78, purposely
drawn in this tasteless manner, with fig. 76. But will be more
perfectly understood by examining this part in the Torso of Michael
Angelo [Fig. 54 p. I], whence this figure was taken.

[Illustration: Fig. 54]

Note, there are casts of a small copy of that famous trunk of a body
to be had at almost every plaster-figure makers, wherein what has been
here described may be sufficiently seen, not only in the part which
figure 76 was taken from, but all over that curious piece of antiquity.

I must here again press my reader to a particular attention to the
windings of these superficial lines, even in their passing over every
joint, what alterations soever may be made in the surface of the skin
by the various bendings of the limbs: and tho' the space allow'd for
it, just in the joints, be ever so small, and consequently the lines
ever so short, the application of this principle of varying these
lines, as far as their lengths will admit of, will be found to have its
effect as gracefully as in the more lengthen'd muscles of the body.

It should be observ'd in the fingers, where the joints are but short,
and the tendons straight; and where beauty seems to submit, in some
degree, to use, yet not so much but you trace in a full-grown taper
finger, these little winding lines among the wrinkles, or in (what
is more pretty because more simple) the dimples of the nuckles. As
we always distinguish things best by seeing their reverse set in
opposition with them; if fig. 82 T p. II, by the straightness of its
lines, shews fig. 83 T p. II, to have some little taste in it, tho' it
is so slightly sketch'd; the difference will more evidently appear when
you in like manner compare a straight coarse finger in common life with
the taper dimpled one of a fine lady.

[Illustration: Figs. 82 and 83]

There is an elegant degree of plumpness peculiar to the skin of the
softer sex, that occasions these delicate dimplings in all their
other joints, as well as these of the fingers; which so perfectly
distinguishes them from those even of a graceful man; and which,
assisted by the more soften'd shapes of the muscles underneath,
presents to the eye all the varieties in the whole figure of the body,
with gentler and fewer parts more sweetly connected together, and with
such a fine simplicity as will always give the turn of the female
frame, represented in the Venus [Fig. 13 p. I], the preference to that
of the Apollo [Fig. 12 p. I].

[Illustration: Figs. 13 and 12]

Now whoever can conceive lines thus constantly flowing, and delicately
varying over every part of the body even to the fingers ends, and will
call to his remembrance what led us to this last description of what
the Italians call, Il poco piu (_the little more_ that is expected from
the hand of a master) will, in my mind, want very little more than what
his own observation on the works of art and nature will lead him to, to
acquire a true idea of the word _Taste_, when applied to form; however
inexplicable this word may hitherto have been imagined.

We have all along had recourse chiefly to the works of the ancients,
not because the moderns have not produced some as excellent; but
because the works of the former are more generally known: nor would
we have it thought, that either of them have ever yet come up to the
utmost beauty of nature. Who but a bigot, even to the antiques, will
say that he has not seen faces and necks, hands and arms in living
women, that even the Grecian Venus doth but coarsely imitate?

And what sufficient reason can be given why the same may not be said of
the rest of the body?




