CHAPTER IV.

_Of SIMPLICITY, or DISTINCTNESS_.


Simplicity, without variety, is wholly insipid, and at best does only
not displease; but when variety is join'd to it, then it pleases,
because it enhances the pleasure of variety, by giving the eye the
power of enjoying it with ease.

There is no object composed of straight lines, that has so much
variety, with so few parts, as the pyramid: and it is its constantly
varying from its base gradually upwards in every situation of the eye,
(without giving the idea of sameness, as the eye moves round it) that
has made it been esteem'd in all ages, in preference to the cone, which
in all views appears nearly the same, being varied only by light and
shade.

Steeples, monuments, and most compositions in painting and sculpture,
are kept within the form of the cone or pyramid, as the most eligible
boundary on account of their simplicity and variety. For the same
reason equestrian statues please more than the single figures.

The authors (for there were three concern'd in the work) of as fine
a group of figures in sculpture, as ever was made, either by ancients
or moderns, (I mean Laocoon and his two sons) chose to be guilty of
the absurdity of making the sons of half the father's size, tho' they
have every other mark of being design'd for men, rather than not bring
their composition within the boundary of a pyramid [Fig. 9 T p. I].
Thus if a judicious workman were employ'd to make a case of wood, for
preserving it from the injuries of the weather, or for the convenience
of carriage; he would soon find by his eye, the whole composition would
readily fit and be easily pack'd up, in one of a pyramidal form.

[Illustration: Fig. 9]

Steeples, &c. have generally been varied from the cone, to take
off from their too great simplicity, and instead of their circular
bases, polygons of different, but even numbers of sides, have been
substituted, I suppose for the sake of uniformity. These forms however
may be said to have been chosen by the architect, with a view to the
cone, as the whole compositions might be bounded by it.

Yet, in my mind, odd numbers have the advantage over the even ones,
as variety is more pleasing than uniformity, where the same end
is answer'd by both; as in this case, where both polygons may be
circumscrib'd by the same circle, or in other words, both compositions
bounded by the same cone.

And I can't help observing, that nature in all her works of fancy, if
I may be allow'd the expression, where it seems immaterial whether even
or odd numbers of divisions were prefer'd, most frequently employs the
odd; as for example, in the indenting of leaves, flowers, blossoms, &c.

The oval also, on account of its variety with simplicity, is as much
to be prefer'd to the circle, as the triangle to the square, or the
pyramid to the cube; and this figure lessen'd at one end, like the egg,
thereby being more varied, is singled out by the author of all variety,
to bound the features of a beautiful face.

[Illustration: Fig. 10]

When the oval has a little more of the cone added to it than the egg
has, it becomes more distinctly a compound of those two most simple
varied figures. This is the shape of the pine-apple [Fig. 10 T p. I],
which nature has particularly distinguish'd by bestowing ornaments of
rich mosaic upon it, composed of contrasted serpentine lines, and the
pips [Fig. 11 T p. I], as the gardiners call them, are still varied by
two cavities and one round eminence in each.

[Illustration: Fig. 11]

Could a more elegant simple form than this have been found; it is
probable that judicious architect, Sir Christopher Wren, would not
have chosen the pine-apples for the two terminations of the sides
of the front of St. Paul's: and perhaps the globe and cross, tho' a
finely varied figure, which terminates the dome, would not have had
the preference of situation, if a religious motive had not been the
occasion.

Thus we see simplicity gives beauty even to variety, as it makes it
more easily understood, and should be ever studied in the works of art,
as it serves to prevent perplexity in forms of elegance; as will be
shewn in the next chapter.




CHAPTER V.

_Of INTRICACY_.


The active mind is ever bent to be employ'd. Pursuing is the business
of our lives; and even abstracted from any other view, gives pleasure.
Every arising difficulty, that for a while attends and interrupts the
pursuit, gives a sort of spring to the mind, enhances the pleasure, and
makes what would else be toil and labour, become sport and recreation.

Wherein would consist the joys of hunting, shooting, fishing, and
many other favourite diversions, without the frequent turns and
difficulties, and disappointments, that are daily met with in the
pursuit?--how joyless does the sportsman return when the hare has not
had fair play? how lively, and in spirits, even when an old cunning one
has baffled, and out-run the dogs!

This love of pursuit, merely as pursuit, is implanted in our natures,
and design'd, no doubt, for necessary, and useful purposes. Animals
have it evidently by instinct. The hound dislikes the game he so
eagerly pursues; and even cats will risk the losing of their prey to
chase it over again. It is a pleasing labour of the mind to solve the
most difficult problems; allegories and riddles, trifling as they are,
afford the mind amusement: and with what delight does it follow the
well-connected thread of a play, or novel, which ever increases as the
plot thickens, and ends most pleas'd, when that is most distinctly
unravell'd?

The eye hath this sort of enjoyment in winding walks, and serpentine
rivers, and all sorts of objects, whose forms, as we shall see
hereafter, are composed principally of what, I call, the _waving_ and
_serpentine_ lines.

Intricacy in form, therefore, I shall define to be that peculiarity
in the lines, which compose it, that _leads the eye a wanton kind of
chace_, and from the pleasure that gives the mind, intitles it to the
name of beautiful: and it may be justly said, that the cause of the
idea of grace more immediately resides in this principle, than in the
other five, except variety; which indeed includes this, and all the
others.

That this observation may appear to have a real foundation in nature,
every help will be requir'd, which the reader himself can call to his
assistance, as well as what will here be suggested to him.

To set this matter in somewhat a clearer light, the familiar instance
of a common jack, with a circular fly, may serve our purpose better
than a more elegant form: preparatory to which, let the figure [Fig. 14
T p. I] be consider'd, which represents the eye, at a common reading
distance viewing a row of letters, but fix'd with most attention to the
middle letter A.

[Illustration: Fig. 14]

Now as we read, a ray may be supposed to be drawn from the center of
the eye to that letter it looks at first, and to move successively with
it from letter to letter, the whole length of the line: but if the eye
stops at any particular letter, A, to observe it more than the rest,
these other letters will grow more and more imperfect to the sight, the
farther they are situated on either side of A, as is express'd in the
figure: and when we endeavour to see all the letters in a line equally
perfect at one view, as it were, this imaginary ray must course it to
and fro with great celerity. Thus though the eye, strictly speaking,
can only pay due attention to these letters in succession, yet the
amazing ease and swiftness, with which it performs this task, enables
us to see considerable spaces with sufficient satisfaction at one
sudden view.

Hence, we shall always suppose some such principal ray moving along
with the eye, and tracing out the parts of every form, we mean to
examine in the most perfect manner: and when we would follow with
exactness the course any body takes, that is in motion, this ray is
always to be supposed to move with the body.

In this manner of attending to forms, they will be found, whether
_at rest_, or _in motion_, to give _movement_ to this imaginary ray;
or, more properly speaking, to the eye itself, affecting it _thereby_
more or less _pleasingly_, according to their different _shapes_ and
_motions_. Thus, for example, in the instance of the jack, whether the
eye (with this imaginary ray) moves slowly down the line, to which the
weight is fix'd, or attends to the slow motion of the weight itself,
the mind is equally fatigu'd: and whether it swiftly courses round the
circular rim of the flyer, when the jack stands; or nimbly follows one
point in its circularity whilst it is whirling about, we are almost
equally made giddy by it. But our sensation differs much from either
of these unpleasant ones, when we observe the curling worm, into which
the worm-wheel is fixt [Fig. 15 L p. I]: for this is always pleasing,
either at rest or in motion, and whether that motion is slow or quick.

[Illustration: Fig. 15]

That it is accounted so, when it is _at rest_, appears by the ribbon,
twisted round a stick (represented on one side of this figure) which
has been a long-establish'd ornament in the carvings of frames,
chimney-pieces, and door-cases; and call'd by the carvers, _the stick
and ribbon ornament_: and when the stick, through the middle is
omitted, it is call'd the _ribbon edge_; both to be seen in almost
every house of fashion.

But the pleasure it gives the eye is still more lively when _in
motion_. I never can forget my frequent strong attention to it, when I
was very young, and that its beguiling movement gave me the same kind
of sensation then, which I since have felt at seeing a country-dance;
tho' perhaps the latter might be somewhat more engaging; particularly
when my eye eagerly pursued a favourite dancer, through all the
windings of the figure, who then was bewitching to the sight, as the
imaginary ray, we were speaking of, was dancing with her all the time.

This single example might be sufficient to explain what I mean by _the
beauty of a composed intricacy of form_; and how it may be said, with
propriety, to _lead_ the eye a _kind of chace_.

But the hair of the head is another very obvious instance, which, being
design'd chiefly as an ornament, proves more or less so, according to
the form it naturally takes, or is put into by art. The most amiable in
itself is the flowing curl; and the many waving and contrasted turns
of naturally intermingling locks ravish the eye with the pleasure of
the pursuit, especially when they are put in motion by a gentle breeze.
The poet knows it, as well as the painter, and has described the wanton
ringlets waving in the wind.

And yet to shew how excess ought to be avoided in intricacy, as well
as in every other principle, the very same head of hair, wisp'd, and
matted together, would make the most disagreeable figure; because
the eye would be perplex'd, and at a fault, and unable to trace
such a confused number of uncomposed and entangled lines; and yet
notwithstanding this, the present fashion the ladies have gone into, of
wearing a part of the hair of their heads braided together from behind,
like intertwisted serpents, arising thickest from the bottom, lessening
as it is brought forward, and naturally conforming to the shape of the
rest of the hair it is pin'd over, is extremely picturesque. Their thus
interlacing the hair in distinct varied quantities is an artful way of
preserving as much of intricacy, as is beautiful.




