CHAPTER VI.

_Of QUANTITY_.


Forms of magnitude, although ill-shaped, will however, on account of
their vastness, draw our attention and raise our admiration.

Huge shapeless rocks have a pleasing kind of horror in them, and the
wide ocean awes us with its vast contents; but when forms of beauty are
presented to the eye in large quantities, the pleasure increases on the
mind, and horror is soften'd into reverence.

How solemn and pleasing are groves of high grown trees, great churches,
and palaces? has not even a single spreading oak, grown to maturity,
acquir'd the character of the venerable oak?

Windsor castle is a noble instance of the effect of quantity. The
hugeness of its few distinct parts strikes the eye with uncommon
grandeur at a distance, as well as nigh. It is quantity, with
simplicity, which makes it one of the finest objects in the kingdom,
tho' void of any regular order of architecture.

The Façade of the old Louvre at Paris is also remarkable for its
quantity. This fragment is allow'd to be the finest piece of building
in France, tho' there are many equal, if not superior, to it in all
other respects, except that of quantity.

Who does not feel a pleasure when he pictures in his mind the immense
buildings which once adorn'd the lower Egypt, by imagining the whole
complete, and ornamented with colossal statues?

Elephants and whales please us with their unwieldy greatness. Even
large personages, merely for being so, command respect: nay, quantity
is an addition to the person which often supplies a deficiency in his
figure.

The robes of state are always made large and full, because they give
a grandeur of appearance, suitable to the offices of the greatest
distinction. The judge's robes have an awful dignity given them by the
quantity of their contents, and when the train is held up, there is a
noble waving line descending from the shoulders of the judge to the
hand of his train-bearer. So when the train is gently thrown aside, it
generally falls into a great variety of folds, which again employ the
eye, and fix its attention.

The grandeur of the Eastern dress, which so far surpasses the European,
depends as much on quantity as on costliness.

In a word, it is quantity which adds greatness to grace. But then
excess is to be avoided, or quantity will become clumsy, heavy, or
ridiculous.

[Illustration: Fig. 16]

The full-bottom wig, like the lion's mane, hath something noble in
it, and adds not only dignity, but sagacity to the countenance [fig.
16 p. I]: but were it to be worn as large again, it would become a
burlesque; or were an improper person to put it on, it would then too
be ridiculous.


When improper, or _incompatible_ excesses meet, they always excite
laughter; more especially when the forms of those excesses are
inelegant, that is, when they are composed of unvaried lines.

[Illustration: Figs. 17 and 18]

For example, the figure refer'd to in the margin [Fig. 17 p. I],
represents a fat grown face of a man, with an infant's cap on, and the
rest of the child's dress stuff'd, and so well placed under his chin,
as to seem to belong to that face. This is a contrivance I have seen at
Bartholomew-fair, and always occasion'd a roar of laughter. The next
[Fig. 18 p. I] is of the same kind, a child with a man's wig and cap
on. In these you see the ideas of youth and age jumbled together, in
forms without beauty.

[Illustration: Fig. 19]

So a Roman general [Fig. 19 p. I], dress'd by a modern tailor and
peruke-maker, for tragedy, is a comic figure.----The dresses of the
times are mix'd, and the lines which compose them are straight or only
round.

Dancing-masters, representing deities, in their grand ballets on the
stage, are no less ridiculous. See the Jupiter [Fig. 20 p. I].

[Illustration: Fig. 20]

Nevertheless custom and fashion will, in length of time, reconcile
almost every absurdity whatever, to the eye, or make it over-look'd.

It is from the same joining of opposite ideas that makes us laugh at
the owl and the ass, for under their aukward forms, they seem to be
gravely musing and meditating, as if they had the sense of human beings.

A monkey too whose figure, as well as most of his actions, so odly
resembles the human, is also very comical; and he becomes more so when
a coat is put on him, as he then becomes a greater burlesque on the man.

There is something extremely odd and comical in the rough shock dog.
The ideas here connected are the inelegant and inanimate figure of a
thrum mop, or muff, and that of a sensible, friendly animal; which is
as much a burlesque of the dog, as the monkey when his coat is on, is
of the man.

What can it be but this inelegance of the figure, join'd with
impropriety, that makes a whole audience burst into laughter, when they
see the miller's sack, in Dr. Faustus, jumping across the stage? was
a well-shap'd vase to do the same, it would equally surprise, but not
make every body laugh, because the elegance of the form would prevent
it.

For when the forms, thus join'd together, are each of them elegant,
and composed of agreeable lines, they will be so far from making us
laugh, that they will become entertaining to the imagination, as
well as pleasing to the eye. The sphinx and siren have been admired
and accounted ornamental in all ages. The former represents strength
and beauty join'd; the latter, beauty and swiftness, in pleasing and
graceful forms.

The griffin, a modern hieroglyphic, signifying strength and swiftness,
united in the two noble forms of the lion and eagle, is a grand object.
So the antique centaur hath a savage greatness as well as beauty.

These may be said to be monsters, it's true, but then they convey
such noble ideas, and have such elegance in their forms as greatly
compensates for their being unnaturally join'd together.

I shall mention but one more instance of this sort, and that the most
extraordinary of all, which is an infant's head of about two years old,
with a pair of duck's-wings placed under its chin, supposed always to
be flying about, and singing psalms [Fig. 22 R p. I].

[Illustration: Fig. 22]

A painter's representation of heaven would be nothing without swarms
of these little inconsistent objects, flying about, or perching on the
clouds; and yet there is something so agreeable in their form, that the
eye is reconciled and overlooks the absurdity, and we find them in the
carving and painting of almost every church. St. Paul's is full of them.

       *       *       *       *       *

As the foregoing principles are the very ground work of what is to
follow; we will, in order to make them the more familiar to us, just
speak of them in the way they are daily put in practice, and may be
seen, in every dress that is worn; and we shall find not only that
ladies of fashion, but that women of every rank, who are said to
dress prettily, have known their force, without considering them as
principles.

       *       *       *       *       *

I. Fitness is first considered by them, as knowing that their dresses
should be useful, commodious, and fitted to their different ages; or
rich, airy, and loose, agreeable to the character they would give out
to the public by their dress.

       *       *       *       *       *

II. Uniformity is chiefly complied with in dress on account of fitness,
and seems to be extended not much farther than dressing both arms
alike, and having the shoes of the same colour. For when any part of
dress has not the excuse of fitness or propriety for its uniformity of
parts, the ladies always call it _formal_.

For which reason, when they are at liberty to make what shapes they
please in ornamenting their persons, those of the best taste choose the
irregular as the more engaging: for example, no two patches are ever
chosen of the same size, or placed at the same height; nor a single one
in the middle of a feature, unless it be to hide a blemish. So a single
feather, flower, or jewel is generally placed on one side of the head;
or if ever put in front, it is turn'd awry to avoid formality.

It was once the fashion to have two curls of equal size, stuck at the
same height close upon the forehead, which probably took its rise from
seeing the pretty effect of curls falling loosely over the face.

A lock of hair falling thus cross the temples, and by that means
breaking the regularity of the oval, has an effect too alluring to be
strictly decent, as is very well known to the loose and lowest class of
women: but being pair'd in so stiff a manner, as they formerly were,
they lost the desired effect, and ill deserv'd the name of favourites.

       *       *       *       *       *

III. Variety in dress, both as to colour and form, is the constant
study of the young and gay----But then,

       *       *       *       *       *

IV. That taudriness may not destroy the proper effect of variety,
simplicity is call'd in to restrain its superfluities, and is often
very artfully made use of to set native beauty off to more advantage.
I have not known any set of people, that have more excell'd in this
principle of simplicity, or plainness, than the Quakers.

       *       *       *       *       *

V. Quantity, or fulness in dress has ever been a darling principle;
so that sometimes those parts of dress, which would properly admit of
being extended to a great degree, have been carried into such strange
excesses, that in the reign of Queen Elizabeth a law was made to put a
stop to the growth of ruffs: nor is the enormous size of the hoops at
present, a less sufficient proof of the extraordinary love of quantity
in dress, beyond that of convenience or elegance.

       *       *       *       *       *

VI. The beauty of intricacy lies in contriving winding shapes, such as
the antique lappets belonging to the head of the sphinx [Fig. 21 p. I],
or as the modern lappet when it is brought before. Every part of dress,
that will admit of the application of this principle, has an air (as it
is term'd) given to it thereby; and altho' it requires dexterity and a
taste to execute these windings well, we find them daily practised with
success.

[Illustration: Fig. 21]

This principle also recommends modesty in dress, to keep up our
expectations, and not suffer them to be too soon gratified. Therefore
the body and limbs should all be cover'd, and little more than certain
hints be given of them thro' the cloathing.

The face indeed will bear a constant view, yet always entertain and
keep our curiosity awake, without the assistance either of a mask, or
veil; because vast variety of changing circumstances keeps the eye
and the mind in constant play, in following the numberless turns of
expression it is capable of. How soon does a face that wants expression
grow insipid, tho' it be ever so pretty?--The rest of the body, not
having these advantages in common with the face, would soon satiate the
eye, were it to be as constantly exposed, nor would it have more effect
than a marble statue. But when it is artfully cloath'd and decorated,
the mind at every turn resumes its imaginary pursuits concerning it.
Thus, if I may be allow'd a simile, the angler chooses not to see the
fish he angles for, until it is fairly caught.




