Chapter IV on simplicity: the painters accordingly divide theirs into
fore-ground, middle-ground, and distance or back-ground; which simple
and distinct quantities _mass_ together that variety which entertains
the eye; as the different parts of base, tenor, and treble, in a
composition in music, entertain the ear.

Let these principles be reversed, or neglected, the the light and shade
will appear as disagreeable as fig. [91 T p. II], whereas, was this to
be a composition of lights and shades only, properly disposed, tho'
ranged under no particular figures, it might still have the pleasing
effect of a picture. And here, as it would be endless to enter upon the
different effects of lights and shades on lucid and transparent bodies,
we shall leave them to the reader's observation, and so conclude this
chapter.

[Illustration: Fig. 91]




CHAPTER XIV.

_Of COLOURING_.


By the beauty of colouring, the painters mean that disposition of
colours on objects, together with their proper shades, which appear
at the same time both distinctly varied and artfully united, in
compositions of any kind; but, by way of pre-eminence, it is generally
understood of flesh-colour, when no other composition is named.

To avoid confusion, and having already said enough of retiring
shades, I shall now only describe the nature and effect of the prime
tint of flesh; for the composition of this, when rightly understood,
comprehends every thing that can be said of the colouring of all other
objects whatever.

And herein (as has been shewn in Chapter VIII, of the manner of
composing pleasing forms) the whole process will depend upon the art of
varying; i. e. upon an artful manner of varying every colour belonging
to flesh, under the direction of the six fundamental principles there
spoken of.

But before we proceed to shew in what manner these principles conduce
to this design, we shall take a view of nature's curious ways of
producing all sorts of complexions, which may help to further our
conception of the principles of varying colours, so as to see why they
cause the effect of beauty.

It is well known, the fair young girl, the brown old man, and the
negro; nay, all mankind, have the same appearance, and are alike
disagreeable to the eye, when the upper skin is taken away: now to
conceal so disagreeable an object, and to produce that variety of
complexions seen in the world, nature hath contrived a transparent
skin, called the cuticula, with a lining to it of a very extraordinary
kind, called the cutis; both which are so thin any little scald
will make them blister and peel off. These adhering skins are more
or less transparent in some parts of the body than in others, and
likewise different in different persons. The cuticula alone is like
gold-beaters-skin, a little wet, but somewhat thinner, especially
in fair young people, which would shew the fat, lean, and all the
blood-vessels, just as they lie under it, as through Isinglass, were it
not for its lining the cutis, which is so curiously constructed, as to
exhibit those things beneath it which are necessary to life and motion,
in pleasing arrangements and dispositions of beauty.

The cutis is composed of tender threads like network, fill'd with
different colour'd juices. The white juice serves to make the very fair
complexion;--yellow, makes the brunnet;--brownish yellow, the ruddy
brown;--green yellow, the olive;--dark brown, the mulatto;--black, the
negro;--These different colour'd juices, together with the different
_meshes_ of the network, and the size of its threads in this or that
part, causes the variety of complexions.

A description of this manner of its shewing the rosy colour of the
cheek, and, in like manner, the bluish tints about the temple, &c. see
in the profile [fig. 95 T p. II], where you are to suppose the black
strokes of the print to be the white threads of the network, and where
the strokes are thickest, and the part blackest, you are to suppose the
flesh would be whitest; so that the lighter part of it stands for the
vermilion-colour of the cheek, gradating every way.

[Illustration: Fig. 95]

Some persons have the network so equally wove over the whole body, face
and all, that the greatest heat or cold will hardly make them change
their colour; and these are seldom seen to blush, tho' ever so bashful,
whilst the texture is so fine in some young women, that they redden, or
turn pale, on the least occasion.

I am apt to think the texture of this network is of a very tender
kind, subject to damage many ways, but able to recover itself again,
especially in youth. The fair fat healthy child of 3 or 4 years old
hath it in great perfection; most visible when it is moderately warm,
but till that age somewhat imperfect.

It is in this manner, then, that nature seems to do her work.--And
now let us see how by art the like appearance may be made and penciled
on the surface of a uniform coloured statue of wax or marble; by
describing which operation we shall still more particularly point out
what is to our present purpose: I mean the reason why the order nature
hath thus made use of should strike us with the idea of beauty; which
by the way, perhaps may be of more use to some painters than they will
care to own.

[Illustration: Fig. 94]

There are but three original colours in painting besides black and
white, viz. red, yellow and blue. Green, and purple, are compounded;
the first of blue and yellow, the latter of red and blue: however these
compounds being so distinctly different from the original colours,
we will rank them as such. Fig. [94 T p. II], represents mixt up, as
on a painter's pallet, scales of these five original colours divided
into seven classes--1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.--4, is the medium, and most
brillant class, being that which will appear a firm red, when those of
5, 6, 7, would deviate into white, and those of 1, 2, 3, would sink
into black, either by twilight or at a moderate distance from the
eye, which shews 4 to be brightest, and a more permanent colour than
the rest. But as white is nearest to light it may be said to be equal
if not superior in value as to beauty, with class 4. Therefore the
classes 5, 6, 7, have also, almost equal beauty with it too, because
what they lose of their brillancy and permanency of colour, they gain
from the white or light; whereas 3, 2, 1, absolutely lose their beauty
by degrees as they approach nearer to black, the representative of
darkness.

Let us then, for distinction and pre-eminence sake, call class 4 of
each colour, _bloom tints_, or if you please, virgin tints, as the
painters call them; and once more recollect, that in the disposition
of colours as well as of forms, variety, simplicity, distinctness,
intricacy, uniformity and quantity, direct in giving beauty to the
colouring of the human frame, especially if we include the face, where
uniformity and strong opposition of tints are required, as in the eyes
and mouth, which call most for our attention. But for the general hue
of flesh now to be described, variety, intricacy and simplicity, are
chiefly required.

The value of the degrees of colour being thus consider'd and ranged in
order upon the pallet, figure 94, let us next apply them to a busto,
fig. [96 R p. II], of white marble, which may be supposed to let every
tint sink into it, like as a drop of ink sinks in and spreads itself
upon course paper, whereby each tint will gradate all around.

[Illustration: Fig. 96]

If you would have the neck of the busto tinged of a very florid and
lively complexion, the pencil must be dipt in the bloom tints of
each colour as they stand one above another at No. 4.--if for a less
florid, in those of No. 5--if for a very fair, from No. 6--and so on
till the marble would scarce be ting'd at all: let therefore No. 6, be
our present choice, and begin with penciling on the red, as at r, the
yellow tint at y, the blue tint at b, and the purple or lake tint at p.

These four tints thus laid on, proceed to covering the whole neck and
breast, but still changing and varying the situations of the tints with
one another, also causing their shapes and sizes to differ as much as
possible; red must be oftenest repeated, yellow next often, purple red
next, and blue but seldom, except in particular parts as the temples,
backs of the hands, &c. where the larger veins shew their branching
shapes (sometimes too distinctly) still varying those appearances.
But there are no doubt infinite variations in nature, from what may
be called the most beautiful order and disposition of the colours in
flesh, not only in different persons, but in different parts of the
same, all subject to the same principles in some degree or other.

Now if we imagine this whole process to be made with the tender tints
of class 7, as they are supposed to stand, red, yellow, blue, green and
purple, underneath each other; the general hue of the performance will
be a seeming uniform prime tint, at any little distance, that is a very
fair, transparent and pearl-like complexion; but never quite uniform as
snow, ivory, marble or wax, like a poet's mistress, for either of these
in living-flesh, would in truth be hideous.

As in nature, by the general yellowish hue of the cuticula, the
gradating of one colour into another appears to be more delicately
soften'd and united together; so will the colours we are supposed to
have been laying upon the busto, appear to be more united and mellowed
by the oils they are ground in, which takes a yellowish cast after a
little time, but is apt to do more mischief hereby than good; for which
reason care is taken to procure such oil as is clearest, and will best
keep its colour[18] in oil painting.

[18] Notwithstanding the deep-rooted notion, even among the majority of
painters themselves, that time is a great improver of good pictures,
I will undertake to shew, that nothing can be more absurd. Having
mention'd above the whole effect of the oil, let us now see in what
manner time operates on colours themselves; in order to discover if any
changes in them can give a picture more union and harmony than has been
in the power of a skilful master, with all his rules of art, to do.
When colours change at all it must be somewhat in the manner following,
for as they are made some of metal, some of earth, some of stone,
and others of more perishable materials, time cannot operate on them
otherwise than as by daily experience we find it doth, which is, that
one changes darker, another lighter, one quite to a different colour,
whilst another, as ultramarine, will keep its natural brightness
even in the fire. Therefore how is it possible that such different
materials, ever variously changing (visibly after a certain time)
should accidentally coincide with the artist's intention, and bring
about the greater harmony of the piece, when it is manifestly contrary
to their nature, for do we not see in most collections that much time
disunites, untunes, blackens, and by degrees destroys even the best
preserved pictures.

But if for argument sake we suppose, that the colours were to fall
equally together, let us see what advantage this would give to any sort
of composition. We will begin with a flower-piece: when a master hath
painted a rose, a lily, an african, a gentianella, or violet, with
his best art, and brightest colours, how far short do they fall of
the freshness and rich brillancy of nature; and shall we wish to see
them fall still lower, more faint, sullied, and dirtied by the hand
of time, and then admire them as having gained an additional beauty,
and call them mended and heightened, rather than fouled, and in a
manner destroy'd; how absurd! Instead of mellow and softened therefore,
always read yellow and sullied, for this is doing time the destroyer,
but common justice. Or shall we desire to see complexions, which in
life are often, literally, as brillant as the flowers above-mention'd,
served in the like ungrateful manner. In a landskip, will the water
be more transparent, or the sky shine with a greater lustre when
embrown'd and darken'd by decay? surely no. I own it would be a pity
that Mr. Addison's beautiful description of time at work in the gallery
of pictures, and the following lines of Mr. Dryden, should want a
sufficient foundation;--

    For time shall with his ready pencil stand,
    Retouch your figures with his ripening hand;
    Mellow your colours, and imbrown the tint;
    Add every grace which time alone can grant;
    To future ages shall your fame convey,
    And give more beauties than he takes away.   Dryden to Kneller.

were it not that the error they are built upon, hath been a continual
blight to the growth of the art, by misguiding both the proficient,
and the encourager; and often compelling the former, contrary to his
judgment, to imitate the damaged hue of decayed pictures; so that when
his works undergo the like injuries, they must have a double remove
from nature; which puts it in the power of the meanest observer to see
his deficiencies. Whence another absurd notion hath taken rise, viz.
that the colours now-a-days do not stand so well as formerly; whereas
colours well prepared, in which there is but little art or expence,
have, and will always have, the same properties in every age, and
without accidents, as damps, bad varnish, and the like (being laid
separate and pure,) will stand and keep together for many years in
defiance of time itself.

In proof of this, let any one take a view of the cieling at
Greenwich-hospital, painted by Sir James Thornhil, forty years ago,
which still remains fresh, strong and clear as if it had been finished
but yesterday: and altho' several french writers have so learnedly,
and philosophically proved, that the air of this island is too thick,
or--too something, for the genius of a painter; yet France in all
her palaces can hardly boast of a nobler, more judicious, or richer
performance of its kind. Note, the upper end of the hall where the
royal family is painted, was left chiefly to the pencil of Mr. Andrea
a foreigner, after the payment originally agreed upon for the work was
so much reduced, as made it not worth Sir James's while to finish the
whole with his own more masterly hand.

Upon the whole of this account we find, that the utmost beauty of
colouring depends on the great principle of varying by all the means
of varying, and on the proper and artful union of that variety; which
may be farther proved by supposing the rules here laid down, all or any
part of them reversed.

I am apt to believe, that the not knowing nature's artful, and
intricate method of uniting colours for the production of the
variegated composition, or prime tint of flesh, hath made colouring,
in the art of painting, a kind of mystery in all ages; insomuch, that
it may fairly be said, out of the many thousands who have labour'd to
attain it, not above ten or twelve painters have happily succeeded
therein, Corregio (who lived in a country-village, and had nothing but
the life to study after) is said almost to have stood alone for this
particular excellence. Guido, who made beauty his chief aim, was always
at a loss about it. Poussin scarce ever obtained a glimpse of it, as
is manifest by his many different attempts: indeed France hath not
produced one remarkably good colourist[19].

[19] The lame excuse writers on painting have made for the many great
masters that have fail'd in this particular, is, that they purposely
deaden'd their colours, and kept them, what they affectedly call'd
_chaste_, that the correctness of their outlines might be seen to
greater advantage. Whereas colours cannot be too brillant if properly
disposed, because the distinction of the parts are thereby made more
perfect; as may be seen by comparing a marble busto with the variegated
colours of the face either in the life, or well painted: it is true,
uncomposed variety, either in the features or the limbs, as being
daubed with many, or one colour, will so confound the parts as to
render them unintelligible.

Rubens boldly, and in a masterly manner, kept his bloom tints bright,
separate, and distinct, but sometimes too much so for easel or cabinet
pictures; however, his manner was admirably well calculated for great
works, to be seen at a considerable distance, such as his celebrated
cieling at Whitehall-chapel[20]: which upon a nearer view, will
illustrate what I have advanc'd with regard to the separate brightness
of the tints; and shew, what indeed is known to every painter, that
had the colours there seen so bright and separate, been all smooth'd
and absolutely blended together, they would have produced a dirty grey
instead of flesh-colour. The difficulty then lies in bringing _blue_
the third original colour, into flesh, on account of the vast variety
introduced thereby; and this omitted, all the difficulty ceases; and a
common sign-painter that lays his colours smooth, instantly becomes, in
point of colouring, a Rubens, a Titian, or a Corregio.

[20] The front of this building by Inigo Jones, is an additional
exemplification of the principles for varying the parts in building;
(explained by the candlesticks, &c. Chapter VIII) which would appear
to be a stronger proof still, were a building formed of squares, on
squares; with squares uniformly cut in each square to be opposed to it,
to shew the reverse.




