CHAPTER II.

_Of VARIETY_.


How great a share variety has in producing beauty may be seen in the
ornamental part of nature.

The shapes and colours of plants, flowers, leaves, the paintings in
butterflies wings, shells, &c. seem of little other intended use, than
that of entertaining the eye with the pleasure of variety.

All the senses delight in it, and equally are averse to sameness. The
ear is as much offended with one even continued note, as the eye is
with being fix'd to a point, or to the view of a dead wall.

Yet when the eye is glutted with a succession of variety, it finds
relief in a certain degree of sameness; and even plain space becomes
agreeable, and properly introduced, and contrasted with variety, adds
to it more variety.

I mean here, and every where indeed, a composed variety; for variety
uncomposed, and without design, is confusion and deformity.

Observe, that a gradual lessening is a kind of varying that gives
beauty. The pyramid diminishing from its basis to its point, and the
scroll or voluta, gradually lessening to its center, are beautiful
forms. So also objects that only seem to do so, though in fact they do
not, have equal beauty: thus perspective views, and particularly those
of buildings, are always pleasing to the eye.

The little ship, between figure 47 and 88 [p. I], suppos'd moving
along the shore even with the eye, might have its top and bottom
bounded by two lines at equal distances all the way, as A; but if the
ship puts out to sea, these lines at top and bottom would seem to
vary and meet each other by degrees, as B, in the point C, which is
in the line where the sky and water meets, call'd the horizon. Thus
much of the manner of perspectives adding beauty, by seemingly varying
otherwise unvaried forms, I thought, might be acceptable to those, who
have not learnt perspective.

[Illustration: Fig. between Figs. 47 and 88]




CHAPTER III.

_Of UNIFORMITY, REGULARITY, or SYMMETRY_.


It may be imagined that the greatest part of the effects of beauty
results from the symmetry of parts in the object, which is beautiful:
but I am very well persuaded, this prevailing notion will soon appear
to have little or no foundation.

It may indeed have properties of greater consequence, such as
propriety, fitness, and use; and yet but little serve the purposes of
pleasing the eye, merely on the score of beauty.

We have, indeed, in our nature a love of imitation from our infancy,
and the eye is often entertained, as well as surprised, with mimicry,
and delighted with the exactness of counterparts: but then this always
gives way to its superior love of variety, and soon grows tiresom.

If the uniformity of figures, parts, or lines were truly the chief
cause of beauty, the more exactly uniform their appearances were kept,
the more pleasure the eye would receive: but this is so far from being
the case, that when the mind has been once satisfied, that the parts
answer one another, with so exact an uniformity, as to preserve to the
whole the character of fitness to stand, to move, to sink, to swim, to
fly, &c. without losing the balance: the eye is rejoiced to see the
object turn'd, and shifted, so as to vary these uniform appearances.

Thus the profile of most objects, as well as faces, are rather more
pleasing than their full fronts.

Whence it is clear, the pleasure does not arise from seeing the exact
resemblance, which one side bears the other, but from the knowledge
that they do so on account of fitness, with design, and for use. For
when the head of a fine woman is turn'd a little to one side, which
takes off from the exact similarity of the two halves of the face,
and somewhat reclining, so varying still more from the straight and
parallel lines of a formal front face: it is always look'd upon as most
pleasing. This is accordingly said to be a graceful air of the head.

It is a constant rule in composition in painting to avoid regularity.
When we view a building, or any other object in life, we have it in our
power, by shifting the ground, to take that view of it which pleases
us best; and in consequence of this, the painter if he is left to his
choice, takes it on the angle rather than in front, as most agreeable
to the eye; because the regularity of the lines is taken away by their
running into perspective, without losing the idea of fitness: and when
he is of necessity obliged to give the front of a building, with all
its equalities and parallelisms, he generally breaks (as it is term'd)
such disagreeable appearances, by throwing a tree before it, or the
shadow of an imaginary cloud, or some other object that may answer the
same purpose of adding variety, which is the same with taking away
uniformity.

If uniform objects were agreeable, why is there such care taken to
contrast, and vary all the limbs of a statue?

[Illustration: Figs. 72, 6 and 7]

The picture of Henry the Eighth [Fig. 72 p. II], would be preferable to
the finely contrasted figures of Guido or Correggio; and the Antinous's
easy sway [Fig. 6 p. I], must submit to the stiff and straight figure
of the dancing-master [Fig. 7 p. I]; and the uniform out-lines of the
muscles in the figure [Fig. 55 p. I] taken from Albert Durer's book of
proportions, would have more taste in them than those in the famous
part of an antique figure [Fig. 54 p. I] from which Michael Angelo
acquired so much of his skill in grace.

[Illustration: Figs. 55 and 54]

In short, whatever appears to be fit, and proper to answer great
purposes, ever satisfies the mind, and pleases on that account.
Uniformity is of this kind. We find it necessary, in some degree, to
give the idea of rest and motion, without the possibility of falling.
But when any such purposes can be as well effected by more irregular
parts, the eye is always better pleased on the account of variety.

How pleasingly is the idea of firmness in standing convey'd to the eye
by the three elegant claws of a table, the three feet of a tea-lamp, or
the celebrated tripod of the ancients?

Thus you see regularity, uniformity, or symmetry, please only as they
serve to give the idea of fitness.




