CHAPTER XI.

_Of PROPORTION_.


If anyone should ask, what it is that constitutes a fine-proportion'd
human figure? how ready and seemingly decisive is the common answer: _a
just symmetry and harmony of parts with respect to the whole_. But as
probably this vague answer took its rise from doctrines not belonging
to form, or idle schemes built on them, I apprehend it will cease to be
thought much to the purpose after a proper enquiry has been made.

Preparatory to which, it becomes necessary in this place, to mention
one reason more which may be added to those given in the introduction,
for my having persuaded the reader to consider objects scoop'd out like
thin shells; which is, that partly by this conception, he may be the
better able to separate and keep asunder the two following _general
ideas_, as we will call them, belonging to form; which are apt to
coincide and mix with each other in the mind, and which it is necessary
(for the sake of making each more fully and particularly clear) should
be kept apart, and consider'd singly.

First, the _general ideas_ of what hath already been discussed in the
foregoing chapters, which only comprehends the surface of form, viewing
it in no other light than merely as being ornamental or not.

Secondly, that _general idea_, now to be discussed, which we commonly
have of form altogether, as arising chiefly from a fitness to some
design'd purpose or use.

Hitherto our main drift hath been to establish and illustrate the
first idea only, by shewing, first the nature of variety, and then its
effects on the mind; with the manner how such impressions are made by
means of the different feelings given to the eye, from its movements in
tracing and coursing[5] over surfaces of all kinds.

[5] See Chapter V, page 25.

The surface of a piece of ornament, that hath every turn in it that
lines are capable of moving into, and at the same time no way applied,
nor of any manner of use, but merely to entertain the eye, would be
such an object as would answer to this first idea alone.

The figure like a leaf, at the bottom of plate I, near to fig. 67, is
something of this kind; it was taken from an ash-tree, and was a sort
of Lusus naturæ, growing only like an excressence, but so beautiful
in the lines of its shell-like windings, as would have been above the
power of a Gibbons to have equalled, even in its own materials; nor
could the graver of an Edlinck, or Drevet, have done it justice on
copper.

[Illustration: Fig. near Fig. 67]

Note, the present taste of ornaments seems to have been partly taken
from productions of this sort, which are to be found about autumn among
plants, particularly asparagus, when it is running to seed.

I shall now endeavour to explain what is included in what I have called
for distinction sake, the second _general idea_ of form, in a much
fuller manner than was done in Chapter I, of Fitness. And begin with
observing, that though surfaces will unavoidably be still included, yet
we must no longer confine ourselves to the particular notice of them as
surfaces only, as we heretofore have done; we must now open our view to
general, as well as particular bulk and solidity; and also look into
what may have filled up, or given rise thereto, such as certain _given_
quantities and dimensions of parts, for inclosing any substance, or for
performing of _motion, purchase, stedfastness,_ and other matters of
use to living beings, which, I apprehend, at length, will bring us to a
tolerable conception of the word _proportion_.

As to these _joint-sensations_ of bulk and motion, do we not at first
sight almost, even without making trial, seem to _feel_ when a leaver
of any kind is too weak, or not long enough to make such or such a
purchase? or when a spring is not sufficient? and don't we find by
experience what weight, or dimension should be given, or taken away, on
this or that account? if so, as the general as well as particular bulks
of form, are made up of materials moulded together under mechanical
directions, for some known purpose or other; how naturally, from these
considerations, shall we fall into a judgment of _fit proportion_;
which is one part of beauty to the mind tho' not always so to the eye.

Our necessities have taught us to mould matter into various shapes,
and to give them fit proportions for particular uses, as bottles,
glasses, knives, dishes, &c. Hath not offence given rise to the
form of the sword, and defence to that of the shield? And what else
but proper fitness of parts hath fix'd the different dimensions of
pistols, muskets, great guns, fowling-pieces and blunderbusses; which
differences as to figure, may as properly be called the different
characters of fire-arms, as the different shapes of men are called
characters of men.

We find also that the profuse variety of shapes, which present
themselves from the whole animal creation, arise chiefly from the
nice fitness of their parts, designed for accomplishing the peculiar
movements of each.

And here I think will be the proper place to speak of a most curious
difference between the living machines of nature, in respect of
fitness, and such poor ones, in comparison with them, as men are only
capable of making; by means of which distinction, I am in hopes of
shewing what particularly constitutes the utmost beauty of proportion
in the human figure.

A clock, by the government's order, has been made, and another
now making, by Mr. Harrison, for the keeping of true time at sea;
which perhaps is one of the most exquisite movements ever made.
Happy the ingenious contriver! although the form of the whole, or of
every part of this curious machine, should be ever so confused, or
displeasingly shaped to the eye; and although even its movements should
be disagreeable to look at, provided it answers the end proposed. An
ornamental composition was no part of his scheme, otherwise than as
a pollish might be necessary. If ornaments are required to be added
to mend its shape, care must be taken that they are no obstruction to
the movement itself, and the more as they would be superfluous, as to
the main design.--But in nature's machines, how wonderfully do we see
beauty and use go hand in hand!

Had a machine for this purpose been nature's work, the whole and every
individual part would have had exquisite beauty of form without danger
of destroying the exquisiteness of its motion, even as if ornament had
been the sole aim; its movements too would have been graceful, without
one superfluous tittle added for either of these lovely purposes.--Now
this is that curious difference between the fitness of nature's
machines (one of which is man) and those made by mortal hands: which
distinction is to lead us to our main point proposed; I mean, to the
shewing what constitutes the utmost beauty of proportion.

There was brought from France some years ago, a little clock-work
machine, with a duck's head and legs fixt to it, which was so contrived
as to have some resemblance of that animal standing upon one foot,
and stretching back its leg, turning its head, opening and shutting
its bill, moving its wings, and shaking its tail; all of them the
plainest and easiest directions in living movements: yet for the
poorly performing of these few motions, this silly, but much extoll'd
machine, being uncover'd, appeared a most complicated, confused, and
disagreeable object: nor would its being covered with a skin closely
adhering to its parts, as that of a real duck's doth, have much
mended its figure; at best, a bag of hob-nails, broken hinges, and
patten-rings, would have looked as well, unless by other means it had
been stuffed out to bring it into form.

Thus again you see, the more variety we pretend to give to our trifling
movements, the more confused and unornamental the forms become; nay
chance but seldom helps them.--How much the reverse are nature's! the
greater the variety her movements have, the more beautiful are the
parts that cause them.

The finny race of animals, as they have fewer motions than other
creatures, so are their forms less remarkable for beauty. It is also
to be noted of every species, that the handsomest of each move best:
birds of a clumsy make seldom fly well, nor do lumpy fish glide so well
through the water as those of a neater make; and beasts of the most
elegant form, always excel in speed; of this, the horse and greyhound
are beautiful examples: and even among themselves, the most elegantly
made seldom fail of being the swiftest.

The war-horse is more equally made for strength than the race-horse,
which surplus of power in the former, if suppos'd added to the latter,
as it would throw more weight into improper parts for the business
of mere speed, so of course it would lessen, in some degree, that
admirable quality, and partly destroy that delicate fitness of his
make; but then a quality in movement, superior to that of speed, would
be given to him by the addition, as he would be render'd thereby more
fit to move with ease in such varied, or graceful directions, as are so
delightful to the eye in the carriage of the fine manag'd war-horse;
and as at the same time, something stately and graceful would be added
to his figure, which before could only be said to have an elegant
neatness. This noble creature stands foremost among brutes; and it is
but consistent with nature's propriety, that the most useful animal in
the brute-creation, should be thus signalized also for the most beauty.

Yet, properly speaking, no living creatures are capable of moving in
such truly varied and graceful directions, as the human species; and
it would be needless to say how much superior in beauty their forms
and textures likewise are. And surely also after what has been said
relating to figure and motion, it is plain and evident that nature
has thought fit to make beauty of proportion, and beauty of movement,
necessary to each other: so that the observation before made on
animals, will hold equally good with regard to man: i. e. that he who
is most exquisitely well-proportion'd is most capable of exquisite
movements, such as ease and _grace in deportment_, or in dancing.

It may be a sort of collateral confirmation of what has been said of
this method of nature's working, as well as otherwise worth our notice,
that when any parts belonging to the human body are conceal'd, and
not immediately concern'd in movement, all such ornamental shapes, as
evidently appear in the muscles and bones[6], are totally neglected as
unnecessary, for nature doth nothing in vain! this is plainly the case
of the intestines, none of them having the least beauty, as to form,
except the _heart_; which noble part, and indeed kind of first mover,
is a simple and well-varied figure; conformable to which, some of the
most elegant Roman urns and vases have been fashion'd.

[6] See Chapter IX on Compositions with the Serpentine-line.

Now, thus much being kept in remembrance, our next step will be to
speak of, first, general measurements; such as the whole height of the
body to its breadth, or the length of a limb to its thickness: and,
secondly, of such appearances of dimensions as are too intricately
varied to admit of a description by lines.

The former will be confined to a very few straight lines, crossing each
other, which will easily be understood by everyone; but the latter
will require somewhat more attention, because it will extend to the
precision of every modification, bound, or limit, of the human figure.

To be somewhat more explicit. As to the first part, I shall begin
with shewing what practicable sort of measuring may be used in order
to produce the most proper variety in the proportions of the parts of
any body. I say, _practicable_, because the vast variety of intricately
situated parts, belonging to the human form, will not admit of
measuring the distances of one part by another, by lines or points,
beyond a certain degree or number, without great perplexity in the
operation itself, or confusion to the imagination. For instance, say, a
line representing one breadth and an half of the wrist, would be equal
to the true breadth of the thickest part of the arm above the elbow;
may it not then be ask'd, what part of the wrist is meant? for if you
place a pair of calipers a little nearer or further from the hand, the
distance of the points will differ, and so they will if they are moved
close to the wrist all round, because it is flatter one way than the
other; but suppose, for argument sake, one certain diameter should be
fix'd upon; may it not again be ask'd, how is it to be apply'd, if to
the flattest side of the arm or the roundest, and how far from the
elbow, and must it be when the arm is extended or when it is bent?
for this also will make a sensible difference, because in the latter
position, the muscle, call'd the biceps, in the front of that part of
the arm, swells up like a ball one way, and narrows itself another; nay
all the muscles shift their appearances in different movements, so that
whatever may have been pretended by some authors, no exact mathematical
measurements by lines, can be given for the true proportion of a human
body.

[Illustration: Figs. 68 and 55]

It comes then to this, that no longer than whilst we suppose all
the lengths and breadths of the body, or limbs, to be as regular
figures as cylinders, or as the leg, figure 68 in plate I, which is
as round as a rolling-stone, are the measures of lengths to breadths
practicable, or of any use to the knowledge of proportion: so that as
all mathematical schemes are foreign to this purpose, we will endeavour
to root them quite out of our way: therefore I must not omit taking
notice, that Albert Durer, Lomazzo, (see two tasteless figures taken
from their books of proportion [Fig. 55 p. I]) and some others, have
not only puzzled mankind with a heap of minute unnecessary divisions,
but also with a strange _notion_ that those divisions are govern'd by
the laws of music; which mistake they seem to have been led into, by
having seen certain uniform and consonant divisions upon one string
produce harmony to the ear, and by persuading themselves, that similar
distances in lines belonging to form, would, in like manner, delight
the eye. The very reverse of which has been shewn to be true, in
