VIII

THE KINGS OF ORION

  "An ape and a lion lie side by side in the heart of a man."
    --PERSIAN PROVERB


Spring-fishing in the North is a cold game for a man whose blood has
become thin in gentler climates.  All afternoon I had failed to stir a
fish, and the wan streams of the Laver, swirling between bare grey
banks, were as icy to the eye as the sharp gusts of hail from the
north-east were to the fingers.  I cast mechanically till I grew weary,
and then with an empty creel and a villainous temper set myself to
trudge the two miles of bent to the inn.  Some distant ridges of hill
stood out snow-clad against the dun sky, and half in anger, half in
dismal satisfaction, I told myself that fishing to-morrow would be as
barren as to-day.

At the inn door a tall man was stamping his feet and watching a servant
lifting rodcases from a dog-cart.  Hooded and wrapped though he was, my
friend Thirlstone was an unmistakable figure in any landscape.  The
long, haggard, brown face, with the skin drawn tightly over the
cheek-bones, the keen blue eyes finely wrinkled round the corners with
staring at many suns, the scar which gave his mouth a humorous droop to
the right, made up a whole which was not easily forgotten.  I had last
seen him on the quay at Funchal bargaining with some rascally boatman
to take him after mythical wild goats in Las Desertas.  Before that we
had met at an embassy ball in Vienna, and still earlier at a
hill-station in Persia to which I had been sent post-haste by an
anxious and embarrassed Government.  Also I had been at school with
him, in those far-away days when we rode nine stone and dreamed of
cricket averages.  He was a soldier of note, who had taken part in two
little wars and one big one; had himself conducted a political mission
through a hard country with some success, and was habitually chosen by
his superiors to keep his eyes open as a foreign attache in our
neighbours' wars.  But his fame as a hunter had gone abroad into places
where even the name of the British army is unknown.  He was the
hungriest shikari I have ever seen, and I have seen many.  If you are
wise you will go forthwith to some library and procure a little book
entitled "Three Hunting Expeditions," by A.W.T.  It is a modest work,
and the style is that of a leading article, but all the lore and
passion of the Red Gods are in its pages.

The sitting-room at the inn is a place of comfort, and while Thirlstone
warmed his long back at the fire I sank contentedly into one of the
well-rubbed leather arm-chairs.  The company of a friend made the
weather and scarcity of salmon less the intolerable grievance they had
seemed an hour ago than a joke to be laughed at.  The landlord came in
with whisky, and banked up the peats till they glowed beneath a pall of
blue smoke.

"I hope to goodness we are alone," said Thirlstone, and he turned to
the retreating landlord and asked the question.

"There's naebody bidin' the nicht forbye yoursels," he said, "but the
morn there's a gentleman comin'.  I got a letter frae him the day.
Maister Wiston, they ca him.  Maybe ye ken him?"

I started at the name, which I knew very well.  Thirlstone, who knew it
better, stopped warming himself and walked to the window, where he
stood pulling his moustache and staring at the snow.  When the man had
left the room, he turned to me with the face of one whose mind is made
up on a course but uncertain of the best method.

"Do you know this sort of weather looks infernally unpromising?  I've
half a mind to chuck it and go back to town."

I gave him no encouragement, finding amusement in his difficulties.
"Oh, it's not so bad,"  I said, "and it won't last.  To-morrow we may
have the day of our lives."

He was silent for a little, staring at the fire. "Anyhow," he said at
last, "we were fools to be so far up the valley.  Why shouldn't we go
down to the Forest Lodge?  They'll take us in, and we should be
deucedly comfortable, and the water's better."

"There's not a pool on the river to touch the stretch here,"  I said.
"I know, for I've fished every inch of it."

He had no reply to this, so he lit a pipe and held his peace for a
time.  Then, with some embarrassment but the air of having made a
discovery, he announced that his conscience was troubling him about his
work, and he thought he ought to get back to it at once.  "There are
several things I have forgotten to see to, and they're rather
important.  I feel a beast behaving like this, but you won't mind, will
you?"

"My dear Thirlstone,"  I said, "what is the good of hedging?  Why can't
you say you won't meet Wiston!"

His face cleared.  "Well, that's the fact--I won't.  It would be too
infernally unpleasant.  You see, I was once by way of being his friend,
and he was in my regiment.  I couldn't do it."

The landlord came in at the moment with a basket of peats.  "How long
is Capt.--Mr. Wiston staying here?" I asked.

"He's no bidin' ony time.  He's just comin' here in the middle o' the
day for his denner, and then drivin' up the water to Altbreac.  He has
the fishin' there."

Thirlstone's face showed profound relief.  "Thank God!" I heard him
mutter under his breath, and when the landlord had gone he fell to
talking of salmon with enthusiasm.  "We must make a big day of it
to-morrow, dark to dark, you know.  Thank Heaven, our beat's
down-stream, too."   And thereafter he made frequent excursions to the
door, and bulletins on the weather were issued regularly.

Dinner over, we drew our chairs to the hearth, and fell to talk and the
slow consumption of tobacco.  When two men from the ends of the earth
meet by a winter fire, their thoughts are certain to drift overseas.
We spoke of the racing tides off Vancouver, and the lonely pine-clad
ridges running up to the snow-peaks of the Selkirks, to which we had
both travelled once upon a time in search of sport.  Thirlstone on his
own account had gone wandering to Alaska, and brought back some
bear-skins and a frost-bitten toe as trophies, and from his tales had
consorted with the finest band of rogues which survives unhanged on
this planet.  Then some casual word took our thoughts to the south, and
our memories dallied with Africa.  Thirlstone had hunted in Somaliland
and done mighty slaughter; while I had spent some never-to-be forgotten
weeks long ago in the hinterland of Zanzibar, in the days before
railways and game-preserves.  I have gone through life with a keen eye
for the discovery of earthly paradises, to which I intend to retire
when my work is over, and the fairest I thought I had found above the
Rift valley, where you had a hundred miles of blue horizon and the
weather of Scotland.  Thirlstone, not having been there, naturally
differed, and urged the claim of a certain glen in Kashmir, where you
may hunt two varieties of bear and three of buck in thickets of
rhododendron, and see the mightiest mountain-wall on earth from your
tent door.  The mention of the Indian frontier brought us back to our
professions, and for a little we talked "shop" with the unblushing
confidence of those who know each other's work and approve it.  As a
very young soldier Thirlstone had gone shooting in the Pamirs, and had
blundered into a Russian party of exploration which contained
Kuropatkin.  He had in consequence grossly outstayed his leave, having
been detained for a fortnight by an arbitrary hospitality; but he had
learned many things, and the experience had given him strong views on
frontier questions.  Half an hour was devoted to a masterly survey of
the East, until a word pulled us up.

"I went there in '99" Thirlstone was saying,--"the time Wiston and I
were sent--" and then he stopped, and his eager face clouded.  Wiston's
name cast a shadow over our reminiscences.

"What did he actually do?"  I asked after a short silence.

"Pretty bad! He seemed a commonplace, good sort of fellow, popular,
fairly competent, a little bad-tempered perhaps.  And then suddenly he
did something so extremely blackguardly that everything was at an end.
It's no good repeating details, and I hate to think about it.  We know
little about our neighbours, and I'm not so sure that we know much
about ourselves.  There may be appalling depths of iniquity in every
one of us, only most people are fortunate enough to go through the
world without meeting anything to wake the devil in them.  I don't
believe Wiston was bad in the ordinary sense.  Only there was something
else in him--somebody else, if you like--and in a moment it came
uppermost, and he was a branded man.  Ugh! it's a gruesome thought."
Thirlstone had let his pipe go out, and was staring moodily into the
fire.

"How do you explain things like that?" he asked.  "I have an idea of my
own about them.  We talk glibly of ourselves and our personality and
our conscience, as if every man's nature were a smooth, round, white
thing, like a chuckie-stone.  But I believe there are two men--perhaps
more-in every one of us.  There's our ordinary self, generally rather
humdrum; and then there's a bit of something else, good, bad, but never
indifferent,--and it is that something else which may make a man a
saint or a great villain."

"'The Kings of Orion have come to earth,'"  I quoted.

Something in the words struck Thirlstone, and he asked me what was the
yarn I spoke of.

"It's an old legend,"  I explained.  "When the kings were driven out of
Orion, they were sent to this planet and given each his habitation in
some mortal soul.  There were differences of character in that royal
family, and so the alter ego which dwells alongside of us may be
virtuous or very much the reverse.  But the point is that he is always
greater than ourselves, for he has been a king.  It's a foolish story,
but very widely believed.  There is something of the sort in Celtic
folk-lore, and there's a reference to it in Ausonius.  Also the bandits
in the Bakhtiari have a version of it in a very excellent ballad."

"Kings of Orion," said Thirlstone musingly.  "I like that idea.  Good
or bad, but always great! After all, we show a kind of belief in it in
our daily practice.  Every man is always making fancies about himself;
but it is never his workaday self, but something else.  The bank clerk
who pictures himself as a financial Napoleon knows that his own thin
little soul is incapable of it; but he knows, too, that it is possible
enough for that other bigger thing which is not his soul, but yet in
some odd way is bound up with it.  I fancy myself a field-marshal in a
European war; but I know perfectly well that if the job were offered
me, I should realise my incompetence and decline.  I expect you rather
picture yourself now and then as a sort of Julius Caesar and
empire-maker, and yet, with all respect, my dear chap, I think it would
be rather too much for you."

"There was once a man,"  I said, "an early Victorian Whig, whose chief
ambitions were to reform the criminal law and abolish slavery.  Well,
this dull, estimable man in his leisure moments was Emperor of
Byzantium.  He fought great wars and built palaces, and then, when the
time for fancy was past, went into the House of Commons and railed
against militarism and Tory extravagance.  That particular king from
Orion had a rather odd sort of earthly tenement."

Thirlstone was all interest.  "A philosophic Whig and the throne of
Byzantium.  A pretty rum mixture!  And yet--yet," and his eyes became
abstracted.  "Did you ever know Tommy Lacelles?"

"The man who once governed Deira? Retired now, and lives somewhere in
Kent.  Yes, I've met him once or twice.  But why?"

"Because," said Thirlstone solemnly, "unless I'm greatly mistaken,
Tommy was another such case, though no  man ever guessed it except
myself.  I don't mind telling you the story, now that he is retired and
vegetating in his ancestral pastures.  Besides, the facts are all in
his favour, and the explanation is our own business....

"His wife was my cousin, and when she died Tommy was left a very
withered, disconsolate man, with no particular object in life.  We all
thought he would give up the service, for he was hideously well off and
then one fine day, to our amazement, he was offered Deira, and accepted
it.  I was short of a job at the time, for my battalion was at home,
and there was nothing going on anywhere, so I thought I should like to
see what the East Coast of Africa was like, and wrote to Tommy about
it.  He jumped at me, cabled offering me what he called his Military
Secretaryship, and I got seconded, and set off.  I had never known him
very well, but what I had seen I had liked; and I suppose he was glad
to have one of Maggie's family with him, for he was still very low
about her loss.  I was in pretty good spirits, for it meant new
experiences, and I had hopes of big game.

"You've never been to Deira?  Well, there's no good trying to describe
it, for it's the only place in the world like itself.  God made it and
left it to its own devices.  The town is pretty enough, with its palms
and green headland, and little scrubby islands in the river's mouth.
It has the usual half-Arab, half-Portugee look-white green-shuttered
houses, flat roofs, sallow little men in duck, and every type of nigger
from the Somali to the Shangaan.  There are some good buildings, and
Government House was the mansion of some old Portugee seigneur, and was
built when people in Africa were not in such a hurry as to-day.  Inland
there's a rolling, forest country, beginning with decent trees and
ending in mimosa-thorn, when the land begins to rise to the stony hills
of the interior; and that poisonous yellow river rolls through it all,
with a denser native population along its banks than you will find
anywhere else north of the Zambesi.  For about two months in the year
the climate is Paradise, and for the rest you live in a Turkish bath,
with every known kind of fever hanging about.  We cleaned out the town
and improved the sanitation, so there were few epidemics, but there was
enough ordinary malaria to sicken a crocodile.

"The place was no special use to us.  It had been annexed in spite of a
tremendous Radical outcry, and, upon my soul, it was one of the few
cases where the Radicals had something to say for themselves.  All we
got by it was half a dozen of the nastiest problems an unfortunate
governor can have to face.  Ten years before it had been a decaying
strip of coast, with a few trading firms in the town, and a small
export of ivory and timber.  But some years before Tommy took it up
there had been a huge discovery of copper in the hills inland, a
railway had been built, and there were several biggish mining
settlements at the end of it.  Deira itself was filled with offices of
European firms, it had got a Stock Exchange of its own, and it was
becoming the usual cosmopolitan playground.  It had a knack, too, of
getting the very worst breed of adventurer.  I know something of your
South African and Australian mining town, and with all their faults
they are run by white men.  If they haven't much morals, they have a
kind of decency which keeps them fairly straight.  But for our sins we
got a brand of Levantine Jew, who was fit for nothing but making money
and making trouble.  They were always defying the law, and then, when
they got into a hole, they squealed to Government for help, and started
a racket in the home papers about the weakness of the Imperial power.
The crux of the whole difficulty was the natives, who lived along the
river and in the foothills.  They were a hardy race of Kaffirs, sort of
far-away cousins to the Zulu, and till the mines were opened they had
behaved well enough.  They had arms, which we had never dared to take
away, but they kept quiet and paid their hut-taxes like men.  I got to
know many of the chiefs, and liked them, for they were upstanding
fellows to look at and heavenborn shikaris.  However, when the Jews
came along they wanted labour, and, since we did not see our way to
allow them to add to the imported coolie population, they had to fall
back upon the Labonga.  At first things went smoothly.  The chiefs were
willing to let their men work for good wages, and for a time there was
enough labour for everybody.  But as the mines extended, and the
natives, after making a few pounds, wanted to get back to their kraals,
there came a shortage; and since the work could not be allowed to
slacken, the owners tried other methods.  They made promises which they
never intended to keep, and they stood on the letter of a law which the
natives did not understand, and they employed touts who were little
better than slave-dealers.  They got the labour, of course, but soon
they had put the Labonga into a state of unrest which  a very little
would turn into a rising.

"Into this kettle of fish Tommy was pitchforked, and when I arrived he
was just beginning to understand how unpleasant it was.  As I said
before, I did not know him very well, and I was amazed to find how bad
he was at his job.  A more curiously incompetent person I never met.
He was a long, thin man, with a grizzled moustache and a mild sleepy
eye-not an impressive figure, except on a horse; and he had an odd lisp
which made even a shrewd remark sound foolish.  He was the most
industrious creature in the world, and a model of official decorum.
His papers were always in order, his despatches always neat and
correct, and I don't believe any one ever caught him tripping in office
work.  But he had no more conception than a child of the kind of
trouble that was brewing.  He knew never an honest man from a rogue,
and the result was that he received all unofficial communications with
a polite disbelief.  I used to force him to see people--miners,
prospectors, traders, any one who had something to say worth listening
to, but it all glided smoothly off his mind.  He was simply the most
incompetent being ever created, living in the world as not being of it,
or rather creating a little official world of his own, where all events
happened on lines laid down by the Colonial Office, and men were like
papers, to be rolled into packets and properly docketed.  He had an
Executive Council of people like himself, competent officials and blind
bats at anything else.  Then there was a precious Legislative Council,
intended to represent the different classes of the population.  There
were several good men on it--one old trader called Mackay, for instance,
who had been thirty years in the country-but most were nominees of the
mining firms, and very seedy rascals at that.  They were always talking
about the rights of the white man, and demanding popular control of the
Government, and similar twaddle.  The leader was a man who hailed from
Hamburg, and called himself Le Foy--descended from a Crusader of the
name of Levi--who was a jackal of one of the chief copper firms.  He
overflowed with Imperialist sentiment, and when he wasn't waving the
flag he used to gush about the beauties of English country life the
grandeur of the English tradition.  He hated me from the start, for
when he talked of going 'home' I thought he meant Hamburg, and said so;
and then a thing happened which made him hate me worse.  He was
infernally rude to Tommy, who, like the dear sheep he was, never saw
it, and, if he had, wouldn't have minded.  But one day I chanced to
overhear some of his impertinences, so I hunted out my biggest sjambok
and lay in wait for Mr. Le Foy.  I told him that he was a
representative of the sovereign people, that I was a member of an
effete bureaucracy, and that it would be most painful if unpleasantness
arose between us.  But, I added, I was prepared, if necessary, to
sacrifice my official career to my private feelings, and if he dared to
use such language again to his Majesty's representative I would give
him a hiding he would remember till he found himself in Abraham's
bosom.  Not liking my sjambok, he became soap and butter at once, and
held his tongue for a month or two.

"But though Tommy was no good at his job, he was a tremendous swell at
other things.  He was an uncommonly good linguist, and had always about
a dozen hobbies which he slaved at; and when he found himself at Deira
with a good deal of leisure, he became a bigger crank than ever.  He
had a lot of books which used to follow him about the world in
zinc-lined boxes--your big paper-backed German books which mean
research,--and he was a Fellow of the Royal Society, and corresponded
with half a dozen foreign shows.  India was his great subject, but he
had been in the Sudan and knew a good deal about African races.  When I
went out to him, his pet hobby was the Bantu, and he had acquired an
amazing amount of miscellaneous learning.  He knew all about their
immigration from the North, and the Arab and Phoenician trade-routes,
and the Portuguese occupation, and the rest of the history of that
unpromising seaboard.  The way he behaved in his researches showed the
man.  He worked hard at the Labonga language--which, I believe, is a
linguistic curiosity of the first water-from missionary books and the
conversation of tame Kaffirs.  But he never thought of paying them a
visit in their native haunts.  I was constantly begging him to do it,
but it was not Tommy's way.  He did not care a straw about political
experience, and he liked to look at things through the medium of paper
and ink.  Then there were the Phoenician remains in the foot-hills
where the copper was mined-old workings, and things which might have
been forts or temples.  He knew all that was to be known about them,
but he had never seen them and never wanted to.  Once only he went to
the hills, to open some new reservoirs and make the ordinary Governor's
speech; but he went in a special train and stayed two hours, most of
which was spent in lunching and being played to by brass bands.

"But, oddly enough, there was one thing which stirred him with an
interest that was not academic.  I discovered it by accident one day
when I went into his study and found him struggling with a map of
Central Asia.  Instead of the mild, benevolent smile with which he
usually greeted my interruptions, he looked positively furtive, and, I
could have sworn, tried to shuffle the map under some papers.  Now it
happens that Central Asia is the part of the globe that I know better
than most men, and I could not help picking up the map and looking at
it.  It was a wretched thing, and had got the Oxus two hundred miles
out of its course.  I pointed this out to Tommy, and to my amazement he
became quite excited.  'Nonsense,' he said.  'You don't mean to say it
goes south of that desert.  Why, I meant to--,' and then he stammered
and stopped.  I wondered what on earth he had meant to do, but I merely
observed that I had been there, and knew.  That brought Tommy out of
his chair in real excitement.  'What!' he cried, 'you!  You never told
me,' and he started to fire off a round of questions, which showed that
if he knew very little about the place, he had it a good deal in his
mind."

I drew some sketch-plans for him, and left him brooding over them.

"That was the first hint I got.  The second was a few nights later,
when we were smoking in the billiard-room.  I had been reading Marco
Polo, and the talk got on to Persia and drifted all over the north side
of the Himalaya.  Tommy, with an abstracted eye, talked of Alexander
and Timour and Genghis Khan, and particularly of Prester John, who was
a character and took his fancy.  I had told him that the natives in the
Pamirs were true Persian stock, and this interested him greatly.  'Why
was there never a great state built up in those valleys?' he asked.
'You get nothing but a few wild conquerors rushing east and west, and
then some squalid khanates.  And yet all the materials were there--the
stuff for a strong race, a rich land, the traditions of an old
civilisation, and natural barriers against all invasion.'

"'I suppose they never found the man,' I said.

"He agreed.  'Their princes were sots, or they were barbarians of
genius who could devastate to the gates of Peking or Constantinople,
but could never build.  They did not recognise their limits, and so
they went out in a whirlwind.  But if there had been a man of solid
genius he might have built up the strongest nation on the globe.  In
time he could have annexed Persia and nibbled at China.  He would have
been rich, for he could tap all the inland trade-routes of Asia.  He
would have had to be a conqueror, for his people would be a race of
warriors, but first and foremost he must have been a statesman.  Think
of such a civilisation, THE Asian civilisation, growing up mysteriously
behind the deserts and the ranges!  That's my idea of Prester John.
Russia would have been confined to the line of the Urals.  China would
have been absorbed.  There would have been no Japan.  The whole history
of the world for the last few hundred years would have been different.
It is the greatest of all the lost chances in history.' Tommy waxed
pathetic over the loss.

"I was a little surprised at his eloquence, especially when he seemed
to remember himself and stopped all of a sudden.  But for the next week
I got no peace with his questions.  I told him all I knew of Bokhara,
and Samarkand, and Tashkend, and Yarkand.  I showed him the passes in
the Pamirs and the Hindu Kush.  I traced out the rivers, and I
calculated distances; we talked over imaginary campaigns, and set up
fanciful constitutions.  It a was childish game, but I found it
interesting enough.  He spoke of it all with a curious personal tone
which puzzled me, till one day when we were amusing ourselves with a
fight on the Zarafshan, and I put in a modest claim to be allowed to
win once in a while.  For a second he looked at me in blank surprise.
'You can't,' he said; 'I've got to enter Samarkand before I can...'
and he stopped again, with a glimmering sense in his face that he was
giving himself away.  And then I knew that I had surprised Tommy's
secret.  While he was muddling his own job, he was salving his pride
with fancies of some wild career in Asia, where Tommy, disguised as the
lord knows what Mussulman grandee, was hammering the little states into
an empire.

"I did not think then as I think now, and I was amused to find so odd a
trait in a dull man.  I had known something of the kind before.  I had
met fellows who after their tenth peg would begin to swagger about some
ridiculous fancy of their own--their little private corner of soul
showing for a moment when the drink had blown aside their common-sense.
Now, I had never known the thing appear in cold blood and everyday
life, but I assumed the case to be the same.  I thought of it only as a
harmless fancy, never imagining that it had anything to do with
character.  I put it down to that kindly imagination which is the old
opiate for failures.  So I played up to Tommy with all my might, and
though he became very discreet after the first betrayal, having hit
upon the clue, I knew what to look for, and I found it.  When I told
him that the Labonga were in a devil of a mess, he would look at me
with an empty face and change the subject; but once among the Turcomans
his eye would kindle, and he would slave at his confounded folly with
sufficient energy to reform the whole East Coast.  It was the spark
that kept the man alive.  Otherwise he would have been as limp as a
rag, but this craziness put life into him, and made him carry his head
in the air and walk like a free man.  I remember he was very keen about
any kind of martial poetry.  He used to go about crooning Scott and
Macaulay to himself, and when we went for a walk or a ride he wouldn't
speak for miles, but keep smiling to himself and humming bits of songs.
I daresay he was very happy,--far happier than your stolid, competent
man, who sees only the one thing to do and does it.  Tommy was muddling
his particular duty, but building glorious palaces in the air.

"One day Mackay, the old trader, came to me after a sitting of the
precious Legislative Council.  We were very friendly, and I had done
all I could to get the Government to listen to his views.  He was a
dour, ill-tempered Scotsman, very anxious for the safety of his
property, but perfectly careless about any danger to himself.

"'Captain Thirlstone,' he said, 'that Governor of yours is a damned
fool.'

"Of course I shut him up very brusquely, but he paid no attention.  'He
just sits and grins, and lets yon Pentecostal crowd we've gotten here
as a judgment for our sins do what they like wi' him.  God kens what'll
happen.  I would go home to-morrow, if I could realise without an
immoderate loss.  For the day of reckoning is at hand.  Maark my words,
Captain--at hand.'

"I said I agreed with him about the approach of trouble, but that the
Governor would rise to the occasion.  I told him that people like Tommy
were only seen at their best in a crisis, and that he might be
perfectly confident that when it arrived he would get a new idea of the
man.  I said this, but of course I did not believe a word of it.  I
thought Tommy was only a dreamer, who had rotted any grit he ever
possessed by his mental opiates.  At that time I did not understand
about the kings from Orion.

"And then came the thing we had all been waiting for--a Labonga rising.
A week before I had got leave and had gone up country, partly to shoot,
but mainly to see for myself what trouble was brewing.  I kept away
from the river, and therefore missed the main native centres, but such
kraals as I passed had a look I did not like.  The chiefs were almost
always invisible, and the young bloods were swaggering about and
bukking to each other, while the women were grinding maize as if for
some big festival.  However, after a bit the country seemed to grow
more normal, and I went into the foothills to shoot, fairly easy in my
mind.  I had got up to a place called Shimonwe, on the Pathi river,
where I had ordered letters to be sent, and one night coming in from a
hard day after kudu I found a post-runner half-dead of fatigue with a
chit from Utterson, who commanded a police district twenty miles nearer
the coast.  It said simply that all the young men round about him had
cleared out and appeared to be moving towards Deira, that he was in the
devil of a quandary, and that, since the police were under the
Governor, he would take his orders from me.

"It looked as if the heather were fairly on fire at last, so I set off
early next morning to trek back.  About midday I met Utterson, a very
badly scared little man, who had come to look for me.  It seemed that
his policemen had bolted in the night and gone to join the rising,
leaving him with two white sergeants, barely fifty rounds of
ammunition, and no neighbour for a hundred miles.  He said that the
Labonga chiefs were not marching to the coast, as he had thought, but
north along the eastern foothills in the direction of the mines.  This
was better news, for it meant that in all probability the railway would
remain open.  It was my business to get somehow to my chief, and I was
in the deuce of a stew how to manage it.  It was no good following the
line of the natives' march, for they would have been between me and my
goal, and the only way was to try and outflank them by going due east,
in the Deira direction, and then turning north, so as to strike the
railway about half-way to the mines.  I told Utterson we had better
scatter, otherwise we should have no chance of getting through a
densely populated native country.  So, about five in the afternoon I
set off with my chief shikari, who, by good luck, was not a Labonga,
and dived into the jungly bush which skirts the hills.

"For three days I had a baddish time.  We steered by the stars,
travelling chiefly by night, and we showed extraordinary skill in
missing the water-holes.  I had a touch of fever and got light-headed,
and it was all I could do to struggle through the thick grass and
wait-a-bit thorns.  My clothes were torn to rags, and I grew so
footsore that it was agony to move.  All the same we travelled fast,
and there was no chance of our missing the road, for any route due
north was bound to cut the railway.  I had the most sickening
uncertainty about what was to come next.  Hely, who was in command at
Deira, was a good enough man, but he had only three companies of white
troops, and the black troops were as likely as not to be on their way
to the rebels.  It looked as if we should have a Cawnpore business on a
small scale, though I thanked Heaven there were no women in the case.
As for Tommy, he would probably be repeating platitudes in Deira and
composing an intelligent despatch on the whole subject.

"About four in the afternoon of the third day I struck the line near a
little station called Palala.  I saw by the look of the rails that
trains were still running, and my hopes revived.  At Palala there was a
coolie stationmaster, who gave me a drink and a little food, after
which I slept heavily in his office till wakened by the arrival of an
up train.  It contained one of the white companies and a man Davidson,
of the 101st, who was Hely's second in command.  From him I had news
that took away my breath.  The Governor had gone up the line two days
before with an A.D.C.  and old Mackay.  'The sportsman has got a move
on him at last,' said Davidson, 'but what he means to do Heaven only
knows.  The Labonga are at the mines, and a kind of mine-guard has been
formed for defence.  The joke of it is that most of the magnates are
treed up there, for the railway is cut and they can't get away.  I
don't envy your chief the job of schooling that nervous crowd.'

"I went on with Davidson, and very early next morning we came to a
broken culvert and had to stop.  There we stuck for three hours till
the down train arrived, and with it Hely.  He was for ordinary a stolid
soul, but I never saw a man in such a fever of excitement.  He gripped
me by the arm and fairly shook me.  'That old man of yours is a hero,'
he cried.  'The Lord forgive me!  and I have always crabbed him.'

"I implored him in Heaven's name to tell me what was up, but he would
say nothing till he had had his pow-pow with Davidson.  It seemed that
he was bringing all his white troops up the line for some great
demonstration that Tommy had conceived.  Davidson went back to Deira,
while we mended the culvert and got the men transferred to the other
train.  Then I screwed the truth out of Hely.  Tommy had got up to the
mines before the rebels arrived, and had found as fine a chaos as can
be imagined.  He did not seem to have had any doubts what to do.  There
was a certain number of white workmen, hard fellows from Cornwall
mostly, with a few Australians, and these he got together with Mackay's
help and organised into a pretty useful corps.  He set them to guard
the offices, and gave them strict orders to shoot at sight any one
attempting to leave.  Then he collected the bosses and talked to them
like a father.  What he said Hely did not know, except that he had
damned their eyes pretty heartily, and told them what a set of swine
they were, making trouble which they had not the pluck to face.
Whether from Mackay, or from his own intelligence, or from a memory of
my neglected warnings, he seemed to have got a tight grip on the facts
at last.  Meanwhile, the Labonga were at the doors, chanting their
battle-songs half a mile away, and shots were heard from the far
pickets.  If they had tried to rush the place then, all would have been
over, but, luckily, that was never their way of fighting.  They sat
down in camp to make their sacrifices and consult their witch-doctors,
and presently Hely arrived with the first troops, having come in on the
northern flank when he found the line cut.  He had been in time to hear
the tail-end of Tommy's final address to the mineowners.  He told them,
in words which Hely said he could never have imagined coming from his
lips, that they would be well served if the Labonga cleaned the whole
place out.  Only, he said, that would be against the will of Britain,
and it was his business, as a loyal servant, to prevent it.  Then,
after giving Hely his instructions, he had put on his uniform, gold
lace and all, and every scrap of bunting he possessed--all the orders
and 'Golden Stars' of half a dozen Oriental States where he had served.
He made Ashurst, the A.D.C., put on his best Hussar's kit, and Mackay
rigged himself out in a frock-coat and a topper; and the three set out
on horseback for the Labonga.  'I believe he'll bring it off, said
Hely, with wild eyes, 'and, by Heaven, if he does, it'll be the best
thing since John Nicholson!'

"For the rest of the way I sat hugging myself with excitement.  The
miracle of miracles seemed to have come.  The old, slack, incompetent
soul in Tommy seemed to have been driven out by that other spirit,
which had hitherto been content to dream of crazy victories on the
Oxus.  I cursed my folly in having missed it all, for I would have
given my right hand to be with him among the Labonga.  I envied that
young fool Ashurst his luck in being present at that queer
transformation scene.  I had not a doubt that Tommy would bring it off
all right.  The kings from Orion don't go into action without coming
out on top.  As we got near the mines I kept my ears open for the sound
of shots; but all was still,--not even the kind of hubbub a native
force makes when it is on the move.  Something had happened, but what
it was no man could guess. When we got to where the line was up, we
made very good time over the five miles to the mines.  No one
interfered with us, and the nearer we got the greater grew my
certainty.  Soon we were at the pickets, who had nothing to tell us;
and then we were racing up the long sandy street to the offices, and
there, sitting smoking on the doorstep of the hotel, surrounded by
everybody who was not on duty, were Mackay and Ashurst.

"They were an odd pair.  Ashurst still wore his uniform; but he seemed
to have been rolling about in it on the ground; his sleek hair was
wildly ruffled, and he was poking holes in the dust with his sword.
Mackay had lost his topper, and wore a disreputable cap, his ancient
frock-coat was without buttons, and his tie had worked itself up behind
his ears.  They talked excitedly to each other, now and then
vouchsafing a scrap of information to an equally excited audience.
When they saw me they rose and rushed for me, and dragged me between
them up the street, while the crowd tailed at our heels.

"'Ye're a true prophet, Captain Thirlstone,' Mackay began, 'and I ask
your pardon for doubting you.  Ye said the Governor only needed a
crisis to behave like a man.  Well, the crisis has come; and if there's
a man alive in this sinful world, it's that chief o' yours.  And then
his emotion overcame him, and, hard-bitten devil as he was, he sat down
on the ground and gasped with hysterical laughter, while Ashurst, with
a very red face, kept putting the wrong end of a cigarette in his mouth
and swearing profanely.

"I never remember a madder sight.  There was the brassy blue sky and
reddish granite rock and acres of thick red dust.  The scrub had that
metallic greenness which you find in all copper places.  Pretty
unwholesome it looked, and the crowd, which had got round us again, was
more unwholesome still.  Fat Jew boys, with diamond rings on dirty
fingers and greasy linen cuffs, kept staring at us with twitching lips;
and one or two smarter fellows in riding-breeches, mine-managers and
suchlike, tried to show their pluck by nervous jokes.  And in the
middle was Mackay, with his damaged frocker, drawling out his story in
broad Scots.

"'He made this laddie put on his braws, and he commandeered this
iniquitous garment for me.  I've raxed its seams, and it'll never look
again on the man that owns it.  Syne he arrayed himself in purple and
fine linen till he as like the king's daughter, all glorious without;
and says he to me, "Mackay," he says, "we'll go and talk to these
uncovenanted deevils in their own tongue.  We'll visit them at home,
Mackay," he says. "They're none such bad fellows, but they want a
little humouring from men like you and me."  So we got on our horses
and started the procession--the Governor with his head in the air, and
the laddie endenvouring to look calm and collected, and me praying to
the God of Israel and trying to keep my breeks from working up above my
knees.  I've been in Kaffir wars afore, but I never thought I would
ride without weapon of any kind into such a black Armageddon.  I am a
peaceable man for ordinar', and a canny one, but I wasna myself in that
hour.  Man, Thirlstone, I was that overcome by the spirit of your
chief, that if he had bidden me gang alone on the same errand, I
wouldna say but what I would have gone.

"'We hadna ridden half a mile before we saw the indunas and their men,
ten thousand if there was one, and terrible as an army with banners.  I
speak feeguratively, for they hadna the scrap of a flag among them.
They were beating the war-drums, and the young men were dancing with
their big skin shields and wagging their ostrich feathers, so I saw
they were out for business.  I'll no' say but what my blood ran cold,
but the Governor's eye got brighter and his back stiffer.  "Kings may
be blest,"  I says to myself, "but thou art glorious."

"'We rode straight for the centre of the crowd, where the young men
were thickest and the big war-drums lay.  As soon as they saw us a
dozen lifted their spears and ran out to meet us.  But they stopped
after six steps.  The sun glinted on the Governor's gold lace and my
lum hat, and no doubt they thought we were heathen deities descended
from the heavens.  Down they went on their faces, and then back like
rabbits to the rest, while the drums stopped, and the whole body
awaited our coming in a silence like the tomb.

"'Never a word we spoke, but just jogged on with our chins cocked up
till we were forenent the big drum, where yon old scoundrel Umgazi was
standing with his young men looking as black as sin.  For a moment
their spears were shaking in their hands, and I heard the click of a
breech-bolt.  If we had winked an eye we would have become pincushions
that instant.  But some unearthly power upheld us.  Even the laddie
kept a stiff face, and for me I forgot my breeks in watching the
Governor.  He looked as solemn as an archangel, and comes to a halt
opposite Umgazi, where he glowers at the old man for maybe three
minutes, while we formed up behind him.  Their eyes fell before his,
and by-and-by their spears dropped to their sides.  "The father has
come to his children," says he in their own tongue.  "What do the
children seek from their father?

"'Ye see the cleverness of the thing.  The man's past folly came to
help him.  The natives had never seen the Governor before till they
beheld him in gold lace and a cocked hat on a muckle horse, speaking
their own tongue and looking like a destroying angel.  I tell you the
Labonga's knees were loosed under them.  They durstna speak a word
until the Governor repeated the question in the same quiet, steely
voice.  "You seek something," he said, "else you had not come out to
meet me in your numbers.  The father waits to hear the children's
desires."

"'Then Umgazi found his tongue and began an uneasy speech.  The mines,
he said, truly enough, were the abode of devils, who compelled the
people to work under the ground.  The crops were unreaped and the buck
went unspeared, because there were no young men left to him.  Their
father had been away or asleep, they thought, for no help had come from
him; therefore it had seemed good to them, being freemen and warriors,
to seek help for themselves.

"'The Governor listened to it all with a set face.  Then he smiled at
them with supernatural assurance.  They were fools, he said, and people
of little wit, and he flung the better part of the Book of Job at their
heads.  The Lord kens where the man got his uncanny knowledge of the
Labonga.  He had all their heathen customs by heart, and he played with
them like a cat with a mouse.  He told then they were damned rascals to
make such a stramash, and damned fools to think they could frighten the
white man by their demonstrations.  There was no brag about his words,
just a calm statement of fact.  At the same time, he said, he had no
mind to let any one wrong his children, and if any wrong had been done
it should be righted.  It was not meet, he said, that the young men
should be taken from the villages unless by their own consent, though
it was his desire that such young men as could be spared should have a
chance of earning an honest penny.  And then he fired at them some
stuff about the British Empire and the King, and you could sec the
Labonga imbibing it like water.  The man in a cocked hat might have
told them that the sky was yellow, and they would have swallowed it.

"'"I have spoken," he says at last, and there was a great shout from
the young men, and old Umgazi looked pretty foolish.  They were coming
round our horses to touch our stirrups with their noses, but the
Governor stopped them.

"'"My children will pile their weapons in front of me," says he, "to
show me how they have armed themselves, and likewise to prove that
their folly is at an end.  All except a dozen," says he, "whom I select
as a bodyguard." And there and then he picked twelve lusty savages for
his guard, while the rest without a cheep stacked their spears and guns
forenent the big drum.

"'Then he turned to us and spoke in English.  "Get back to the mines
hell-for-leather, and tell them what's happening, and see that you get
up some kind of a show for to-morrow at noon.  I will bring the chiefs,
and we'll feast them.  Get all the bands you can, and let them play me
in.  Tell the mines fellows to look active for it's the chance of their
lives.  "Then he says to the Labonga, "My men will return he says, "but
as for me I will spend the night with my children.  Make ready food,
but let no beer be made, for it is a solemn occasion."

"'And so we left him.  I will not describe how I spent last night
mysel', but I have something to say about this remarkable phenomenon.
I could enlarge on the triumph of mind over matter.  ....

"Mackay did not enlarge.  He stopped, cocked his ears, and looked down
the road, from which came the strains of 'Annie Laurie,' played with
much spirit but grievously out of tune. Followed 'The British
Grenadiers,' and then an attempt at 'The March of the Priests.'  Mackay
rose in excitement and began to crane his disreputable neck, while the
band--a fine scratch collection of instruments--took up their stand at
the end of the street, flanked by a piper in khaki who performed when
their breath failed.  Mackay chuckled with satisfaction.  'The deevils
have entered into the spirit of my instructions,' he said.  'In a wee
bit the place will be like Falkirk Tryst for din.

"Punctually at twelve there came a great hullabaloo up the road, the
beating of drums and the yelling of natives, and presently the
procession hove in sight.  There was Tommy on his horse, and on each
side of him six savages with feather head-dress, and shields and
war-paint complete.  After him trooped about thirty of the great
chiefs, walking two by two, for all the world like an Aldershot parade.
They carried no arms, but the bodyguard shook their spears, and let
yells out of them that would have scared Julius Caesar.  Then the band
started in, and the piper blew up, and the mines people commenced to
cheer, and I thought the heavens would fall.  Long before Tommy came
abreast of me I knew what I should see.  His uniform looked as if it
had been slept in, and his orders were all awry.  But he had his head
flung back, and his eyes very bright, and his jaw set square.  He never
looked to right or left, never recognised me or anybody, for he was
seeing something quite different from the red road and the white
shanties and the hot sky."

The fire had almost died out.  Thirlstone stooped for a moment and
stirred the peats.

"Yes," he said, "I knew that in his fool's ear the trumpets of all Asia
were ringing, and the King of Bokhara was entering Samarkand."




BABYLON

(The Song of NEHEMIAH'S Workmen)

  How many miles to Babylon?
  'Three score and ten.
  Can I get there by candle-light?
  Yes, and back again.

  We are come back from Babylon,
  Out of the plains and the glare,
  To the little hills of our own country
  And the sting of our kindred air;
  To the rickle of stones on the red rock's edge
  Which Kedron cleaves like a sword.
  We will build the walls of Zion again,
  To the glory of Zion's lord.

  Now is no more of dalliance
  By the reedy waters in spring,
  When we sang of home, and sighed, and dreamed,
  And wept on remembering.
  Now we are back in our ancient hills
  Out of the plains and the sun;
  But before we make it a dwelling-place
  There's a wonderful lot to be done.

  The walls are to build from west to east,
  From Gihon to Olivet,
  Waters to lead and wells to clear,
  And the garden furrows to set.
  From the Sheep Gate to the Fish Gate
  Is a welter of mire and mess;
  And southward over the common lands
  'Tis a dragon's wilderness.

  The Courts of the Lord are a heap of dust
  Where the hill winds whistle and race,
  And the noble pillars of God His House
  Stand in a ruined place
  In the Holy of Holies foxes lair,
  And owls and night-birds build.
  There's a deal to do ere we patch it anew
  As our father Solomon willed.

  Now is the day of the ordered life
  And the law which all obey.
  We toil by rote and speak by note
  And never a soul dare stray.
  Ever among us a lean old man
  Keepeth his watch and ward,
  Crying, "The Lord hath set you free:
  Prepare ye the way of the Lord."

  A goodly task we are called unto,
  A task to dream on o' nights,
  --Work for Judah and Judah's God,
  Setting our lands to rights;
  Everything fair and all things square
  And straight as a plummet string.
  --Is it mortal guile, if once in a while
  Our thoughts go wandering?...

  We were not slaves in Babylon,
  For the gate of our souls lay free,
  There in that vast and sunlit land
  On the edges of mystery.
  Daily we wrought and daily we thought,
  And we chafed not at rod and power,
  For Sinim, Ssabea, and dusky Hind
  Talked to us hour by hour.

  The man who lives in Babylon
  May poorly sup and fare,
  But loves and lures from the ends of the earth
  Beckon him everywhere.
  Next year he too may have sailed strange seas
  And conquered a diadem;
  For kings are as common in Babylon
  As crows in Bethlehem.

  Here we are bound to the common round
  In a land which knows not change
  Nothing befalleth to stir the blood
  Or quicken the heart to range;
  Never a hope that we cannot plumb
  Or a stranger visage in sight,--
  At the most a sleek Samaritan
  Or a ragged Amorite.

  Here we are sober and staid of soul,
  Working beneath the law,
  Settled amid our father's dust,
  Seeing the hills they saw.
  All things fixed and determinate,
  Chiselled and squared by rule;
  Is it mortal guile once in a while
  To try and escape from school?

  We will go back to Babylon,
  Silently one by one,
  Out from the hills and the laggard brooks
  To the streams that brim in the sun.
  Only a moment, Lord, we crave,
  To breathe and listen and see.--
  Then we start anew with muscle and thew
  To hammer trestles for Thee.




