III

THE LEMNIAN

He pushed the matted locks from his brow as he peered into the mist.
His hair was thick with salt, and his eyes smarted from the greenwood
fire on the poop.  The four slaves who crouched beside the
thwarts-Carians with thin birdlike faces-were in a pitiable case, their
hands blue with oar-weals and the lash marks on their shoulders
beginning to gape from sun and sea.  The Lemnian himself bore marks of
ill usage.  His cloak was still sopping, his eyes heavy with watching,
and his lips black and cracked with thirst.  Two days before the storm
had caught him and swept his little craft into mid-Aegean.  He was a
sailor, come of sailor stock, and he had fought the gale manfully and
well.  But the sea had burst his waterjars, and the torments of drought
had been added to his toil.  He had been driven south almost to Scyros,
but had found no harbour.  Then a weary day with the oars had brought
him close to the Euboean shore, when a freshet of storm drove him
seaward again.  Now at last in this northerly creek of Sciathos he had
found shelter and a spring.  But it was a perilous place, for there
were robbers in the bushy hills--mainland men who loved above all things
to rob an islander: and out at sea, as he looked towards Pelion, there
seemed something adoing which boded little good.  There was deep water
beneath a ledge of cliff, half covered by a tangle of wildwood.  So
Atta lay in the bows, looking through the trails of vine at the racing
tides now reddening in the dawn.

The storm had hit others besides him it seemed.  The channel was full
of ships, aimless ships that tossed between tide and wind.  Looking
closer, he saw that they were all wreckage.  There had been tremendous
doings in the north, and a navy of some sort had come to grief.  Atta
was a prudent man, and knew that a broken fleet might be dangerous.
There might be men lurking in the maimed galleys who would make short
work of the owner of a battered but navigable craft.  At first he
thought that the ships were those of the Hellenes.  The troublesome
fellows were everywhere in the islands, stirring up strife and robbing
the old lords.  But the tides running strongly from the east were
bringing some of the wreckage in an eddy into the bay.  He lay closer
and watched the spars and splintered poops as they neared him.  These
were no galleys of the Hellenes.  Then came a drowned man, swollen and
horrible:  then another-swarthy, hooknosed fellows, all yellow with the
sea.  Atta was puzzled.  They must be the men from the East about whom
he had been hearing.  Long ere he left Lemnos there had been news about
the Persians.  They were coming like locusts out of the dawn, swarming
over Ionia and Thrace, men and ships numerous beyond telling.  They
meant no ill to honest islanders:  a little earth and water were enough
to win their friendship.  But they meant death to the hubris of the
Hellenes.  Atta was on the side of the invaders; he wished them well in
their war with his ancient foes.  They would eat them up, Athenians,
Lacedaemonians, Corinthians, Aeginetans, men of Argos and Elis, and
none would be left to trouble him.  But in the meantime something had
gone wrong.  Clearly there had been no battle.  As the bodies butted
against the side of the galley he hooked up one or two and found no
trace of a wound.  Poseidon had grown cranky, and had claimed victims.
The god would be appeased by this time, and all would go well.

Danger being past, he bade the men get ashore and fill the water-skins.
"God's curse on all Hellenes," he said, as he soaked up the cold water
from the spring in the thicket.

About noon he set sail again.  The wind sat in the north-east, but the
wall of Pelion turned it into a light stern breeze which carried him
swiftly westward.  The four slaves, still leg-weary and arm-weary, lay
like logs beside the thwarts.  Two slept; one munched some salty figs;
the fourth, the headman, stared wearily forward, with ever and again a
glance back at his master.  But the Lemnian never looked his way.  His
head was on his breast, as he steered, and he brooded on the sins of
the Hellenes.  He was of the old Pelasgian stock, the first lords of
the land, who had come out of the soil at the call of God.  The
pillaging northmen had crushed his folk out of the mainlands and most
of the islands, but in Lemnos they had met their match.  It was a
family story how every grown male had been slain, and how the women
long after had slaughtered their conquerors in the night.  "Lemnian
deeds," said the Hellenes, when they wished to speak of some shameful
thing:  but to Atta the shame was a glory to be cherished for ever.  He
and his kind were the ancient people, and the gods loved old things, as
those new folk would find.  Very especially he hated the men of Athens.
Had not one of their captains, Militades, beaten the Lemnians and
brought the island under Athenian sway?  True, it was a rule only in
name, for any Athenian who came alone to Lemnos would soon be cleaving
the air from the highest cliff-top.  But the thought irked his pride,
and he gloated over the Persians' coming.  The Great King from beyond
the deserts would smite those outrageous upstarts.  Atta would
willingly give earth and water.  It was the whim of a fantastic
barbarian, and would be well repaid if the bastard Hellenes were
destroyed.  They spoke his own tongue, and worshipped his own gods, and
yet did evil.  Let the nemesis of Zeus devour them!

The wreckage pursued him everywhere.  Dead men shouldered the sides of
the galley, and the straits were stuck full of things like monstrous
buoys, where tall ships had foundered.  At Artemision he thought he saw
signs of an anchored fleet with the low poops of the Hellenes, and
sheered off to the northern shores.  There, looking towards Oeta and
the Malian Gulf, he found an anchorage at sunset.  The waters were ugly
and the times ill, and he had come on an enterprise bigger than he had
dreamed.  The Lemnian was a stout fellow, but he had no love for
needless danger.  He laughed mirthlessly as he thought of his errand,
for he was going to Hellas, to the shrine of the Hellenes.

It was a woman's doing, like most crazy enterprises.  Three years ago
his wife had laboured hard in childbirth, and had had the whims of
labouring women.  Up in the keep of Larisa, on the windy hillside,
there had been heart-searching and talk about the gods.  The little
olive-wood Hermes, the very private and particular god of Atta's folk,
was good enough in simple things like a lambing or a harvest, but he
was scarcely fit for heavy tasks.  Atta's wife declared that her lord
lacked piety.  There were mainland gods who repaid worship, but his
scorn of all Hellenes made him blind to the merits of those potent
divinities.  At first Atta resisted.  There was Attic blood in his
wife, and he strove to argue with her unorthodox craving.  But the
woman persisted, and a Lemnian wife, as she is beyond other wives in
virtue and comeliness, excels them in stubbornness of temper.  A second
time she was with child, and nothing would content her but that Atta
should make his prayers to the stronger gods.  Dodona was far away, and
long ere he reached it his throat would be cut in the hills.  But
Delphi was but two days' journey from the Malian coast, and the god of
Delphi, the Far-Darter had surprising gifts, if one were to credit
travellers' tales.  Atta yielded with an ill grace, and out of his
wealth devised an offering to Apollo.  So on this July day he found
himself looking across the gulf to Kallidromos bound for a Hellenic
shrine, but hating all Hellenes in his soul.  A verse of Homer consoled
him--the words which Phocion spoke to Achilles.  "Verily even the gods
may be turned, they whose excellence and honour and strength are
greater than thine; yet even these do men, when they pray, turn from
their purpose with offerings of incense and pleasant vows."   The
Far-Darter must hate the hubris  of those Hellenes, and be the more
ready to avenge it since they dared to claim his countenance.  "No race
has ownership in the gods," a Lemnian song-maker had said when Atta had
been questioning the ways of Poseidon.

The following dawn found him coasting past the north end of Euboea in
the thin fog of a windless summer morn.  He steered by the peak of
Othrys and a spur of Oeta, as he had learnt from a slave who had
travelled the road.  Presently he was in the muddy Malian waters, and
the sun was scattering the mist on the landward side.  And then he
became aware of a greater commotion than Poseidon's play with the ships
off Pelion.  A murmur like a winter's storm came seawards.  He lowered
the sail, which he had set to catch a chance breeze, and bade the men
rest on their oars.  An earthquake seemed to be tearing at the roots of
the hills.

The mist rolled up, and his hawk eyes saw a strange sight.  The water
was green and still around him, but shoreward it changed its colour.
It was a dirty red, and things bobbed about in it like the Persians in
the creek of Sciathos.  On the strip of shore, below the sheer wall of
Kallidromos, men were fighting-myriads of men, for away towards Locris
they stretched in ranks and banners and tents till the eye lost them in
the haze.  There was no sail on the queer, muddy-red-edged sea; there
was no man on the hills:  but on that one flat ribbon of sand all the
nations of the earth were warring.  He remembered about the place:
Thermopylae they called it, the Gate of the Hot Springs.  The Hellenes
were fighting the Persians in the pass for their Fatherland.

Atta was prudent and loved not other men's quarrels.  He gave the word
to the rowers to row seaward.  In twenty strokes they were in the mist
again...

Atta was prudent, but he was also stubborn.  He spent the day in a
creek on the northern shore of the gulf, listening to the weird hum
which came over the waters out of the haze.  He cursed the delay.  Up
on Kallidromos would be clear dry air and the path to Delphi among the
oak woods.  The Hellenes could not be fighting everywhere at once.  He
might find some spot on the shore, far in their rear, where he could
land and gain the hills.  There was danger indeed, but once on the
ridge he would be safe; and by the time he came back the Great King
would have swept the defenders into the sea, and be well on the road
for Athens.  He asked himself if it were fitting that a Lemnian should
be stayed in his holy task by the struggles of Hellene and Barbarian.
His thoughts flew to his steading at Larisa, and the dark-eyed wife who
was awaiting his homecoming.  He could not return without Apollo's
favour:  his manhood and the memory of his lady's eyes forbade it.  So
late in the afternoon he pushed off again and steered his galley for
the south.

About sunset the mist cleared from the sea; but the dark falls swiftly
in the shadow of the high hills, and Atta had no fear.  With the night
the hum sank to a whisper; it seemed that the invaders were drawing off
to camp, for the sound receded to the west.  At the last light the
Lemnian touched a rock-point well to the rear of the defence.  He
noticed that the spume at the tide's edge was reddish and stuck to his
hands like gum.  Of a surety much blood was flowing on that coast.

He bade his slaves return to the north shore and lie hidden to await
him.  When he came back he would light a signal fire on the topmost
bluff of Kallidromos.  Let them watch for it and come to take him off.
Then he seized his bow and quiver, and his short hunting-spear, buckled
his cloak about him, saw that the gift to Apollo was safe in the folds
of it, and marched sturdily up the hillside.

The moon was in her first quarter, a slim horn which at her rise showed
only the faint outline of the hill.  Atta plodded steadfastly on, but
he found the way hard.  This was not like the crisp sea-turf of Lemnos,
where among the barrows of the ancient dead, sheep and kine could find
sweet fodder.  Kallidromos ran up as steep as the roof of a barn.
Cytisus and thyme and juniper grew rank, but above all the place was
strewn with rocks, leg-twisting boulders, and great cliffs where eagles
dwelt.  Being a seaman, Atta had his bearings.  The path to Delphi left
the shore road near the Hot Springs, and went south by a rift of the
mountain.  If he went up the slope in a beeline he must strike it in
time and find better going.  Still it was an eerie place to be tramping
after dark.  The Hellenes had strange gods of the thicket and hillside,
and he had no wish to intrude upon their sanctuaries.  He told himself
that next to the Hellenes he hated this country of theirs, where a man
sweltered in hot jungles or tripped among hidden crags.  He sighed for
the cool beaches below Larisa, where the surf was white as the snows of
Samothrace, and the fisherboys sang round their smoking broth-pots.

Presently he found a path.  It was not the mule road, worn by many
feet, that he had looked for, but a little track which twined among the
boulders.  Still it eased his feet, so he cleared the thorns from his
sandals, strapped his belt tighter, and stepped out more confidently.
Up and up he went, making odd detours among the crags.  Once he came to
a promontory, and, looking down, saw lights twinkling from the Hot
Springs.  He had thought the course lay more southerly, but consoled
himself by remembering that a mountain path must have many windings.
The great matter was that he was ascending, for he knew that he must
cross the ridge of Oeta before he struck the Locrian glens that led to
the Far-Darter's shrine.

At what seemed the summit of the first ridge he halted for breath, and,
prone on the thyme, looked back to sea.  The Hot Springs were hidden,
but across the gulf a single light shone from the far shore.  He
guessed that by this time his galley had been beached and his slaves
were cooking supper.  The thought made him homesick.  He had beaten and
cursed these slaves of his times without number, but now in this
strange land he felt them kinsfolk, men of his own household.  Then he
told himself he was no better than a woman.  Had he not gone sailing to
Chalcedon and distant Pontus, many months' journey from home while this
was but a trip of days?  In a week he would be welcomed by a smiling
wife, with a friendly god behind him.

The track still bore west, though Delphi lay in the south.  Moreover,
he had come to a broader road running through a little tableland.  The
highest peaks of Oeta were dark against the sky, and around him was a
flat glade where oaks whispered in the night breezes.  By this time he
judged from the stars that midnight had passed, and he began to
consider whether, now that he was beyond the fighting, he should not
sleep and wait for dawn.  He made up his mind to find a shelter, and,
in the aimless way of the night traveller, pushed on and on in the
quest of it.  The truth is his mind was on Lemnos, and a dark-eyed,
white-armed dame spinning in the evening by the threshold.  His eyes
roamed among the oaktrees, but vacantly and idly, and many a mossy
corner was passed unheeded.  He forgot his ill temper, and hummed
cheerfully the song his reapers sang in the barley-fields below his
orchard.  It was a song of seamen turned husbandmen, for the gods it
called on were the gods of the sea....

Suddenly he found himself crouching among the young oaks, peering and
listening.  There was something coming from the west.  It was like the
first mutterings of a storm in a narrow harbour, a steady rustling and
whispering.  It was not wind; he knew winds too well to be deceived.
It was the tramp of light-shod feet among the twigs--many feet, for the
sound remained steady, while the noise of a few men will rise and fall.
They were coming fast and coming silently.  The war had reached far up
Kallidromos.

Atta had played this game often in the little island wars.  Very
swiftly he ran back and away from the path up the slope which he knew
to be the first ridge of Kallidromos.  The army, whatever it might be,
was on the Delphian road.  Were the Hellenes about to turn the flank of
the Great King?

A moment later he laughed at his folly.  For the men began to appear,
and they were crossing to meet him, coming from the west.  Lying close
in the brushwood he could see them clearly.  It was well he had left
the road, for they stuck to it, following every winding-crouching, too,
like hunters after deer.  The first man he saw was a Hellene, but the
ranks behind were no Hellenes.  There was no glint of bronze or gleam
of fair skin.  They were dark, long-haired fellows, with spears like
his own, and round Eastern caps, and egg-shaped bucklers.  Then Atta
rejoiced.  It was the Great King who was turning the flank of the
Hellenes.  They guarded the gate, the fools, while the enemy slipped
through the roof.

He did not rejoice long.  The van of the army was narrow and kept to
the path, but the men behind were straggling all over the hillside.
Another minute and he would be discovered. The thought was cheerless.
It was true that he was an islander and friendly to the Persian, but up
on the heights who would listen to his tale?  He would be taken for a
spy, and one of those thirsty spears would drink his blood.  It must be
farewell to Delphi for the moment, he thought, or farewell to Lemnos
for ever.  Crouching low, he ran back and away from the path to the
crest of the sea-ridge of Kallidromos.

The men came no nearer him.  They were keeping roughly to the line of
the path, and drifted through the oak wood before him, an army without
end.  He had scarcely thought there were so many fighting men in the
world.  He resolved to lie there on the crest, in the hope that ere the
first light they would be gone.  Then he would push on to Delphi,
leaving them to settle their quarrels behind him.  These were the hard
times for a pious pilgrim.

But another noise caught his ear from the right.  The army had flanking
squadrons, and men were coming along the ridge.  Very bitter anger rose
in Atta's heart.  He had cursed the Hellenes, and now he cursed the
Barbarians no less.  Nay, he cursed all war, that spoiled the errands
of peaceful folk.  And then, seeking safety, he dropped over the crest
on to the steep shoreward face of the mountain.

In an instant his breath had gone from him.  He slid down a long slope
of screes, and then with a gasp found himself falling sheer into space.
Another second and he was caught in a tangle of bush, and then dropped
once more upon screes, where he clutched desperately for handhold.
Breathless and bleeding he came to anchor on a shelf of greensward and
found himself blinking up at the crest which seemed to tower a thousand
feet above.  There were men on the crest now.  He heard them speak and
felt that they were looking down.

The shock kept him still till the men had passed.  Then the terror of
the place gripped him, and he tried feverishly to retrace his steps.  A
dweller all his days among gentle downs, he grew dizzy with the sense
of being hung in space.  But the only fruit of his efforts was to set
him slipping again.  This time he pulled up at the root of gnarled oak,
which overhung the sheerest cliff on Kallidromos.  The danger brought
his wits back.  He sullenly reviewed his case, and found it desperate.

He could not go back, and, even if he did, he would meet the Persians.
If he went on he would break his neck, or at the best fall into the
Hellenes' hands.  Oddly enough he feared his old enemies less than his
friends.  He did not think that the Hellenes would butcher him.  Again,
he might sit perched in his eyrie till they settled their quarrel, or
he fell off.  He rejected this last way.  Fall off he should for
certain, unless he kept moving.  Already he was retching with the
vertigo of the heights.  It was growing lighter.  Suddenly he was
looking not into a black world, but to a pearl-grey floor far beneath
him.  It was the sea, the thing he knew and loved.  The sight screwed
up his courage.  He remembered that he was Lemnian and a seafarer.  He
would be conquered neither by rock, nor by Hellene, nor by the Great
King.  Least of all by the last, who was a barbarian.  Slowly, with
clenched teeth and narrowed eyes, he began to clamber down a ridge
which flanked the great cliffs of Kallidromos.  His plan was to reach
the shore and take the road to the east before the Persians completed
their circuit.  Some instinct told him that a great army would not take
the track he had mounted by.  There must be some longer and easier way
debouching farther down the coast.  He might yet have the good luck to
slip between them and the sea.

The two hours which followed tried his courage hard.  Thrice he fell,
and only a juniper-root stood between him and death.  His hands grew
ragged, and his nails were worn to the quick.  He had long ago lost his
weapons; his cloak was in shreds, all save the breast-fold which held
the gift to Apollo.  The heavens brightened, but he dared not look
around.  He knew he was traversing awesome places, where a goat could
scarcely tread.  Many times he gave up hope of life.  His head was
swimming, and he was so deadly sick that often he had to lie gasping on
some shoulder of rock less steep than the rest.  But his anger kept him
to his purpose.  He was filled with fury at the Hellenes.  It was they
and their folly that had brought him these mischances.  Some day ....

He found himself sitting blinking on the shore of the sea.  A furlong
off the water was lapping on the reefs.  A man, larger than human in
the morning mist, was standing above him.

"Greeting, stranger," said the voice.  "By Hermes, you choose the
difficult roads to travel."

Atta felt for broken bones, and, reassured, struggled to his feet.

"God's curse upon all mountains," he said.  He staggered to the edge of
the tide and laved his brow.  The savour of salt revived him.  He
turned to find the tall man at his elbow, and noted how worn and ragged
he was, and yet how upright.  "When a pigeon is flushed from the rocks,
there is a hawk near," said the voice.

Atta was angry.  "A hawk!"  he cried.  "Nay, an army of eagles.  There
will be some rare flushing of Hellenes before evening."

"What frightened you, Islander?"  the stranger asked.  "Did a wolf bark
up on the hillside?"

"Ay, a wolf.  The wolf from the East with a multitude of wolflings.
There will be fine eating soon in the pass."

The man's face grew dark.  He put his hand to his mouth and called.
Half a dozen sentries ran to join him.  He spoke to them in the harsh
Lacedaemonian speech which made Atta sick to hear.  They talked with
the back of the throat and there was not an "s" in their words.

"There is mischief in the hills," the first man said.  "This islander
has been frightened down over the rocks.  The Persian is stealing a
march on us."

The sentries laughed.  One quoted a proverb about island courage.
Atta's wrath flared and he forgot himself.  He had no wish to warn the
Hellenes, but it irked his pride to be thought a liar.  He began to
tell his story hastily, angrily, confusedly; and the men still laughed.

Then he turned eastward and saw the proof before him.  The light had
grown and the sun was coming up over Pelion.  The first beam fell on
the eastern ridge of Kallidromos, and there, clear on the sky-line, was
the proof.  The Persian was making a wide circuit, but moving
shoreward.  In a little he would be at the coast, and by noon at the
Hellenes' rear.

His hearers doubted no more.  Atta was hurried forward through the
lines of the Greeks to the narrow throat of the pass, where behind a
rough rampart of stones lay the Lacedaemonian headquarters.  He was
still giddy from the heights, and it was in a giddy dream that he
traversed the misty shingles of the beach amid ranks of sleeping
warriors.  It was a grim place, for there were dead and dying in it,
and blood on every stone.  But in the lee of the wall little fires were
burning and slaves were cooking breakfast.  The smell of roasting flesh
came pleasantly to his nostrils, and he remembered that he had had no
meal since he crossed the gulf.

Then he found himself the centre of a group who had the air of kings.
They looked as if they had been years in war.  Never had he seen faces
so worn and so terribly scarred.  The hollows in their cheeks gave them
the air of smiling, and yet they were grave.  Their scarlet vests were
torn and muddled, and the armour which lay near was dinted like the
scrap-iron before a smithy door.  But what caught his attention were
the eyes of the men.  They glittered as no eyes he had ever seen before
glittered.  The sight cleared his bewilderment and took the pride out
of his heart.  He could not pretend to despise a folk who looked like
Ares fresh from the wars of the Immortals.

They spoke among themselves in quiet voices.  Scouts came and went, and
once or twice one of the men, taller than the rest, asked Atta a
question.  The Lemnian sat in the heart of the group, sniffing the
smell of cooking, and looking at the rents in his cloak and the long
scratches on his legs.  Something was pressing on his breast, and he
found that it was Apollo's gift.  He had forgotten all about it.
Delphi seemed beyond the moon, and his errand a child's dream.

Then the King, for so he thought of the tall man, spoke--

"You have done us a service, Islander.  The Persian is at our back and
front, and there will be no escape for those who stay.  Our allies are
going home, for they do not share our vows.  We of Lacedaemon wait in
the pass.  If you go with the men of Corinth you will find a place of
safety before noon.  No doubt in the Euripus there is some boat to take
you to your own land."

He spoke courteously, not in the rude Athenian way; and somehow the
quietness of his voice and his glittering eyes roused wild longings in
Atta's heart.  His island pride was face to face with a greater-greater
than he had ever dreamed of.

"Bid yon cooks give me some broth," he said gruffly.  "I am faint.
After I have eaten I will speak with you."

He was given food, and as he ate he thought.  He was on trial before
these men of Lacedaemon.  More, the old faith of the islands, the pride
of the first masters, was at stake in his hands.  He had boasted that
he and his kind were the last of the men; now these Hellenes of
Lacedaemon were preparing a great deed, and they deemed him unworthy to
share in it.  They offered him safety.  Could he brook the insult?  He
had forgotten that the cause of the Persian was his; that the Hellenes
were the foes of his race.  He saw only that the last test of manhood
was preparing and the manhood in him rose to greet the trial.  An odd
wild ecstasy surged in his veins.  It was not the lust of battle, for
he had no love of slaying, or hate for the Persian, for he was his
friend.  It was the sheer joy of proving that the Lemnian stock had a
starker pride than these men of Lacedamon.  They would die for their
fatherland, and their vows; but he, for a whim, a scruple, a delicacy
of honour.  His mind was so clear that no other course occurred to him.
There was only one way for a man.  He, too, would be dying for his
fatherland, for through him the island race would be ennobled in the
eyes of gods and men.

Troops were filing fast to the east--Thebans, Corinthians.  "Time
flies, Islander," said the King's voice.  "The hours of safety are
slipping past."  Atta looked up carelessly.  "I will stay," he said.
"God's curse on all Hellenes!  Little I care for your quarrels.  It is
nothing to me if your Hellas is under the heels of the East.  But I
care much for brave men.  It shall never be said that a man of Lemnos,
a son of the old race, fell back when Death threatened.  I stay with
you, men of Lacedaemon."

The King's eyes glittered; they seemed to peer into his heart.

"It appears they breed men in the islands," he said.  "But you err.
Death does not threaten.  Death awaits us.

"It is all one," said Atta.  "But I crave a boon.  Let me fight my last
fight by your side.  I am of older stock than you, and a king in my own
country.  I would strike my last blow among kings."

There was an hour of respite before battle was joined, and Atta spent
it by the edge of the sea.  He had been given arms, and in girding
himself for the fight he had found Apollo's offering in his breastfold.
He was done with the gods of the Hellenes.  His offering should go to
the gods of his own people.  So, calling upon Poseidon, he flung the
little gold cup far out to sea.  It flashed in the sunlight, and then
sank in the soft green tides so noiselessly that it seemed as if the
hand of the Sea-god had been stretched to take it.  "Hail, Poseidon!"
the Lemnian cried. "I am bound this day for the Ferryman.  To you only
I make prayer, and to the little Hermes of Larisa.  Be kind to my kin
when they travel the sea, and keep them islanders and seafarers for
ever.  Hail and farewell, God of my own folk!"

Then, while the little waves lapped on the white sand, Atta made a
song.  He was thinking of the homestead far up in the green downs,
looking over to the snows of Samothrace.  At this hour in the morning
there would be a tinkle of sheep-bells as the flocks went down to the
low pastures.  Cool wind would be blowing, and the noise of the surf
below the cliffs would come faint to the ear.  In the hall the maids
mould be spinning, while their dark-haired mistress would be casting
swift glances to the doorway, lest it might be filled any moment by the
form of her returning lord.  Outside in the chequered sunlight of the
orchard the child would be playing with his nurse, crooning in childish
syllables the chanty his father had taught him.  And at the thought of
his home a great passion welled up in Atta's heart.  It was not regret,
but joy and pride and aching love.  In his antique island creed the
death he was awaiting was not other than a bridal.  He was dying for
the things he loved, and by his death they would be blessed eternally.
He would not have long to wait before bright eyes came to greet him in
the House of Shadows.

So Atta made the Song of Atta, and sang it then, and later in the press
of battle.  It was a simple song, like the lays of seafarers.  It put
into rough verse the thought which cheers the heart of all
adventurers--nay, which makes adventure possible for those who have
much to leave.  It spoke of the shining pathway of the sea which is the
Great Uniter.  A man may lie dead in Pontus or beyond the Pillars of
Herakles, but if he dies on the shore there is nothing between him and
his fatherland.  It spoke of a battle all the long dark night in a
strange place--a place of marshes and black cliffs and shadowy terrors.

"In the dawn the sweet light comes," said the song, "and the salt winds
and the tides will bear me home..."

When in the evening the Persians took toll of the dead, they found one
man who puzzled them.  He lay among the tall Lacedaemonians on the very
lip of the sea, and around him were swathes of their countrymen.  It
looked as if he had been fighting his way to the water, and had been
overtaken by death as his feet reached the edge.  Nowhere in the pass
did the dead lie so thick, and yet he was no Hellene.  He was torn like
a deer that the dogs have worried, but the little left of his garments
and his features spoke of Eastern race.  The survivors could tell
nothing except that he had fought like a god and had been singing all
the while.

The matter came to the ear of the Great King who was sore enough at the
issue of the day.  That one of his men had performed feats of valeur
beyond the Hellenes was a pleasant tale to tell.  And so his captains
reported it.  Accordingly when the fleet from Artemision arrived next
morning, and all but a few score Persians were shovelled into holes,
that the Hellenes might seem to have been conquered by a lesser force,
Atta's body was laid out with pomp in the midst of the Lacedaemonians.
And the seamen rubbed their eyes and thanked their strange gods that
one man of the East had been found to match those terrible warriors
whose name was a nightmare.  Further, the Great King gave orders that
the body of Atta should be embalmed and carried with the army, and that
his name and kin should be sought out and duly honoured.  This latter
was a task too hard for the staff, and no more was heard of it till
months later, when the King, in full flight after Salamis, bethought
him of the one man who had not played him false.  Finding that his
lieutenants had nothing to tell him, he eased five of them of their
heads.

As it happened, the deed was not quite forgotten.  An islander, a
Lesbian and a cautious man, had fought at Thermopylae in the Persian
ranks, and had heard Atta's singing and seen how he fell.  Long
afterwards some errand took this man to Lemnos, and in the evening,
speaking with the Elders, he told his tale and repeated something of
the song.  There was that in the words which gave the Lemnians a clue,
the mention, I think, of the olive-wood Hermes and the snows of
Samothrace.  So Atta came to great honour among his own people, and his
memory and his words were handed down to the generations.  The song
became a favourite island lay, and for centuries throughout the Aegean
seafaring men sang it when they turned their prows to wild seas.  Nay,
it travelled farther, for you will find part of it stolen by Euripides
and put in a chorus of the Andromache.  There are echoes of it in some
of the epigrams of the Anthology; and, though the old days have gone,
the simple fisher-folk still sing snatches in their barbarous dialect.
The Klephts used to make a catch of it at night round their fires in
the hills, and only the other day I met a man in Scyros who had
collected a dozen variants, and was publishing them in a dull book on
island folklore.

In the centuries which followed the great fight, the sea fell away from
the roots of the cliffs and left a mile of marshland.  About fifty
years ago a peasant, digging in a rice-field, found the cup which Atta
bad given to Poseidon. There was much talk about the discovery, and
scholars debated hotly about its origin.  To-day it is in the Berlin
Museum, and according to the new fashion in archaeology it is labelled
"Minoan," and kept in the Cretan Section.  But any one who looks
carefully will see behind the rim a neat little carving of a dolphin;
and I happen to know that that was the private badge of Atta's house.




ATTA'S SONG

(Roughly translated.)

  I will sing of thee, Great Sea-Mother,
  Whose white arms gather
  Thy sons in the ending:
  And draw them homeward
  From far sad marches--
  Wild lands in the sunset,
  Bitter shores of the morning--
  Soothe them and guide them
  By shining pathways
  Homeward to thee.

  All day I have striven in dark glens
  With parched throat and dim eyes,
  Where the red crags choke the stream
  And dank thickets hide the spear.
  I have spilled the blood of my foes
  And their wolves have torn my flanks.
  I am faint, O Mother,
  Faint and aweary.
  I have longed for thy cool winds
  And thy kind grey eyes
  And thy lover's arms.

  At the even I came
  To a land of terrors,
  Of hot swamps where the feet mired
  And waters that flowerd red with blood
  There I strove with thousands,
  Wild-eyed and lost,
  As a lion among serpents.
  --But sudden before me
  I saw the flash
  Of the sweet wide waters
  That wash my homeland
  And mirror the stars of home.
  Then sang I for joy,
  For I knew the Preserver,
  Thee, the Uniter,
  The great Sea-Mother.
  Soon will the sweet light come,
  And the salt winds and the tides
  Will bear me home.

  Far in the sunrise,
  Nestled in thy bosom,
  Lies my own green isle.
  Thither wilt thou bear me.
  To where, above the sea-cliffs,
  Stretch mild meadows, flower-decked, thyme-scented,
  Crisp with sea breezes.
  There my flocks feed
  On sunny uplands,
  Looking over thy waters
  To where the mount Saos
  Raises purl snows to God.

  Hermes, guide of souls,
  I made thee a shrine in my orchard,
  And round thy olive-wood limbs
  The maidens twined Spring blossoms--
  Violet and helichryse
  And the pale wind flowers.
  Keep thou watch for me,
  For I am coming.
  Tell to my lady
  And to all my kinsfolk
  That I who have gone from them
  Tarry not long, but come swift o'er the sea-path,
  My feet light with joy,
  My eyes bright with longing.
  For little it matters
  Where a man may fall,
  If he fall by the sea-shore;
  The kind waters await him,
  The white arms are around him,
  And the wise Mother of Men
  Will carry him home.

  I who sing
  Wait joyfully on the morning.
  Ten thousand beset me
  And their spears ache for my heart.
  They will crush me and grind me to mire,
  So that none will know the man that once was me.
  But at the first light I shall be gone,
  Singing, flitting, o'er the grey waters,
  Outward, homeward,
  To thee, the Preserver,
  Thee, the Uniter,
  Mother the Sea.




IV

SPACE

  "Est impossibile? Certum est."
    --TERTULLIAN.


Leithen told me this story one evening in early September as we sat
beside the pony track which gropes its way from Glenvalin up the Correi
na Sidhe.  I had arrived that afternoon from the south, while he had
been taking an off-day from a week's stalking, so we had walked up the
glen together after tea to get the news of the forest.  A rifle was out
on the Correi na Sidhe beat, and a thin spire of smoke had risen from
the top of Sgurr Dearg to show that a stag had been killed at the
burnhead.  The lumpish hill pony with its deer-saddle had gone up the
Correi in a gillie's charge while we followed at leisure, picking our
way among the loose granite rocks and the patches of wet bogland.  The
track climbed high on one of the ridges of Sgurr Dearg, till it hung
over a caldron of green glen with the Alt-na-Sidhe churning in its linn
a thousand feet below.  It was a breathless evening, I remember, with a
pale-blue sky just clearing from the haze of the day.  West-wind
weather may make the North, even in September, no bad imitation of the
Tropics, and I sincerely pitied the man who all these stifling hours
had been toiling on the screes of Sgurr Dearg.  By-and-by we sat down
on a bank of heather, and idly watched the trough swimming at our feet.
The clatter of the pony's hoofs grew fainter, the drone of bees had
gone, even the midges seemed to have forgotten their calling.  No place
on earth can be so deathly still as a deer-forest early in the season
before the stags have begun roaring, for there are no sheep with their
homely noises, and only the rare croak of a raven breaks the silence.
The hillside was far from sheer-one could have walked down with a
little care-but something in the shape of the hollow and the remote
gleam of white water gave it an extraordinary depth and space.  There
was a shimmer left from the day's heat, which invested bracken and rock
and scree with a curious airy unreality.  One could almost have
believed that the eye had tricked the mind, that all was mirage, that
five yards from the path the solid earth fell away into nothingness.  I
have a bad head, and instinctively I drew farther back into the
heather.  Leithen's eyes were looking vacantly before him.

"Did you ever know Hollond?" he asked.

Then he laughed shortly.  "I don't know why I asked that, but somehow
this place reminded me of Hollond.  That glimmering hollow looks as if
it were the beginning of eternity.  It must be eerie to live with the
feeling always on one."

Leithen seemed disinclined for further exercise.  He lit a pipe and
smoked quietly for a little.  "Odd that you didn't know Hollond.  You
must have heard his name.  I thought you amused yourself with
metaphysics."

Then I remembered.  There had been an erratic genius who had written
some articles in Mind on that dreary subject, the mathematical
conception of infinity.  Men had praised them to me, but I confess I
never quite understood their argument.  "Wasn't he some sort of
mathematical professor?"  I asked.

"He was, and, in his own way, a tremendous swell.  He wrote a book on
Number which has translations in every European language.  He is dead
now, and the Royal Society founded a medal in his honour.  But I wasn't
thinking of that side of him."

It was the time and place for a story, for the pony would not be back
for an hour.  So I asked Leithen about the other side of Hollond which
was recalled to him by Correi na Sidhe.  He seemed a little unwilling
to speak...

"I wonder if you will understand it.  You ought to, of course, better
than me, for you know something of philosophy.  But it took me a long
time to get the hang of it, and I can't give you any kind of
explanation.  He was my fag at Eton, and when I began to get on at the
Bar I was able to advise him on one or two private matters, so that he
rather fancied my legal ability.  He came to me with his story because
he had to tell someone, and he wouldn't trust a colleague.  He said he
didn't want a scientist to know, for scientists were either pledged to
their own theories and wouldn't understand, or, if they understood,
would get ahead of him in his researches.  He wanted a lawyer, he said,
who was accustomed to weighing evidence.  That was good sense, for
evidence must always be judged by the same laws, and I suppose in the
long-run the most abstruse business comes down to a fairly simple
deduction from certain data.  Anyhow, that was the way he used to talk,
and I listened to him, for I liked the man, and had an enormous respect
for his brains.  At Eton he sluiced down all the mathematics they could
give him, and he was an astonishing swell at Cambridge.  He was a
simple fellow, too, and talked no more jargon than he could help.  I
used to climb with him in the Alps now and then, and you would never
have guessed that he had any thoughts beyond getting up steep rocks.

"It was at Chamonix, I remember, that I first got a hint of the matter
that was filling his mind.  We had been taking an off-day, and were
sitting in the hotel garden, watching the Aiguilles getting purple in
the twilight.  Chamonix always makes me choke a little-it is so crushed
in by those great snow masses.  I said something about it--said I liked
the open spaces like the Gornegrat or the Bel Alp better.  He asked me
why:  if it was the difference of the air, or merely the wider horizon?
I said it was the sense of not being crowded, of living in an empty
world.  He repeated the word 'empty' and laughed.

"'By "empty" you mean,' he said, 'where things don't knock up against
you?'

I told him No.  I mean just empty, void, nothing but blank aether.

"You don't knock up against things here, and the air is as good as you
want.  It can't be the lack of ordinary emptiness you feel."

"I agreed that the word needed explaining.  'I suppose it is mental
restlessness,' I said.  'I like to feel that for a tremendous distance
there is nothing round me.  Why, I don't know.  Some men are built the
other way and have a terror of space.'

"He said that that was better.  'It is a personal fancy, and depends on
your KNOWING that there is nothing between you and the top of the Dent
Blanche.  And you know because your eyes tell you there is nothing.
Even if you were blind, you might have a sort of sense about adjacent
matter.  Blind men often have it.  But in any case, whether got from
instinct or sight, the KNOWLEDGE is what matters.'

"Hollond was embarking on a Socratic dialogue in which I could see
little point.  I told him so, and he laughed. "'I am not sure that I am
very clear myself.  But yes--there IS a point.  Supposing you knew-not
by sight or by instinct, but by sheer intellectual knowledge, as I know
the truth of a mathematical proposition--that what we call empty space
was full, crammed.  Not with lumps of what we call matter like hills
and houses, but with things as real--as real to the mind.  Would you
still feel crowded?'

"'No,' I said, 'I don't think so.  It is only what we call matter that
signifies.  It would be just as well not to feel crowded by the other
thing, for there would be no escape from it.  But what are you getting
at?  Do you mean atoms or electric currents or what?'

"He said he wasn't thinking about that sort of thing, and began to talk
of another subject.

"Next night, when we were pigging it at the Geant cabane, he started
again on the same tack.  He asked me how I accounted for the fact that
animals could find their way back over great tracts of unknown country.
I said I supposed it was the homing instinct.

"'Rubbish, man,' he said.  'That's only another name for the puzzle,
not an explanation.  There must be some reason for it.  They must KNOW
something that we cannot understand.  Tie a cat in a bag and take it
fifty miles by train and it will make its way home.  That cat has some
clue that we haven't.'

"I was tired and sleepy, and told him that I did not care a rush about
the psychology of cats.  But he was not to be snubbed, and went on
talking.

"'How if Space is really full of things we cannot see and as yet do not
know?  How if all animals and some savages have a cell in their brain
or a nerve which responds to the invisible world?  How if all Space be
full of these landmarks, not material in our sense, but quite real?  A
dog barks at nothing, a wild beast makes an aimless circuit.  Why?
Perhaps because Space is made up of corridors and alleys, ways to
travel and things to shun?  For all we know, to a greater intelligence
than ours the top of Mont Blanc may be as crowded as Piccadilly Circus.'

"But at that point I fell asleep and left Hollond to repeat his
questions to a guide who knew no English and a snoring porter.

"Six months later, one foggy January afternoon, Hollond rang me up at
the Temple and proposed to come to see me that night after dinner.  I
thought he wanted to talk Alpine shop, but he turned up in Duke Street
about nine with a kit-bag full of papers.  He was an odd fellow to look
at--a yellowish face with the skin stretched tight on the cheek-bones,
clean-shaven, a sharp chin which he kept poking forward, and deep-set,
greyish eyes.  He was a hard fellow, too, always in pretty good
condition, which was remarkable considering how he slaved for nine
months out of the twelve.  He had a quiet, slow-spoken manner, but that
night I saw that he was considerably excited.

"He said that he had come to me because we were old friends.  He
proposed to tell me a tremendous secret.  'I must get another mind to
work on it or I'll go crazy.  I don't want a scientist.  I want a plain
man.'

"Then he fixed me with a look like a tragic actor's.  'Do you remember
that talk we had in August at Chamonix--about Space?  I daresay you
thought I was playing the fool.  So I was in a sense, but I was feeling
my way towards something which has been in my mind for ten years.  Now
I have got it, and you must hear about it.  You may take my word that
it's a pretty startling discovery.'

"I lit a pipe and told him to go ahead, warning him that I knew about
as much science as the dustman.

"I am bound to say that it took me a long time to understand what he
meant.  He began by saying that everybody thought of Space as an 'empty
homogeneous medium.'  'Never mind at present what the ultimate
constituents of that medium are.  We take it as a finished product, and
we think of it as mere extension, something without any quality at all.
That is the view of civilised man.  You will find all the philosophers
taking it for granted.  Yes, but every living thing does not take that
view.  An animal, for instance.  It feels a kind of quality in Space.
It can find its way over new country, because it perceives certain
landmarks, not necessarily material, but perceptible, or if you like
intelligible.  Take an Australian savage.  He has the same power, and,
I believe, for the same reason.  He is conscious of intelligible
landmarks.'

"'You mean what people call a sense of direction,' I put in.

"'Yes, but what in Heaven's name is a sense of direction?  The phrase
explains nothing.  However incoherent the mind of the animal or the
savage may be, it is there somewhere, working on some data.  I've been
all through the psychological and anthropological side of the business,
and after you eliminate the clues from sight and hearing and smell and
half-conscious memory there remains a solid lump of the inexplicable.'

"Hollond's eye had kindled, and he sat doubled up in his chair,
dominating me with a finger.

"'Here, then is a power which man is civilising himself out of.  Call
it anything you like, but you must admit that it is a power.  Don't you
see that it is a perception of another kind of reality that we are
leaving behind us?... Well, you know the way nature works.  The wheel
comes full circle, and what we think we have lost we regain in a higher
form.  So for a long time I have been wondering whether the civilised
mind could not recreate for itself this lost gift, the gift of seeing
the quality of Space.  I mean that I wondered whether the scientific
modern brain could not get to the stage of realising that Space is not
an empty homogeneous medium, but full of intricate differences,
intelligible and real, though not with our common reality.'

"I found all this very puzzling and he had to repeat it several times
before I got a glimpse of what he was talking about.

"'I've wondered for a long time he went on 'but now quite suddenly, I
have begun to know.' He stopped and asked me abruptly if I knew much
about mathematics.

"'It's a pity,' he said,'but the main point is not technical, though I
wish you could appreciate the beauty of some of my proofs.  Then he
began to tell me about his last six months' work.  I should have
mentioned that he was a brilliant physicist besides other things.  All
Hollond's tastes were on the borderlands of sciences, where mathematics
fades into metaphysics and physics merges in the abstrusest kind of
mathematics.  Well, it seems he had been working for years at the
ultimate problem of matter, and especially of that rarefied matter we
call aether or space.  I forget what his view was--atoms or molecules or
electric waves.  If he ever told me I have forgotten, but I'm not
certain that I ever knew.  However, the point was that these ultimate
constituents were dynamic and mobile, not a mere passive medium but a
medium in constant movement and change.  He claimed to have
discovered--by ordinary inductive experiment--that the constituents of
aether possessed certain functions, and moved in certain figures
obedient to certain mathematical laws.  Space, I gathered, was
perpetually 'forming fours' in some fancy way.

"Here he left his physics and became the mathematician.  Among his
mathematical discoveries had been certain curves or figures or
something whose behaviour involved a new dimension.  I gathered that
this wasn't the ordinary Fourth Dimension that people talk of, but that
fourth-dimensional inwardness or involution was part of it.  The
explanation lay in the pile of manuscripts he left with me, but though
I tried honestly I couldn't get the hang of it.  My mathematics stopped
with desperate finality just as he got into his subject.

"His point was that the constituents of Space moved according to these
new mathematical figures of his.  They were always changing, but the
principles of their change were as fixed as the law of gravitation.
Therefore, if you once grasped these principles you knew the contents
of the void.  What do you make of that?"

I said that it seemed to me a reasonable enough argument, but that it
got one very little way forward. "A man,"  I said, "might know the
contents of Space and the laws of their arrangement and yet be unable
to see anything more than his fellows.  It is a purely academic
knowledge.  His mind knows it as the result of many deductions, but his
senses perceive nothing."

Leithen laughed.  "Just what I said to Hollond.  He asked the opinion
of my legal mind.  I said I could not pronounce on his argument but
that I could point out that he had established no trait d'union between
the intellect which understood and the senses which perceived.  It was
like a blind man with immense knowledge but no eyes, and therefore no
peg to hang his knowledge on and make it useful.  He had not explained
his savage or his cat.  'Hang it, man,' I said, 'before you can
appreciate the existence of your Spacial forms you have to go through
elaborate experiments and deductions.  You can't be doing that every
minute.  Therefore you don't get any nearer to the USE of the sense you
say that man once possessed, though you can explain it a bit.'"

"What did he say?" I asked.

"The funny thing was that he never seemed to see my difficulty.  When I
kept bringing him back to it he shied off with a new wild theory of
perception.  He argued that the mind can live in a world of realities
without any sensuous stimulus to connect them with the world of our
ordinary life.  Of course that wasn't my point.  I supposed that this
world of Space was real enough to him, but I wanted to know how he got
there.  He never answered me.  He was the typical Cambridge man, you
know--dogmatic about uncertainties, but curiously diffident about the
obvious.  He laboured to get me to understand the notion of his
mathematical forms, which I was quite willing to take on trust from
him.  Some queer things he said, too.  He took our feeling about Left
and Right as an example of our instinct for the quality of Space.  But
when I objected that Left and Right varied with each object, and only
existed in connection with some definite material thing, he said that
that was exactly what he meant.  It was an example of the mobility of
the Spacial forms.  Do you see any sense in that?"

I shook my head.  It seemed to me pure craziness.

"And then he tried to show me what he called the 'involution of Space,'
by taking two points on a piece of paper.  The points were a foot away
when the paper was flat, they coincided when it was doubled up.  He
said that there were no gaps between the figures, for the medium was
continuous, and he took as an illustration the loops on a cord.  You
are to think of a cord always looping and unlooping itself according to
certain mathematical laws.  Oh, I tell you, I gave up trying to follow
him.  And he was so desperately in earnest all the time.  By his
account Space was a sort of mathematical pandemonium."

Leithen stopped to refill his pipe, and I mused upon the ironic fate
which had compelled a mathematical genius to make his sole confidant of
a philistine lawyer, and induced that lawyer to repeat it confusedly to
an ignoramus at twilight on a Scotch hill.  As told by Leithen it was a
very halting tale.

"But there was one thing I could see very clearly," Leithen went on,
"and that was Hollond's own case.  This crowded world of Space was
perfectly real to him.  How he had got to it I do not know.  Perhaps
his mind, dwelling constantly on the problem, had unsealed some
atrophied cell and restored the old instinct.  Anyhow, he was living
his daily life with a foot in each world.

"He often came to see me, and after the first hectic discussions he
didn't talk much.  There was no noticeable change in him--a little more
abstracted perhaps.  He would walk in the street or come into a room
with a quick look round him, and sometimes for no earthly reason he
would swerve.  Did you ever watch a cat crossing a room?  It sidles
along by the furniture and walks over an open space of carpet as if it
were picking its way among obstacles.  Well, Hollond behaved like that,
but he had always been counted a little odd, and nobody noticed it but
me.

"I knew better than to chaff him, and had stopped argument, so there
wasn't much to be said.  But sometimes he would give me news about his
experiences.  The whole thing was perfectly clear and scientific and
above board, and nothing creepy about it.  You know how I hate the
washy supernatural stuff they give us nowadays.  Hollond was well and
fit, with an appetite like a hunter.  But as he talked,
sometimes--well, you know I haven't much in the way of nerves or
imagination--but I used to get a little eerie.  Used to feel the solid
earth dissolving round me.  It was the opposite of vertigo, if you
understand me--a sense of airy realities crowding in on you-crowding
the mind, that is, not the body.

"I gathered from Hollond that he was always conscious of corridors and
halls and alleys in Space, shifting, but shifting according to
inexorable laws.  I never could get quite clear as to what this
consciousness was like.  When I asked he used to look puzzled and
worried and helpless.  I made out from him that one landmark involved a
sequence, and once given a bearing from an object you could keep the
direction without a mistake.  He told me he could easily, if he wanted,
go in a dirigible from the top of Mont Blanc to the top of Snowdon in
the thickest fog and without a compass, if he were given the proper
angle to start from.  I confess I didn't follow that myself.  Material
objects had nothing to do with the Spacial forms, for a table or a bed
in our world might be placed across a corridor of Space.  The forms
played their game independent of our kind of reality.  But the worst of
it was, that if you kept your mind too much in one world you were apt
to forget about the other and Hollond was always barking his shins on
stones and chairs and things.

"He told me all this quite simply and frankly.  Remember his mind and
no other part of him lived in his new world.  He said it gave him an
odd sense of detachment to sit in a room among people, and to know that
nothing there but himself had any relation at all to the infinite
strange world of Space that flowed around them.  He would listen, he
said, to a great man talking, with one eye on the cat on the rug,
thinking to himself how much more the cat knew than the man."

"How long was it before he went mad?"  I asked.

It was a foolish question, and made Leithen cross.  "He never went mad
in your sense.  My dear fellow, you're very much wrong if you think
there was anything pathological about him--then.  The man was
brilliantly sane.  His mind was as keen is a keen sword.  I couldn't
understand him, but I could judge of his sanity right enough."

I asked if it made him happy or miserable.

"At first I think it made him uncomfortable.  He was restless because
he knew too much and too little.  The unknown pressed in on his mind as
bad air weighs on the lungs.  Then it lightened and he accepted the new
world in the same sober practical way that he took other things.  I
think that the free exercise of his mind in a pure medium gave him a
feeling of extraordinary power and ease.  His eyes used to sparkle when
he talked.  And another odd thing he told me.  He was a keen
rockclimber, but, curiously enough, he had never a very good head.
Dizzy heights always worried him, though he managed to keep hold on
himself.  But now all that had gone.  The sense of the fulness of Space
made him as happy--happier I believe--with his legs dangling into
eternity, as sitting before his own study fire.

"I remember saying that it was all rather like the mediaeval wizards
who made their spells by means of numbers and figures.

"He caught me up at once.  'Not numbers,' he said.  "Number has no
place in Nature.  It is an invention of the human mind to atone for a
bad memory.  But figures are a different matter.  All the mysteries of
the world are in them, and the old magicians knew that at least, if
they knew no more.'

"He had only one grievance.  He complained that it was terribly lonely.
'It is the Desolation,' he would quote, 'spoken of by Daniel the
prophet.' He would spend hours travelling those eerie shifting
corridors of Space with no hint of another human soul.  How could there
be?  It was a world of pure reason, where human personality had no
place. What puzzled me was why he should feel the absence of this.  One
wouldn't you know, in an intricate problem of geometry or a game of
chess.  I asked him, but he didn't understand the question.  I puzzled
over it a good deal, for it seemed to me that if Hollond felt lonely,
there must be more in this world of his than we imagined.  I began to
wonder if there was any truth in fads like psychical research.  Also, I
was not so sure that he was as normal as I had thought:  it looked as
if his nerves might be going bad.

"Oddly enough, Hollond was getting on the same track himself.  He had
discovered, so he said, that in sleep everybody now and then lived in
this new world of his.  You know how one dreams of triangular railway
platforms with trains running simultaneously down all three sides and
not colliding.  Well, this sort of cantrip was 'common form,' as we say
at the Bar, in Hollond's Space, and he was very curious about the why
and wherefore of Sleep.  He began to haunt psychological laboratories,
where they experiment with the charwoman and the odd man, and he used
to go up to Cambridge for seances.  It was a foreign atmosphere to him,
and I don't think he was very happy in it.  He found so many charlatans
that he used to get angry, and declare he would be better employed at
Mother's Meetings!"

From far up the Glen came the sound of the pony's hoofs.  The stag had
been loaded up and the gillies were returning.  Leithen looked at his
watch.  "We'd better wait and see the beast," he said.

"... Well, nothing happened for more than a year.  Then one evening in
May he burst into my rooms in high excitement.  You understand quite
clearly that there was no suspicion of horror or fright or anything
unpleasant about this world he had discovered.  It was simply a series
of interesting and difficult problems.  All this time Hollond had been
rather extra well and cheery.  But when he came in I thought I noticed
a different look in his eyes, something puzzled and diffident and
apprehensive.

"'There's a queer performance going on in the other world,' he said.
'It's unbelievable.  I never dreamed of such a thing.  I--I don't
quite know how to put it, and I don't know how to explain it, but--but
I am becoming aware that there are other beings--other minds--moving
in Space besides mine.'

"I suppose I ought to have realised then that things were beginning to
go wrong.  But it was very difficult, he was so rational and anxious to
make it all clear.  I asked him how he knew.  'There could, of course,
on his own showing be no CHANGE in that world, for the forms of Space
moved and existed under inexorable laws.  He said he found his own mind
failing him at points.  There would come over him a sense of
fear--intellectual fear--and weakness, a sense of something else, quite
alien to Space, thwarting him.  Of course he could only describe his
impressions very lamely, for they were purely of the mind, and he had
no material peg to hang them on, so that I could realise them.  But the
gist of it was that he had been gradually becoming conscious of what he
called 'Presences' in his world.  They had no effect on Space--did not
leave footprints in its corridors, for instance--but they affected his
mind.  There was some mysterious contact established between him and
them.  I asked him if the affection was unpleasant and he said 'No, not
exactly.' But I could see a hint of fear in his eyes.

"Think of it.  Try to realise what intellectual fear is.  I can't, but
it is conceivable.  To you and me fear implies pain to ourselves or
some other, and such pain is always in the last resort pain of the
flesh.  Consider it carefully and you will see that it is so.  But
imagine fear so sublimated and transmuted as to be the tension of pure
spirit.  I can't realise it, but I think it possible.  I don't pretend
to understand how Hollond got to know about these Presences.  But there
was no doubt about the fact.  He was positive, and he wasn't in the
least mad--not in our sense.  In that very month he published his book
on Number, and gave a German professor who attacked it a most
tremendous public trouncing.

"I know what you are going to say,--that the fancy was a weakening of
the mind from within.  I admit I should have thought of that but he
looked so confoundedly sane and able that it seemed ridiculous.  He
kept asking me my opinion, as a lawyer, on the facts he offered.  It
was the oddest case ever put before me, but I did my best for him.  I
dropped all my own views of sense and nonsense.  I told him that,
taking all that he had told me as fact, the Presences might be either
ordinary minds traversing Space in sleep; or minds such as his which
had independently captured the sense of Space's quality; or, finally,
the spirits of just men made perfect, behaving as psychical researchers
think they do.  It was a ridiculous task to set a prosaic man, and I
wasn't quite serious.  But Holland was serious enough.

"He admitted that all three explanations were conceivable, but he was
very doubtful about the first.  The projection of the spirit into Space
during sleep, he thought, was a faint and feeble thing, and these were
powerful Presences.  With the second and the third he was rather
impressed.  I suppose I should have seen what was happening and tried
to stop it; at least, looking back that seems to have been my duty.
But it was difficult to think that anything was wrong with Hollond;
indeed the odd thing is that all this time the idea of madness never
entered my head.  I rather backed him up.  Somehow the thing took my
fancy, though I thought it moonshine at the bottom of my heart.  I
enlarged on the pioneering before him.  'Think,' I told him, 'what may
be waiting for you.  You may discover the meaning of Spirit.  You may
open up a new world, as rich as the old one, but imperishable.  You may
prove to mankind their immortality and deliver them for ever from the
fear of death.  Why, man, you are picking at the lock of all the
world's mysteries.'

"But Hollond did not cheer up.  He seemed strangely languid and
dispirited.  'That is all true enough,' he said,'if you are right, if
your alternatives are exhaustive.  But suppose they are something else,
something .... What that 'something' might be he had apparently no
idea, and very soon he went away.

"He said another thing before he left.  We asked me if I ever read
poetry, and I said, not often.  Nor did he:  but he had picked up a
little book somewhere and found a man who knew about the Presences.  I
think his name was Traherne, one of the seventeenth-century fellows.
He quoted a verse which stuck to my fly-paper memory.  It ran something
like

  'Within the region of the air,
  Compassed about with Heavens fair,
  Great tracts of lands there may be found,
  Where many numerous hosts,
  In those far distant coasts,
  For other great and glorious ends
  Inhabit, my yet unknown friends.'

Hollond was positive he did not mean angels or anything of the sort.  I
told him that Traherne evidently took a cheerful view of them.  He
admitted that, but added: 'He had religion, you see.  He believed that
everything was for the best.  I am not a man of faith, and can only
take comfort from what I understand.  I'm in the dark, I tell you...'

"Next week I was busy with the Chilian Arbitration case, and saw nobody
for a couple of months.  Then one evening I ran against Hollond on the
Embankment, and thought him looking horribly ill.  He walked back with
me to my rooms, and hardly uttered one word all the way.  I gave him a
stiff whisky-and-soda, which he gulped down absent-mindedly.  There was
that strained, hunted look in his eyes that you see in a frightened
animal's.  He was always lean, but now he had fallen away to skin and
bone.

"'I can't stay long,' he told me, 'for I'm off to the Alps to-morrow
and I have a lot to do.'  Before then he used to plunge readily into
his story, but now he seemed shy about beginning.  Indeed I had to ask
him a question.

"'Things are difficult,' he said hesitatingly, and rather distressing.
Do you know, Leithen, I think you were wrong about--about what I spoke
to you of.  You said there must be one of three explanations.  I am
beginning to think that there is a fourth.

"He stopped for a second or two, then suddenly leaned forward and
gripped my knee so fiercely that I cried out.  'That world is the
Desolation,' he said in a choking voice, 'and perhaps I am getting near
the Abomination of the Desolation that the old prophet spoke of.  I
tell you, man, I am on the edge of a terror, a terror,' he almost
screamed, 'that no mortal can think of and live.'

You can imagine that I was considerably startled.  It was lightning out
of a clear sky.  How the devil could one associate horror with
mathematics?  I don't see it yet...  At any rate, I--You may be sure I
cursed my folly for ever pretending to take him seriously.  The only
way would have been to have laughed him out of it at the start.  And
yet I couldn't, you know--it was too real and reasonable.  Anyhow, I
tried a firm tone now, and told him the whole thing was arrant raving
bosh.  I bade him be a man and pull himself together.  I made him dine
with me, and took him home, and got him into a better state of mind
before he went to bed.  Next morning I saw him off at Charing Cross,
very haggard still, but better. He promised to write to me pretty
often....


The pony, with a great eleven-pointer lurching athwart its back, was
abreast of us, and from the autumn mist came the sound of soft Highland
voices.  Leithen and I got up to go, when we heard that the rifle had
made direct for the Lodge by a short cut past the Sanctuary.  In the
wake of the gillies we descended the Correi road into a glen all
swimming with dim purple shadows.  The pony minced and boggled; the
stag's antlers stood out sharp on the rise against a patch of sky,
looking like a skeleton tree.  Then we dropped into a covert of birches
and emerged on the white glen highway.

Leithen's story had bored and puzzled me at the start, but now it had
somehow gripped my fancy.  Space a domain of endless corridors and
Presences moving in them!  The world was not quite the same as an hour
ago.  It was the hour, as the French say, "between dog and wolf," when
the mind is disposed to marvels.  I thought of my stalking on the
morrow, and was miserably conscious that I would miss my stag.  Those
airy forms would get in the way.  Confound Leithen and his yarns!

"I want to hear the end of your story,"  I told him, as the lights of
the Lodge showed half a mile distant.

"The end was a tragedy," he said slowly.  "I don't much care to talk
about it.  But how was I to know?  I couldn't see the nerve going.  You
see I couldn't believe it was all nonsense.  If I could I might have
seen.  But I still think there was something in it--up to a point.  Oh,
I agree he went mad in the end.  It is the only explanation.  Something
must have snapped in that fine brain, and he saw the little bit more
which we call madness.  Thank God, you and I are prosaic fellows...

"I was going out to Chamonix myself a week later.  But before I started
I got a post-card from Hollond, the only word from him.  He had printed
my name and address, and on the other side had scribbled six words--'I
know at last--God's mercy.--H.G.H'  The handwriting was like a sick man
of ninety.  I knew that things must be pretty bad with my friend.

"I got to Chamonix in time for his funeral.  An ordinary climbing
accident--you probably read about it in the papers. The Press talked
about the toll which the Alps took from intellectuals--the usual rot.
There was an inquiry, but the facts were quite simple.  The body was
only recognised by the clothes.  He had fallen several thousand feet.

"It seems that he had climbed for a few days with one of the Kronigs
and Dupont, and they had done some hair-raising things on the
Aiguilles.  Dupont told me that they had found a new route up the
Montanvert side of the Charmoz.  He said that Hollond climbed like a
'diable fou' and if you know Dupont's standard of madness you will see
that the pace must have been pretty hot. 'But monsieur was sick,' he
added; 'his eyes were not good.  And I and Franz, we were grieved for
him and a little afraid.  We were glad when he left us.'

"He dismissed the guides two days before his death.  The next day he
spent in the hotel, getting his affairs straight.  He left everything
in perfect order, but not a line to a soul, not even to his sister.
The following day he set out alone about three in the morning for the
Grepon.  He took the road up the Nantillons glacier to the Col, and
then he must have climbed the Mummery crack by himself.  After that he
left the ordinary route and tried a new traverse across the Mer de
Glace face.  Somewhere near the top he fell, and next day a party going
to the Dent du Requin found him on the rocks thousands of feet below.

"He had slipped in attempting the most foolhardy course on earth, and
there was a lot of talk about the dangers of guideless climbing.  But I
guessed the truth, and I am sure Dupont knew, though he held his
tongue...."

We were now on the gravel of the drive, and I was feeling better.  The
thought of dinner warmed my heart and drove out the eeriness of the
twilight glen.  The hour between dog and wolf was passing.  After all,
there was a gross and jolly earth at hand for wise men who had a mind
to comfort.

Leithen, I saw, did not share my mood.  He looked glum and puzzled, as
if his tale had aroused grim memories.  He finished it at the Lodge
door.

"... For, of course, he had gone out that day to die.  He had seen the
something more, the little bit too much, which plucks a man from his
moorings.  He had gone so far into the land of pure spirit that he must
needs go further and shed the fleshly envelope that cumbered him.  God
send that he found rest!  I believe that he chose the steepest cliff in
the Alps for a purpose.  He wanted to be unrecognisable.  He was a
brave man and a good citizen.  I think he hoped that those who found
him might not see the look in his eyes."




STOCKS AND STONES

[The Chief Topaiwari replieth to Sir Walter Raleigh who upbraideth him
for idol worship]


  My gods, you say, are idols dumb,
  Which men have wrought from wood or clay,
  Carven with chisel, shaped with thumb,
  A morning's task, an evening's play.
  You bid me turn my face on high
  Where the blue heaven the sun enthrones,
  And serve a viewless deity,
  Nor make my bow to stocks and stones.

  My lord, I am not skilled in wit
  Nor wise in priestcraft, but I know
  That fear to man is spur and bit
  To jog and curb his fancies' flow.
  He fears and loves, for love and awe
  In mortal souls may well unite
  To fashion forth the perfect law
  Where Duty takes to wife Delight.

  But on each man one Fear awaits
  And chills his marrow like the dead.--
  He cannot worship what he hates
  Or make a god of naked Dread.
  The homeless winds that twist and race,
  The heights of cloud that veer and roll,
  The unplumb'd Abyss, the drift of Space--
  These are the fears that drain the soul.

  Ye dauntless ones from out the sea
  Fear nought. Perchance your gods are strong
  To rule the air where grim things be,
  And quell the deeps with all their throng.
  For me, I dread not fire nor steel,
  Nor aught that walks in open light,
  But fend me from the endless Wheel,
  The voids of Space, the gulfs of Night.

  Wherefore my brittle gods I make
  Of friendly clay and kindly stone,--
  Wrought with my hands, to serve or break,
  From crown to toe my work, my own.
  My eyes can see, my nose can smell,
  My fingers touch their painted face,
  They weave their little homely spell
  To warm me from the cold of Space.

  My gods are wrought of common stuff
  For human joys and mortal tears;
  Weakly, perchance, yet staunch enough
  To build a barrier 'gainst my fears,
  Where, lowly but secure, I wait
  And hear without the strange winds blow.--
  I cannot worship what I hate,
  Or serve a god I dare not know.




