III.

The young girl and young man enter into society. The prudent mother knows
that it is gently insinuated to her son that she is a _prude_, a _dotard_
who knows nothing of the passions; who does not suspect that _everything
in nature is good_, and should be respected; and who has read the
history of our species to so little purpose that she has not perceived
that humanity has love in all forms: the _polygamic_ and _polyandric_,
and even ... the _ambiguous_.

She knows also, that he is told that the satisfaction of the animal
instinct is necessary to the _health_ of man, and that brothels are
places of public utility.

She knows, lastly, that young and giddy girls, with lax principles, make
dangerous confidences to her daughter.

It is time, in opposition to these lax doctrines and pernicious examples,
to give to her children the philosophy of Love. According to her method,
she suffers is to elucidate itself.

My son, says she, what is the end of the attraction of mineral molecules
towards each other?

SON. The _production_ of a body having a determined form.

MOTHER. What is the end of the attraction of the plant for heat, light,
air, the elements which it absorbs?

SON. The _production_ of its own body, the development of its organs, and
of its properties, its preservation.

MOTHER. And do you know, my daughter, what is the end of the attraction
of the pistil and stamens of the flower.

DAUGHTER. The _production_ of a being resembling its parents.

MOTHER. Why do we as well as the animals experience an inclination or
attraction for certain kinds of food?

SON. It is evidently in order to incite to action the organs which
procure to the organism the elements adapted to _produce_ blood.

MOTHER. Why do both sexes of the same species experience an attraction
towards each other?

DAUGHTER. For the _production_ of young to perpetuate the species.

MOTHER. Why do the females, and often males among animals experience an
inclination or attraction to take care of the young?

DAUGHTER. In order to preserve them and to educate them as far as is in
their power, that they may be able to provide for themselves.

MOTHER. Are you quite sure, my children, that the end of these
attractions is not the attraction itself, the procurement of a pleasure?

SON. The pleasure seems to me only the means of impelling the being to
fulfill a necessary or useful function. Thus the end of our scientific,
artistic and industrial inclinations or attractions is not the pleasure
which we take in their satisfaction, but the _production_ of science, art
and industry.

DAUGHTER. That is, the increase and progress of our intellect through the
knowledge of the laws of Nature, in order to modify this nature with a
view to our wants and pleasures.

MOTHER. To what inclination or attraction is Society due?

SON. To our attraction for our fellow beings.

DAUGHTER. This attraction is the father of Justice and of Goodness: it
_produces_ them.

MOTHER. Will you generalize the character of this inclination or
attraction in accordance with what we have just said?

SON. The end of all attraction or inclination is the _production_,
_progress_ and _preservation_ of beings.

MOTHER. Are all instincts good which are merely inclinations or
attractions?

SON. For animals, which are subject to fatality, they are; because they
tend directly to their end, without ever appearing to deviate from it. In
our species, they are good in principle, if we regard their end; but they
may become evil through the deviation to which our liberty subjects them.

MOTHER. By what token can we know that our instinct has a right tendency?

DAUGHTER. By comparing its use with its end; by assuring ourselves that
this use is not prejudicial to the practice of justice, that it does not
detract from the right of any of our faculties; that is, that it disturbs
neither our individual harmony nor that of others; for it is on these
conditions alone that it can coöperate in the realization of the social
ideal.

MOTHER. Very well. Now apply this general doctrine to human love, my
children.

SON. Since love is one of the forms of attraction, and since the general
end of attraction is the production, progress and preservation of beings
and species, it is evident that human love should possess these
characteristics. Its principal function appears to me to be the
reproduction of the species.

DAUGHTER. It seems to me, brother, that this is not enough; since true
husbands and wives do not cease to love each other after this end has
been fulfilled, and since persons may love without having children.

MOTHER. You are right, my daughter; our faculties being more numerous and
more fully developed than those of the animals, our love cannot be
incomplete like theirs; it cannot be of the same nature in our
progressive species as in those species fatal and unprogressive of
themselves. In us, each faculty, properly employed, aids in the
improvement of all the rest, wrongly employed, it interrupts our harmony
and lowers us; it is the same with our love. Or rather this passion is
the one that most of all causes us to grow or to decline.

You know, my children, that humanity advances only by forming itself an
ideal and endeavoring to realize it. Every passion has its ideal, which
is modified by that of the whole. In the beginning, man, in the animal
state, made the end of love the pleasure resulting from the satisfaction
of a wholly physical want: he cared nothing for the most evident
aim--progeny. A little later, man less gross, loved woman for her beauty
and fruitfulness; this was the patriarchal age of love. Later still, the
Northern races wrought a change in this instinct; love became decomposed,
as it were; the lover possessed the love of the soul; the woman was loved
not only for her beauty, but as the inspirer of lofty deeds; the husband
was the possessor of the body alone and the children were the fruit of
marriage; this was the chivalrous age of love. Since pacific labor has
been organized and has gained a place in public opinion, love has entered
a new phase; many among the moderns consider it as the initiative of
labor. Some regard the attraction of pleasure as playing the chief part
in industrial production, and leave full liberty to the attraction,
however inconsistent it may be; others preserve the couple, and transform
woman into the moving power of action; the love that she inspires excites
the efforts of the worker.

The progress hitherto made by humanity is therefore that love has now
for its end the perpetuation of the species, the modification of man by
woman, and the production of labor.

In a higher ideal of Justice, the sexes being equal in rights, love will
have a higher end; the spouses will unite on account of conformity of
principles, union of hearts, wedding of intellects, common labor: love
will join them to double their strength, to modify them by each other,
from the friction of their hearts will be struck out sentiments which
neither would have had alone; from the union of their intellects will be
born thoughts which neither would have had alone; from the aid that they
will lend each other in their common labor will proceed works that
neither would have accomplished alone, as from the union of their whole
being, will be born new generations more perfect than the preceding
because they will be the product of the greatest possible harmony. It
will be only when woman shall take her lawful place that humanity will
see love in all its splendor, and that this passion, subversive to-day in
inequality and incoherence, will become what it should be; one of the
great instruments of Progress.

We, my children, who are too rational to mistake the means by which
Nature impels us to accomplish her designs for the designs themselves,
will take care not to fancy that the end of love is pleasure; on the
other hand, we have too much respect for equality to imagine that it is
for the benefit of one sex alone. We will remain faithful to the ideal of
our lofty destinies, in defining love as the reciprocal attraction of man
and woman with the end of perpetuating the species, of improving the
partners mutually with respect to intellect and feeling, and of advancing
science, art and industry by the labor of the pair.


