PART II.

OBJECTIONS TO THE EMANCIPATION OF WOMAN. NATURE AND FUNCTIONS OF WOMAN.
LOVE. MARRIAGE. LEGAL REFORMS. SUMMARY.




OBJECTIONS TO THE EMANCIPATION OF WOMEN.


I.

What arguments do the adversaries of the emancipation of women use to
refute the equality of the rights of the sexes?

Some, theosophists of the old school, claim that one half of humanity is
condemned by God himself to submit to the other half, because, they say,
the first woman sinned.

Not wishing to depart from the firm ground of justice, reason and proved
facts, we will not argue with this class of adversaries.

Others, who claim to be imbued with the modern spirit, and pretend to be
disciples of the doctrines of liberty, condemn woman to inferiority and
obedience because, they say, she is weaker physically and intellectually
than man;

Because she performs functions of an inferior order;

Because she produces less than man in an industrial point of view;

Because her peculiar temperament prevents her from performing certain
functions;

Because she is only fit for in-door life; because her vocation is to be
mother and housewife, to devote herself entirely to her husband and
children;

Because man protects and supports her;

Because man is her proxy, and exercises rights both for her and himself;

Because woman has no more time than capacity to exercise certain rights.

The rights of woman are in her beauty and our love, add some, gallantly.

Woman does not claim her rights; many women themselves are scandalized by
the demands made by a few of their sex, continue other men.

And they spare the courageous women who plead the cause of right, and the
men who sustain them neither calumnies, nor mockery, nor insult, hoping
to intimidate the former and disgust the latter.

Vain hope! the time in which we could be intimidated has gone by. If it
is justifiable to fear the opinion of those whom we deem juster and more
intelligent than ourselves, it would be folly to be disturbed by those
whose irrationality and injustice we feel able to demonstrate.

This double demonstration we are about to attempt, taking up one by one
the arguments of these gentlemen.

1. Woman cannot have the same rights as man, because she is inferior to
him in intellectual faculties, you say. From this proposition, we have a
right to conclude that you consider the _human faculties as the basis of
right_;

That, the law proclaiming equality of right for your sex, you are all
equal in qualities, all alike strong and alike intelligent.

That, lastly, no woman is as strong and as intelligent as you; I cannot
say, as the least among you, since, if right is founded on qualities, as
it is equal, your qualities must be equal.

Now gentlemen, what becomes of these pretensions in the presence of
_facts_ that show you all unequal in strength and in intellect? What
becomes of these pretensions in the presence of _facts_ that show us a
host of women stronger than many men; a host of women more intelligent
than the great mass of men?

Being unequal in strength and in intellect, and notwithstanding declared
equal in right, it is evident therefore that you have not founded right
on qualities.

And if you have not taken these qualities into account when your right
has been in question, why then do you talk so loudly of them when the
question is that of the right of woman.

If the faculties were the basis of right, as the faculties are unequal,
the right would be unequal; and, to be just, it would be necessary to
accord right to those who made good their claims to the necessary
faculties and to exclude the rest; by this standard many women would be
chosen and an infinite number of men excluded. See where we end when we
have not the intellectual energy to take principles into consideration!
You have but one means of evicting us of equality; namely, to prove that
we do not belong to the same species as you.

2. Woman, you add, cannot have the same rights as man because, as mother
and housewife, she performs only functions of an inferior order.

From this second proposition, we have a right to conclude that _functions
are the basis of right_;

That your functions are equivalent, since your right is equal!

That the functions of woman are not equivalent to those of man.

You have to prove then, gentlemen, that the functions _individually_
performed by each of you are equivalent; that, for example, Cuvier,
Geoffroy St. Hilaire, Arago, Fulton, Jacquard, and other inventors and
scholars have not done more, are not doing more for humanity and
civilization than an equal number of manufacturers of pins' heads.

You have to prove next that the labors of maternity, those of the
household to which the workman owes his life, his health, his strength,
the possibility of accomplishing his task--that these functions without
which there would be no humanity, are not equivalent; that is, as useful
to the social body as those of the manufacturer of jewels or of toys.

You have to prove lastly that the functions of the female teacher,
merchant, book keeper, clerk, dressmaker, milliner, cook, waiting-maid,
etc., are not equivalent to those of the male teacher, merchant,
accountant, clerk, cook, tailor, hatter, footman, etc.;

I grant that it is embarrassing to your triumphant argument to encounter
the thousands of _facts_ which show us the _real_ woman performing
numerous functions in competition with you;

So it is, and these facts must be taken into account. But gentlemen, I
have you in a dilemma! if functions are the basis of right, as right is
equal, functions are equivalent; in which case those performed by woman
are not inferior, since none are so. The functions which she performs are
therefore equivalent to yours, and, by this equivalence, she again
becomes equal.

Or else functions are not the basis of right; did you not take them into
account when the establishment of your right was in question; why then do
you speak of functions when the question is the right of woman?

Extricate yourself from this as you can; I shall not help you.


