III.

Gentlemen, we will conclude.

Though that were true which I deny; that woman is inferior to you;
though that were true which _facts_ prove false; that she can perform
none of the functions which you perform, that she is fit only for
maternity and the household, she would be none the less your equal in
right, because right is based neither on superiority of faculties nor on
that of the functions which proceed from them, but on identity of
species.

A human being, like you, having, like you, intellect, will, free will and
various aptitudes, woman has the right, like you, to be free and
autonomous, to develop her faculties freely, to exercise her activity
freely; to mark out her path, to reduce her to subjection, as you do, is
therefore a violation of Human Right in the person of woman--an odious
abuse of force.

From the stand point of facts, this violation of right takes the form of
grievous inconsistency; for we find many women far superior to the
majority of men; whence it follows that right is granted to those who
ought not to have it, according to your doctrine, and refused to those
who ought to possess it, according to the same doctrine, since they make
good their claim to the qualities requisite.

We find that you accord right to qualities and functions, _because the
individual is a man_, and that you cease to recognize it in the same
case, _because the individual is a woman_.

Yet you boast of your lofty reason,--yet you boast of possessing the
sense of justice!

Take care, gentlemen! Our rights have the same foundation as yours: in
denying the former, you deny the latter in principle.

A word more to you, pretended disciples of the doctrines of '89, and we
have done. Do you know why so many women took part with our Revolution,
armed the men, and rocked their children to the song of the
_Marseillaise_! It was because they thought they saw under the
Declaration of the rights of men and citizens, the declaration of the
rights of women and female citizens.

When the Assembly took it upon itself to undeceive them, by lacking logic
with respect to them, and closing their meetings, they abandoned the
Revolution, and you know what ensued.

Do you know why, in 1848, so many women, especially among the people,
declared themselves for the Revolution? It was because they hoped that
this Revolution would be more consistent with respect to them than the
former had been.

When, in their senseless arrogance and lack of intelligence, the
representatives not only forbid them to assemble, but _drove_ them from
the assemblies of men, the women abandoned the Revolution by detaching
their husbands and sons from it, and you know what ensued.

Do you comprehend at last?

I tell you truly; all your struggles are in vain, if woman does not go
with you.

An order of things may be established by a _coup de main_, but it is only
maintained by the adhesion of majorities; and these majorities,
gentlemen, are formed by us women, through the influence that we possess
over men, through the education that we give them with our milk.

We have it in our power to inspire them from their cradles with love,
hatred or indifference for certain principles; in this is our strength;
and you are blind not to comprehend that if man is on one side and woman
on the other, humanity is condemned to weave Penelope's web.

Gentlemen, woman is ripe for civil liberty, and we declare to you that we
shall henceforth regard whoever shall rise against our lawful claim as an
enemy of progress and of the Revolution; while we shall rank among the
friends of progress and of the Revolution, those who declare themselves
in favor of our civil emancipation, SHOULD THEY BE YOUR ADVERSARIES?

If you refuse to listen to our lawful demands, we shall accuse you before
posterity of the crime with which you reproach the holders of slaves.

We shall accuse you before posterity of having denied the faculties of
woman, because you feared her competition.

We shall accuse you before posterity of having refused her justice,
because you wished to make her your servant and plaything. We shall
accuse you before posterity of being enemies of right and progress.

And our accusation will remain standing and living before future
generations who, more enlightened, more just, more moral than you, will
turn away their eyes with disdain and contempt from the tomb of their
fathers.




NATURE AND FUNCTIONS OF WOMAN


I.

I think that we have sufficiently though summarily proved to all honest
inquiries that social right is identical for both sexes since they are
identical in species. The question of right being placed beyond
discussion, we can now ask what use woman shall make of her right; in
other terms, what functions she is qualified to perform in accordance
with her whole nature.

Let us first mark the profound difference that exists between right and
function, then define and divide the latter.

_Right_ is the condition _sine qua non_ of the development and
manifestations of the human being: it is absolute, general for the whole
species, because the individuals who compose it should be able lawfully
to develop and manifest themselves.

_Function_ is the use of the faculties of the individual with a view to a
purpose useful to himself and to others; function is therefore a
production of utility and, in conclusion, the manifestation of the
aptitudes predominating in each of us, whether naturally, or in
consequence of education and habit.

Society, having needs of every kind, has functions of every nature and
various scope; these functions may be classified as follows:

     1. Scientific and philosophic functions;
     2. Industrial functions;
     3. Artistic functions;
     4. Educational functions;
     5. Medical functions;
     6. Functions for the preservation of safety;
     7. Judicial functions;
     8. Functions of exchange and circulation;
     9. Administrative and governmental functions;
    10. Legislative functions;
    11. Functions of solidarity or of social benevolence and of
        institutions for the prevention of crime.

This classification, which would be very imperfect and insufficient, were
this a treatise on social organization, being all that is needed for the
use that we have to make of it, we shall adhere to it in this place.

Men, and women after them, have deemed proper hitherto to class man and
woman separately; to define each type, and to deduce from this ideal the
functions suited to each sex. Neither have chosen to see that numerous
facts contradict their classification.

What! exclaims the classifiers, do you deny that the sexes differ? Do you
deny that, if they differ, they should have different functions?

If our classification does not seem good to you, criticise it, we ask
nothing more; but replace it by a better one.

To criticise your classification, ladies and gentlemen, is what I intend
to do; but if the elements are wanting to establish a better, can you,
ought you even to require me to present you one.

Do you think me a man, that you exact of me abuse of the _à priora_, and
a startling arbitrary course of reasoning. "Proudhon is right," murmur
these gentlemen; "woman is incapable of abstract reasoning, of
generalizing, of _knowing herself_"....

Really, gentlemen, do you think that it is through incapacity that I am
unwilling to present to you a classification of the sexes, a theory of
the nature of woman?... Let us hasten then to prove the contrary: instead
of one theory, we will give you _four_. Man and woman form a series only
with respect to the reproduction of the species: all the other
characteristics by which it has been attempted to make a distinction
between them are only generalities contradicted by a multitude of facts;
now, as a generality is not a law, nothing can be therefore concluded
from these, nothing absolute deduced from them in a functional point of
view.

On the other hand, the greatest radical difference of zoological species
lies in the nervous system, especially in the greater or lesser bulk and
complexity of the encephalus; now, Anatomy admits, after numerous
experiments, that, in proportion to the whole size of the body, the brain
of woman equals in volume that of man; that the composition of both is
the same, and Phrenology adds that the organs of the brain are the same
in both sexes.

Lastly, it is a biological principle that organs are developed by
exercise and atrophied by continued repose; now, man and woman do not
exercise their encephalic organs in the same manner; educational
training, manners, prejudice, enforced habits tend to develop in the
masculine what becomes atrophied in the feminine head; whence it follows
that the differences empirically established are by no means the result
of Nature, but of the accidental causes by which they have been produced.

Conclusion: the two sexes therefore, when reared alike become developed
alike, and are fit for the same functions, except those which concern the
reproduction of the species.

Here, gentlemen, is a theory complete in all its parts, tenable in an
anatomo-biologic point of view, and which I challenge you to prove false,
for I shall find replies to all your objections.


