II.

3. Woman produces less than man industrially, you say. Admitting this to
be true, do you count as nothing the great maternal function--the risks
that woman runs in accomplishing it;

Do you count as nothing the labors of the household, the cares that are
lavished upon you, and to which you owe cleanliness and health?

If the quantity of the product be the origin of the equality of right,
why have those who produce little, those who produce nothing, and all of
you who produce unequally, equal right?

Why are all those women who produce, while their husbands and sons enjoy
and dissipate, destitute of the rights which the latter possess?

You do not admit the question of product into that of right when man is
in question, why then do you admit it when woman is in question?

You see that this is inconsiderate, irrational, unjust.

4. Woman cannot be the equal of man, because her peculiar temperament
interdicts to her certain functions.

Well, then a legislator can, without being unreasonable, decree that all
men who are unfitted by temperament for the profession of arms, for
instance, are excluded from equality of right!

Temperament, the source of right?

If a woman had written anything so absurd, she would have been cried down
from one end of the world to the other.

Why, gentlemen, do you not exclude from equality all men who are weak,
all those who are incapable of performing the functions that you
_prejudge_ woman incapable of performing?

When you are in question, you admit indeed that the right to perform
every function supposes neither the faculty nor the inclination to make
use of it; why do you not reason in the same manner when the question
concerns us? What would you think of women if, having your rights while
you were in subjection, they should keep you in an inferior position
because you could not accomplish the great functions of gestation and
lactation.

Man, they would say, being unable to be mother and nurse, shall not have
the right of being instructed like us; of having, like us, civil dignity.
His coarser temperament renders him incapable of being a witness to a
certificate of birth or death; it is evident that his clumsiness excludes
him judicially from diplomatic functions; we cannot therefore recognize
his right to solicit them, etc.

Ah! gentlemen, you reason in the same manner in excluding woman from
equality under the pretext that, in general, she is of a temperament
weaker than your own; that is, you reason absurdly.

5. Woman cannot be the equal of man in right because he protects and
maintains her.

If it is because you protect and maintain us, that we ought not to have
our right, restore it then to unmarried women who are of age, and to
widows whom you neither protect nor maintain.

Restore their right then to the wives who have no need of your
protection, since the law protects them, even against you; to the wives
whom you do not maintain, since they bring you either a dowry, or a
profession, or services which you would be obliged to recompense if any
other rendered them to you.

And if to be maintained by another, suffices to deprive an individual of
his right, take it away from the host of men who are maintained by the
incomes or the labor of their wives.

6. Man, in the exercise of certain rights, is the proxy of woman.

Gentleman, a proxy is chosen freely, and is not imposed on an individual;
I do not accept you as proxies: I am intelligent enough to transact my
business myself, and I pray you to restore to me, as well as to all the
women who think as I do, an authority which you use unworthily. If
married women, to have peace, are willing to continue you as their
authority, it is their business; but none of you can legitimately retain
that of widows and unmarried women who have attained majority.

7. Woman has not the same rights as man, because she has no more time
than capacity to exercise them.

Has woman less time and capacity than your working men, pinned twelve
hours a day to their petty and stultifying tasks? Affirm it if you dare!

Does it need less time and capacity to make a deposition in a criminal
suit, as woman does, than to witness a civil act or a notarial contract,
a right that woman has not.

Does it need less time and capacity to be the guardian of sons and to
administer their fortune, as woman does, than to be the guardian of a
stranger or of a nephew, and administer their property, a right that
woman has not.

Does it need less time and capacity to superintend a manufactory, a
commercial establishment, workmen, as do so many women, than to be at the
head of an office, or of a public administration, and to superintend its
officials, a right that woman has not?

Does it need less time and capacity to devote one's self to instruction
in a large boarding school, as do so many women, than in the chair of a
professorship, as man alone has the right to do?

Woman proves, _by her works_, that she lacks capacity and time no more
than you. Facts stifle affirmations for which you should blush. Fie! I am
glad that I am not a man, lest I might say like things and be led to
pretend that an instructress, a literary woman, a woman artist, an
experienced female merchant has not the capacity of a porter or a
rag-picker because she has not a beard on her chin.

8. The rights of woman are in her beauty and in the love of man.

Rights, based on beauty, and on that fragile thing styled man's love!
What are these worth, I ask you, gentlemen?

Then woman shall have rights if she is beautiful, and as long as she
shall continue so; if she is beloved, and as long as she shall continue
so? Old, ugly and forsaken, she must be thrown into the car of the
condemned to be transported to the guillotine?

If a woman should say such things, what a universal hue and cry would be
raised?

Yet men pretend that they are rational! We congratulate woman on having
too much common sense ever to be so in this wise.

After all these arguments, none of which will bear analysis, comes at
last the triumphant objection: women do not claim their rights, many
among them are even scandalized by the demand made by a few in the name
of all. Do not women demand them, gentlemen?

What are a host of American women doing at the present time?

What have a number of English women done already?

What did Jean Deroin, Pauline Roland and many others, do here in 1848?

What am I doing to-day, in the name of a legion of women of whom I am the
interpreter?

_All_ women do not make reclamations, no; but do you not know that every
demand of right is made at first singly?

That slaves accustomed to their chains, do not feel them until their
instigators to revolt show them the bruises on their flesh?

A few only demand their rights, you say; but is it in accordance with
principle or with numbers that you judge of the justice of a cause?

Did you wait until _all_ the male population demanded their right of
universal suffrage in order to decree it to them?

Did you wait for the revendication of _all_ the slaves of your colonies
before emancipating them?

Yes, it is true, gentlemen, that many women are opposed to the
emancipation of their sex. What does this prove? That there are human
beings abased enough to have lost all sentiment of dignity; but not that
right is not right.

Among the blacks, there are many who hate, denounce, and deliver up to
the scourge and to death those among them who are meditating how to break
their chains; which is right, which has the sentiment of human dignity,
the latter or the former?

We demand our place at your side, gentlemen, because identity of species
gives us the right to occupy it.

We demand our right, because the inferiority inwhich we are kept is one
of the most active causes of the decay of morals.

We demand our right, because we are persuaded that woman has to set her
stamp on Science, Philosophy, Justice and Politics.

We demand our right, lastly, because we are convinced that the general
questions, the lack of solution of which threatens our modern
civilization with ruin, can only be resolved by the co-operation of woman
delivered from her fetters and left free in her genius.

Is it not a great proof of our insanity, our _impurity_, gentlemen, that
we feel this ardent desire to check the corruption of morals, and to
labor for the triumph of Justice, the coming of the reign of Duty and
Reason, the establishment of an order of things in which humanity,
worthier and happier, shall pursue its glorious destinies without the
accompaniment of cannon or the shedding of blood?

Is it not because the advocates of emancipation are _impure women whom
sin has rendered mad, beings incapable of comprehending Justice and
conscientious works_?


