VII.

We have explained why we reject the theories that we have sketched; we
will now explain why we neither give nor wish to give a classification of
the sexes.

We do not give a classification, because we neither have nor can have
one; the elements for its establishment are lacking. A biological
deduction permits us to affirm that such a one exists; but it is
impossible to disengage its law in the present surroundings; the
veritable feminine stamp will be known only after one or two centuries of
like education and equal rights: then there will be no need of a
classification, for the function will fall naturally to the proper
functionary under a system of equality in which the social elements
classify themselves.

My belief and my hopes concerning the future, I shall not confess; for I
may be in error, since I have no facts to control my intuitions, and
everything that is purely Utopian has always a dangerous side. Besides
have I not said that, had I formed a classification, I should not give
it? Why not? Because, a detestable use would be made of it, as usual, if
it were adopted.

Hitherto, have not men availed themselves of classifications based upon
characteristics afterwards recognized as purely imaginary to oppress,
distort and calumniate those banished to the inferior ranks?

History is at hand to give us this salutary lesson. Where is now to-day
the _ville-pedaille_, the villains and base-tenants, fit only to drain
ditches and to be stripped to the skin? Inventing, governing, making laws
for, and gradually transforming our globe, devastated by the _superior
and only capable_ species, into a smiling and peaceful domain.

Upon all classification of the human species, whether in castes, in
classes, or in sexes, are based three wrongs.

The first is to make it a crime in the individual degraded into the lower
series, that he does not resemble the conventional type that has been
formed of this series, while the so called superior being is not required
to resemble his type; thus a weak, cowardly, unintelligent man, a _man
milliner_ or an _embroiderer_, is none the less a man, while a virago, a
firm and courageous woman, a great queen, a woman philosopher are not
women, but men whom none love and who are given over as a prey to wild
beasts, jealous, effeminate men, to devour.

The second wrong is to take advantage of the conventional type to deform
the being classed in the inferior series in order to kill his energies
and to hinder his progress. Then, to attain this end, education, social
surroundings are organized, prejudices are invented; and so successfully
is this done in general that the oppressed, ignorant of himself, believes
himself really of an inferior nature, resigns himself to his chains, and
is even indignant at the rebellion of those of his series who are too
energetic and individual not to react against the part to which social
imbecility has condemned them.

The third wrong is to take advantage of the state of debasement to which
the oppressed has been reduced, to calumniate him and deny his rights;
men exclaim, Look! See the serf! see the slave! see the negro! see the
workingman! see woman! What rights would you grant these inferior and
feeble natures? _They are incapable of knowing and ruling themselves_: we
must therefore think for them, wish for them, and govern them.

Ah no, gentlemen, these are not men and women; they are the deplorable
results of your selfishness, of your frightful spirit of domination, of
your imbecility.... If there were infernal gods, I should devote you to
them relentlessly with all my heart. Instead of calumniating your fellows
that you may preserve your privileges, give them instruction and liberty;
then only will you have the right to pass judgment on their nature: for
we can only know the nature of a human being when it has become freely
developed in equality.

I think that I have justified my repugnance to give a classification of
the sexes, both by the impossibility of actually establishing a
reasonable one, and by the very legitimate fear of the bad use that would
be made of it.

But it will be objected, and not without reason, that a classification is
necessary for social practice.

I consent to it with all my heart, since I have reserved my positions,
and proved the worthlessness of existing classifications.

As it is my principle that the function should fall to the functionary
who proves his capacity, I say that at present, through the difference of
education, man and woman have distinct functions; and that we must give
to the latter the place that in general she deserves.

I add that it is a violation of the natural right of woman to form her
with a view to certain functions to which she is destined; she should in
all respects enjoy the rights common to all; it cannot rightfully be said
to her any more than to man, "your sex cannot do that, cannot pretend to
that;" if it does it and pretends to it, it is because the sex can do it
and pretend to it; if it could not, it would not do it; the first right
is liberty, the first duty, the culture of one's aptitudes, the
development of his reason and his power of usefulness: if a god should
affirm the contrary, not conscience, but the god would speak falsely.

Let woman take the place therefore that is suited to her present
development, but let her never cease to remember that this place is not a
fixed point, and that she should continually strive to mount upwards
until, her peculiar nature revealing itself through equality of
education, instruction, right and duty, she takes her rightful place by
the side of man and on a level with him.

Let her laugh at all the utopian follies elaborated concerning her
nature, her functions determined for eternity, and remember that she is
not what nature, but what subjection, prejudice, ignorance has made her;
let her escape from all her chains, and no longer permit herself to be
intimidated and debased.

Thus, gentlemen, all my ideas on the nature and functions of woman may be
summed up in these few propositions:

I believe, because a physiological deduction authorizes me to do so, that
general humanity common to both sexes is stamped by sexuality.

In _fact_, I know not, and you know no better than I, what are the true
characteristics arising from the distinction of the sexes, and I believe
that they can be revealed only by liberty in equality, parity of
instruction and of education.

In social practice, functions should belong to those who can perform
them: woman therefore should perform those functions for which she shows
herself qualified, and society should become so organized that this may
be possible.

What are these functions relative to her degree of present development? I
will tell you directly.




LOVE; ITS FUNCTION IN HUMANITY.


