CHAPTER VII.

SUMMARY.


Appear, all ye modern innovators, before your judge, the public. Sum up
your opinions.

COMMUNIST. The two sexes differ, do not perform the same functions, but
_they are equal before the law_.

For woman to be really emancipated, society must be remoulded
economically, and marriage suppressed.

PHILADELPHIAN AND ICARIAN. We are of your opinion, brother, except in
what concerns marriage.

ORTHODOX ST. SIMONIAN. If Christianity has despised and oppressed woman,
it has been because, in its sight, she represented matter, the world,
evil. We, who are come to give the true meaning of the Trinity,
rehabilitate or explain what our predecessors have condemned. Woman is
the equal of man, because in God, who comprises everything, matter is
equal to spirit. With man, woman forms the couple which is the social
individual, the functionary. As woman is very different from man, we do
not take the liberty of judging her; we content ourselves with
_summoning_ her that she may reveal herself.

Notwithstanding we think that she can only be affranchised by being
emancipated in love.

PIERRE LEROUX _agitated_. Take care! It is not so much in sex that woman
should be affranchised; it is only in her quality of _wife and human
being_. She has sex only for him she loves; to all other men she is what
they are themselves: sensation, sentiment, sense. She must be free in
marriage and in the commonwealth as man himself should be.

FUSIONIST _interrupting him_. You are right, Pierre Leroux; yet neither
is the previous speaker wholly wrong; woman is free and the equal of man
in everything, because spirit and matter are equal in God; because the
man and the woman form together the human androgynus, the derivation of
the divine androgynus. It is not so, my dear sister?

MYSELF. Excuse me, brothers, from joining in your theological discussion;
my wings are not strong enough to follow you into the bosom of God, in
order to assure myself whether he is spirit or matter, androgynus or not,
binary, trinary, quarternary, or nothing of all these. It is enough for
me that you all grant that woman should be free, and the equal of man.

I permit myself only a single observation; that your notion of the couple
or of the androgynus, at the bottom one and the same thing, tends fatally
to the subjugation of my sex; if, by a metaphor, a fiction, we make of
two beings, endowed each with a separate will, free-will and intellect, a
single unity; _in social practice_, this unity is manifested by a single
will, a single free-will, a single intellect, and the individuality that
prevails in our society is that which is endowed with strength of arm;
the other is annihilated, and the right given to the couple is in reality
only the right of the stronger. The use that M. Proudhon has made of
androgyny ought to cure you of this fancy; as the use which your
predecessors made of the ternary ought to have preserved you from
trinitary metaphysics. Be it said without offence to you, gentlemen, I
have a decided antipathy to any trinities and androgynies whatsoever; I
am a sworn enemy to all metaphysics, whether profane or sacred,--a
constitutional vice, aggravated in me by Kant and his school.

PHALANSTERIAN. For God's sake, gentlemen, let us quit this mysticism. Man
and woman are different, but the one is as necessary as the other to the
great work that should be accomplished by humanity; therefore they are
equal. As each individual has a right to develop himself integrally, to
manifest himself completely in order to perform the parcellary task which
his attractions assign to him, the liberty of one sex can no more be
called in question than can that of the other. Man modulates in major,
woman in minor, with an exceptional eighth; but, as in all the general
functions, the combination of the two modes is necessary, it is evident
that each of them ought to be double, and that woman ought everywhere to
be equal with man.

M. DE GIRARDIN _somewhat abruptly_. Gentlemen, I agree with you that
woman ought to be free and equal with man; only I maintain that her
function is to manage, to economize, and to rear her children, while man
labors and brings into the household the product of his industry.

As I wish woman to be freed from servitude and all children to be
rendered legitimate, I suppress civil marriage, and institute universal
dowry.

M. LEGOUVE _smiling_. You go too fast and too far, my dear sir, you will
frighten everybody. At least, I believe like you in the equality of the
sexes through the equivalence of their functions, but I take good care
not to breathe a word of it. I content myself with claiming for woman
instruction, diminution of conjugal servitude, and offices of charity;
counting, between ourselves, that these victories obtained, women will be
in a position through their education and proved utility, to affranchise
themselves completely. Well! despite my reserve and moderation, you see
that some call me _effeminate_, others _sans culotte_.

M. MICHELET, _rising with tears in his eyes_. Alas, gentlemen, you are
all in the wrong road; and I am very sorry, my beloved academician
Legouvé, to see you employ your elegant pen in leading woman in so
perilous and irrational a way.

As to you, gentlemen, who lay claim to liberty and equality of rights for
woman, you are not authorized by her to do so; she demands no right, what
should she do with it--a being always feeble, always sick, always
wounded. Poor creature! What can be her rôle here below, if not to be
adored by her husband, whose duty it is to constitute himself her
instructor, her physician, her confessor, her sick nurse, her
waiting-maid; to keep her in a hot-house, and with all these multiplied
cares to earn beside the daily bread; for woman cannot, ought not to
work; she is the love and the altar of the heart of man.

Some among you have dared utter the vile word: Divorce.

No divorce! The woman who has given herself away, has received the
imprint of man. You should not abandon her, however guilty she may be. I
thought in the beginning that after your death she ought to wear mourning
to the tomb, beyond which, she and her husband would be fused into the
unity of love. But I have thought better of it; you may appoint a
successor.

While Michelet is seating himself, wiping his eyes, the lid of a coffin
is seen to rise, and Comte exclaims in a sepulchral tone:

_Worthily_ and _admirably_ spoken, illustrious professor!

What! you here? exclaims the assembly. Then one does not perish entirely,
as you taught your disciples?

COMTE. No, gentlemen, and I was very agreeably surprised to see myself
mistaken. But it is not to instruct you about the life beyond the tomb
that I return; that would not have been worth the trouble of disturbing
myself. It is to express to the great professor Michelet all the
satisfaction that I feel in seeing him so richly poetise the ideal that I
set up, and strew so many flowers over the _admirable_ maxim of Aristotle
and the _commandment_ of the great St. Paul.

Yes, thrice illustrious Master, you have rightly said: woman is made for
man, she should obey him, be devoted to him; she is only a doll in
private life, absolutely nothing in public life. Yes, men should labor
for her; yes, marriage is indissoluble; all this is irreproachable.

AUGUSTE COMTISM. I regret but one thing--that you have not preserved the
ejaculatory orisons of the wife to the husband, and of the husband to the
wife; it would have been a good example and have made a fine effect to
see them every morning kneeling face to face, with clasped hands and
closed eyes. I hope that this is only forgetfulness, and that you will
reëstablish this detail in your next edition. I congratulate you openly
on the happy thought that you have conceived of justifying the absorption
of woman by man by aid of a wound and the mysteries of impregnation;
this will have a great effect on the ignorant.

Rebellious women, and the madmen _with corrupt hearts_ who sustain them,
say that you are a poetic and ingenuous egotist, that our beloved
Proudhon is a brutal egotist; that I am an egotist by A + B. Let them say
so; I approve and bless you."

The apparition was preparing to lie down again in his coffin when, having
a passion for encountering phantoms, I seized a corner of his winding
sheet, and, notwithstanding an unequivocal sign from him of _vade retro_,
I had the courage to represent humbly to the defunct high priest that the
brow of M. Proudhon deserved quite as much to be blessed as that of M.
Michelet. The defunct gravely crossed his fleshless fore finger and thumb
over the haughty and irreverent head of the great critic, who neither
bowed nor seemed infinitely flattered.

It being his turn to speak, Proudhon rose and said: "Gentlemen
Communists, Philadelphians, Fusionists, Phalansterians, Saint Simonians,
and you, MM. Girardin and Legouvé, as well as all of your adherents, you
are all _effeminate_, men _hardened in absurdity_.

"If my friend Michelet has gilded, perfumed and sugared the pill for you,
I cannot imitate his address and moderation, for you know that in
temperament I, P. J. Proudhon, am neither tender nor poetical. Permit me
then roughly to tell you the truth concerning a question _of which you do
not understand the first word_.

"The Church, St. Thomas d'Aquinas, St. Bonaventure, St. Paul, and Auguste
Comte, as well as the Romans, the Greeks, Manu and Mahomet teach that
woman is made for the pleasure and use of man, and that she should be
subjected to him; now I have sufficiently established these great truths
by affirmations without reply. It is demonstrated to-day, therefore, to
all who believe in me that woman is a passive being, having the germ of
nothing, who owes everything to man, and that, consequently, she belongs
to him as the work to the workman. Lest my solution might appear somewhat
harsh to you, or to savor too much of antiquity of the Middle Ages, I
have borrowed of the modern innovators their farce of Androgyny; I have
made the couple the organ of Justice; in this couple, woman, transformed
by man, becomes a triple deity, a domestic idol, subject in everything to
her priest. I shut her up in the household, and permit her to have only
the superintendence of festivals and spectacles, the education of
children and maidens, etc.

"Is it not evident, gentlemen, that woman, because she is weaker than we,
is, _by justice_, condemned to obey us, and that _her liberty consists in
experiencing no amorous emotion, even for her husband_? Is it not
evident, in consequence, that you, who do not think as I, are
_effeminate, absurd_ men, and that the women who are no more willing to
be slaves than we were in '89 are _insurgents, impure women whom sin has
rendered mad_?"

The majority of the assembly laugh; De Girardin shrugs his shoulders;
Legouvé bites his lip in order not to laugh; Michelet appears troubled at
this sally which may spoil everything. As, in uttering the word
_insurgent_, the orator glances at me with marked design, I cannot help
saying "yes, I deserve the name of _insurgent_ like our fathers of '89.
As to you, if you do not amend, I fear greatly that I shall see you die
duly confessed and blessed with extreme unction ... and you will have
well deserved it!"

Now, gentlemen, let us ascertain the vote of your honorable assembly.

Four schools,--the Communists, the St. Simonians, the Fusionians and the
Phalansterians,--with one publicist, M. de Girardin, who makes as much
noise by himself alone as a whole school, are for the liberty of woman
and the equality of the sexes.

MM. Comte, Proudhon and Michelet are against the liberty of women and the
equality of the sexes.

M. Legouvé and his innumerable adherents wish liberty for woman, and
desire that she should labor to become equal to man through equivalence
of functions.

Which means that the great majority of those _who think_ are, in
different degrees, for our emancipation.

Now that my readers are acquainted with your several opinions, gentlemen,
it belongs to me, a woman, to speak myself in behalf of my right, without
leaning on anything but Justice and Reason.




