I.

You tell the child that lies, "it is wrong to deceive; you would not wish
others to deceive you."

You tell the child that pilfers, "it is wrong to steal; you would not
wish others to steal from you."

You tell the child that takes advantage of his strength and knowledge to
torment his younger companion; "you would not wish others to do these
things to you; you are wicked and cowardly."

These are good lessons. Why then, when the child has become a young man,
do you say: _Young men must sow their wild oats_?

_To sow their wild oats_ is to deceive young girls, to destroy their
future, to practice adultery, to keep mistresses, to visit brothels.

Yet mothers, women thus consent to the profanation of their sex!

Those who forbade their child to steal a toy, permit him to steal the
honor and repose of human beings!

Those who shamed their son for falsehood, permit him to deceive poor
young girls!

Those who made it a crime in their son to oppress those weaker than
themselves, permit him to be oppressive and perfidious toward women!

Then they complain later that their sons treat them ill; that they
dishonor and ruin themselves;

That they desire the death of their parents, in order to enrich the
usurers from whom they have borrowed money to maintain their mistresses
in luxury.

They complain that they destroy their health, and give their mothers puny
grandchildren, for whose existence they are in continual anxiety.

Ah! ladies, you have only what you deserve; bear the weight of a joint
responsibility which you cannot escape. You authorized your sons to sow
their wild oats; endure the consequences.

But a mother cannot be the confident of her son, it is said.

Why not, madam, if you have brought him up in such a way as to have no
dishonorable confidence to make to you.

He would have none to make, if you had accustomed him to conquer himself,
to respect every woman as though she were his mother, every young girl as
though she were his sister; to treat others as he would think it right to
be treated by them; if you had fully inculcated on him that there is but
one system of morality, which both sexes are equally bound to obey; if
you had caused him to honor, love and practice labor; if you had told him
that we live to improve ourselves, to practise justice and kindness, and
to render back to humanity what it does for us in protecting us,
enlightening us, rendering us moral, surrounding us with security and
comfort; that in fine our glory lies in subjecting ourselves to the great
law of Duty.

If you had reared him in this manner, madam, on surprising in your son
the first signs of the ardent attraction that man feels toward the other
sex, far from abandoning the education of this instinct to the chances of
inexperience, you would do for it what you did for the others; you would
teach the young man to subject it to a wise discipline.

Instead of repeating the stupidly atrocious phrase; _young men must sow
their wild oats_, you would have taken your son's hand affectionately in
your own, and, looking in his face, would have said: "My child, Nature
decrees that a woman should henceforth attract you more strongly than I,
and should maintain or destroy what I have so laboriously built up: I do
not murmur at this; it must be so. But my affection and duty require me
to enlighten you in this grave juncture. Tell me, if a young man, to
satisfy the instinct which is now awakening in you, should corrupt your
sister, should sacrifice her life, what would you think of him? what
would you do?"

The young man, accustomed from childhood to practise Justice, would not
fail to reply: "I should think him depraved and cowardly. Would he not be
punished?"

"No, my son, the seducer is not punished by the law."

"Well! I would kill him, for my right of justice reverts to me when the
law makes no provision."

"Right, my child. Then you will be neither depraved nor cowardly with
respect to any young girl; you will not deserve the sentence which you
have pronounced; namely, death. You will respect all young girls and
women as you would wish your sister, your daughter to be respected.

"Another question: what would you think of a man who should persuade me
to betray your father; who should rob him of my heart and cares; who
should draw me aside from the grave duties of maternity? What would you
think of the man who should act thus with respect to your own companion?"

"I would judge him like the former and would treat him no better."

"Right again. Then you will respect all married women as you would wish
your mother and your wife to be respected; and if you should meet any one
towards whom you should feel attracted, or who should be disloyal enough
to seek to attract you, you will shun her: for flight is the sole remedy
for passion.

"A multitude of women, innocent at first, have been turned aside from the
right path by men who do not think as you do. They now avenge themselves
upon your sex for the evil it has done them. They corrupt and ruin men
who, in their company, lose all sense of morality, who learn to laugh at
what you believe and venerate, and undermine and destroy their health. Do
you feel the deplorable courage to expose yourself to such risks?"

The young man, practised from childhood to subject his inclinations to
reason and justice, would reply: "No, mother, I will not do what I would
not wish my companion to do; I will neither degrade myself morally, nor
destroy my health, nor contribute my share towards perpetuating a state
of things which degrades the sex to which belongs my mother, my sister,
my wife and my daughters, should I be so happy as to possess them.

"I acknowledge frankly that I foresee a violent struggle with myself,
but, thanks to the moral training to which you have accustomed me, thanks
to the ideal of destiny which you have given me, which I have accepted in
the plenitude of my reason, and which my duty marks out for me, I do not
despair of subduing myself."--"This victory will be less difficult to
obtain, if you employ yourself usefully and seriously; for you will thus
attract your vitality to the superior regions of the brain. You will do
wisely to add to this, much physical exercise; to abstain from too
substantial a diet, and especially from stimulating drinks! you know the
reaction of the physical upon the moral system. Carefully avoid
licentious reading and improper conversation; give a place in your mind
to the virgin who will be united to you; think and act as if in her
presence; it will guard you and keep you pure. This sweet ideal will
strengthen you against temptation, and contribute greatly to render you
insensible towards those women who should have no place in your heart."

"Love, my child, is a thing most serious in its results; for the beings
whom it unites become modified by each other; it leaves its traces,
however short may be its duration.

"Its end is Marriage, one of the ends of which is the continuity of the
species. Now, you know the effects of solidarity of blood; it is most
important therefore that you should choose for your companion a woman
whose character, morals and principles are in unison with your own; not
only for your happiness, but for the _organization_ of your children, the
harmony of their nature and conduct.

"If passion does not leave you sufficiently free in your judgment, come
to me: I will see for you, and if I say: my son, this woman will debase
you, will cause you to commit faults; be sure that your children will
have evil propensities; she is not adapted to rear them according to your
ideal, which she will never accept, because she is vain and selfish; if
I tell you this, I know, my son, that whatever may be your suffering, you
will renounce a woman whom you would cease to love after a few months'
union, and will prefer a transient sadness to a life of unhappiness."


