II.

The mother who has just shown her son why love should be subjected to
Reason and Justice, and has pointed out to him what he should do to
subdue its animal phase, perceives also the awakening of this instinct in
her daughter. She wins her attention and gains her confidence by
revealing to her what is passing within her heart, telling her that, at
her age, she felt the same.

"Hitherto," continues she, "you have been but a child; your career as a
woman is now commencing. You desire the affection of a man, and your
heart is moved at the sweet thought of becoming a mother. Do not blush,
my daughter; it is lawful, on condition that your desires are made
subject to Reason and the law of Duty.

"Many snares will be spread before your steps; for men of all ages
address to a young girl innumerable flattering speeches, and surround her
with homage which renders her vain and coquettish if she has the weakness
to suffer herself to be intoxicated thereby. Persuade yourself fully that
all this adoration is not addressed to you individually, but to your
youth, to the brightness of your eyes, to the freshness of your
complexion, and that, were you far better than you are and far superior
in intellect, these men would be ceremoniously and frigidly polite, were
you thirty years older. This thought present in your mind will make you
smile at their frivolous and common-place jargon, and will preserve you
from many weaknesses, such as rivalry of dress, petty jealousies, and the
ridiculous blunder of playing the young girl at fifty.

"As you can espouse but one man, it is sufficient to be loved by one in
the manner that you wish. A woman who comports herself voluntarily so as
to captivate the hearts of many men, and leaves each to believe that she
prefers him above all, is an unworthy coquette, who sins against Justice
and Kindness: against Justice, inasmuch as she demands a sentiment for
which she can make no return; as she acts towards others as she would
think it unjust that others should act towards her; against Kindness,
inasmuch as she risks causing suffering to sincere hearts and sacrificing
their repose to a pleasurable impulse of vanity: such a woman, my child,
is contemptible; she is a dangerous enemy of her sex; first, because she
gives a bad opinion of it; next, because she is an enemy to the repose of
other women; I know that you are too ingenuous, too true and too worthy
to fear that you will fall into such errors.

"You have acknowledged to me that your young imagination had pictured to
itself a man. Far from banishing this ideal, let it be always present to
your mind, much less in its physical aspect than in that of intellect,
morality and industry. This image will do more to keep you safe than all
my counsels, than all the surveillance that I might, but never would
exercise over you, because this would be unworthy of us both.

"Do not forget however that an ideal is absolute; that the reality is
always defective; do not therefore seek in the man to whom you shall give
your heart, a realization of the ideal, but the qualities and faculties
which, with your aid, will permit him to approximate to what you wish to
see him. You yourself are the ideal of a man, not such as you are, but
such as he will aid you to become.

"I dwell upon this point, my daughter, because nothing is more dangerous
than to insist on finding the ideal in the reality; this makes us over
difficult and lacking in indulgence; and, if we have a lively imagination
and little reason, renders us unhappy and involves us in innumerable
errors.

You know and feel that the end of love is Marriage; now one of your
duties as lover and spouse is the improvement of the one to whom you
shall be united. You will stand with him in two different relations!
first as his betrothed, afterwards as his wife. Your modifying power
will, in the first case, be exercised in a direct proportion to his
desire to please and to be worthy of you; in the second, in proportion to
his confidence, esteem and affection for you. In the first case, he will
_wish_ to modify himself; in the second, he will do so without knowing
it."

"What, mother, will he not always love me the same?"

"Love, my child, undergoes transformations which we should expect and to
which we should submit; in the beginning it is a fever of the soul; but
fever is a condition which cannot last without destroying life. Your
husband, while loving you perhaps more deeply, will love you less
ardently than before Marriage. Your love will become transformed, why
shall not his be the same?

"You cannot imagine how much trouble results from the ignorance of women
on this point, and from the vain pursuit of the ideal in love. Many
women, believing that their husband loves them no longer because he
loves them in a different manner, become detached from him, suffer, and
betray their duties; others, dreaming of perfection in the loved one,
fancy that they have found it, and becoming disabused after the fever has
past, quit him, accusing him of having deceived them; they love others
with the same illusion, followed by the same disenchantment, until age
creeps on without curing them of the chimera. Lastly, there are others
who, comprehending only the first period of love, cease to love the man
who has passed beyond it, and pursue another love which will bring them
the same fever; these, as you comprehend, have not the slightest idea of
woman's grave duties in Love.

"What I have just said of women is equally true of men. You will avoid
these dangers, my daughter, you who have been accustomed from childhood
to submit to reason; who know that all reality is imperfect, that habit
weakens sentiment, you will therefore take the man who suits you, as he
is, designing to improve him and to render him happy, knowing in advance
that his love will change without becoming extinguished, if you succeed
in gaining his affection, confidence and esteem, so that he will find in
you good counsel, peace, assistance and security. You are too pure, my
daughter, to foresee all the snares that will be spread for you. It
belongs to me therefore to arm your youthful prudence: You will perhaps
encounter men married or betrothed who, according to the common
expression, _will pay court to you_, and will utter innumerable sophisms
to justify their conduct."

"Their sophisms would fall to the ground before the simple answer: Sir,
as I should be driven to despair if another woman should rob me of him
whom I loved, as I should despise and hate her, all your compliments
cannot persuade me that it is right for me to do what I would not that
others should do to me. If you return to the subject, I shall inform the
person interested.

"Right, my child: but if a young man who was free should speak of love,
and urge you to write to him in secret?"

"Might he not have good reason for acting in this manner?"

"None, my child. You must know that men are exceedingly corrupt; that
many among them eschew marriage, flit from one woman to another, take
advantage of our credulity, and make use of the most impassioned language
to lead us in the way of shame and perdition. Now, my child, know besides
that we bear the weight of men's faults as well as of our own; the verbal
and written promises of a man bind him to nothing. If, suffering yourself
to be led astray, you should become a mother, the child would remain your
charge; and you could no longer hope for marriage; I say nothing of our
grief and shame, nor of the terrible risks to which you would expose your
brother, who might perish in punishing the vile seducer whom the law does
not touch. If a man seeks you therefore unknown to us, be sure that it is
because his intentions are evil; that he considers you as a toy which he
purposes to break when it ceases to amuse him. Now, my daughter, you know
that woman is created to be the worthy companion of man; that she is not
born to be sacrificed to him as an object of pleasure. Instead therefore
of suffering yourself to be seduced, profit by the influence over men
which is given you by your beauty and grace, to recall them to their
duties: in this manner, you may be the means of saving many women; you
will give a favorable opinion of your sex, and will prepare a good
example for your daughter by setting one to your companions, many of whom
will follow it in order to share in the esteem that will surround you;
always remember that our acts not only injure ourselves, but we have a
joint responsibility with others, and consequently no one can be lost or
saved alone.

"One word more, my child. In your uncertainties, do not hesitate to
confide your troubles to me; do not say, My mother is too reasonable to
understand me in this. Was it not by becoming a child again in order to
comprehend you, that I fulfilled my sacred task of instructor? be
persuaded that it will not be more difficult for me to become a young
girl again in order to comprehend, while remaining a tender and
experienced mother to advise you.

"You are free: I am not your censor, but your elder sister, who loves you
with devotion and desires your happiness before all things. As a
recompense for my love and my long-continued cares, I only ask to be your
best friend; that is, the one in whose presence you will think and speak
aloud. Is this asking too much of you, who are my joy and crown."

This is the way, ladies, in which the woman who has attained majority,
strives to educate the world in Love.


