V.

1. Woman carrying into Philosophy and Science her subtleness of
observation, her love of the concrete, will correct the exaggerated
tendency of man for abstract reasoning, and demonstrate the falsity of
theories constructed, _à priori_, on a few facts alone. Then only will
ontology disappear, then will it be recognized that a hypothesis is
merely an interrogation point; that truth is always intelligible in its
nature, however unknown it may be; we shall generalize nothing but known
facts, we shall carefully avoid erecting simple generalities into laws,
and we shall thus have veritable philosophy, and true human science,
because they will bear the imprint of both sexes.

2. Woman carrying her peculiar faculties into the arts and manufactures,
will increasingly introduce therein art, perfection in details.
Cultivated in the direction of her aptitudes, she will find ingenious
methods of application of scientific discoveries.

3. Patient, gentle, good, more moral than man, she is the born educator
of childhood, the moralizer of the grown man; the majority of the
educational functions revert to her of right, and she has her assigned
place in special instruction.

4. By her quick intuition and her acuteness of observation, woman alone
can discover the therapeutics of nervous affections; her dexterity will
render her valuable in all delicate surgical operations. On her should
devolve the care of treating the diseases of women and children, because
she alone is capable of fully comprehending them; she has her especial
place in hospitals, not only for the cure of disease, but also for the
execution and surveillance of the details of management and the care of
the patients.

5. The presence of woman in judicial functions, as juror and arbiter,
will be a guarantee of veritable human justice to all; that is, of
equity.

Woman alone through her gentleness, her mercy, her sympathetic
disposition, and her subtleness and observation, can comprehend that
society has its share of culpability in every fault committed; for it
should be organized to prevent wrong rather than to punish it. This point
of view, especially feminine, will transform the penitentiary system and
raise up numerous institutions. Then only will the world comprehend that
the punishment inflicted on the guilty should be a means of reparation
and regeneration; society will no longer slay its prisoners as if weak
and fearful: it will amend the assassin instead of imitating him; it will
force the thief to work to make restitution of what he has stolen; it
will no longer believe that it has the right by imprisoning a criminal to
deprive him of his reason, to drive him to despair, to suicide by
solitary confinement; to deprive him completely of marriage; to couple
him with those more corrupt than himself. Conscious of its own share of
culpability, society will repair in penitentiaries the fault of its
carelessness: it will be firm, yet kind and moralizing: it will give in
them the education which it ought to have given outside, and will prepare
work houses for the liberated convicts in order that the contempt and
horror often shown toward them by men worse than they may not drive them
to a second offence.

7. Woman, carrying into the social household her spirit of order and
economy, her love of details and abhorrence of waste and foolish expense,
will reform government: she will simplify everything; will suppress
sinecures and the accumulation of offices, and will produce much from
little instead of, like man, producing little from much: the purse of the
tax-payers will not complain of the change.

8. Under the direct influence of woman as legislator, we shall have a
reconstruction of all laws; first and before everything, we shall have
preventive measures, a compulsory education; then the form of legal
proceedings will be simplified, the civil code recast, and all laws
concerning illegitimate children and the inequality of the sexes banished
from it; the laws concerning morals will be more severe, and the penal
code more rational and equitable.

By her administrative reforms born of the economical instinct of woman,
taxes will be diminished; her abhorrence of blood and war will greatly
reduce the fearful impost of blood-shed. Having a deliberative voice, and
knowing, by her griefs and love the value of a man, it will be only from
sheer necessity that she will consent to vote bevies of citizens for the
shambles called wars: she will do this only when her country is menaced
or when it is necessary to protect oppressed nationalities; in all other
cases, she will employ the system of conciliation.

9. Woman, being much more economical and a better analyst than man, when
thoroughly instructed, will soon perceive that nations, like individuals,
differ in aptitudes, and that the end of these differences is union and
fraternity through exchange of products: she will therefore deter her
country from cultivating certain branches of the acts and manufactures in
which other nations excel and which they can produce to better advantage;
she will cure it of the foolish pretension of being sufficient unto
itself, and will prevent it from sacrificing the interest of the mass of
consumers to that of a few producers: thus the barriers and custom duties
that separate the different organs of humanity will fall by degrees;
there will be treaties of free trade, and all will be gainers by the
cheapness of products, and the suppression of the expenses of maintaining
a too often annoying department of customs.

The qualities and faculties of woman not only make her an educator, but
assure her preponderance in all functions arising from social solidarity;
she alone knows how to console, to encourage, to moralize with
gentleness, to comfort with delicacy; she has the genius of charity; to
her therefore should revert the superintendence and direction of
hospitals and prisons for women, the management of charitable
institutions, the care of abandoned children, etc. She should create
institutions to furnish employment to workmen out of work, and to save
liberated convicts from indolence and relapse into crime.

Thus, gentleman, without departing from the data of your theory, you
behold woman placed everywhere by the side of man, except in the hard
labor from which you yourselves will soon be released by machinery, and
in the military institutions which, in all probability, will some day
disappear.

Hitherto institutions, laws, sciences, philosophy have chiefly borne the
masculine imprint; all of these things are only half human; in order that
they may become wholly so, woman must be associated in them ostensibly
and lawfully, consequently, she must be cultivated like you; culture will
not make her like you, do not fear it; the rose and the carnation growing
in the same soil, under the same sky, in the same sunshine, with the
cares of the same gardener, remain rose and carnation: they are more
beautiful in proportion as they are better cultivated, and as the
elements which they absorb are more abundant: if man and woman differ, a
similar education will only make them differ still more, because each
will employ it in the development of that which is peculiar to himself.

For the interest of all things and people it is necessary that woman
should enter all the avocations of life, that she should have her
function in all the functions: _after_ the general interest of humanity,
comes that of the family; it cannot go _before_ it.

Since woman now is generally mother and housewife while performing at the
same time a host of other functions, she will become none the less so in
taking upon herself a few more; besides, the time of life at which an
individual enters certain important functions is that at which woman has
finished her maternal task. A few women acting as public functionaries
will not hinder the great majority of their companions from remaining in
private life, any more than a few men in the same position hinder the
mass of men from continuing there.


