CHAPTER XIII

SOME UNCONSIDERED ASPECTS OF RELIGIOUS EDUCATION


=Authority in Religious Education.=—I should like to preface my remarks
on Religious Education by saying that there is not the slightest pretence
that they are exhaustive. My treatment has for its object the indication
of practical lines for religious education, and I very earnestly hope
that the reader will find I have left out things I ought to have said, or
said things I ought not to have said.

Let us first consider how the principle of authority bears on religious
teaching. The sense of duty, more or less illuminated, or more or less
benighted, is always relative to a ruler with whom it rests to say ‘Thou
shalt’ or ‘Thou shalt not.’ It is brought home, too, to most of us who
are set in authority, that we ourselves are acting under a higher, and
finally, under the highest rule. A child cannot have a lasting sense
of duty until he is brought into contact with a supreme Authority,
who is the source of law, and the pleasing of whom converts duty into
joy. In these rather latitudinarian days, there is perhaps no part of
religious teaching more important than to train children in the sense
of the immediate presence and continual going forth of the supreme
Authority. ‘Thou art about my path and about my bed and spiest out all
my ways,’ should be a thought, not of fear, but of very great comfort to
every child. This constant recognition of authority excites the twofold
response of docility and of reverence. It is said that the children
of our day are marked by wilfulness and a certain flippancy and want
of reverence; if this is so, and in so far as it is so, it is because
children are brought up without the consciousness of their relation to
God, whom we are taught to call ‘Our Father.’ This divine name reminds
us that authority is lodged in the Author of our being, and is tender,
pitiful, preventive, strong to care for and wise to govern; as we see it
feebly shown forth even in the best of human fathers.

=Questions in the Air.=—But there are questions in the air about the
authenticity of the Scriptures, and what not, and we are all more or less
at the mercy of words; and, because the so-called higher criticism finds
much to question as to the verbal accuracy of passages of the Scriptures,
we get a dim idea that the divine authority itself is in question. One
part of the work of this Union[11] is, no doubt, to strengthen the hands
of parents by comforting them with the sense of the higher Power behind
theirs and always supporting them in the exercise of the deputed powers
they hold as heads of families. There is another notion in the air which
tells against the recognition of authority, and that is, the greatly
increased respect for individual personality and for the right of each
individual to develop on the lines of his own character. But it is a
mistake to suppose that the exercise of authority runs counter to any
individual development that is not on morally wrong lines.

=How Authority Works.=—The supreme authority (and all deputed authority)
works precisely as does a good and just national government, whose
business it is to defend the liberties of the subject at all points,
even by checking, repressing, and punishing the licence which interferes
with the rights of others and with the true liberty of the transgressor.
The law (that is, the utterance of authority) is for the punishment of
evil-doers, but for the praise of them that do well; and the association
of harshness, punishment, force, arbitrary dealings, with the idea
of authority, human and divine, is an example of the confusion of
thought to which most of our errors in conduct are traceable. It is not
authority which punishes: the penalties which follow us through life,
of which those in the family are a faint foretaste, are the inevitable
consequences of broken law, whether moral or physical, and from which
authority, strong and benign, exists to save us by prevention, and, if
needs be, by lesser and corrective penalties.

It seems to me that reading and teaching on the following subjects,
for example, might help to focus thought on a subject of vital
importance:—our relation to the supreme authority, not a relation of
choice, but as inevitable as the family relationships into which we
are born; the duty of loyalty and the shame of infidelity; the duty
of reverence; the duty of docility to indications of the divine will;
scriptural revelations of God, as the ruler of men, as saying to Abraham,
‘Go, and he goeth’; to Cyrus, ‘Do this, and he doeth it’; revelations
which history affords of God as the ruler of nations, and as the benign
ruler of men who prospers the ways of His servants; how the sense of
the divine authority may be imparted in the home; how reverence for holy
things may be taught; definite Bible teaching on this head.—Indeed, the
subject is capable of great amplification, and suggests trains of thought
very important in these days.

=The Habits of the Religious Life.=—The next point we must set ourselves
to consider is the laying down of lines of _habit_ in the religious life.
We need not enter again into the physiological reasons for the compelling
power of habit. My present purpose is to consider how far this power can
be employed in the religious development of a child. Let us consider the
subject as it bears upon habits of thought and of attitude, of life and
of speech; though indeed all these are one, for every act and attitude is
begotten of a thought, however unaware we be of thinking.

=Habit of the Thought of God.=—It is said of the wicked that ‘God is
not in all their thoughts.’ Of the child it should be said that God is
in all his thoughts; happy-making, joyous thoughts, restful and dutiful
thoughts, thoughts of loving and giving and serving, the wealth of
beautiful thoughts with which every child’s heart overflows. We are
inclined to think that a child is a little morbid and precocious when he
asks questions and has imaginings about things divine, and we do our best
to divert him. What he needs is to be guided into true, happy thinking;
every day should bring him ‘new thoughts of God, new hopes of heaven.’ He
understands things divine better than we do, because his ideas have not
been shaped to a conventional standard; and thoughts of God are to him an
escape into the infinite from the worrying limitations, the perception
of the prison bars, which are among the bitter pangs of childhood. To
keep a child in this habit of the thought of God—so that to lose it, for
even a little while, is like coming home after an absence and finding his
mother out—is a very delicate part of a parent’s work.

=Reverent Attitudes.=—The importance of reverent attitudes is a little
apt to be overlooked in these days. We are, before all things, sincere,
and are afraid to insist upon ‘mere forms,’ feeling it best to leave
the child to the natural expression of his own emotions. Here perhaps
we are wrong, as it is just as true to say that the form gives birth to
the feeling as that the feeling should give birth to the form. Children
should be taught to take time, to be reverent at grace before meals,
at family prayers, at their own prayers, in church, when they are old
enough to attend. Perhaps some of us may remember standing daily by our
mother’s knee in reverent attitude to recite the Apostles’ Creed, and
the recollection of the reverence expressed in that early act remains
with one through a lifetime. ‘Because of the angels’ should be a thought
to repress unbecoming behaviour in children. It is a mistake to suppose
that the forms of reverence need be tiresome to them. They love little
ceremonies, and to be taught to kneel nicely while saying their short
prayers would help them to a feeling of reverence in after life. In
connection with children’s behaviour in church, the sentiment and forms
of reverence cannot be expected if they are taken to church too young,
or to too long services, or are expected to maintain their attention
throughout. If children must be taken to long services, they should be
allowed the resource of a Sunday picture-book, and told that the hymns
and the ‘Our Father,’ for example, are the parts of the service for
them. But in these days of bright short services especially adapted for
children the difficulty need not arise.

=Regularity in Devotions.=—The habit of regularity in children’s
devotions is very important. The mother cannot always be present, but
I have known children far more punctual in their devotions when away
from their mother, because they know it to be her wish, than if she were
there to remind them. They may say, like a little friend of mine, aged
four, ‘Mother, I always worship idols.’ ‘Do you indeed, Margaret? when?’
‘Why, when I say my prayers to the chair.’ But it is a great thing for
all of us to get the habit of ‘saying our prayers’ at a given time and
in a given place, which comes to be to us as a holy place. The chair, or
the bedside, or the little prayer-table, or, best of all, the mother’s
knee, plays no small part in framing the soul to a habit of devotion.
In this connection it is worth while to remark that the evening prayers
of children and of school girls and boys should not be left until the
children are tired and drop asleep over their evening exercises. After
tea is a very good set time for prayers when it can be managed.

=The Habit of Reading the Bible.=—The habit of hearing, and later, of
reading the Bible, is one to establish at an early age. We are met with a
difficulty—that the Bible is, in fact, a library containing passages and,
indeed, whole books which are not for the edification of children; and
many parents fall back upon little collections of texts for morning and
evening use. But I doubt the wisdom of this plan. We may believe that the
narrative teaching of the Scriptures is far more helpful to children,
anyway, than the stimulating moral and spiritual texts picked out for
them in little devotional books. The twopenny single books of the Bible,
published by the Bible Society, should be a resource for parents. A child
old enough to take pleasure in reading for himself would greatly enjoy
reading through the Gospel of St Mark, bit by bit, for example, in a nice
little book, as part of his morning’s devotions.

=Children Formalists by Nature.=—But while pressing the importance of
habits of prayer and devotional reading, it should be remembered that
children are little formalists by nature, and that they should not be
encouraged in long readings or long prayers with a notion of any merit in
such exercises.

=The Habit of Praise.=—Perhaps we do not attach enough importance to the
habit of praise in our children’s devotions. Praise and thanksgiving come
freely from the young heart; gladness is natural and holy, and music is a
delight. The singing of hymns at home and of the hymns and canticles in
church should be a special delight; and the habit of soft and reverent
singing, of offering our very best in praise, should be carefully formed.
Hymns with a story, such as: ‘A little ship was on the sea,’ ‘I think
when I read that sweet story of old,’ ‘Hushed was the evening hymn,’ are
perhaps the best for little children.

Children should be trained in the habits of attention and real devotion
during short services or parts of services. The habit of finding their
places in the prayer-book and following the service is interesting and
aids attention, but perhaps it would be well to tell children, of even
ten or eleven, that during the litany, for example, they might occupy
themselves by saying over silently hymns that they know.

=The Habit of Sunday-keeping.=—The habit of Sunday observances, not
rigid, not dull, and yet peculiar to the day, is especially important.
Sunday stories, Sunday hymns, Sunday walks, Sunday talks, Sunday
painting, Sunday knitting even, Sunday card-games, should all be special
to the day,—quiet, glad, serene. The people who clamour for a Sunday
that shall be as other days little know how healing to the jaded brain
is the change of thought and occupation the seventh day brings with it.
There is hardly a more precious inheritance to be handed on than that of
the traditional English Sunday, stripped of its austerities, we hope,
but keeping its character of quiet gladness and communion with Nature as
well as with God. But I cannot pursue the subject further. The field of
the habits of the religious life should afford many valuable matters for
reflection and teaching; as, for example, the habitual thought of God in
a family; the habit of reverence in thought, attitude, act, and speech;
the habit of prayer as regards time, place, manner, matter; the habit
of praise and thanksgiving; the habits of attention and devotion during
a service (or part of a service); aids to devout habits; the habit of
devotional reading.

=Inspiring Ideas of the Religious Life.=—The most important part of our
subject remains to be considered—the inspiring ideas we propose to give
children in the things of the divine life. This is a matter we are a
little apt to leave to chance; but when we consider the vitalising power
of an idea, and how a single great idea changes the current of a life, it
becomes us to consider very carefully what ideas of the things of God
we may most fitly offer children, and how these may be most invitingly
presented. It is a very sad fact that many children get their first ideas
of God in the nursery, and that these are of a Being on the watch for
their transgressions and always ready to chastise. It is hard to estimate
the alienation which these first ideas of the divine Father set up in
the hearts of His little children. Another danger is, lest the things of
the divine life should be made too familiar and hackneyed, that the name
of our blessed Lord should be used without reverence; and that children
should get the notion that the Lord God exists for their uses, and not
they, for His service.

=The Fatherhood of God.=—Perhaps the first vitalising idea to give
children is that of the tender Fatherhood of God; that they live and move
and have their being within the divine embrace. Let children grow up
in this joyful assurance, and, in the days to come, infidelity to this
closest of all relationships will be as shameful a thing in their eyes as
it was in the eyes of the Christian Church during the age of faith.

=The Kingship of Christ.=—Next, perhaps, the idea of Christ their King
is fitted to touch springs of conduct and to rouse the enthusiasm of
loyalty in children, who have it in them, as we all know, to bestow
heroic devotion on that which they find heroic. Perhaps we do not make
enough of this principle of hero-worship in human nature in our teaching
of religion. We are inclined to make our religious aims subjective rather
than objective. We are tempted to look upon Christianity as a ‘scheme of
salvation’ designed and carried out for our benefit; whereas the very
essence of Christianity is passionate devotion to an altogether adorable
Person.

=Our Saviour.=—But, recognising this, there is still a danger in these
days of adopting a rose-water treatment in our dealings with children.
Few grown-up people, alas! have so keen and vivid a sense of sin as a
little transgressor say of six or seven. Many a naughty, passionate, or
sulky and generally hardened little offender is so, simply because he
does not know, with any personal knowledge, that there is a Saviour of
the world, who has for him instant forgiveness and waiting love. But
here again, the thoughts of a child should be turned outwards to Jesus,
our Saviour, and not inward to his own thoughts and feelings towards our
blessed Saviour.

=The Indwelling of the Holy Ghost.=—One more salient truth of the
Christian verity I have space to touch upon. Most Christian parents
teach their children to recognise the indwelling of the Holy Ghost, the
Comforter; they expand the ideas expressed in—

    “Enable with perpetual light
    The dulness of our blinded sight.”

    “Anoint and cheer our soiled face
    With the abundance of Thy grace.”

But it would be well if we could hinder in our children’s minds the
rise of a wall of separation between things sacred and things so-called
secular, by making them feel that all ‘sound learning,’ as well as all
‘religious instruction,’ falls within the office of God, the Holy Spirit,
the supreme educator of mankind.

Many other inspiring ideas concerning the religious life will occur to
every parent and teacher, ideas of more value than any I can suggest.
Teaching, reading, and meditation, for example, on any one of the several
clauses of the Lord’s Prayer and of the Apostles’ Creed, or, again, on
the clauses of that Duty towards God in the Church Catechism which all
who receive the Old and the New Testament Scriptures must accept, should
be profitable.

I have touched very inadequately, not upon all that is necessary to bring
up children in ‘the nurture and admonition of the Lord,’ but on a few of
the principles which seem to me essential.




