CHAPTER XVI

HOW TO USE SCHOOL-BOOKS


=Disciplinary Subjects of Instruction.=—Having cleared our minds as to
the end we have in view, we ask ourselves—‘Is there any fruitful _idea_
underlying this or that study that the children are engaged in?’ We
divest ourselves of the notion that to develop the faculties is the chief
thing, and a ‘subject’ which does not rise out of some great thought
of life we usually reject as not nourishing, not fruitful; while we
retain those studies which give exercise in habits of clear and orderly
thinking. Mathematics, grammar, logic, etc., are not purely disciplinary,
they do develop (if a bull may be allowed) intellectual muscle. We by no
means reject the familiar staples of education in the school sense, but
we prize them even more for the record of intellectual habits they leave
in the brain tissue, than for their distinct value in developing certain
‘faculties.’

=‘Open, Sesame.’=—I think we should have a great educational revolution
once we ceased to regard ourselves as assortments of so-called faculties,
and realised ourselves as persons whose great business it is to get in
touch with other persons of all sorts and conditions, of all countries
and climes, of all times, past and present. History would become
entrancing, literature a magic mirror for the discovery of other minds,
the study of sociology a duty and a delight. We should tend to become
responsive and wise, humble and reverent, recognising the duties and
the joys of the full human life. We cannot of course overtake such a
programme of work, but we can keep it in view; and I suppose every life
is moulded upon its ideal.

=The Bible, the great Storehouse of Moral Impressions.=—Valuable as are
some compendiums of its moral teaching, it is to the Bible itself we
must go as to the great storehouse of moral impressions. Let us hear De
Quincey on this subject:—

“It had happened, that among our vast nursery collection of books was
the Bible, illustrated with many pictures. And in long dark evenings,
as my three sisters with myself sat by the firelight round the guard of
our nursery, no book was so much in request amongst us. It ruled us and
swayed us as mysteriously as music. Our younger nurse, whom we all loved,
would sometimes, according to her simple powers, endeavour to explain
what we found obscure. We, the children, were all constitutionally
touched with pensiveness; the fitful gloom and sudden lambencies of the
room by firelight suited our evening state of feelings; and they suited
also, the divine revelations of power and mysterious beauty which awed
us. Above all, the story of a just man—man and yet _not_ man, real
above all things, and yet shadowy above all things—who had suffered the
passion of death in Palestine, slept upon our minds like early dawn upon
the waters. The nurse knew and explained to us the chief differences in
oriental climates; and all these differences (as it happens) express
themselves, more or less, in varying relation to the great accidents and
powers of summer. The cloudless sunlights of Syria—these seemed to argue
everlasting summer; the disciples plucking the ears of corn—that _must_
be summer; but, above all, the very name of Palm Sunday (a festival in
the English Church) troubled me like an anthem.”

=Effect of our Liturgy on a Child.=—I cannot refrain from adding De
Quincey’s beautiful words describing the effect of our liturgy upon him
as a child. “On Sunday mornings I went with the rest of my family to
church: it was a church on the ancient model of England, having aisles,
galleries, organ, all things ancient and venerable, and the proportions
majestic. Here, whilst the congregation knelt through the long litany,
as often as we came to that passage, so beautiful amongst many that
are so, where God is supplicated on behalf of ‘all sick persons and
young children,’ and that He would ‘show His pity upon all prisoners
and captives,’ I wept in secret; and raising my streaming eyes to the
upper windows of the galleries, saw, on days when the sun was shining, a
spectacle as affecting as ever prophet can have beheld. The _sides_ of
the windows were rich with stained glass; through the deep purples and
crimsons streamed the golden light; emblazonries of heavenly illumination
(from the sun) mingling with the earthly emblazonries (from art and
its gorgeous colouring) of what is grandest in man. _There_ were the
apostles that had trampled upon earth, and the glories of earth, out of
celestial love to man. _There_ were the martyrs that had borne witness
to the truth through flames, through torments, and through armies of
fierce, insulting faces. _There_ were the saints who, under intolerable
pangs, had glorified God by meek submission to His will.” “God speaks to
children, also, in dreams and by the oracles that lurk in darkness. But
in _solitude_, above all things, when made vocal to the meditative heart
by the truths and services of a national church, God holds with children
‘communion undisturbed.’ _Solitude_, though it may be silent as light,
is, like light, the mightiest of agencies; for solitude is essential to
man. All men come into this world _alone_; all leave it _alone_.”

=Principles on which to select School-Books.=—In their power of giving
impulse and stirring emotion is another use of books, the right books;
but that is just the question—which _are_ the right books?—a point upon
which I should not wish to play Sir Oracle. The ‘hundred best books for
the schoolroom’ may be put down on a list, but not by me. I venture to
propose one or two principles in the matter of school-books, and shall
leave the far more difficult part, the application of those principles,
to the reader. For example, I think we owe it to children to let them dig
their knowledge, of whatever subject, for themselves out of the fit book;
and this for two reasons: What a child _digs for_ is his own possession;
what is poured into his ear, like the idle song of a pleasant singer,
floats out as lightly as it came in, and is rarely assimilated. I do not
mean to say that the lecture and the oral lesson are without their uses;
but these uses are, to give impulse and to _order_ knowledge; and not to
convey knowledge, or to afford us that part of our education which comes
of fit knowledge, fitly given.

Again, as I have already said, ideas must reach us directly from the mind
of the thinker, and it is chiefly by means of the books they have written
that we get into touch with the best minds.

=Marks of a Fit Book.=—As to the distinguishing marks of a book for the
schoolroom, a word or two may be said. A fit book is not necessarily
a big book. John Quincy Adams, aged nine, wrote to his father for the
fourth volume of Smollett for his private reading, though, as he owned
up, his thoughts were running on birds’ eggs; and perhaps some of us
remember going religiously through the many volumes of Alison’s _History
of Europe_ with a private feeling that the bigness of the book swelled
the virtue of the reader. But, now, big men write little books, to be
used with discretion; because sometimes the little books are no more than
abstracts, the dry bones of the subjects; and sometimes the little books
are fresh and living. Again, we need not always insist that a book should
be written by the original thinker. It sometimes happens that second-rate
minds have assimilated the matter in hand, and are able to give out what
is their own thought (only because they have _made_ it their own) in a
form more suitable for our purpose than that of the first-hand thinkers.
We cannot make any hard and fast rule—a big book or a little book, a book
at first-hand or at second-hand; either may be right provided we have
it in us to discern a _living_ book, quick, and informed with the ideas
proper to the subject of which it treats.

=How to use the Right Books.=—So much for the right books; the right use
of them is another matter. The children must enjoy the book. The ideas
it holds must each make that sudden, delightful impact upon their minds,
must cause that intellectual stir, which mark the inception of an idea.
The teacher’s part in this regard is to see and feel for himself, and
then to rouse his pupils by an appreciative look or word; but to beware
how he deadens the impression by a flood of talk. Intellectual sympathy
is very stimulating; but we have all been in the case of the little girl
who said, “Mother, I think I could understand if you did not explain
_quite_ so much.” A teacher said of her pupil, “I find it so hard to tell
whether she has really grasped a thing or whether she has only got the
mechanical hang of it.” Children are imitative monkeys, and it is the
‘mechanical hang’ that is apt to arrive after a douche of explanation.

=Children must Labour.=—This, of getting ideas out of them, is by no
means all we must do with books. ‘In all labour there is profit,’ at
any rate in some labour; and the labour of thought is what his book
must induce in the child. He must generalise, classify, infer, judge,
visualise, discriminate, labour in one way or another, with that capable
mind of his, until the substance of his book is assimilated or rejected,
according as he shall determine; for the determination rests with him and
not with his teacher.

=Value of Narration.=—The simplest way of dealing with a paragraph
or a chapter is to require the child to narrate its contents after a
single attentive reading,—_one_ reading, however slow, should be made
a condition; for we are all too apt to make sure we shall have another
opportunity of finding out ‘what ’tis all about.’ There is the weekly
review if we fail to get a clear grasp of the news of the day; and, if we
fail a second time, there is a monthly or a quarterly review or an annual
summing up: in fact, many of us let present-day history pass by us with
easy minds, feeling sure that, in the end, we shall be _compelled_ to see
the bearings of events. This is a bad habit to get into; and we should
do well to save our children by not giving them the vague expectation
of second and third and tenth opportunities to do that which should have
been done at first.

=A Single Careful Reading.=—There is much difference between intelligent
reading, which the pupil should do in silence, and a mere parrot-like
cramming up of contents; and it is not a bad test of education to be
able to give the points of a description, the sequence of a series of
incidents, the links in a chain of argument, correctly, after a single
careful reading. This is a power which a barrister, a publisher, a
scholar, labours to acquire; and it is a power which children can acquire
with great ease, and once acquired, the gulf is bridged which divides the
reading from the non-reading community.

=Other Ways of using Books.=—But this is only _one_ way to use books:
others are to enumerate the statements in a given paragraph or chapter;
to analyse a chapter, to divide it into paragraphs under proper headings,
to tabulate and classify series; to trace cause to consequence and
consequence to cause; to discern character and perceive how character and
circumstance interact; to get lessons of life and conduct, or the living
knowledge which makes for science, out of books; all this is possible
for school boys and girls, and _until_ they have begun to use books for
themselves in such ways, they can hardly be said to have begun their
education.

=The Teacher’s Part.=—The teacher’s part is, in the first place, to see
what is to be done, to look over the work of the day in advance and see
what mental discipline, as well as what vital knowledge, this and that
lesson afford; and then to set such questions and such tasks as shall
give full scope to his pupils’ mental activity. Let marginal notes be
freely made, as neatly and beautifully as may be, for books should be
handled with reverence. Let numbers, letters, underlining be used to help
the eye and to save the needless fag of writing abstracts. Let the pupil
write for himself half a dozen questions which cover the passage studied;
he need not write the answers if he be taught that the mind can know
nothing but what it can produce in the form of an answer to a question
put by the mind to itself.

=Disciplinary Devices must not come between Children and the Soul of the
Book.=—These few hints by no means cover the disciplinary uses of a good
school-book; but let us be careful that our disciplinary devices, and our
mechanical devices to secure and tabulate the substance of knowledge,
do not come between the children and that which is the _soul_ of the
book, the living thought it contains. Science is doing so much for us in
these days, nature is drawing so close to us, art is unfolding so much
meaning to us, the world is becoming so rich for us, that we are a little
in danger of neglecting the art of deriving sustenance from books. Let
us not in such wise impoverish our lives and the lives of our children;
for, to quote the golden words of Milton: “Books are not absolutely dead
things, but do contain a potency of life in them to be as active as that
soul was, whose progeny they are; nay, they do preserve, as in a vial,
the purest efficacy and extraction of that living intellect that bred
them. As good almost kill a man, as kill a good book; who kills a man
kills a good reasonable creature, God’s image; but he who destroys a good
book, kills reason itself—kills the image of God, as it were, in the eye.”




