CHAPTER VII

AN ADEQUATE THEORY OF EDUCATION


=A Human Being.=—I have laid before the reader, as a working
hypothesis,—that man is homogeneous, a spiritual being invested with a
body—capable of responding to spiritual impulses, the organ by which he
expresses himself, the vehicle by which he receives impressions, and the
medium by which he establishes relations with what we call the material
world;—that will, conscience, affection, reason, are not the various
parts of a composite whole, but are different modes of action of the
person.

_His Capacities._—That he is capable of many relations and consequently
of many modes of action; that, given the due relations, his power of
expansion in these relations appears to be, not illimitable, but, so far
as we know, as yet unlimited.

_His Limitations._—But that, deprived of any or all of the relations
proper to him, a human being has no power of self-development in these
directions; though he would appear not to lose any of his capacity for
these relations.

_His Education._—Again, that any relation once initiated leaves, so to
speak, an organic memory of itself in the nervous tissue of the brain;
that in this physical registration of an experience or a thought, or
of the memory of an experience or a thought, lies the possibility of
habit; that some nine-tenths of our life run upon lines of habit; and
that, therefore, in order to educate, we must know something of both the
psychological and physiological history of a habit, how to initiate it
and how to develop it; and, finally, that a human being under education
has two functions—the formation of habits and the assimilation of ideas.

=The Behaviour of Ideas.=—Physiologists and ‘rational psychologists’ have
made the basis of habit pretty plain to us. All who run may read. The
nature, functions, and behaviour of ideas, and how ideas have power in
their impact upon the cerebral hemisphere to make some sort of sensible
impression—all this is matter as to which we are able only to make
‘guesses at truth.’ But this need not dismay us, for such other ultimate
facts as sleep and life and death are equally unexplained. In every
department of science we are brought up before facts which we have to
assume as the bases of our so-called science. Where a working hypothesis
is necessary, all we can do is to assume those bases that seem to us the
most adequate and the most fruitful. Let us say with Plato that an idea
is an entity, a live thing of the mind.

=No one can Beget an Idea by Himself.=—Apparently no one has power to
beget an idea by himself; it appears to be the progeny of two minds.
So-and-so ‘put it in my head,’ we say, and that is the history of all
ideas—the most simple and the most profound. But, once begotten, the
idea seems to survive indefinitely. It is painted in a picture, written
in a book, carved into a chair, or only spoken to someone who speaks
it again, who speaks it again, who speaks it again, so that it goes on
being spoken, for how long? Who knows! Nothing so strikes the student of
history as the persistent way in which ideas recur, except the way in
which they elude observation until occasion calls them forth. Our natural
progeny may indeed die and be buried; but of this spiritual progeny of
ideas, who may forecast the history or foretell the end?

=Certain Persons attract Certain Ideas.=—Perhaps we may be allowed
this further hypothesis—that, as an idea comes of the contact of two
minds, the idea of another is no more than a _notion_ to us until it
has undergone a process of generation within us; and for that reason
different ideas appeal to different minds—not at all because the ideas
themselves have an independent desire to club into ‘apperception masses,’
but because certain persons have in themselves, by inheritance, may we
assume, that which is proper to attract certain ideas. To illustrate
invisible things by visible, let us suppose that the relation is
something like that between the pollen and the ovule it is to fertilise.
The ways of carrying the pollen are various, not to say promiscuous, but
there is nothing haphazard in the result. The right pollen goes to the
right ovule and the plant bears seed after its kind; even so, the person
brings forth ideas after his kind.

=The Idea that ‘Strikes’ us.=—The _crux_ of the situation is: how can
an emanation so purely spiritual as an idea make an impression upon
even the most delicate material substance? We do not know. We have some
little demonstration that it is so in the fact of the score of reflex
actions by which we visibly respond to an idea that ‘strikes’ us. The eye
brightens, the pulse quickens, the colour rises, the whole person becomes
vitalised, capable, strenuous, no longer weighed down by this clog of
flesh. Every habit we have formed has had its initial idea, and every
idea we receive is able to initiate a habit of thought and of action.
Every human being has the power of communicating notions to other human
beings; and, after he is dead, this power survives him in the work he has
done and the words he has said. How illimitable is life! That the divine
Spirit has like intimate power of corresponding with the human spirit,
needs not to be urged, once we recognise ourselves as spiritual beings at
all.

=Expansion and Activity of the Person.=—Nor does this teeming population
of ideas arise to us without order and without purpose beyond the scope
of our busy efforts and intentions. It would seem as if a new human being
came into the world with unlimited capacity for manifold relations,
with a tendency to certain relations in preference to certain others,
but with no degree of adaptation to these relations. To secure that
adaptation and the expansion and activity of the person, along the lines
of the relations most proper to him, is the work of education; to be
accomplished by the two factors of ideas and habits. Every relation must
be initiated by its own ‘captain’[6] idea, sustained upon fitting ideas;
and wrought into the material substance of the _person_ by its proper
habits. This is the field before us.

=Story of Kaspar Hauser.=—To make my meaning plainer, let me run over the
story of Kaspar Hauser, that ‘child of Nuremberg’ upon whom an unique
experiment was said to have been tried, criminal in its character, and
therefore not to be repeated. The story is as well accredited as most of
our data, but we will assume its truth in so far only as the experience
of this boy tallies with what we know of the experience of an infant;
or, as regards the use of his senses, with the experience of an adult
person who has for the first time attained to, sight, let us say. On
28th May 1828, the attention of a cobbler in Nuremberg was excited by a
strange figure leaning, as if unable to support itself, against a wall
and uttering a moaning sound. The figure was that of a young man of about
seventeen, who, when the cobbler approached, moaned some incoherent
sounds. He had fair hair and blue eyes, and the lower part of his face
projected a little like a monkey’s. Everyone who watched him came to the
same conclusion, that his mind was that of a child of two or three, while
his body was nearly grown up; and yet he was not half-witted, because he
immediately began to pick up words and phrases, had a wonderful memory,
and never forgot a face he had once seen or the name which belonged
to it. At first, he was placed in the guard-house for safety, and the
children of the gaoler taught him to walk and to talk as they did their
own baby-sister. He was not afraid of anything. After six or seven weeks
the townspeople decided to adopt him as the ‘child of Nuremberg.’ He was
placed under the charge of Professor Daumer, whose interest led him to
undertake the difficult task of developing his mind so that it might fit
his body. Later, Dr Daumer gleaned a short account of his previous life
from Hauser by careful questioning. It was to this effect. ‘He neither
knows who he is nor where he came from. He always lived in a hole where
he sat on straw on the ground. He never heard a sound nor saw any vivid
light. He awoke and he slept and awoke again. When he awoke he found a
loaf of bread and a pitcher of water beside him. Sometimes the water
tasted nasty, and then he fell asleep again. He never saw the face of the
man who came to him. At last the man taught him to stand and to walk, and
finally carried him out of his hole.’ For several months after he came
to Nuremberg he refused to eat anything but bread and water, and was, in
fact, made quite ill by the smell of meat, beer, wine or milk. For the
first four months of his stay with Daumer, his senses of sight, taste,
hearing and smell were very acute. He could see much further than most
people by day, without, however, losing his power of seeing in the dark.
At the same time he could not distinguish between a thing and a picture
of that thing, and could not for a long time judge distances at all,
for he saw everything flat. He thought a ball rolled because it wished
to do so, and could not see why animals should not behave, at table for
instance, like human beings. His sense of smell was very keen, painfully
so, in fact, for he was made quite ill by the smell of the dye in his
clothes, the smell of paper, etc. On the other hand, he could distinguish
the leaves of trees by their smell. In about three months Dr Daumer was
able to teach him other things besides the use of his senses. He was
encouraged to write letters and essays, to use his hands in every way,
to dig in the garden, etc. For the next eleven months he lived a happy,
simple life with his friend and tutor, who mentions, however, that the
intense acuteness of his senses was gradually passing away, but that he
had still the charming, obedient, child-like nature which had won all
hearts.

=What Nature does for a Child.=—Here we have an instance (more or less
credible), and the only instance on record, of what Nature, absolutely
unaided and unhindered, has done for a child. Kaspar Hauser came out of
his long retirement, unusually intelligent, with his senses intensely
acute, and sweet and docile in disposition. This is an object-lesson
which cannot lawfully be repeated, and we may not take a single instance
as proving any position. But certainly this illuminating story—coupled
with the fact that Kaspar Hauser, on his emergence, was in some respects
in the condition of an infant in arms—that is, he knew nothing of
round, or flat, or far, or near, or hot, or cold, he had no experience;
and in some respects in that of a child of two years old with quick
intelligence, keen perceptive powers, capital memory, and child-like
sweetness—Kaspar Hauser’s story and our common experience go to prove
that the labour we spend on developing the ‘faculties,’ or in cultivating
the senses, is largely thrown away. Nature has no need of our endeavours
in these directions. Under the most adverse conceivable conditions
she can work wonders if let alone. What she cannot away with is our
misdirected efforts, which hinder and impede her beneficent work. Nature
left to herself hands over every child to its parents and other educators
in this condition of acute perceptive powers, keen intelligence, and
moral teachableness and sweetness. This solitary instance goes to show
that she is even capable of maintaining a human being in this child-like
condition until he reaches the verge of manhood.

=The Child has every Power that will serve Him.=—What, then, have we
to do for the child? Plainly we have not to develop the _person_; he
is there already, with, possibly, every power that will serve him in
his passage through life. Some day we shall be told that the very word
education is a misnomer belonging to the stage of thought when the
drawing forth of ‘faculties’ was supposed to be a teacher’s business.
We shall have some fit new word meaning, perhaps, ‘applied wisdom,’ for
wisdom is _the science of relations_, and the thing we have to do for a
young human being is to put him in touch, so far as we can, with all the
relations proper to him.

=Fulness of Living depends on the Establishment of Relations.=—We begin
to see light, both as to the lines upon which we should form habits and
as to that much-vexed question—the subjects of instruction proper for
children. We are no longer divided between the claims of the classical
and the modern side. We no longer ask ourselves whether it is better to
learn a few subjects ‘thoroughly,’ so we say, or to get a ‘smattering’
of many. These questions are beside the mark. In considering the
relationships which we may initiate for a child, I will begin with what
we shall probably be inclined to call the lowest rung of the ladder. We
may believe that a person—I have a ‘baby person’ in view—is put into
this most delightful world for the express purpose of forming ties of
intimacy, joy, association, and knowledge with the living and moving
things that are therein, with what St Francis would have called his
brother the mountain and his brother the ant and his brothers in the
starry heavens. Fulness of living, joy in life, depend, far more than
we know, upon the establishment of these relations. What do we do? We
consider the matter carefully; we say the boy will make a jumble of it
if he is taught more than one or two sciences. We ask our friends—‘What
sciences will tell best in examinations?’ and, ‘Which are most easily
learned?’ We discover which are the best text-books in the smallest
compass. The boy learns up his text, listens to lectures, makes diagrams,
watches demonstrations. Behold! he has learned a science and is able
to produce facts and figures, for a time any way, in connection with
some one class of natural phenomena; but of tender intimacy with Nature
herself he has acquired none. Let me sketch what seems to me the better
way for the child.

=The Power of Recognition.=—His parents know that the first step in
intimacy is recognition; and they will measure his education, not
solely by his progress in the ‘three R’s,’ but by the number of living
and growing things he knows by look, name, and habitat. A child of six
will note with eager interest the order of time in which the trees put
on their leaves; will tell you whether to look in hedge, or meadow,
or copse, for eyebright, wood-sorrel, ground-ivy; will not think that
flowers were made to be plucked, for—

    “’Tis (his) faith that every flower
    Enjoys the air it breathes”—

but will take his friends to see where the milk-wort grows, or the
bog-bean, or the sweet-gale. The birds of the air are no longer casual;
he soon knows when and where to expect the redstart and the meadow
pipit. The water-skater and the dragon-fly are interesting and admired
acquaintances. His eyes have sparkled at the beauty of crystals, and,
though he may not have been able to find them _in situ_, he knows the
look of the crystals of lime and quartz, and the lovely pink of felspar,
and many more.

=Æsthetic Appreciation.=—Æsthetic appreciation follows close upon
recognition, for does he not try from very early days to catch the flower
in its beauty of colour and grace of gesture with his own paintbrush?
The wise mother is careful to open her child’s eyes to another kind of
appreciation. She makes him look from a distance at a wild cherry-tree,
or at a willow with its soft catkins, and she shows him that the picture
on a Japanese screen has caught the very look of the thing, though when
he comes to compare a single catkin or a single cherry blossom with those
on the screen, there is no portraiture; and so he begins to learn at a
very early age that to paint that which we see and that which we know to
be there, are two different things, and that the former art is the more
gratifying.

=First-hand Knowledge.=—By-and-by he passes from acquaintance, the
pleasant recognition of friendly faces, to knowledge, the sort
of knowledge we call science. He begins to notice that there are
resemblances between wild-rose and apple blossom, between buttercup
and wood-anemone, between the large rhododendron blossom and the tiny
heath floret. A suggestion will make him find out accurately what these
resemblances are, and he gets the new and delightful idea of families of
plants. His little bit of knowledge is real science, because he gets it
at first-hand; in his small way he is another Linnæus.

=Appreciative Knowledge and Exact Knowledge.=—All the time he is storing
up associations of delight which will come back for his refreshment when
he is an old man. With this sort of appreciative knowledge of things to
begin with, the superstructure of exact knowledge, living science, no
mere affair of text-books and examinations, is easily raised, because a
natural desire is implanted. We might say the same of art, so far, any
way, as the appreciation of art goes. The child who has been taught to
see, appreciates pictures with discrimination.

=How a Child sets up a New Relation.=—This is how a child goes to work
to set up a new relation: a little girl of seven was handling an oar for
the first time and remarked—‘What a lot of crab-water there is to-day!’
Then the next day—‘There’s not near so much crab-water to-day.’ She was
asked—‘How do you know when it’s crab-water?’ ‘Oh! it’s so tough and you
can’t get your oar through, and it knocks you off your seat!’ The child
was all wrong, of course, but she was getting a scrap of real science and
would soon get on the right track. How much better this than to learn out
of a text-book, ‘the particles which constitute water have no cohesion,
and may be readily separated by a solid substance.’

When we consider that the setting up of relations, moral and
intellectual, is our chief concern in life, and that the function of
education is to put the child in the way of relations proper to him,
and to offer the inspiring idea which commonly initiates a relation, we
perceive that a little incident like the above may be of more importance
than the passing of an examination.




