CHAPTER XII

SOME UNCONSIDERED ASPECTS OF MORAL TRAINING


=Three Foundation Principles.=—Three principles which underlie the
educational thought of the Union,[10] and the furtherance of which some
of us have deeply at heart, are:—(_a_) The recognition of authority as a
fundamental principle, as universal and as inevitable in the moral world
as is that of gravitation in the physical; (_b_) the recognition of the
physical basis of habits and of the important part which the formation of
habits plays in education; (_c_) the recognition of the vital character
and inspiring power of ideas.

=Authority, the Basis of Moral Teaching.=—First let us consider the
principle of authority, which is the basis of moral as it is of religious
teaching. ‘Ought’ is part of the verb ‘to owe,’ and that which we owe
is a personal debt to a Lawgiver and Ruler, however men name the final
authority. If they choose to speak of Buddha or Humanity, they do not
escape from the sense of a moral authority. They know that that which
they _ought_ is that which they _owe_ to do, a debt to some power or
personality external to themselves. God has made us so that, however much
we may be in the dark as to the divine Name, we can never for a minute
escape from the sense of ‘Ought,’ the law, which becomes flesh-torturing
and spirit-quelling in proportion as we are removed from the light of
Revelation. To us, who know the name of God and have the revelation
of the Scriptures, authority carries no vague terror. We know what is
required of us, and that the requirements are never arbitrary, but
necessary in the nature of things, both for the moral government of the
world and to gratify the unquenchable desire of every human soul to rise
into a higher state of being. Perhaps parents, great as they are and
should be in the eyes of their children, should always keep well to the
front the fact that their authority is derived.

=Principles, not Rules.=—‘God does not allow’ us to do thus and thus
should be a rarely expressed but often present thought to parents
who study the nature of the divine authority where it is most fully
revealed, that is, in the Gospels. They see there that authority works
by principles and not by rules, and as they themselves are the deputy
authorities set over every household, it becomes them to consider the
divine method of government. They should discern the signs of the times
too; the tendency is to think that a man can only act according to his
‘lights,’ and, therefore, that it is right for him to do that which is
right in his own eyes; in other words, that every man is his own final
authority in questions of right and wrong. It is extremely important that
parents should keep in view, and counteract if need be, this tendency of
the day.

=Limitations of Authority.=—On the other hand, it is well that they
should understand the limitations of authority. Even the divine authority
does not compel. It indicates the way and protects the way-farer, and
strengthens and directs self-compelling power. It permits a man to make
free choice of obedience rather than compels him to obey. In the moral
training of children arbitrary action almost always produces revolt.
Parents believe that they are doing well to _rule_ their households,
without considering the pattern, the principles, and the limitations of
parental authority.

=Duty can exist only as that which we owe.=—An American writer on
the moral instruction of children states that ‘it is the business
of the moral instructor in the school to deliver to his pupils the
subject-matter of morality, but not to deal with the sanctions of it.’
Here we have a contention at least two thousand years old. Socrates
combated it as expressed in the formulæ:—‘Man is the measure of all
things’; ‘Just as each thing appears to each man, so it is to him’; ‘All
truth is relative.’ We say to-day that a man can but live up to his
‘lights’; in other words, there is no authority, no truth, and no law
beyond what every man carries in his own bosom. The necessary issue of
this teaching is the doctrine of the unknowable God—the God who, if He
exists, does not exist for us, because we have no relations with Him.
It is in their early years at home that children should be taught to
realise that duty can exist only as that which we _owe_ to God; that
the law of God is exceeding broad and encompasses us as the air we
breathe, only more so, for it reaches to our secret thoughts; and this
is not a hardship but a delight. That mothers should love their little
children and make them happy all day long—this is part of the law of
God: that children are glad when they are good, and sad when they are
naughty—this, too, is the law of God: that, if Tommy drops his spoon, it
falls to the ground, is a law of God too, of a different kind. Mother or
teacher cannot give children a better inheritance than the constant sense
of being ruled and encompassed by law, and that law is another name for
the will of God.

=Morals do not come by Nature.=—No doubt every child is born with a
conscience, that is, with a sense that he ought to choose the right
and refuse the wrong; but he is not born with the power to discern
good and evil. An educated conscience is a far rarer possession than
we imagine; we are all startled now and then by the laxities of
right-minded neighbours in matters the right and wrong of which is patent
to ourselves; but probably our own moral eccentricities are equally
startling to our friends. The blame rests on our faulty moral education,
which has hardly made us aware of fallacious thought and insincere
speech; we believe that Latin and Greek must be taught, but that morals
come by nature. A certain rough-and-ready kind of morality, varying with
our conditions, does come by heredity and environment; but that most
delicate and beautiful of human possessions, an educated conscience,
comes only by teaching with authority and adorning by example.

=Children born neither Moral nor Immoral.=—It is curious how educated
people are still at sea as regards the moral status of children. Some
time ago I was present at an interesting discussion, among the members
of an educational society, on the subject of children’s lies. It was
interesting to notice that the meeting, consisting of able, educated
people, divided itself into those who held that children were born
true and those who held that they were born false; it did not occur
to anybody to recall his own childhood, or even to reflect on his own
condition at the present moment. The question lay between children being
born moral and born immoral. Nobody reflected that every human being
comes into the world with infinite possibilities for good; and, alas!
infinite possibilities for evil; possibly with evil hereditary tendencies
which may be rectified by education, or with good tendencies which his
bringing-up may nullify.

=Moral Teaching.=—We need go no further than the Ten Commandments and
our Lord’s exposition of the moral law to find corrective teaching for
the spasmodic, impulsive moral efforts which tend to make up our notion
of what the children call ‘being good,’ and nowhere shall we find a
more lucid and practical commentary on the moral law than is set forth
in the Church Catechism. It was the practice of a venerable Father of
the Church, Bishop Ken, to recite the ‘duty towards God,’ and the ‘duty
towards my neighbour’ every day. It is a practice worth imitating, and it
would not be amiss to let all children of whatever communion learn these
short abstracts of the whole duty of man.

=Of the Poets.=—The poets give us the best help in this kind of teaching;
as, for example, Wordsworth’s _Ode to Duty_:—

    “Stern lawgiver! yet thou dost wear
    The Godhead’s most benignant grace;
    Nor know we anything so fair
    As is the smile upon thy face;
    Flowers laugh before thee on their beds;
    And fragrance in thy footing treads;
    Thou dost preserve the stars from wrong;
    And the most ancient heavens, through thee, are fresh and strong.”

Or Matthew Arnold’s lines on _Rugby Chapel_—

    “Servants of God!—or sons
    Shall I not call you? because
    Not as servants ye knew
    Your Father’s innermost mind,
    His, who unwillingly sees
    One of His little ones lost—
    Yours is the praise, if mankind
    Hath not as yet in its march
    Fainted, and fallen, and died!”

Or this, again, of Tennyson—

    “Not once or twice in our fair island story
    The path of duty was the way to glory:
    He, that ever following her commands,
    On with toil of heart and knees and hands,
    Thro’ the long gorge to the far light, has won
    His path upward and prevail’d,—
    Shall find the toppling crags of duty, scaled,
    Are close upon the shining table-lands
    To which our God Himself is moon and sun.”

Or Matthew Arnold’s _Morality_—

    How, “Tasks in hours of insight willed
          Can be through hours of gloom fulfilled.”

Possibly we could hardly do better than lead children to reflect on some
high poetic teaching, adding love to law and devotion to duty, so that
children shall know themselves, by duty as by prayer,

    “Bound by gold chains about the feet of God.”

In the matter of the ideas that inspire the virtuous life, we miss much
by our way of taking things for granted.

=Ethical Teaching of the Middle Ages.=—The mediæval Church preserved
classical traditions. It endeavoured to answer the Socratic inquiry:
“What ought we to do and what do we mean by the words ‘ought’ and
‘doing’ or ‘acting’?” and it answered, as far as might be by way of
object-lessons, visible signs of spiritual things signified.

In the Arena Chapel at Padua, we have Giotto’s Faith and Infidelity, Love
and Envy, Charity and Avarice, Justice and Injustice, Temperance and
Gluttony, Hope and Despair, pictured forth in unmistakable characters
for the reading of the unlearned and ignorant. We have the same theme,
treated with a difference, in what Mr Ruskin calls the ‘Bible of
Amiens,’ where we may study Humility and Pride, Temperance and Gluttony,
Chastity and Lust, Charity and Avarice, Hope and Despair, Faith and
Idolatry, Perseverance and Atheism, Love and Discord, Obedience and
Rebellion, Courage and Cowardice, Patience and Anger, Gentleness and
Churlishness,—in pairs of quatrefoils, an upper and a lower, each under
the feet of an Apostle, who was held to personify the special virtue. But
_we_ know nothing about cardinal virtues and deadly sins.

=We have no Authoritative Teaching.=—We have no teaching by authoritative
utterance strong in the majesty of virtue. We work out no schemes of
ethical teaching in marble; we paint no scale of virtues on our walls,
and no repellent vices. Our poets speak for us, it is true; but the moral
aphorisms, set like jewels though they be on the fore-finger of time,
are scattered here and there, and we leave it serenely to happy chance
whether our children shall or shall not light upon the couple of lines
which should fire them with the impulse to virtuous living. It may be
said that we neglect all additional ethical teaching because we have the
Bible; but how far and _how_ do we use it? Here we have indeed the most
perfect ethical system, the most inspiring and heart-enthralling, that
the world has ever possessed; but it is questionable whether we attempt
to set a noble child’s heart beating with the thought that he is required
to be perfect as his Father which is in Heaven is perfect.

=High Ideals.=—It is time we set ourselves seriously to this work of
moral education which is to be done, most of all, by presenting the
children with high ideals. ‘Lives of great men all remind us we can
make our lives sublime,’ and the study of the lives of great men and
of the great moments in the lives of smaller men is most wonderfully
inspiring to children, especially when they perceive the strenuousness
of the childhood out of which a noble manhood has evolved itself. As one
grows older no truth strikes one more than that ‘the child is father to
the man.’ It is amazing how many people of one’s own acquaintance have
fulfilled the dreams of their childhood and early youth, and have had
their days indeed ‘bound each to each in natural piety.’

=Value of Biography.=—The Bible is, of course, a storehouse of most
inspiring biographies; but it would be well if we could manage our
teaching so as to bring out in each character the master-thought of
all his thinking. The late Queen has done this with singular tact and
power in the Albert Memorial Chapel, where, as we know, Prophets and
Patriarchs are presented, each showing in action that special virtue or
form of endeavour which seemed to her the keynote of his character. This
is a happy effort to revive the mediæval object teaching of which I have
already spoken. The same thing occurs again in the School of Song of
the Edinburgh Cathedral, where Mrs Traquair has frescoed the walls to
illustrate the _Benedicite_, where ‘holy and humble men of heart,’ for
example, is illustrated by three men of our own day of different schools
of thought—Cardinal Newman is the only one I recollect. The force of this
kind of master-idea, and the unity it gives to life, cannot be better
illustrated than by the perhaps apocryphal ‘I will be good’ of our late
beloved Queen. There are few children in the kingdom whose hearts have
not thrilled to the phrase. Perhaps she will one day know how much was
done to give moral impulse to this great Empire by that simple child-like
promise so abundantly fulfilled.

=Of Patriotic Poems.=—Next in value to biographies from the point of view
of inspiration are the burning words of the poets,—Tennyson’s _Ode to
the Iron Duke_, for example. Perhaps no poet has done more to stir the
fire of patriotism amongst us than Mr Rudyard Kipling: “We learn from our
wistful mothers to call Old England ‘home,’” opens the door to a flood of
patriotic feeling; as indeed do the whole of the poems, _The Native-born_
and _The Flag of England_:—

    “Never was isle so little,
    Never were seas so lone,
    But over the scud and the palm trees
    The English flag has flown.”

From another point of view, how this (of Browning’s) makes the heart
quick with patriotic emotions!—

    “Buy my English posies,
    Kent and Surrey may,
    Violets of the undercliff
    Wet with Channel spray,
    Cowslips of the Devon combe,
    Midland furze afire;
    Buy my English posies
    And I’ll sell you heart’s desire.”

=Mottoes.=—In the reading of the Bible, of poetry, of the best prose,
the culling of mottoes is a delightful and most stimulating occupation,
especially if a motto book be kept, perhaps under headings, perhaps not.
It would not be a bad idea for children to make their own year-book,
with a motto for every day in the year culled from their own reading.
What an incentive to a good day it would be to read in the morning as
a motto of our very own choice and selection, and not the voice of an
outside mentor: ‘Keep ye the law; be swift in all obedience’! The theme
suggests endless subjects for consideration and direct teaching: for
example, lives with a keynote; Bible heroes; Greek heroes; poems of moral
inspiration; poems of patriotism, duty, or any single moral quality;
moral object-lessons; mottoes and where to find them, etc.

=The Habit of Sweet Thoughts.=—Moral habits, the way to form them and
the bounden duty of every parent to send children into the world with
a good outfit of moral habits, is a subject so much to the front in
our thoughts, that I need not dwell further upon it here. The moral
impulse having been given by means of some such inspiring idea as we
have considered, the parent’s or teacher’s next business is to keep the
idea well to the front, with tact and delicacy, and without insistence,
and to afford apparently casual opportunities for moral effort on the
lines of the first impulse. Again, let us keep before the children that
it is the manner of thoughts we think which matters; and, in the early
days, when a child’s face is an open book to his parents, the habit of
sweet thoughts must be kept up, and every selfish, resentful, unamiable
movement of children’s minds observed in the countenance must be changed
before consciousness sets in.

=Virtues in which Children should be Trained.=—One more point: parents
should take pains to have their own thoughts clear as to the manner
of virtues they want their children to develop. Candour, fortitude,
temperance, patience, meekness, courage, generosity, indeed the whole
rôle of the virtues, would be stimulating subjects for thought and
teaching, offering ample illustrations. One caution I should like to
offer. A child’s whole notion of religion is ‘being good.’ It is well
that he should know that being good is not his whole duty to God,
although it is so much of it; that the relationship of love and personal
service, which he owes as a child to his Father, as a subject to his
King, is even more than the ‘being good’ which gives our Almighty Father
such pleasure in His children.




