CHAPTER V

PSYCHOLOGY IN RELATION TO CURRENT THOUGHT


=Educational Thought in the Eighteenth Century.=—If the end of the
eighteenth and the end of the nineteenth centuries have one feature in
common more than another, it is, that in both education comes to the
front as among the chief ends of man. The eighteenth-century people
had the best of it. They had clear oracles in their Locke and their
Rousseau. They knew what they wanted to do, and they did it with charming
enthusiasm. The period teems with memoirs; and it is very pleasant to
read about the philosophically and consistently brought up children of
the more thoughtful families. They had convictions, and they had the
courage of their convictions. We are less happy. A few decades ago we
too were in a furore of joyous excitement about education. Educational
‘movements,’ schools, colleges, lectures, higher education for women,
‘public’ day schools for girls, examination tests which should give
assurance on every point, were multiplied all over the country and
all over the world. It was a forward movement which has brought us
incalculable gains; and not the least of these gains is the fact that
to-day we are dissatisfied and depressed, and inclined to wonder whether
we are not on the wrong tack. If educational work of the best kind had
not been going on amongst us for the last two or three decades, we
should not have arrived at this ‘divine discontent.’ All the same, it
is pretty evident that the time has come when we must change our front.
Now, elementary schools, now, girls’ high schools, now, public schools,
now, women’s colleges, are pronounced to be, on the whole, ‘a failure.’
They do a great deal, it is said, but is what they do worth doing? Is
it, in fact, education? The bolder sceptics go so far as to attack our
two ancient universities; but they, very likely, will weather the storm
because of the very inertness, the ‘masterly inactivity,’ let us call
it, which their opponents abuse; the universities do a great deal of
‘letting-alone.’

=General Dissatisfaction with Education.=—Our pretty general
dissatisfaction with education, as it is, is a wholesome symptom, and
probably means that sounder theory and happier practice are on their way
to us. One thing we begin to see clearly, that the stream can rise no
higher than its source, that sound theory must underlie successful work.
We begin to suspect that we took up schemes and methods of education
a little hastily, without considering what philosophy or, let us say,
psychology, underlies those schemes and methods; now, we see that our
results cannot be in advance of our principles. To-day the _psychologist_
is abroad, as, twenty or thirty years ago, the _schoolmaster_ was abroad.

=Psychologies are many.=—But, alas, psychologies are many, and
educational denominations are bitterly opposed to one another. We must
feel our way to some test by which we can discern a working psychology
for our own age; for, like all science, psychology is progressive. What
worked even fifty years ago will not work to-day, and what fulfils our
needs to-day will not serve fifty years hence; there is no last word to
be said upon education; it evolves with the evolution of the race. At
the same time, that there should be at least half a dozen systems in the
field, no one of them entirely satisfactory even to the persons who adopt
it, shows that we, who practise education, should at any rate attempt to
know what are the requirements of a sound system of psychology.

=Conditions of an Adequate System.=—That system which shall be of use to
practical people in giving purpose, unity and continuity to education,
must satisfy the following demands:—_It must be adequate_, covering
the whole nature of man and his relations with all that is other than
himself. _It must be necessary_, that is, no other equally adequate
psychology should present itself; and _it must touch at all points the
living thought of the age_; that is, it must not be a by-issue to be
discussed by specialists at their leisure, but the intelligent man in the
street should feel its movement to be in step with the two or three great
ideas by which the world is just now being educated.

=Sacredness of the Person.=—Among the thoughts which the mysterious
Zeitgeist is employing to bring us up, I think we may put first _the
sacredness of the person_. Every person is interesting to us to-day.
The interviewer does more than satisfy vulgar curiosity; what he has
to tell is equally welcome to us all, whether he interviews the London
‘step-girl,’ the costermonger, the man of the book-barrow, ’Arry and
’Arriet out for a holiday, an ambassador, an author, an artist, a royal
personage; every detail that will help us to realise the personality
of one or other is more than welcome. So, too, of what is called the
‘Kailyard’ literature; it rests on a sound basis. Literary merit it may
or may not have, but it tells us what we want to know—everyday details
about the people, any people, of any county, or of any country. Slang
dictionaries, collections of folk-lore, big biographies which tell us
minutely how a man dines and breakfasts, walks and sleeps, all is grist
to our mill. We set an enormous and, I think, an increasing value upon
_persons_, simply, _per se_; and any system of psychology which is to
appeal to us must bring the _person_ to the fore. He may be influenced
by this and that; but he, himself, the indefinable person, of whom we
are sensible while he is yet in arms, and of whom we never finally lose
sight, however he be marred by vice and misery, must play for himself
the game of life, and shape for himself those influences of environment,
education, and what not, that do their part to make him what he is. A
system of psychology which gives us man in this sort of relation to
educational forces should become common property at once, because this
is what every mother of a family and teacher of a school, every sort of
director of men and women, knows about.

=The Evolution of the Individual.=—Next we demand of education that it
should _make for the evolution of the individual_; should not only put
the person in the first place, but should have for its sole aim the
making the very most of that person, intellectually, morally, physically.
We do not desire any dead accretions of mere knowledge, or externals of
mere accomplishment. We desire an education that shall be assimilated;
shall become part and parcel of the person; and the psychology which
shall show us how to educate our children in this vital way will meet
our demands. The doctrine of evolution has brought about a greater
_bouleversement_ in philosophy than perhaps we are aware of, and we shall
find by-and-by that ‘education’ means nothing less than the evolution of
the human being at all points; and that the acquisition of mere learning
is not necessarily education at all.

=The Solidarity of the Race.=—One other idea that appears to be at work
in the world for the elevation of mankind is that of _the solidarity
of the race_. The American poet, Walt Whitman, expresses one side of
this intuition when he tells us how _he_ conquers with every triumphant
general, bleeds with every wounded soldier, shares the spring morning and
the open road and the pride of the horses with every jolly waggoner—in
fact, lives in all other lives that touch him anywhere, even in
imagination. This is something more than the brotherhood of man; that
belongs to the present; but our sense of the oneness of humanity reaches
into the remotest past, making us regard with tender reverence every
relic of the antiquity of our own people or of any other; and, with a
sort of jubilant hope, every prognostic of science or philanthropy which
appears to us to be the promise of the centuries to come. Is it too much
to expect that psychology shall take cognisance of this great educational
force as well as of the two others I have indicated? I do not say that
these three are the only, so to speak, _motor_ ideas of our age; but I
think they are the three of which we are all most aware, and I think,
too, that any system of psychology which takes no cognisance of either,
or of all of them, does not afford that basis for our educational theory
and practice of which we are in search.

=The Best Thought is Common Thought.=—Let us consider now some three or
four of the psychologies which have the most widespread influence to-day.
But we do not presume to do this as critics, rather as inheritors of
other men’s labour, who take stock of our possessions in order that we
may use them to the most advantage. For the best thought of any age is
common thought; the men who write it down do but give expression to what
is working in the minds of the rest. But we must bear in mind that truth
behaves like a country gate allowed to ‘swing to’ after a push. Now it
swings a long way to this side and now a long way to that, and at last
after shorter and shorter oscillations the latch settles. The reformer,
the investigator, works towards one aspect of truth, which is the whole
truth to him, and which he advances out of line with the rest. The next
reformer works at a tangent, apparently in opposition, but he is bringing
up another front of truth. Then there is work for us, the people of
average mind. We consider all sides, balance what has been done, and find
truth, perhaps in the mean, perhaps as a side issue which did not make
itself plain to original thinkers of either school. But we do not scorn
the bridge that has borne us.

=Locke’s ‘States of Consciousness.’=—We need not go further back than
Locke, who represents the traditional educational notions in the homes
of the upper middle classes. People who bring up their children by
‘common sense,’ according to ‘the way of our family,’ do so more often
than they know because their great-great-grandfathers read Locke. He
did not concern himself with the _mind_, or _soul_, of man, but with
‘_states of consciousness_.’ Ideas, images, were for him to be got only
through the senses; and a man could know nothing but what he got hold
of through his own senses and assimilated by his own understanding.
As for choice and selection in these ideas and images, Locke gives a
comprehensive counsel—‘What it becomes a gentleman to know’ is the proper
subject-matter for education. The mind (_i.e._ the man?) appears to
have little colour or character of its own, but has certain powers and
activities for the employment of the ideas it receives; and to account
for these, Locke invented the pestilent fallacy which has, perhaps, been
more injurious than any other to the cause of education—the fallacy of
the ‘faculties of the mind.’

=Does not provide for the Evolution of the Person.=—Now let us bring
Locke up to the standard which we have erected, remembering always that
our power to raise a higher standard is due to him and such as he. There
is no unity of an inspiring idea, no natural progress and continuity, no
ennobling aim, in an education which stops at the knowledge a gentleman
should acquire and the accomplishments a gentleman should possess.
The _person_ hardly appears except in the way of the semi-mechanical
activities of his so-called faculties; he is practically the resultant of
the images conveyed through his senses. The _evolution_, the expansion of
the individual in the directions proper to him, has no place here; every
man is shut tight, as it were, in his own skin, but is taught to behave
himself becomingly within that limit. That intellectual commerce of
ideas whereby the dead yet speak their living thoughts in the work they
have left us, and by which as by links of an endless chain all men are
bound to each and all men influence each, has no place in a philosophy
which teaches that a man can know only through his own understanding
working upon the images he receives through his senses. In so far as we
wish to attain to the possibilities of the hour we must take farewell of
Locke, though we do so with gratitude, and even with affection.

=Modern Physiological-Psychology.=—The modern school, which regards
psychology strictly as a ‘natural science,’ works more or less on the
basis of Locke, plus an illuminating knowledge of biology. Here, as with
Locke, the ‘mind’ is apprehended only as ‘states of consciousness’; the
senses are the sole avenues of knowledge, which reaches the brain in the
form of ideas or images. But I shall represent this ‘rational psychology’
best by citing a few sentences from Professor James (Harvard University),
whose wise and temperate treatment of the subject commands the respect
and attention of even those who differ from him. He opens with a limiting
definition of psychology as the ‘_description and explanation of states
of consciousness as such_.’ He treats psychology as a ‘natural science.’
After bringing forward facts familiar to most of us, showing the intimate
connection between acts of thought and the cerebral hemisphere, he says:
“Taking all such facts together, the simple and radical conception
dawns upon the mind that mental action may be uniformly and absolutely
a function of brain action varying as the latter varies, and being to
the brain action as effect to cause. This conception is the working
hypothesis which underlies all the physiological-psychology of recent
years.” This is not far removed from the announcement of the Frenchman
that the brain secretes thought as the liver secretes bile, both
processes being purely material and mechanical, and doing away with any
requirement for the profoundest thinking beyond that of a well-nourished
brain.

=Unjustifiable Materialism.=—No wonder the author finds himself compelled
to admit that to some readers “such an assumption will seem like the
most unjustifiable _à priori_ materialism.” The discussion of ‘the
self’ might be supposed to present insuperable difficulties, but they
are disposed of, and, says our author, “The logical conclusion seems to
be that the _states of consciousness are all that psychology needs to
do her work with. Metaphysics or theology may prove the soul to exist,
but for psychology the hypothesis of such a substantial principle of
unity is superfluous._” That is to say, the important personage which
I call _I_, _myself_, need be no more than perpetually shifting states
of consciousness effected by the brain; and the sameness or identity
of person, which seems at first sight the one bit of solid ground in a
shifting morass, rests upon no more than the fact that the brain may be
conscious of the same objects to-day that it was conscious of years ago.

=Psychology, ‘A Phrase of Diffidence.’=—But, after proving with great
clearness and power through a considerable volume[2] that all the
phenomena of intelligent life _may_ have their sole source in the
physical brain, Professor James concludes—“When, then, we talk of
psychology as a natural science we must not assume that that means a
sort of psychology that stands at last on solid ground. It means just
the reverse; it means a psychology particularly fragile and into which
the waters of metaphysical criticism leak at every joint, a psychology
all of whose elementary assumptions and data must be reconsidered in
wider connections and translated into other terms. It is, in short, a
phrase of diffidence and not of arrogance, and it is indeed strange
to hear people talk triumphantly of the ‘New Psychology’ and write
‘Histories of Psychology’ when into the real elements and forces, which
the word covers, not the first glimpse of clear insight exists. A string
of raw facts, a little gossip and wrangle about opinions, a little
classification and generalisation on the mere descriptive level ... but
not a single law ... not a single proposition from which any consequence
can causally be deduced.” This is soothing, and we close Professor
James’s book with satisfaction; but the pity of it is that all the ‘new’
psychologists are not so modest as the Professor,—some of them are, may
we venture to say so, not a little arrogant: what is more, the student
who goes carefully through this text-book of psychology is only too
likely to consider that the author has proved his case—that psychology is
a ‘natural science,’ ‘and it is,’ like Peter Bell’s primrose, ‘nothing
more’—up to the hilt, and he is not likely to go through a process of
reconversion at the last page.

=We become Devitalised.=—It is dreary to suppose that one may not be
anybody after all, but only a momentary state of consciousness. Hope
goes out of life, for there is nothing pleasant to look forward to. If
something agreeable should happen next year, there is no _I_, _myself_,
to enjoy it; only the ‘state of consciousness’ of some moment to come.
Faith goes where all is fortuitous; when other people and ourselves are,
so to speak, the circumstances of the moment. Where there are no persons,
there is no possibility of that divine afflatus which we call enthusiasm;
for that recognition of another on a higher plane which we mean when we
say ‘I believe in so and so,’ for that recognition of the divine Being
which we call Faith. We become devitalised; life is flat and grey; we
throw desperate, if dull, energy into the task of the hour because we
shall so, any way, get rid of that hour; we are glad to be amused, but
still more glad of the stimulus of feverish work; but the work, like
ourselves, is devitalised, without living idea, without consecrating aim.
Our manner becomes impassive, our speech caustic, our countenance dreary
and impenetrable. This is the change that is passing over large numbers
of the teaching profession, men and women of keen intelligence, who might
well have been inspired by high ideals, quickened by noble enthusiasms,
had they not imbibed an educational faith which meets all aspirations
with a _Cui bono?_ We give what we have, and only what we have. What have
these to pass on to the children under their care?

=This System Inadequate, Unnecessary, Inharmonious.=—But we need not sit
down under this blighting system of thought. It is _inadequate_, as the
best of their own prophets—Mr James, for example—freely allow; there is
more in man than this philosophy has ever dreamt of. It is _unnecessary_,
for, as we shall presently see, more than one other psychology accounts
with greater, though never with complete, success for the phenomena
which a human being presents. It is _inharmonious_ with the _movement
of the age_. It effaces that personality which the age tends to exalt
and magnify, and to regard with tender interest, under even sordid
conditions. The principle of _solidarity_ is lost, and those of social
and family life loosened; for what binding tie can there be between
beings whose entity _may_ be no more than a state of consciousness?

=Evolution is Checked.=—Again, the _evolution_ of the individual is
checked at the point of mechanical perfection. Good mathematicians,
clear-headed scientists, may be turned out; but what place is there for
the higher forces of humanity, aspiration, speculation, devotion? We have
reason to keep watch at the place of the letting out of waters, that is,
the psychology upon which our educational thought and action rest. There
is delightful certitude in the results of anthropometrical research. You
may predicate with certainty given facts about a child from the way in
which he stretches out his arm. Good _pathological_ work is being done,
and many a child’s hidden weakness is revealed and consequently brought
under curative treatment by the tests which it is now possible to apply.
The danger is that we should take a part for the whole and allow this
‘new psychology’ to usurp the whole field of education.




