CHAPTER I

DOCILITY AND AUTHORITY IN THE HOME AND SCHOOL

1. In what points are there better relations between children and their
elders than there were a generation or two ago?

2. Characterise the elder generation of parents.

3. What of ‘ill-guided’ homes?

4. Give an example of martinet rule. Name some notable men who grew up
under such rule.

5. Compare the arbitrary parent now with the arbitrary parent of the past.

6. Was arbitrary rule a failure?

7. What thought should encourage our own efforts?

8. Show that arbitrariness arose from limitations.

9. That it is one cause of the reticence of children.

10. In what way has the direction of philosophic thought altered the
relations of parents and children?

11. What effect has the doctrine of the ‘Infallible Reason’ upon
authority?

12. Show that English thought again proclaims the apotheosis of Reason.

13. What is the final justification of the idea of authority?

14. Why is the enthronement of the human reason the dethronement of the
highest authority?

15. Show that the spread of an idea is ‘quick as thought.’

16. Why has the notion of the finality of human reason become intolerable?

17. On what grounds would you say that authority and docility are
fundamental principles?

18. Show that self-interest does not account for the response of docility
to authority.

19. Show that the work of the rationalistic philosophers was necessary.

20. Show that they hold a brief for human freedom.

21. Describe the way in which the education of the world seems to be
carried on.

22. Show the danger of the notion that authority is vested in persons.

23. Show that a person in authority is under authority.


CHAPTER II

DOCILITY AND AUTHORITY IN THE HOME AND SCHOOL

_Part II.—How Authority Behaves_

1. Show, by example, that it is easy to go wrong on principle.

2. Distinguish between authority and autocracy.

3. How does autocracy behave?

4. Show that it is the autocrat who remits duties and grants indulgences.

5. How does authority behave?

6. Give half-a-dozen features by which we may distinguish the rule of
authority.

7. What are the qualities proper to a ruler?

8. Distinguish between mechanical and reasonable obedience.

9. Show the use of the former.

10. Show how acts of mechanical obedience help a child to the masterly
use of his body.

11. How is the man, who can make himself do what he wills, trained?

12. Why is the effort of decision the greatest effort of life?

13. Show how habit spares us much of this labour.

14. Show how the habit of obedience eases the lives of children.

15. How does authority avoid cause of offence?

16. Show that alert authority in the home is a preventive force.

17. Show how important the changing of the thoughts, diverting, is in the
formation of habit.

18. Show that children, too, exercise authority.

19. What question might parents put to themselves daily as an aid to the
maintenance of authority?


