CHAPTER XXI

SUGGESTIONS TOWARDS A CURRICULUM

_Part II.—School-Books_

1. Who must, in the end, decide upon the right school-books?

2. What are the relative places of lecture and book?

3. Show the danger of elaborate appliances.

4. Upon what principle should studies be co-ordinated?

5. What results of education should we look for in a young person leaving
school?

6. Show that the worth of education by _things_ is now fully recognised.

7. What habit should we look for as a chief acquirement of school-life?

8. Give a rough classification of the subjects in which knowledge is due
to children.

9. Show the importance of the Bible as a means of education.

10. What knowledge of history should boys and girls of twelve to fourteen
have?

11. What mistake is commonly made in teaching this subject?

12. What knowledge of languages should they have?

13. What should we aim at in the early teaching of science?

14. What least amount of time in the open is a _sine quâ non_ of a living
education?

15. What is the use of books in nature-teaching?

16. Name a few useful books.

17. What do you understand by ‘picture-talks’?


CHAPTER XXII

SUGGESTIONS TOWARDS A CURRICULUM

_Part III.—The Love of Knowledge_

1. Why does the use of books make for short hours?

2. What is the evil of a utilitarian education?

3. Distinguish between relations and interests.

4. Show that the tendency of present-day education is to depreciate
knowledge.

5. Enumerate some causes of the failure of our efforts at intellectual
education.

6. Show the danger, which besets teachers, of pursuing intellectual
futilities.

7. By what test may we distinguish a fad from an educational method?

8. Our end is to produce an educated child. How is he to be recognised?

9. Children delight in school for many reasons. Which of these is the
only abiding motive?

10. What change in our educational methods should secure the children’s
educational Magna Carta?




APPENDIX II

SOME SPECIMENS OF EXAMINATION WORK DONE IN THE ‘PARENTS’ REVIEW’ SCHOOL,
IN WHICH THE PUPILS ARE EDUCATED UPON BOOKS AND THINGS


The _Parents’ Review_ School, an output of the Parents Union, was, in the
first place, designed to bring home schools, taught by governesses, up to
the standard of other schools. A Training College for governesses, with
Practising School, etc., was established later. Children may not enter
the School under six; because we think the first six years of life are
wanted for physical growth and the self-education which children carry
on with little ordered aid. The _Parents’ Review_ School is conducted by
means of programmes of work, in five classes, sent out, term by term,
to each of the home schools (and to some other schools); and the same
programmes are used in the Practising School. Examination papers are set
at the end of each term.

The work is arranged on the principles which have been set forth in this
volume; a wide curriculum, a considerable number of books for each child
in the several classes, and, besides, a couple of hours’ work daily, not
with _Books_ but with _Things_. Many of the pupils in the school have
absorbed, in a way, the culture of their parents; but the children of
uncultured parents take with equal readiness and comparable results to
this sort of work, which is, I think, fitted, not only for the clever,
but for the average and even the dull child.

=Class Ia.=—The child of six goes into Class Ia.; he works for 2½ hours a
day, but half an hour of this time is spent in drill and games. Including
drill, he has thirteen ‘subjects’ of study, for which about sixteen
books are used. He recites hymns, poems, and Bible verses; works from
Messrs Sonnenschein and Nesbitt’s _A B C Arithmetic_; sings French and
English songs; begins Mrs Curwen’s _Child Pianist_, learns to write and
to print, learns to read, learns French orally, does brush-drawing and
various handicrafts. All these things are done with joy, but cannot be
illustrated here. Bible lessons, read from the Bible; tales, natural
history, and geography are taught from appointed books, helped by the
child’s own observation.

Our plan in each of these subjects is to read him the passage for the
lesson (a good long passage), talk about it a little, avoiding much
explanation, and then let him narrate what has been read. This he does
very well and with pleasure, and is often happy in catching the style as
well as the words of the author.

Certain pages, say 40 or 50, from each of the children’s books are
appointed for a term’s reading. At the end of the term an examination
paper is sent out containing one or two questions on each book. Here are
a few of the answers. The children in the first two classes narrate their
answers, which someone writes from their dictation.

_Q._ Tell the story of Naaman.

A. (aged 6¾):—

    “Naaman had something the matter with him, and his master sent
    a letter to the King of Israel, and the king was very unhappy
    and did not know what to do because he thought that he wanted
    to come and fight against him, and he rent his clothes. And
    he said, ‘I can’t cure him,’ so he sent him to Elisha, and he
    told him to take a lot of presents and a lot of things with
    him. And when Naaman came to Elisha’s door, Elisha sent Gehazi
    to tell him to dip himself seven times in the waters of Jordan,
    and he said to himself, ‘I surely thought he would have come
    out, and I thought a lot of people would come out and make a
    fuss’; and he went back in a rage. And his servant said to
    him, ‘Why didn’t you go?’ And he said, ‘My rivers are much the
    best.’ So his servants said, ‘If he had asked you to do some
    great thing, wouldst thou have done it?’ So he went and dipped
    himself seven times in the water, and when he came out he was
    quite all right again. And when he was coming home they saw
    Gehazi coming, so Naaman told them to stop the horses, and so
    they stopped, and Gehazi said, ‘There are some people come to
    see me, please give me some money and some cloaks,’ and they
    were very heavy, so Naaman sent some of his men to carry them,
    and when he came near the house he said to his servants, ‘You
    can go now.’ Elisha said, ‘Because you have done this you shall
    have the leprosy that Naaman had.’”

_Q._ Tell a fairy story.

B. (aged 6¾):—

    “When Ulysses was coming back from Troy he passed the Sirens.
    He could hear them, but he couldn’t get to them, because he was
    bound. He wanted to get to them so as he could listen to them
    a long time, because a lot of people had come and listened to
    them, and they found it so beautiful that they wanted to stay
    there, and they stayed till they died. His companions couldn’t
    hear them because they stopped up their ears with wax and
    cotton-wool. And this was the song they sang:—

        ‘Hither, come hither and hearken awhile,
          Odysseus far-famed king,
        No sailor has ever passed this way
          But has paused to hear us sing.
        Our song is sweeter than honey,
          And he that hears it knows
        What he never learnt from another,
          And his joy before he goes.
        We know what the heroes bore at Troy
          In the ten long years of strife,
        We know what happened in all the world,
          And the secret things of life.’

    And then they rowed on till at last the song faded away, and
    they rowed on and on for a long time, and then when they could
    not hear them nor see them, the wax was taken out of their
    ears, and then they unbound Ulysses.”

_Q._ What have you noticed (yourself) about a spider?

C. (aged 7¾):—

    “We have found out the name of one spider, and often have
    seen spiders under the microscope—they were all very hairy.
    We have often noticed a lot of spiders running about the
    ground—quantities. Last term we saw a spider’s web up in the
    corner of the window with a spider sucking out the juice of a
    fly; and we have often touched a web to try and make the spider
    come out, and we never could, because she saw it wasn’t a fly,
    before she came out.

    “I saw the claw of a spider under the microscope, with its
    little teeth; we saw her spinnerets and her great eyes. There
    were the two big eyes in one row, four little ones in the next
    row, and two little ones in the next row. We have often found
    eggs of the spiders; we have some now that we have got in a
    little box, and we want to hatch them out, so we have put them
    on the mantelpiece to force them.

    “Once we saw a spider on a leaf, and we tried to catch it, but
    we couldn’t; he immediately let himself down on to the ground
    with a thread.

    “We saw the circulation in the leg of another spider under the
    microscope; it looked like a little line going up and down.”

_Q._ Gather three sorts of tree leaf-buds and two sorts of catkin, and
tell all you can about them.

D. (aged 6):—

    (1) “The chestnut bud is brown and sticky, it is a sort of
    cotton-woolly with the leaves inside. It splits open and sends
    out two leaves, and the leaves split open.

    (2) “The oak twig has always a lot of buds on the top, and one
    bud always dies. Where the bud starts there is a little bit of
    knot-wood. The oak-bud is very tiny.

    (3) “The lime bud has a green side and a red side, and then
    it bursts open and several little leaves come out and all the
    little things that shut up the leaves die away.

    (4) “Golden catkins and silver pussy palms of a willow tree.
    The golden catkins have stamens with all the pollen on them.
    They grow upwards, and two never grow opposite to each other.
    The silver pussy palms have seed boxes, with a little tube
    growing out, and a little sticky knob on the top. The bees rub
    the pollen off their backs on to the sticky knob.”

_Q._ Tell about the North-West Passage. (Book studied, _The World at
Home_.)

E. (aged 7):—

    “People in England are very fond of finding things out, and
    they wanted to find out the North-West Passage. If people
    wanted to go to the Pacific Ocean, they had to go round Africa
    by the Cape of Good Hope, or else round South America by Cape
    Horn. This was a very long way. They thought they might find
    out a shorter way by going along the North Coast by America,
    and they would come out in the Pacific Ocean. They would call
    this way the North-West Passage. First one man and then another
    tried to find a way. They found a lot of straits and bays which
    they called after themselves. The enemy they met which made
    them turn back was the cold. It was in the frozen zone, and the
    sea was all ice, and the ice lumps were as big as mountains,
    and when they came against a ship they crashed it to pieces.
    Once a man named Captain Franklin tried over and over again to
    find the North-West Passage, and once he went and never came
    back again, for he got stuck fast in the ice, and the ice did
    not break, and he had not much food with him, and what he had
    was soon eaten up, and he could not get any more, for all the
    animals in that country had gone away, for it was winter, and
    he could not wait for the summer, when they would return. A
    ship went out from England called the _Fox_ to look for him,
    but all they found was a boat, a Bible, a watch, and a pair of
    slippers near each other. After looking a lot they found the
    North-West Passage, but because there is so much ice there the
    ships can’t use it.”

=Class Ib.=—In Class Ib., the children are usually between seven
and eight, but may be nine. They have fifteen ‘subjects’ (perhaps
twenty-three books). The subjects which do not lend themselves to
illustration are a continuation of the work in Class Ia. But by this
time the children can usually read, and read for themselves some, at any
rate, of their books for _History, Geography, and Tales_. In Class Ib.
the children narrate their lessons as in Ia., and, also, their answers
to the examination questions. They appear to enjoy doing this; indeed,
the examinations which come at the end of each term are a pleasure; the
only difficulty is that small children want to go on ‘telling.’ Their
words are taken down literally. One is struck by the correctness and
copiousness of the language used; but young children delight in words,
and often surprise their elders by their free and correct use of
‘dictionary words.’ One notices the verve with which the children tell
the tale, the orderly sequence of events, the correctness and fulness of
detail, the accuracy of names. These things are natural to children until
they are schooled out of them.

_Q._ Tell all you know about St Patrick. (Book studied, _Old Tales from
British History_.)

A. (aged 7):—

    “St Patrick was the son of a Scotch farming clergyman, and one
    day some Irish pirates came and took Patrick with them to make
    him a slave; and they sold him to an Irish nobleman. And the
    Irish nobleman made him a shepherd to take care of his flocks,
    and shepherds have a lot of time to think when they are out
    guarding their flocks by night. And Patrick was very sorry that
    the poor Irish were heathens. One day he slipped off and got
    into a boat with some sailors, and after a great adventure,
    for their food ran short, they arrived safely in Scotland. And
    Patrick was still thinking about the Irish, so he went off in a
    boat of his own, with a few followers, to Ireland. A shepherd
    saw them coming, and told his master the pirates were coming.
    So he armed his servants and went down to meet the pirates,
    but when he heard the errand they were on, he offered them
    to come into his house. Now Patrick settled in Ireland, but
    some heathen priests rose up against him, and a wise man said,
    ‘What is the good of killing him? Other Irish people are now
    Christians, and they will teach too.’ So he saved his life. And
    Patrick gave him the book of Psalms written by his own hand.
    One day Patrick asked a rich man if he might have a little plot
    of land on the top of a hill, but the rich man refused him,
    but gave him a little plot of land at the bottom of the hill.
    And there Patrick built a church, and a house for himself and
    servants to live in. Then the rich man got ill, and was just
    about to die, but got better, but as he thought Patrick was
    like a wizard, who could foretell his fortune, he thought he’d
    better try to please him. So he sent him a brass cauldron,
    enough to hold one whole sheep, and Patrick said ‘I thank you,
    master.’ The rich man was angry, and sent for the cauldron back
    again, and Patrick said, ‘I thank you, master.’ So the rich
    man was ashamed, and brought back the cauldron, and said he
    could have the little plot of land on the top of the hill. So
    they went up to measure it. Then a roe-deer dashed out of the
    thicket, but left her fawn behind her, and the men were going
    to kill the fawn, but Patrick took it up and carried it down
    the hill; the mother followed, for she saw he was doing no harm
    to it. On that place he built a fine church, which is still
    standing. And Patrick died on a journey, and was buried at a
    place called Downpatrick after him.”

_Q._ Tell what you know about Alfred Tennyson. (Book studied, Mrs Frewen
Lord’s _Tales from Westminster Abbey_.)

B. (aged 7½):—

    “Alfred Tennyson was born in 1809, and he loved the country
    very much. One Sunday when they were going out to chapel,
    except Lord Tennyson as he was very young, his brother Charles
    gave him his slate to write about birds and flowers, and when
    they came back he had filled his slate with his first poem. He
    and his brother used to make up stories that sometimes lasted
    a month. He was very shortsighted, and when he was looking
    at anything it looked as if he were smelling it. He had good
    ears, for he could hear the shriek of a bat. Alfred Tennyson
    wrote _The Revenge_ and _The Siege of Lucknow_, and Sir John
    Franklin’s poem:—

        ‘Not here; the white North hath thy bones,
          And thou, heroic sailor soul,
        Art passing on thy happier voyage now,
          Toward no earthly pole.’

    And he also wrote the _May Queen_ and _Cradle Song_. Because
    his poetry was so good the Queen gave him a name and knighted
    him. He says that if you tread on a daisy it will turn up and
    get red. He was 83 years old when he died—the year he died in
    was 1892. He was buried in Westminster Abbey, in Poets’ Corner.”

_Q._ What is a hero? What heroes have you heard of? Tell about one.

C. (aged 7):—

    “(1) A hero is a brave man. (2) Count Roland, Huon of Bordeaux,
    the Horatii and Curatii. (3) Once there was a brave Emperor
    called Charlemagne, and he was fighting with the heathen King
    of Saragossa. Just a wee bit of land was left to the heathen
    king, so he sent a messenger to speak about peace. They
    pretended that they would have peace, so they went back to
    Charlemagne and asked him to leave Roland behind to take charge
    of the mountain passes. So Charlemagne said that he would leave
    Roland behind because there was none so brave as him, so that
    when Charlemagne had turned his army they should come in great
    numbers to fight against Roland. And Roland stayed behind with
    twenty thousand men, and Oliver heard a great noise by the side
    of Spain, and then Oliver climbed on a pine tree, and he saw
    the arms glimmering and the spears shining, and then he said to
    Roland that there were a full hundred thousand, and that they
    just had so few, and that it was much better to sound his horn
    and Charlemagne will turn his army. Roland said he would be mad
    if he did that. Oliver said again to sound his horn, and Roland
    said he would lose his fame in France if he did it. Then Oliver
    said again, ‘Friend Roland, sound thy horn and Charles will
    hear it, and turn his army.’ Then all the mountain passes were
    full of the enemies, and when they came nearer they fought, and
    they fought, and they fought, and at last the Christians were
    falling too, and when there were only sixty left he blew his
    horn. Charlemagne heard it and said he must go, and Ganelon
    said he was just pretending, but then Charlemagne heard it
    fainter, and knew that it was true that he must go, and then
    fainter again, but Charlemagne was nearer and so heard it
    better. And Roland said, ‘Ride as fast as you can for many men
    have been killed, and there are few left.’ Then Charlemagne
    bade his men sound their horns, so that they knew that help
    was near and then the heathen fled away. There were just the
    two left, Roland and the Archbishop, and Roland said to the
    Archbishop that he would try to fetch the dead bodies of the
    braver soldiers. Then the Archbishop said to Roland, ‘Quick,
    before I die.’ Then Roland went and brought them before the
    Archbishop and laid them down there. Then he went and searched
    the field again, and under a pine tree he found Oliver’s body,
    then he brought it too and laid it in front of the Archbishop.
    Then Roland fainted to the ground, then the Archbishop tried to
    bring some water for Roland, and he fell down and died. Then
    Roland put the hands over the chest of the Archbishop, then he
    prayed to God to give him a place in Paradise, and then he said
    that the field was his. Before he died he put his sword and
    his ivory horn under him, and laid himself down on the ground,
    so that Charlemagne, when he came, would know that he was the
    conqueror. And God sent St Michael and another saint to fetch
    his soul up to heaven.”

_Q._ Gather three sorts of tree leaf-bud and two sorts of catkin and tell
all you can about them.

E. (a cottage child aged 9):—

    “_Beech Twig._—It has rather a woody stalk, and it is a very
    light grey-browny stalk, and it is very thin, and the little
    branches that grow out are light brown and it is thicker where
    the buds are and it is a lighter brown up at the top than it is
    at the bottom, and the buds are a light reddy-brown and very
    pointed, and they are scaly. The bark is rather rough and there
    is a lot of little kind of brown spots on it.

    “_Lime Twig._—It is called Ruby-budded Lime because the buds
    are red, and they are fat rather, and they have got some green
    in as well, and they come rather to a point at the top, they
    grow alternately and the little stalk that they grow out of is
    reddy-green, and the top part of the stalk is green, and it is
    woody, and it is rough, and it is a reddy-green at the bottom.
    Where the buds come out it is swelled out, the bark has come
    off and it has left it white and woody. At the top of one of
    the stalks the bud has come off.

    “_Sycamore Twig._—Well, the back is _very_ woody, and it is a
    brown stalk and it is rough and there is a little weeny bud
    growing out of the side, and the buds grow out two and two, and
    there are a lot of little buds.

    “_Willow._—Well, the stalk is a dark brown, and is very smooth
    and it will bend very easily, and the buds when they first come
    on the stalk are little brown ones, and then a silvery-green
    comes out and there is a scale at the bottom, and then they get
    greyer and bigger with little green leaves at the bottom, and
    then it comes yellow, and there is a lot of pollen on it. If
    you touch it the pollen comes on your finger.

    “_Hazel._—Well, the stalk is a dark brown, something the colour
    of the willow, and it bends easily, and the buds are green and
    there is little scales, and then the catkins come and they
    grow very long, and there is a lot of little flowers in one,
    and there is pollen in that, and the stalk is rather rough,
    and there are some big buds at the top just bursting, and the
    leaves are coming out, and the buds are very soft and glossy,
    and the scales are at the bottom.”

_Q._ What have you noticed about a thrush? Tell all you know about it.

F. (aged 8):—

    “Thrushes are browny birds. They eat snails, and they take the
    snail in their mouths and knock it against a stone to break
    the shell and eat the snail. I found a stone with a lot of
    bits of shell round it, so knew that a thrush had been there.
    Where we used to live a thrush used to sing every morning on
    the same tree. The song of the thrush is like a nightingale.
    We often see a lot of thrushes on the lawn before breakfast or
    after a shower. They have yellow beaks and their breasts are
    specked with lovely yellow and brown. Once we found a thrush
    asleep on a sponge in a bedroom and we carried it out and put
    it on a tree. Thrushes eat worms as well as snails, and on the
    lawn they listen with their heads on one side and go along as
    the worm gets under the ground, and presently, perhaps, the
    worm comes up and they gobble it up, or they put their beaks
    in and get it. Thrushes build their nests with sticks at the
    bottom and line them with little bits of wool they pick up, or
    feathers, and they like to get down very much.”

=Class II.=—In Class II. the children are between nine and twelve,
occasionally over twelve. They have twenty-one ‘subjects,’ and about
twenty-five books are used. They work from 9 to 12 each day, with half
an hour’s interval for games and drill. Some Latin and German (optional)
are added to the curriculum. In music we continue Mrs Curwen’s (_Child
Pianist_) method and Tonic Sol-fa, and learn French, German (optional),
and English songs. But I cannot here give details of our work, and
must confine myself to illustrations from seven of the subjects on the
programme. Children in Class II. write or dictate, or write a part and
dictate a part of their examination answers according to their age. The
examination lasts a week, and to write the whole of their work would be
fatiguing at this stage. The plan followed is, that the examination in
each subject shall be done in the time for that subject on the time-table.

I should like to say a word about the Greek and Roman History. Plutarch’s
_Lives_ are read in Classes II. and III., and as children are usually
five years in these two classes, they may read some fifteen of these
_Lives_, which I think stand alone in literature as teaching that a man
is part of the State, that his business is to be of service to the State,
but that the value of his service depends upon his personal character.
The _Lives_ are read to the children almost without comment, but _with
necessary omissions_. Proper names are written on the blackboard; and,
at the end, children narrate the substance of the lesson. The English
History book used in Classes II. and III. is extremely popular; it is Mr
Arnold-Forster’s (of about 800 pages), and is well known as a serious,
manly, and statesmanlike treatment of English History; in no case is
there any writing down to the children. Mrs Creighton’s _First History
of France_ is also a favourite, though I should have thought there was
hardly enough detail to make it so. Contemporary periods of English
and French History are studied term by term. For Natural History, Miss
Arabella Buckley’s _Fairyland of Science_ and _Life and Her Children_,
Mrs Brightwen’s books, etc., give scientific information and excite
intelligent curiosity, while out-of-door nature-study lays the foundation
for science. The handiworks of Class II. are such as cardboard Sloyd,
clay modelling, needlework, gardening, etc. These, field-work, piano
practice, etc., are done in the afternoons or after tea.

_Q._ “Ah! Pericles, those that have need of a lamp, take care to supply
it with oil.” Who said this? Tell the story. (Book studied, Plutarch’s
_Lives: Pericles_.)

D. (aged 11½), answer dictated:—

    “Anaxagoras, the philosopher, said these words to Pericles.

    “Pericles was the ruler of Athens, and Anaxagoras had taught
    him when a boy. Being ruler of Athens, he led a very busy
    life, attending to the affairs of State, and so was not able
    to give much time to his household affairs. Once a year he
    collected his money, and could only manage his income by giving
    out an allowance to each member of his family and household
    every day: this was done by Evangelus, his steward. Anaxagoras
    thought this a very wrong way of arranging matters, and said
    that Pericles paid too much heed to bodily affairs, because he
    thought you ought to mind only about philosophy and spiritual
    doings, and not about the affairs of the world. To give an
    example to Pericles he gave up all his household and tried to
    live entirely on philosophy. But he soon found his mistake when
    he found himself starving and penniless, with no house. So he
    covered his head up and prepared to die. Pericles, hearing of
    this, went immediately to his rescue and begged him to live;
    not because he thought death a misfortune, but that he said,
    ‘What shall I do without your help in the affairs of State?’
    And then Anaxagoras uttered the words which are above, meaning,
    of course (though putting it in a clever way), that Pericles
    was to keep him. On the other hand, he might have meant that he
    had been mistaken in his philosophy.”

_Q._ Tell the history of ‘F.D.’ on a penny. (Book studied,
Arnold-Forster’s _History of England_.)

C. (aged 10), answer written by child:—

    “The letters ‘F.D.’ stand for the Latin words _Fidei Defensor_,
    meaning ‘The Defender of the Faith.’ Henry VIII. had a little
    while ago written a book on the Pope (who was Clement VII.)
    saying that the Pope was the true head of the Church, and
    everyone ought to obey him. The Pope was so pleased that he
    made Henry _Fidei Defensor_. It must be remembered that the
    king had married his brother Arthur’s[26] widow, a Spanish
    princess, namely, Catherine of Aragon (_sic_), and as they
    had no son Henry wished to divorce her, but the Pope would
    not allow him to, as he had given Henry special leaf (_sic_)
    to marry her. At this Henry was furious, and began to think
    about the Pope’s words, ‘Defender of the Faith.’ He would
    not act as he thought till someone suggested it. So two men,
    called Cromwell and Cranmer, came forward, telling the king
    to take the Pope’s words, not as he meant them, but as they
    really were, as they stood. The king was delighted, and made
    Cranmer a bishop and Cromwell his wisest counsellor.[26] In
    1534 Parliament[26] was called upon to declare Henry head of
    the Church. All said he was, except two men, Sir Thomas More
    and Fisher, bishop of Rochester; these would not agree, and
    were executed in 1535. If we look on a penny we see the letters
    ‘F.D.,’ which shows from the reign of Henry VIII. till now the
    Pope has not been allowed to interfere with England. In order
    to spite the Pope, Henry allowed the Lutherans and learned men
    to come into England.”

_Q._ What did you see in the _Seagull_ sailing up the Firth of Forth?
(Book studied, _Geographical Reader_, Book II.)

G. (aged 9), answer dictated:—

    “In sailing up the Forth we first of all see Leith, which is
    the seaport town of Edinburgh. Then we come to Edinburgh. The
    old and new Edinburghs are built on opposite hills, the valley
    in between is laid out in lovely gardens. One thing very odd
    about Edinburgh is that the streets look as if they are built
    one on top of the other. At one end of the town there is a
    castle which looks so like the rocks and mountains it is built
    on, one can hardly distinguish it. At the other end of the town
    there is Holyrood, where the ancient kings used to live. We do
    not see many merchantmen because there are no good harbours,
    there are a good many fishing smacks and pleasure boats. As
    we go along we see women with big baskets with a strap across
    their foreheads, and they are calling out ‘caller herrings.’”

_Q._ “And Jonathan loved him as his own soul.” Of whom was this said?
Tell a story of Jonathan’s love.

E. (aged 9), answer dictated:—

    “This was said of David. Saul’s anger was kindled against
    David; and Jonathan and David were talking together, and
    Jonathan had been telling David that he would do anything for
    him, and David said, ‘To-morrow is the feast of a new moon, and
    Saul will expect me to sit with him at the table; therefore
    say, ‘David earnestly asked leave of me to go to Bethlehem,
    his city, where there is a sacrifice of his family.’ If Saul
    is angry, then I shall know that he would kill me, but if he
    is not angry, it will be all right.’ Jonathan said, ‘So shall
    it be, but it will not be safe for anybody to know anything
    about it; come into the field, and I will tell you what to do.
    Thou shalt remain hidden by the stone, and I will bring a lad
    and my arrows and bow, and I will shoot an arrow as if firing
    at a target; and if I say ‘Run,’ to the lad, ‘is not the arrow
    beyond thee? go fetch it,’ then thou shalt know that thou must
    flee from Saul.’ David’s seat was empty at the feast that
    night, but Saul said nothing. But the next day his seat was
    empty, and when Saul asked why, Jonathan told him what David
    had asked him to say. And Saul’s anger was kindled, so much so
    that Jonathan feasted not that day, for he was grieved; and
    next morning he went out with his bow and arrows, and the lad,
    and shot an arrow as if at a mark. Then Jonathan said to the
    lad, ‘Run, is not the arrow beyond thee? haste.’ Then Jonathan
    gave his artillery unto the lad and sent him back to the
    city; and David came out of his hiding-place, and they made a
    covenant together, for Jonathan loved him as his own soul. Then
    David had to flee to Naioth in Ramah and Jonathan went back to
    the city.”

_Q._ What do you know of Richelieu? (Book studied, Mrs Creighton’s _First
History of France_.)

E. (aged 10), answer partly written, partly dictated:—

    “Cardinal Richeleu (_sic_) was brought to the French Court by
    the Queen mother, who thought he would do as she wished, but
    she was mistaken, for he no sooner was there than he turned
    against her, for Louse (_sic_) took him into his favour and
    made him Prime Minister after he had been there a few weeks.
    Richeleu (_sic_) was a devoted Catholic, and was determined to
    put down the Hugenots (_sic_), or Protestants as we call them,
    so he laid siege to La Rochelle, the chief town of the Hugenots
    (_sic_), who applied to the English for help. Charles sent a
    fleet to La Rochelle under pretence of helping the Hugenots
    (_sic_)[27] but Admiral Pennington, who was in command of
    the ships, received orders when half way down the channel to
    take in French soldiers and sailors at Calais and to go to
    the French side. When Admiral Pennington ordered the ships to
    take in the soldiers, his men mutinied and he had to go back.
    Richelieu had thrown up earthworks across the harbour so that
    it was impossible to get in. Now Rochelle held out bravely, but
    at last it had to surrender, and out of 40,000, 140 crawled
    out, too weak to bury the dead in the streets. La Rochelle was
    razed to the ground, and never recovered its prosperity. One
    by one the Huguenot towns surrendered, and thus the Huguenots
    were destroyed. When Richelieu was made Prime Minister, the
    nobles did not like him, because they thought he had too much
    power, and now when Louis was ill, the Queen mother came to
    him, and in a stormy passion of tears begged Louis to send away
    his ungrateful servant. Louis promised he would do so, and
    Richelieu’s fall seemed certain. Now all the nobles crowded to
    the Queen mother to pay their respects to her, as they thought
    she would now be the most important person in the Government.
    But one noble, who was wiser than the rest, went to Richelieu
    and begged to plead his cause before the King. The King
    promised he would keep him if he would serve him as he had done
    before. The Queen mother was foiled, and returned to Brussels,
    where she died.”

_Q._ What towns, rivers, and castles would you see in travelling about
Warwickshire? (Book studied, _Geographical Reader_, Book III.)

B. (aged 9½), answer dictated:—

    “Warwick, Kenilworth, Coventry, Stratford, Leamington, and
    Birmingham are all towns which you would see if you travelled
    through Warwick.

    “The Avon stretches from north to south of Warwickshire. It has
    its tributary the Leam, upon which Leamington is situated.

    “There is a castle of Warwick and Coventry and Kenilworth.

    “Warwick is the capital of the county. It has a famous castle,
    whose high and lofty towers stand upon the bank of the river
    Avon.

    “Coventry is a very old town. It also has a beautiful castle,
    where the fair Lady Godiva and her father used to live, about
    whom I suppose you have read.

    “Stratford is called ‘The Swan on the Avon,’ because that is
    where Shakespeare, the great poet, was born and died, and this
    is a little piece of poetry about him:—

        ‘Where his first infant lays, sweet Shakespeare sung,
        Where the last accents faltered on his tongue.’

    “The river Avon takes its rise in the vale of Evesham, then
    winds through pleasant fields and meadows till it comes to the
    south of Warwickshire, and then it becomes broad and stately
    and flows on up to Coventry, where the Leam branches off from
    it (!), and then it becomes narrower and narrower until it gets
    out of Warwickshire and stops altogether at Naseby (!)”

_Q._ How many kinds of bees are there in a hive? What work does each do?
Tell how they build the comb. (Book studied, _Fairyland of Science_.)

F. (aged 10), answer dictated:—

    “Three kinds. The _drones_ or males, the _workers_ or females,
    and the _queen_ bee. The drone is fat, the queen is long and
    thin, the workers are small and slim. The queen bee lays the
    eggs, the worker bee brings the honey in and makes the cell,
    and the drones wait to be fed. On a summer’s day you see
    something hanging on a tree like a plum pudding, this is a
    swarm of bees. You will soon see someone come up with a hive,
    turn it upside down, shake the bough gently, and they will fall
    in. They will put some clean calico quickly over the bottom
    of the hive, and turn it back over on a bench. The bees first
    close up every little hole in the hive with wax, then they hang
    on to the roof, clinging on to one another by their legs. Then
    one comes away and scrapes some wax from under its body, and
    bites it in its mouth until it is pulled out like ribbon, this
    she plasters on the roof of the hive, then she flies out to get
    honey, and comes home to digest it, hanging from the roof, and
    in 24 hours this digested honey turns to wax, then she goes
    through the same process again. Next, the nursing bees come
    and poke their heads into this wax, bite the wax away (20 bees
    do this before one hole is ready to make a cell). Other bees
    are working on the other side at the same time. Each cell is
    made six-sided, so as to take up the least wax and the smallest
    space. When the cells are made the bees come in with honey in
    their honey-bag or first stomach; they can easily pass the
    honey back though their mouths into the cells. It takes many
    bees to fill one cell, so they are hard at work.”

G. (aged 9), written by child:—

Composition on ‘_The Opening of Parliament_.’

    “The opening of Parliament by King Edward VII and Queen
    Alexander (_sic_) was rather grand. First, they drove to the
    Houses of Parliament in a grand state carriage which had
    been used by George III, and then when they got there they
    had to robe in a certain room in great big robes, all edged
    with ermine fur, and with huge trains. Queen Alexandra had
    an evening dress on, and King Edward a very nice kingly sort
    of suit (which was nearly covered up by his robes), and then
    they walked along to the real Houses of Parliament, where
    the members really sit. Then the king made a speech to open
    Parliment (_sic_), and other people made speeches too, and
    everything was done with grandeur and stateliness such as would
    befit a king. May Parliament long be his!”

=Class III.=—In Class III. the range of age is from eleven or twelve
to fifteen. The ‘subjects’: Bible Lessons and Recitations (Poetry and
Bible passages); English Grammar, French, German, and Latin; Italian
(optional); English, French, and Ancient History (Plutarch’s _Lives_),
Singing (French, English, and German Songs); Writing, Dictation, Drill;
Drawing in Brush and Charcoal; Natural History, Botany, Physiology,
Geography; Arithmetic; Geometry, and Reading. About thirty-five books are
used. Time, 3½ hours a day; half an hour out of this time, as before,
for drill and games. There is no preparation or home work in any of the
classes. The reader will notice from the subjoined specimens that the
papers are still written _con amore_, and show an intelligent grasp of
the several subjects. Though there are errors in many of the papers,
they are not often the mistakes of ignorance or stupidity, nor are they
those of a person who has never understood what he is writing about.
‘Composition’ is never taught as a subject; well-taught children compose
as well-bred children behave—by the light of nature. It is probable
that no considerable writer was ever taught the art of ‘composition.’
The same remark may be made about spelling: excepting for an occasional
‘inveterate’ case, the habit of reading teaches spelling. All the pupils
of the _Parents’ Review_ School do not take all the subjects set in the
programmes of the several classes. Sometimes, parents have the mistaken
notion that the greater the number of subjects the heavier the work;
though, in reality, the contrary is the case, unless the hours of study
are increased. Sometimes, outside lessons in languages, music, etc.,
interfere; sometimes, health will not allow of more than an hour or two
of work in the day. The children in the practising school do all the work
set, and their work compares satisfactorily with the rest, though the
classes have the disadvantage of changing teachers every week. Children
in Class III. write the whole of their examination work.

_Q._ Describe the founding of Christ’s Kingdom. What are the laws of His
Kingdom?

A. (aged 13):—

    “Christ came to found His kingdom. He preached the laws to His
    people. He taught them to pray for it: ‘Thy kingdom come.’
    And He told His chosen few to ‘go and preach the Gospel of
    the kingdom.’ He founded His kingdom in their hearts, and He
    reigned there. He will still found His kingdom in our hearts.
    He will come and reign as King. The kingdom was first founded
    by the sea of Galilee. ‘Follow Me,’ said our Lord to Andrew,
    and from that moment the kingdom was founded in Andrew’s heart.
    Then there were Peter, James, John, Phillip (_sic_), Nathaniel
    (_sic_), and the kingdom grew. From that moment Christ never
    stopped His work for the kingdom—preaching and teaching,
    healing and comforting, proclaiming the laws of the kingdom.
    ‘Think not that I am come to destroy the law or the prophets. I
    am not come to destroy, but to fulfil.’ ‘One jot or one tittle
    shall in no wise pass from the law.’ ‘Whosoever shall break one
    of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, the same
    shall be called the least in the kingdom.’ No commandment was
    to pass from the law, but there was a new commandment, a new
    law, and that was ‘love.’ ‘Love your enemies.’ The Pharisees
    could not understand it. ‘Love your friends, and hate your
    enemies,’ was their law. But Jesus said, ‘Bless them that curse
    you, and pray for them that despitefully use you.’ ‘Give,
    hoping for nothing in return’; and, ‘Whosoever shall smite thee
    on one cheek turn to him the other also.’ Christ’s law is the
    love which ‘suffereth long and is kind ... seeketh not her own
    ... never faileth ... hopeth all things, endureth all things’;
    and ‘now abideth faith, hope, and charity, these three, but the
    greatest of these is—love.’”

_Q._ Explain ‘English Funds, Consols 2¾ per cent., 113.’ And give an
account of the South Sea Bubble. (Book studied, Arnold-Forster’s _History
of England_.)

B. (aged 14½):—

    “This means that when the South Sea Company first appeared, the
    Government gave them £113 on condition that the Company should
    give 2¾ per cent., which means £2 15s. on every £100 lent, for
    a certain number of years. In the reign of George I. the money
    matters of the country were in a very bad state. The Government
    was very much in debt, especially to those people who had
    purchased annuities, and had a right to receive a certain sum
    of money from the Government every year as long as they lived.
    Sir Robert Walpole, who was then Prime Minister, was most
    anxious to pay off part of this debt. He heard of a Company
    which had just been started, called the South Sea Company,
    whose object was to trade in the South Seas. This was what
    Walpole wished for. He suggested to them that they should pay
    off the debt due to the people who had bought annuities, and in
    return the Government would give them some priveleges (_sic_)
    and charts which would be useful to them. This the Company
    agreed to do, but instead of paying the people in money they
    gave them what were called ‘shares’ in the South Sea Company.
    These shares were supposed to be very valuable, and it was
    thought that the South Sea Company was really prosperous, and
    that those who had shares in it would have most enormous profit
    in the end. Thousands of people came to buy shares, and some of
    them were so anxious to get them that they spent enormous sums
    of money on these worthless pieces of paper. All was well for
    a time, but at last the people began to wish for their money
    instead of the shares, and claimed it loudly from the Company.
    It was then that the bubble burst. It was discovered then that
    the Company was quite unable to pay what was due, and that all
    this time they had been deluding the nation by promises and
    giving them shares, and that they had never been the rich and
    prosperous Company they made themselves out to be. Naturally,
    the most dreadful distress prevailed everywhere, and many were
    absolutely ruined, so that the Government had to help those who
    were most distressed. At this point Sir Robert Walpole came to
    the rescue. He made the Bank of England pay some of the debts,
    and behaved with such cleverness that he saved the country
    almost from ruin.”

_Q._ What do you know of the States General? (Book studied, Mrs
Creighton’s _First History of France_.)

C. (aged 12):—

    “The States General met in May, 1789. The people had long
    wanted reforms, and been talking about them, and now on the
    5th of May, 1789, the States General met again for the first
    time since 1614. If the nobles sat in one house, and the people
    in another, as was the custom, they could never get the changes
    made. So the people with their leader, the Marquis of Mirabeau,
    declared that they would not leave the tennis court on which
    they were standing till it was agreed that they could sit
    together with the nobles. When Louis XVI. came down in State,
    and told them they were to sit apart, they said they would not
    leave their place except at the bayonets (_sic_) point. When he
    heard this he said, ‘Very well, leave them alone.’ So they sat
    together.”

_Q._ Show fully how Aristides acquired the title of ‘The Just.’ Why was
it a strange title for a man in those days? (Book studied, Plutarch’s
_Lives: Aristides_.)

D. (aged 13¼):—

    “Aristides acquired the title of ‘The Just’ by his justice, and
    because he never did anything unjust in order to become rich
    or powerful. While many of the judges and chief men in Athens
    took bribes, he alone always refused to do so, and he also
    never spent the public money on himself. When, after having
    defeated the Persians, at Platae, the Greek States decided to
    have a standing army, it was Aristides who was sent round to
    settle how much each town should contribute. And he did this so
    fairly and well, that all the Greek States blessed and praised
    his arrangement. It is said that Aristides could not only
    resiste (_sic_) the unjust claims of those whom he loved, but
    also those of his enemies. Once when he was judging a quarrel
    between two men, one of them remarked that the other had
    often injured Aristides. ‘Tell me not that,’ was the reply of
    Aristides, ‘but what he has done to thee, for it is thy cause I
    am judging, not my own.’ Another time when he had gone to law
    himself, and when, after having heard what he had to say, his
    judges were going to pass sentence on his adversary without
    having heard him, Aristides rose and entreated his judges to
    hear what his enemy could say in his own defence. In all that
    he did Aristides was inflexibly just, and many stories were
    told of his justice. Though he loved his country well, he would
    never do anything wrong to gain for Athens some advantage, and
    in all he did his one aim was justice, and his only ambition
    to be called ‘The Just.’ He was so just and good, that he was
    called the ‘most just man in Greece.’ In the times in which
    Aristides lived, men used to care more to be called great,
    rich, or powerful than just. Themistocles, the great rival of
    Aristides, used to do all he could to become the first man in
    Athens, and rich as well as powerful. He did not hesitate to
    take bribes, and all he did for the Athenians was done with a
    view to making himself the head of the people, and the first
    man in the State. He used often to do unjust as well as cruel
    things in order to get his own ends. It was the same with most
    other men who lived at this time, they prefered (_sic_) being
    rich, powerful, or great, to being distinguished by the title
    of ‘The Just.’”

_Q._ Describe a journey in Northern Italy. (Book studied, _Geographical
Reader_, Book IV.).

E. (aged 12):—

    “I am about to go for a tour round the northern part of Italy,
    and after I have taken a train to Savoy, which is about the
    south-east of France, I enter into Italy by the Cenis pass,
    which is very lofty, about 7,000 feet above sea level.

    “On arriving in Italy, I come into the province of Piedmont,
    which has three mountain torrents or streams running through
    it. These streams join at Turin, the capital of Piedmont, and
    form the Po river, which flows out on the east coast of France
    into the Gulf of Venice. On the banks of the three mountain
    streams are some Protestants by the name of Waldenses, who
    say they are followers of the disciples, but if you ask any
    outsider, they will say, ‘Oh! the Waldenses are followers of a
    good man, by the name of Waldo, who fled out of France in the
    12th century.’

    “We will now go and see Turin, and the first thing we say is,
    ‘What a clean town,’ and so it certainly is, for it is quite
    the cleanest town in Italy, as the people have only to turn on
    the fountain taps to clean their paved streets. And after we
    have looked at Alessandria, where Napoleon gained his great
    victory, we leave Piedmont and follow up the river Po, until
    we come to its next tributary, the river Ticino, which runs
    up north into the Lake Maggiore, which is five to six miles
    wide and about sixty miles in length. This lake has four
    islands, which are named after Count Borromeo and so called
    the Borromean Islands, which are cultivated like gardens with
    terrases (_sic_) for resting places.

    “Now let us go to Milan, which is so well known by its
    beautiful cathedral of white and black marble which have
    (_sic_) no less than 4000 sculptures of white marble, with
    pillars of Egyptian granite. Milan is famous for silks and lace
    to provide for the numerous palaces.

    “We will now go back to the next lake, Lake Como, which is
    surrounded by mountains, and supposed to be the most beautiful
    of all lakes. At the south it goes out in a fork, and between
    the fork is a beautiful piece of land called Bellagia (_sic_).

    “The next lake we come to is the Garda, the largest of all the
    lakes, and then we go on to the smallest of lakes called Lugano.

    “We now having visited all the lakes, take a look at Lodi, the
    famous cheese market in Italy; after which we visit Verona,
    where Pliny the naturalist was born, also Paul Veronese.
    Shakespeare lays the scene of his play ‘Romeo and Juliet’ in
    Verona. The short time we have we spend at Venice, the queen
    of the Italian citys (_sic_) with its wonderful canals and the
    marvellous cathedral of St Mark’s, also the dark, gloomy palace
    of the Doge.”

_Q._ How are the following seeds dispersed:—Birch, Pine, Dandelion,
Balsam, Broom? Give diagrams and observations. (Book studied, Mrs
Brightwen’s _Glimpses into Plant Life_.)

F. (aged 13):—

    “The seeds of the Birch are very small, with two wings, one on
    each side, so that in a high wind numbers of them are blown on
    to high places, such as crevises (_sic_) on the face of a rock,
    or crevises (_sic_) on a church tower, or the tower of an old
    ruin. They are so light that they are carried a long way.

    “The seeds of the Pine are very small, and the veins in the
    seed are wriggly, so that the seed is curly, which makes it
    whirl rapidly in the air, and the whirling motion carries it
    along a little way before it rests on the ground. It has two
    small wings.

    “The seeds of the Dandilion (_sic_) are large, with a kind
    of silky parashute (_sic_) attached, so that when they fall
    off they do not fall to the ground, but are carried a little
    way because the wind catches the under part of the parashute
    (_sic_). The seed has a little hook at the top of it which
    prevents it from being pulled out of the ground by the
    parashute (_sic_) after it is once in.

    “The Balsam seed case splits when the seeds are ripe and
    sends them flying in all directions, so they are far enough
    dispersed, and need no wings or parashutes (_sic_) to help them.

    “The Broom seed case is a carpel, more like that of the sweet
    pea. When the seeds are ripe the two sides of the carpel split
    open and curl up like springs and send the seeds flying out, so
    they are dispersed without needing wings or parachutes.”

_Q._ Describe the tissue of a potato and of a piece of rhubarb. (Book
studied, Oliver’s _Elementary Botany_.)

G. (aged 13):—

    “The tissue of _Rhubarb_ is _very_ fibrous indeed. In fact, it
    is almost entirely made up of vessels. These are cells which
    have become tubes by the dividing cell-wall being absorbed.
    These vessels are very beautiful when seen under a microscope,
    for their walls are all thickened in some way, in order to make
    them strong enough to bear the weight of the leaf. Some are
    thickened by a spiral cord, which goes round and round the wall
    of the vessel. In some vessels this is quite tightly twisted
    round the wall, that is to say, the rings do not come far
    apart; in others it is quite loose and far apart. Another kind
    of thickening is by rings, which just go round the tube and are
    not joined to each other. Other vessels, again, have little
    knots in them like what there are in birch bark.

    “The _Potato_ tissue is mainly made up of starch, as it is one
    of the plant’s storehouses, and starch is one of the plant’s
    principal foods.”

_Q._ Give a diagram of the eye, and explain how we see everything. (Book
studied, Dr Schofield’s _Physiology for Schools_.)

H. (aged 13):—

    “The eye can be likened to a camera, and the brain to the man
    behind the camera. The image enters at the hole, passes through
    the lens, is reflected on the plate, but the camera does not
    see, it is the man behind the camera who sees. In the same way,
    the image passes in at the pupil and through the lens, both
    sides of which are curved, and can be tightened or slackened
    according to the distance of the image. Then the image passes
    along the nerve of sight to the two bulbs in the brain which
    see. If you hold a rounded glass between a sheet of paper and
    the image at the right distance (for the glass cannot tighten
    or slacken like our lens), you will see the image reflected
    upside-down on the paper. This is the way the lens acts. There
    is a small yellow spot a little below the middle of the back of
    the eye; here the sight is more acute, and so, though we can
    see lots of things at one time, we can only look at one thing
    at a time. There is a blind spot where the nerve enters the eye
    (which shows that the nerve of sight itself is blind) so that
    some part of every image is lost, like a black dot punched in
    it. But we are so used to it that we cannot see it.”

_Q._ Describe your favourite scene in _Waverley_.

I. (aged 12½):—

    “_A Highland Stag Hunt._—The Highland Cheifs (_sic_) were
    in various postures: some reclining lazily on their plaids,
    others stalking up and down conversing with one another, and
    a few were already seated in position for the sport. MacIvor
    was talking with another Cheif (_sic_) as to what the sport
    would be; but as they talked in Gaelic, Edward had no part in
    the conversation, but sat looking at the scene before him.
    They were seated on a low hill at the head of a broad valley
    which narrowed into a small opening or cleft in the hills at
    the extreme end. It was hemmed in on all sides by hills of
    various heights. It was through this opening that the beaters
    were to drive the deer. Already Waverly (_sic_) could hear
    the distant shouts of the men calling to each other coming
    nearer and nearer. Soon he could distinguish the antlers of the
    deer moving towards the opening like a forest of trees stiped
    (_sic_) of their leaves. The sportsmen prepared themselves to
    give them a warm reception, and all were ready as the deer
    entered the valley.

    “They looked very ferocious, as they advanced towards where
    Edward and the cheifs (_sic_) were standing and seemed as if
    they were determined to fight; the roes and weaker ones in the
    centre, and the bulls standing as if on defence. As soon as
    they came within range, some of the cheifs (_sic_) fired, and
    two or three deer came down. Waverly (_sic_) also had the good
    fortune (and also the skill) to bring down a couple and gain
    the aplause (_sic_) of the other sportsmen. But the herd was
    now charging furiously up the valley towards them. The order
    was given to lie down, as it was impossible to stem the coming
    wave of deer; but as it was given in Gaelic it conveyed no
    meaning to Edward’s mind, and he remained standing.

    “The heard (_sic_) was now not fifty yards from him; and in
    another minute he would have been trampled to death; but
    MacIvor at his own risk, jumped up and literaly (_sic_) dragged
    him to the ground just as the deer reached them. Edward had a
    sensation as if he was out in a severe hail storm, but this did
    not last long.

    “When they had passed, and Edward attempted to rise, he found
    that besides a number of bruises he had also severely sprained
    his ancle (_sic_), and was unable to walk, or even stand. A
    shelter was soon made for him out of a plaid in which he was
    laid; and then MacIvor called the Highland doctor or herbalist,
    to attend him. The doctor approached Edward with every sign
    of humiliation, but before attending to his ancle (_sic_), he
    insisted upon walking slowly round him several times, in the
    direction in which the sun goes, muttering at the same time a
    spell over him as he went, and though Waverly (_sic_) was in
    great pain he had to submit to his foolery. Waverly (_sic_)
    saw to his great astonishment that MacIvor believed or seemed
    to believe in the old man’s cantations (_sic_). At last, when
    he had finished his spells, which he seemed to think more
    necessary than the dressing, he drew from his pocket a little
    packet of herbs, some of which he applied to the sprained
    ancle (_sic_) and after it had been bound up, Edward felt much
    relieved. He rewarded the doctor with some money, the value
    of which seemed to exceed his wildest imaginations, for he
    heaped so many blessings upon the head of Waverly (_sic_) that
    MacIvor said, ‘A hundred thousand curses on you,’ whereupon he
    stopped.”

=Class IV.=—Girls are usually in Class IV. for two or three years,
from fourteen or fifteen to seventeen, after which they are ready to
specialise and usually do well. The programme for Class IV. is especially
interesting; it adds Geology and Astronomy to the sciences studied, more
advanced Algebra to the Mathematics, and sets the history of Modern
Europe instead of French history. The literature, to illustrate the
history, includes the reading of a good many books, and the German and
French books when possible illustrate the history studied. All the books
(about forty) are of a different calibre from those used in the lower
classes; they are books for intelligent students.

I think the reader will observe that due growth has taken place in the
minds of the girls, both as regards judgment and power of appreciation.
Not, I think, in intelligence,—

    “Love has no nonage, nor the mind.”

But as our concern is with boys and girls under twelve, it will be enough
to show by two or three papers that this sort of education by books
results in intelligence.

_Q._ For what purpose were priests instituted? (Book studied, Dr Abbot’s
_Bible Lessons_.)

A. (aged 15½):—

    “The system of the Jewish priesthood was almost entirely
    symbolical. God ordained it, we believe, to lead the primitive
    mind of his chosen people onwards and upwards, to the true
    belief and earthly comprehension of that great sacrifice, by
    the grace of which we are all now honoured to become ‘kings and
    priests unto God.’ In the earliest times of the patriarchs,
    there was in every holy and honourable Jewish family some
    voluntary priest to offer up the burnt offerings and yearly
    sacrifices. We have an example of this in Job the patriarch,
    who, we read, ministered to his family in the capacity of
    priest of their offerings. In the wilderness, however, God
    commanded through Moses the foundation of a separate and
    holy priesthood to minister in His Tabernacle and offer His
    appointed sacrifices. The tribe of Levi and the family of Aaron
    were set apart for this purpose, and in the building of the
    tabernacle, and the annointing (_sic_) of Aaron and his four
    sons, the cornerstone was laid to that great building which
    became a fit dwelling for the presence of God and the heart of
    Israel, until Christ came to change and lighten the world; and
    the symbol and the shadow became the truth.”

_Q._ “His power was to assert itself in deeds, not words.” Write a short
sketch of the character of Cromwell, discussing the above statement.
(Book studied, Green’s _Shorter History of the English People_.)

B. (aged 15):—

    “Cromwell was no orator. It has been said that if all his
    speeches were taken and made into a book, it would seem simply
    a pack of nonsense. In Parliament though, the earnestness with
    which he spoke attracted attention. His deeds proved his innate
    power, which could not express itself in words. He may be
    called the inarticulate man. In his mind, everything was clear,
    and his various actions proved his purposes and determinations,
    but in speaking, he simply brought out a hurried volume of
    words, in the mazes of which one entirely lost the point meant
    to be implied. Cromwell also was more of an administrator than
    a statesman, unspeculative and conservative. He was subject to
    fits of hypocondria (_sic_), which naturally had some effect
    on his character. He considered himself a servant of God, and
    acted accordingly. Undoubtedly he was under the conviction that
    he was carrying out the Lord’s will in all he did. He was not
    in calm moods a bloody man, but when his anger was kindled he
    would spare no one. At times he would be filled with remorse
    for the part he had taken in the martyrdom of the king; then,
    again he would say it was the just punishment of heaven on
    Charles. In giving orders his words were curt and to the
    point, but in making speeches he adopted the phraseology of
    the Bible, which added to their ambiguity. One would think he
    was ambitious, for at one time he asked Whitelock: ‘What if a
    man should take upon himself to be king?’ evidently having in
    view the regal power, and yet according to his own assertion he
    would rather have returned to his occupation as a farmer, than
    have undertaken the government of Britain. But in this, as in
    other acts, he recognised the call of God, (as he thought) and
    obeyed it.”

_Q._ What do you know of the Girondins? (Book studied, Lord’s _Modern
Europe_.)

C. (aged 17):—

    “The Girondins were the perhaps most tolerant and reasonable of
    the revolutionary parties. They were a body of men who found
    the government of France under the king more than they could
    stand, and who were the first to welcome any changes, but were
    shocked and horrified at the dreadful riots and massacres which
    followed the fall of the throne. Such a party, representing
    justice and reform, could not be popular with the more violent
    Jacobins and like clubs. The day came when these latter were in
    power, and all the Girondins were thrown into prison.

    “They were all taken from prison before the Court of Justice
    for trial, and placed before the judge, where they sat quite
    silently; they were one by one condemned to execution,
    receiving the sentence of death with perfect calmness. Only
    their leader was seen to fall down; one of his companions leant
    over him and said: ‘What, are _you_ afraid?’ ‘Non,’ was the
    answer, ‘Je mours,’ he had stabbed himself with his dagger.

    “As the Girondins marched back to their cells, condemned to die
    the next morning, they all sang the ‘Marseillaise,’ as they had
    arranged, to tell their fellow-prisoners what the sentence had
    been. When they reached the prison a splendid supper was placed
    for them, and they all sat down with great cheerfulness to eat
    it, none of them showing the least signs of breaking down.
    Towards morning priests were sent to them, and very early in
    the day they all marched to the foot of the guillotine, singing
    as they went. They kept on singing a solemn chant when the
    executions commenced, which became fainter and fainter as one
    by one they were beheaded, until all were gone.”

_Q._ Distinguish between _arrogant_ and _presumptuous_, _interference_
and _interposition_, _genuine_ and _authentic_, _hate_ and _detest_,
_loathe_ and _abhor_, _education_ and _instruction_, _apprehend_ and
_comprehend_, using each word in a sentence. (Book studied, Trench’s
_Study of Words_.)

E. (aged 15):—

    “A man who is ‘arrogant’ is a man who has right to what
    he wants, but who is harsh and exacting in taking it. A
    ‘presumptuous’ man is a man who expects more than is due and
    takes it. ‘Judge Jeffries was an _arrogant_ old man.’ ‘Charles
    II. was a _presumptuous_ king, he thought he could have
    absolute power.’

    “‘Interference,’ is not minding your own business, and meddling
    with other people’s when we are not wanted. ‘Interposition’ is
    more the ‘doing good by interfering’ as protecting a little boy
    from a bully. ‘But for the _interference_ of James all would
    have gone well.’ ‘Thanks to the _interposition_ of Mary a
    quarrel was averted.’

    “‘Genuine’ means real, true, what it seems to be as—‘a real
    _genuine_ ruby.’ ‘Authentic,’ in speaking of a book, means
    really written by the author to which it is ascribed. ‘Dickens’
    _Oliver Twist_ is certainly _authentic_.’

    “You would ‘hate’ a man who killed your father. ‘Charles II.
    hated Cromwell.’ You would ‘detest’ a man who had not done you
    any personal injury, but who (_sic_) you knew to be a murderer.
    ‘Yeo _detested_ the Spaniards.’

    “You would ‘loathe’ a poisonous snake or a hypocrite. ‘David
    Copperfield _loathed_ Uriah Heep.’ You would abhor a man
    inferior to you in intellect or principles, as a great king
    would ‘abhor’ a cringing coward, leave him behind, go on
    without him, refuse to listen to him. ‘Napoleon _abhorred_ the
    traitor.’

    “‘Education’ is the lessons you receive as a matter of course,
    as French, writing, grammar. ‘Instruction’ is this, but more
    also, it includes moral teaching, the teaching of honesty, and
    the teaching of gentleness. ‘Henry had a good _education_.’ ‘No
    well-_instructed_ Britain (_sic_) is a coward.’

    “‘Apprehend’ is to see, or hear, and notice. ‘Comprehend’ is
    to understand, without seeing or hearing perhaps. ‘Phillip
    _apprehended_ that danger was near, but he did not _comprehend_
    it.’”

_Q._ Give shortly Carlyle’s estimate of Burns, showing what he did for
Scotland, and what was the cause of his personal failure in life. (Book
studied, Carlyle’s _Essay on Burns_.)

F. (aged 17):—

    “Carlyle looked upon Burns as one of the nicest of men and
    greatest of poets; rather a weak man, perhaps, but covering
    all his faults with his genius and kindness of heart,
    clever and persevering, and basely neglected and shunned by
    his contemporaries. It is quite extraordinary to read the
    world-famous poems of this poet, and to remember that he
    was a ploughman, and surrounded only by the most uneducated
    peasants and fellow-labourers, though, of course, the life of
    a ploughman in the hills of Scotland is far more likely to
    encourage poetry and reflection than the life of many a London
    dentist or hair-dresser far higher in rank; but it is easy to
    believe in fact, that Burns would have found inspirations for
    his genius in a flat sandy waste or a grocer’s shop, and, as
    Carlyle says, a man or woman is not a genius unless they are
    extraordinary, not really inspired if such a person could have
    been imagined before. Robert Burns has provided Scotland for
    centuries at least, with plenty of national poetry, his poems
    are such as can be enjoyed, like flowers and trees and all
    things really beautiful, by old and young, stupid and clever,
    fishermen and prime ministers—surely that is a work of which
    any man would be proud!

    “Burns (_sic_) chief fault, if fault it can be called, and the
    cause of his failure in life, seems to have been a sort of
    bitterness against people more fortunate than himself without
    the art of hiding it. This, real or affected, seems very common
    in poets, and such an inspired man, a man with a mind greater
    than kings, must have felt very deeply, almost without knowing
    it, the ‘unrefinedness’ of the people he loved best, and his
    own distance from the admirers who clustered round him later in
    life.

    “All his life, it seems, he was in a place by himself, now
    spending his time with his own family, acting a part all day,
    trying to make his relations feel him an equal, pretending to
    take a great interest in what he did not care for—the pigs, and
    cows, and porridge, seeing his own dearest friends looking at
    him with awe, and feeling him something above them, thinking of
    his ‘great’ friends, and feeling embarrassed when he came, and
    more at ease without his presence.

    “Now, on the other hand, associating with people, high in
    rank and education, enjoying their friendship and praise, but
    feeling, be they ever so kind and familiar, that he was not
    their equal by birth, and that they could not treat him quite
    as such, however hard they might try, turning familiarity in
    his mind into slights, and kindness into condescension. This
    to a proud man must have been misery, and Burns must have been
    very lonely in a crowd of companions, thronged with admirers,
    but without a friend.

    “Nobody understood Burns; he shared his opinions with no one
    he knew. When, at the beginning of the French Revolution he
    expressed his delight and approval, the people who admired him
    were shocked, refused to speak to him, and regarded him either
    as mad or terribly wicked. His poems were not admired as much
    as they deserved to be, he had hardly any money, was never
    likely to get on in the world, was shunned and disgraced, and
    began, as a last resource,[28] to drink too much. Ill-health
    was one of his misfortunes, and this intemperance killed him.

    “Thus died at the age of thirty-seven, poor, friendless,
    despised, the man who has given pleasure to thousands, and an
    undying collection of poems and songs to his country.”

_Q._ Give some account, as far as you can in the _style_ of Carlyle, of
the Procession of May 4th. (Book studied, Carlyle’s _French Revolution_.)

G. (aged 14½):—

    “See the doors of Notre Dame open wide, the Procession
    issuing[29] forth, a sea of human faces that are to reform
    France. First come the nobles in their gayly (_sic_) tinted
    robes, next the clergy, and then the commons, the Tiers Etats
    in their slouched hats firm and resolute, and lastly the king,
    and the Œuil-de-bœuf, these are greeted by a tremendous storm
    of vivats. Vive le roi! Vive la nation! Let us suppose we can
    take up some coigne (_sic_) of vantage from which we can watch
    the procession, but with eyes different from other eyes, namely
    with prophetic eyes. See a man coming, striding at the head of
    the Tiers Etats, tall and with thick lips and black hair, whose
    father and brother walk among the nobles. Close beside walks
    Doctor Guillotin,[29] learned Doctor Guillotin,[29] who said,
    ‘My friends (_mes amis_), I have a machine that will whisk off
    your heads in a second, and cause you no pain,’ now doomed
    for two years to see and hear nothing but guillotin, and for
    more than two centuries after yonder a desolate ghost on this
    (_sic_) of the Styx. Mark, too, a small mean man, a sea-green
    man with sea-green eyes, Robespierre by name, a small underhand
    secretary walking beside one Dantun (_sic_) tall and massive,
    cruelty and vengeance on their faces. We may not linger longer,
    but one other we must note, one tall and active with a cunning
    air, namely, Camille Desmouellins (_sic_), one day to rise to
    fame and the next to be forgotten.

    “Many more walk in that procession one day to become famous,
    Bailli, future president of a New Republick (_sic_), and Marat,
    with Broglie the War-God and others.

    “The Tiers Etats with Mayor Bailli march to the rooms where
    they are to sit, but the doors are shut: there is sound of
    hammering within.

    “Mayor Bailli knocks, and wants to know why they are shut out?
    It is the king’s orders. He wants his papers. He may come in
    and get them, and with this they must be content.

    “They swarm to Versailles, the king steps out on the balconny
    (_sic_) and speaks. He says the room is being prepared for his
    own august presence; a platform is being erected, he says he
    is sorry to inconvience (_sic_) them; but he is afraid they
    must wait, and with that he retires. Meanwhile patriotism
    consults as to what had best be done. Shall they meet on the
    palace steps? or even in the streets? At length they adjourn
    to the tennis court, and there patriotism swears one by one
    to be faithful to the New National Assembly, as they now name
    themselves This is known as the Oath of the Tennis Court.”

I have placed before the reader examples of a portion of some thirty
pupils’ work to illustrate their education by books. It is not necessary
to speak of their education by Things: that is thorough and systematic;
but may I point out that what has been cited is average work. I do not
know if the reader considers that I have proved my point, that is, that
‘studies’—schoolroom studies—‘are for delight, for ornament, and for
ability.’




APPENDIX III

WHAT A CHILD SHOULD KNOW AT TWELVE


In order to induce the heads of schools (private schools, preparatory
schools, girls’ schools, and ‘Lower’ schools) to consider seriously
whether it is not possible to introduce some such method of _Education by
Books_, let me put forward a few considerations:—

    1. The cost of the books per pupil for the six years—from six
    to twelve—does not average more than £1 a year. A scheme of
    work for elementary schools might be arranged at a much less
    annual cost for books.

    2. Two and a half, for Class I., to three and a half hours a
    day, for Class III., is ample time for this book education.

    3. Much writing is unnecessary, because the pupils have the
    matter in their books and know where to find it.

    4. Classes II. and III. are able to occupy themselves in study
    with pleasure and profit.

    5. Teachers are relieved of the exhausting drudgery of many
    corrections.

    6. The pupils have the afternoons for handicrafts, nature-work,
    walks, games, etc.

    7. The evenings are free, whether at school or at home, for
    reading aloud, choral singing, hobbies, etc.

    8. The pupils get many intelligent interests, beget hobbies,
    and have leisure for them.

    9. There is no distressing cramming for the term’s examination.
    The pupils know their work, and find it easy to answer
    questions set to find out what they know, rather than what they
    do not know.

    10. Children of any age, however taught hitherto, take up this
    sort of work with avidity.

    11. Boys and girls taught in this way take up ordinary school
    work, preparation for examinations, etc., with intelligence,
    zeal, and success.

The six years’ work—from six to twelve—which I suggest, should and does
result in the power of the pupils—

    (_a_) To grasp the sense of a passage of some length at a
    single reading: and to narrate the substance of what they have
    read or heard.

    (_b_) To spell, and express themselves in writing with ease and
    fair correctness.

    (_c_) To give an orderly and detailed account of any subject
    they have studied.

    (_d_) To describe in writing what they have seen, or heard from
    the newspapers.

    (_e_) They should have a familiar acquaintance with the common
    objects of the country, with power to reproduce some of these
    in brushwork.

    (_f_) Should have skill in various handicrafts, as cardboard
    Sloyd, basket-making, clay-modelling, etc.

    (_g_) In Arithmetic, they should have some knowledge of vulgar
    and decimal fractions, percentage, household accounts, etc.

    (_h_) Should have a knowledge of Elementary Algebra, and should
    have done practical exercises in Geometry.

    (_i_) Of Elementary Latin Grammar; should read fables and easy
    tales, and, say, one or two books of ‘Cæsar.’

    (_j_) They should have some power of understanding spoken
    French, and be able to speak a little; and to read an easy
    French book without a dictionary.

    (_k_) In German, much the same as in French, but less progress.

    (_l_) In History, they will have gone through a rather detailed
    study of English, French, and Classical (Plutarch) History.

    (_m_) In Geography they will have studied in detail the map
    of the world, and have been at one time able to fill in the
    landscape, industries, etc., from their studies, of each
    division of the map.

    (_n_) They will have learned the elements of Physical
    Geography, Botany, Human Physiology, and Natural History, and
    will have read interesting books on some of these subjects.

    (_o_) They should have some knowledge of English Grammar.

    (_p_) They should have a considerable knowledge of Scripture
    History and the Bible text.

    (_q_) They should have learned a good deal of Scripture and of
    Poetry, and should have read some Literature.

    (_r_) They should have learned to sing on the Tonic Sol-fa
    method, and should know a number of English, French, and German
    Songs.

    (_s_) They should have learned Swedish Drill and various drills
    and calisthenic exercises.

    (_t_) In Drawing they should be able to represent common
    objects of the house and field with brush or charcoal; should
    be able to give rudimentary expression to ideas; and should be
    acquainted with the works of some artists through reproductions.

    (_u_) In Music their knowledge of theory and their ear-training
    should keep pace with their powers of execution.

This is the degree of progress an average pupil of twelve should
have made under a teacher of knowledge and ability. Progress in the
_disciplinary_ subjects, languages and mathematics, for example, must
depend entirely on the knowledge and ability of the teacher.




APPENDIX IV

EXAMINATION OF A CHILD OF TWELVE, IN THE ‘PARENTS’ REVIEW’ SCHOOL, ON THE
WORK OF A TERM


Possibly a complete set of answers to an examination paper may be of use
as showing the all-round standing of a scholar educated on the principles
I have advanced. This paper is not exceptional,[30] and some weakness
will be noticed in what I have called the disciplinary subjects.


_Programme of the Term’s Work on which the Examination Questions are set._


_Bible Lessons._

_The Bible for the Young_, by the Rev. J. Paterson Smyth (Sampson, Low,
2s.), _Genesis_, Lessons xvii.-xxiv., _S. Matthew_, Lessons xvi.-xxiv.,
and the Lesson on Christmas. Teacher to prepare lesson beforehand,
and to use the Bible passages in teaching. Answers to Catechism with
explanations from the beginning to the _Lord’s Prayer_ (optional).


_Recitations._

Learn two passages of 20 verses each from chapters in Bible Lessons.
Learn _The Death of the Duke of Wellington_; _The Charge of the Light
Brigade_; _You ask me Why_.


_French._[31]

The Gouin _Series_; _A Study of French_, by Eugène & Duriaux (Edition
1898, Macmillan & Co., 3s. 6d.), pages 184, 194, 196, 198; teacher study
preface. _Première Année Grammaire_, par P. Larousse, Rules 61, 63, 64,
66, 70, 74, Exercises 55, 58, 61, 63. Read the first half of _Le Général
Dourakine_, par Mdme. de Ségur (Hachette, 1s.), parse two pages. Learn a
poem from _Recueil de Poésies_, par Mdme. de Witt (Hachette, 2s.).


_German._[31]

Eight sections of the Gouin _Series_; (or, translate into English and
retranslate into German pages 1-8 from Niebuhr’s _Heroengeschichten_
(Clarendon Press, 1s. 6d.). _Book of Ballads on German History_
(University Press, 2s.); two ballads to be learnt by heart. _First German
Book_, by A. L. Becker (Hachette, 1s.), Lessons xxvii-xxxv. Use the
words, from the lists of useful words, in sentences. Beginners read from
