CHAPTER III

‘MASTERLY INACTIVITY’

1. Contrast our sense of responsibility with that held in the fifties and
sixties.

2. Show that the change in our point of view indicates moral progress.

3. What kind of responsibility presses heavily at present upon thoughtful
people?

4. Show that anxiety is the note of a transition stage.

5. Why does a sense of responsibility produce a fussy and restless habit?

6. Why should we do well to admit the idea of ‘masterly inactivity’ as a
factor in education?

7. What four or five ideas are contained in this of ‘masterly inactivity’?

8. What is Wordsworth’s phrase?

9. What is the first element in this attitude of mind?

10. Show that good-humour is the second element.

11. That self-confidence also is necessary.

12. What may mothers learn from the fine, easy, way of some fathers?

13. Show that confidence in children, also, is an element of ‘masterly
inactivity.’

14. Why must parents and teachers be omniscient?

15. Show why ‘masterly inactivity’ is necessary to the bringing up of a
child whose life is conditioned by ‘fate and free-will.’

16. What delicate poise between fate and free-will is to be aimed at for
the child?

17. Show the importance of a sound mind in a sound body to the parent.

18. What may we learn from the quality which all the early painters have
bestowed upon the pattern Mother?

19. Give one or two practical hints for tired mothers.

20. Why is leisure necessary to children’s well-being?

21. What is the foundation of the ‘masterly inactivity’ we have in view?


CHAPTER IV

SOME OF THE RIGHTS OF CHILDREN AS PERSONS

1. Why should children be free in their play?

2. In what respect are organised games not play?

3. Why should we beware of interfering with children’s work?

4. Show that children must stand or fall by their own efforts.

5. Show the danger of a system of prodding.

6. How far may we count upon the dutifulness of boys and girls?

7. How far should children be free to choose their friends?

8. To spend their pocket-money?

9. To form their opinions?

10. Show that spontaneity is not an indigenous wild-flower.


CHAPTER V

PSYCHOLOGY IN RELATION TO CURRENT THOUGHT

1. Characterise the educational thought of the eighteenth century.

2. Show that we, too, have had a period of certainty.

3. Account for the general dissatisfaction we labour under now.

4. By what tests may we discern a working psychology for our own age?

5. Illustrate the fact that the sacredness of the person is among the
living thoughts of the age upon which we are being brought up.

6. On what grounds do we demand of education that it should make the most
of the person?

7. How is ‘the solidarity of the race’ to be reckoned with in education?

8. Show that the best thought of any age is common thought.

9. Discuss Locke’s _States of Consciousness_.

10. Show that this theory does not provide for the evolution of the
person.

11. How does modern physiological-psychology compare with Locke’s theory?

12. How does Professor James define this psychology?

13. Show that this definition makes the production of thought, etc.,
purely mechanical.

14. How far is this assumption ‘unjustifiable materialism’?

15. What is Professor James’ pronouncement about what is called the ‘new
psychology’?

16. Illustrate the fact that a psychology which eliminates personality is
dreary and devitalising.

17. By what signs may we recognise the fact when the ‘new psychology’
becomes part of our faith?

18. Show that this system is inadequate, unnecessary, and inharmonious.

19. At what point does it check the evolution of the individual?


