CHAPTER XX

SUGGESTIONS TOWARDS A CURRICULUM

(_For Children under Fourteen_)

PART I


=Summary of Preceding Chapters.=—I have left the consideration of a
curriculum, which is, practically, the subject of this volume, till the
final chapters; because a curriculum is not an independent product,
but is linked to much else by chains of cause and consequence. The
fundamental principles of docility and authority have been considered
in the first place because they _are_ fundamental; but, for that very
reason, they should be present but not in evidence; we do not expose
the foundations of our house. Not only so, but these principles must be
conditioned by respect for the personality of children; and, in order to
give children room for free development on the lines proper to them, it
is well that parents and teachers should adopt an attitude of masterly
inactivity.

Having considered the relations of teachers and taught, I have touched
upon those between education and current thought. Education should be
in the flow, as it were, and not shut up in a watertight compartment.
Perhaps, reverence for personality as such, a sense of the solidarity
of the race, and a profound consciousness of evolutionary progress, are
among the elements of current thought which should help us towards an
educational ideal.

In considering the training of children under the convenient divisions of
physical, mental, moral, and religious, I have not thought it necessary
to give counsels upon matters of common knowledge and general acceptance,
but have dwelt upon aspects of training under each heading which are
rather likely to be overlooked. Under the phrase ‘Education is a life,’ I
have tried to show how necessary it is to sustain the intellectual life
upon ideas, and, as a corollary, that a school-book should be a medium
for ideas and not merely a receptacle for facts. That normal children
have a natural desire for, and a right of admission to, all knowledge,
appears to me to be covered by the phrase, ‘Education is the science of
relations.’

These considerations clear the ground for the consideration of a
curriculum, which occupies the remaining chapters; these are, in fact,
a summary of what has gone before; and therefore I beg the reader’s
patience with such repetitions as seem to me necessary in bringing the
argument to a point.

=Some Preliminary Considerations.=—As the following suggestions have
been worked out in connection with the Parents’ National Educational
Union, it may perhaps be desirable to repeat here that the first effort
of this society, continued through ten years of its existence, was to
impress upon its members the definition of Education contained in our
motto, ‘_Education is an Atmosphere, a Discipline, a Life._’ By this we
mean that parents and teachers should know how to make sensible use of
a child’s circumstances (_atmosphere_), should train him in habits of
good living (_discipline_), and should nourish his mind with ideas, the
food of the intellectual _life_. These three we believe to be the only
instruments of which we may make lawful use in bringing up children. An
easier way may be found by trading on their sensibilities, emotions,
desires, passions; but the result must be disastrous. And for this
reason, that habits, ideas, and circumstances are external, and we may
help each other to get the best that is to be had of them; we may not,
however, meddle directly with the personality of child or man; we may not
work upon his vanity, his fears, his love, his emulation, or anything
that goes to make him a person. Most thinking people are in earnest about
the bringing up of children; but we are in danger of taking too much
upon us, and of not recognising the limitations which confine us to the
outworks of personality.

=A Definite Aim.=—The Parents’ Union, having devoted, as I have said, ten
years of its existence to learning how to use the three instruments of
education (circumstances, habits, and ideas), took a new departure some
few years ago, and asked what should be the end in view as the result of
a wise use of due means. What is education? The answer we accept is that
_Education is the Science of Relations_.

We do not use this phrase in the Herbartian sense, that things or
thoughts are related to each other and that teachers must be careful to
pack the right things, in together, so that, having got into the pupil’s
brain, each may fasten on its kind, and, together, make a strong clique
or apperception mass.

What concerns us personally is the fact that we have relations with
what there is in the present and with what there has been in the past,
with what is above us, and about us; and that fulness of living and
serviceableness depend for each of us upon how far we apprehend these
relationships and how many of them we lay hold of. Every child is heir
to an enormous patrimony. The question is, what are the formalities
necessary to put him in possession of that which is his?

=Education Objective, not Subjective.=—The point of view is shifted;
it is no longer _subjective_ as regards the child, but _objective_. We
do not talk about developing his faculties, training his moral nature,
guiding his religious feelings, educating him with a view to his social
standing or his future calling. We take the child as we find him, a
person with many healthy affinities and embryonic attachments, and we
try to give him a chance to make the largest possible number of these
attachments valid.

An infant comes into the world with a thousand feelers which he at once
begins to fix with great energy; and out of everything about him he gets—

    “That calm delight which, if I err not, surely must belong,
    To those first-born affinities that fit
    Our new existence to existing things,
    And in our dawn of being, constitute
    The bond of union between life and joy.”[19]

He gets also when left to himself that real knowledge about each thing
he comes across which establishes his relations with that thing.
Later, we step in to educate him. In proportion to the range of living
relationships we put in his way will he have wide and vital interests and
joy in living. His life will be dutiful and serviceable if he is made
aware of the laws which rule each relationship; he will learn the laws of
work and the joys of work as he perceives that no relation with persons
or with things can be kept up without effort.

Our part is to remove obstructions, to give stimulus and guidance to the
child who is trying to get into touch with the universe of things and
thoughts. Our error is to suppose that we must act as his showman to
the universe, and that there is no community between child and universe
except such as we choose to set up.

=Interests.=—Have we many keen interests soliciting us outside of our
necessary work? If we have, we shall not be enslaved by vapid joys.

Interests are not to be taken up on the spur of the moment; they spring
out of the affinities which we have found and laid hold of. And the
object of education is, I take it, to give children the _use_ of as much
of the world as may be.

Influenced by such considerations as these, the phrase, ‘_Education is
the Science of Relations_,’ gives us the advantage of a definite aim in
our work.

=Educational Unrest.=—We have been made familiar with the phrase
‘educational unrest,’ and we all feel its fitness. Never were there
more able and devoted teachers, whether as the heads or on the staffs
of schools of all classes. Money, labour, and research are freely spent
on education, theory is widely studied, and pains are taken to learn
what is done elsewhere; yet there is something amiss beyond that ‘divine
discontent’ which leads to effort. We know that a change of front is
necessary; and we are ready, provided that the change be something more
than an experiment. Headmasters and mistresses are, I believe, amongst
the persons most ready to fall in with a sound reform; but, because these
are persons with wide experience and highly-trained intellects, they are
unwilling to launch changes which have not a philosophic basis as well as
a utilitarian end.

=A Unifying Principle.=—Hitherto we, of the Parents’ Union, have
pressed on the public rather our views on home-training than those on
school-teaching, but this is because we have been unwilling to disturb
the existing order. We have, however, during the last twelve years worked
out in our training college and school _a unifying principle and adequate
methods_ with happy results. We exist because we have a definite aim, and
to carry out that aim. I need not now speak of the few principles which
form a guide to us in the upbringing of children; but that principle
which guides us in what is commonly called education—the teaching of
knowledge—may be found to indicate the cause of many educational failures
and may point the way to reform.

=Education should give Knowledge touched with Emotion.=—To adapt a phrase
of Matthew Arnold’s concerning religion,—education should aim at giving
knowledge ‘_touched with emotion_.’ I have already quoted the charming
episode in Frederika Bremer’s _Neighbours_, where two schoolgirls fight
a duel on behalf of their heroes—Charles XII. and Peter the Great.
Parents may be glad that we have no girl-duels to-day! The schoolgirl
does not care for heroes, she cares for marks. Knowledge for her is not
‘touched with emotion,’ unless it be those of personal acquisitiveness
and emulation. The boys and girls have it in them to be generous and
enthusiastic; that they leave school without interests, beyond that of
preparing for further examinations or the absorbing interest of games,
is no doubt the fault of the schools. Perhaps the ‘unrest’ of the public
mind at home and abroad about secondary education is due to the fact
that young people are turned out from excellent schools _devitalised_ so
far as their minds go. No ‘large draughts of intellectual day’ have been
offered to their thirst; and yet the thirst was there to begin with.

Mr Benson[20] speaks very frankly. He says: “I honestly believe that the
masters of public schools have two strong ambitions—to make boys good
and to make them healthy; but I do not think they care about making them
intellectual: intellectual life is left to take care of itself. My belief
is that a great many masters look upon the boys’ work as a question of
duty—that is, they consider it from the moral standpoint and not from
the intellectual.... It must be frankly admitted that the intellectual
standard maintained at the English public schools is low; and, what is
more serious, I do not see any evidence that it is tending to become
higher.”

Professor Sadler, with a perhaps wider outlook, says, practically, the
same thing—our secondary schools have capital points, but intellectually
they are behind-hand, compared even with those of some continental
nations. Mr Benson speaks no doubt from personal knowledge; but is it a
fact that so intellectual a body as our headmasters deliberately forego
intellectual distinction in their schools? Or is it not rather that
examinations throw them back on the pseudo-intellectual work known as
‘cram’? It is because cram is deadening that some of us deprecate the
registration of teachers as a backward movement. Hundreds of mediocre
young women set themselves to cram for a course of examinations, often a
long course, to end at last in registration; and already headmistresses
feel the evil and inquire diligently for assistants who are ‘not the
usual sort.’ Women are apt to be over-strenuous and over-conscientious,
and the strain of moral effort carried on through years of preparation
for successive examinations often leaves a certain dulness of
apprehension. There are brilliant exceptions, but the average young woman
who has undergone such an experience has little initiative, is slow of
perception, not readily adaptable, not quick in the uptake; is, in fact,
a little devitalised. I speak of moral effort, because the labour of
preparing for examinations, of going through steady long-sustained grind,
is apt to be rather a moral than an intellectual effort. With young men
it is otherwise; they are commonly less strenuous, less absorbed, and
therefore, perhaps, more receptive to the ideas that beset the way of
their studies.

=Education is the Science of Relations.=—The idea that vivifies teaching
in the Parents’ Union is that _Education is the Science of Relations_;
by which phrase we mean that children come into the world with a natural
‘appetency,’ to use Coleridge’s word, for, and affinity with, all the
material of knowledge; for interest in the heroic past and in the age
of myths; for a desire to know about everything that moves and lives,
about strange places and strange peoples; for a wish to handle material
and to make; a desire to run and ride and row and do whatever the law of
gravitation permits. Therefore we do not feel it is lawful in the early
days of a child’s life to select certain subjects for his education to
the exclusion of others; to say he shall not learn Latin, for example, or
shall not learn Science; but we endeavour that he shall have relations
of pleasure and intimacy established with as many as possible of the
interests proper to him; not learning a slight or incomplete smattering
about this or that subject, but plunging into vital knowledge, with a
great field before him which in all his life he will not be able to
explore. In this conception we get that ‘touch of emotion’ which vivifies
knowledge, for it is probable that we _feel_ only as we are brought into
our proper vital relations.

=Is there such a thing as the ‘Child-Mind’?=—We get courage to attack
so wide a programme through a few working ideas or principles: one of
these is, there is no such thing as the ‘child-mind’; we believe that
the ignorance of children is illimitable, but that, on the other hand,
their intelligence is hardly to be reckoned with by our slower wits.
In practical working we find this idea a great power; the teachers do
not talk down to the children; they are careful _not_ to explain every
word that is used, or to ascertain if children understand every detail.
As a girl of twelve or so the writer browsed a good deal on Cowper’s
poems and somehow took an interest in _Mrs Montague’s Feather Hangings_.
Only the other day did the ball to fit that socket arrive in the shape
of an article in _The Quarterly_ on ‘The Queen of the Bluestockings.’
Behold, there was Mrs Montague with her feather hangings! The pleasure
of meeting with her after all these years was extraordinary; for in no
way is knowledge more enriching than in this of leaving behind it a,
so to speak, dormant appetite for more of the kind. The recent finds at
Knossos are only to be appreciated by those who recollect how Ulysses
told Penelope about Crete with its ninety cities, and Knossos, and King
Minos. Not what we have learned, but what we are waiting to know, is
the delectable part of knowledge. Nor should knowledge be peptonised or
diluted, but offered to the children with some substance in it and some
vitality. We find that children can cover a large and various field with
delight and intelligence in the time that is usually wasted over ‘the
three R’s,’ object-lessons, and other much-diluted matter in which the
teaching is more than the knowledge.

=Knowledge _versus_ Information.=—The distinction between _knowledge_
and _information_ is, I think, fundamental. Information is the record of
facts, experiences, appearances, etc., whether in books or in the verbal
memory of the individual; knowledge, it seems to me, implies the result
of the voluntary and delightful action of the mind upon the material
presented to it. Great minds, a Darwin or a Plato, are able to deal at
first hand with appearances or experiences; the ordinary mind gets a
little of its knowledge by such direct dealing, but for the most part it
is set in action by the vivifying knowledge of others, which is at the
same time a stimulus and a point of departure. The information acquired
in the course of education is only by chance, and here and there, of
practical value. Knowledge, on the other hand, that is, the product of
the vital action of the mind on the material presented to it, is power;
as it implies an increase of intellectual aptitude in new directions, and
an always new point of departure.

Perhaps the chief function of a teacher is to distinguish information
from knowledge in the acquisitions of his pupils. Because knowledge is
power, the child who has got knowledge will certainly show power in
dealing with it. He will recast, condense, illustrate, or narrate with
vividness and with freedom in the arrangement of his words. The child who
has got only information will write and speak in the stereotyped phrases
of his text-book, or will mangle in his notes the words of his teacher.

=Children have a Natural Craving for Knowledge.=—It is the easier for
us to deal in this direct fashion with knowledge because we are not
embarrassed by the necessity of cultivating faculties; for working
purposes the so-called faculties are sufficiently described as _mind_;
and the normal mind is, we find, as able to deal with knowledge as are
the normal digestive organs with food. Our concern is to give a child
such knowledge as shall open up for him as large a share as may be of the
world he lives in for his use and enjoyment. As there are gymnastics for
the body, so for the mind there are certain subjects whose use is chiefly
disciplinary, and of these we avail ourselves. Again, as our various
organs labour without our consciousness in the assimilation of food,
so judgment, imagination, and what not, deal of their own accord with
knowledge, that it may be _incorporated_, which is not the same thing as
‘remembered.’ A further analogy—as the digestive organs are incited by
appetite, so children come into the world with a few inherent desires,
some with more, some less, to incite them to their proper activities.
These are, roughly speaking, the desire for power, for praise, for
wealth, for distinction, for society, and for _knowledge_. It seems to
me that education, which appeals to the desire for wealth (marks, prizes,
scholarships, or the like), or to the desire of excelling (as in the
taking of places, etc.), or to any other of the natural desires, _except
that for knowledge_, destroys the balance of character; and, what is
even more fatal, destroys by inanition that desire for and delight in
knowledge which is meant for our joy and enrichment through the whole of
life. “A desire for knowledge,” says Dr Johnson, “is the natural feeling
of mankind, and every human being whose mind is not debauched will be
willing to give all that he has to get knowledge.” Is it possible that
what has been called ‘mark-hunger’ is a debauchery of the mind? The
undebauched mind takes knowledge with avidity; and we find their studies
are so interesting to children that they need no other stimulus.

=Children must be Educated on Books.=—A corollary of the principle that
education is the science of relations, is, that no education seems to
be worth the name which has not made children at home in the world of
books, and so related them, mind to mind, with thinkers who have dealt
with knowledge. We reject epitomes, compilations, and their like, and put
into children’s hands books which, long or short, are _living_. Thus it
becomes a large part of the teacher’s work to help children to deal with
their books; so that the oral lesson and lecture are but small matters in
education, and are used chiefly to summarise or to expand or illustrate.

Too much faith is commonly placed in oral lessons and lectures; “to be
poured into like a bucket,” as says Carlyle, “is not exhilarating to any
soul”; neither is it exhilarating to have every difficulty explained to
weariness, or to have the explanation teased out of one by questions. “I
will not be put to the _question_. Don’t you consider, sir, that these
are not the manners of a gentleman? I will not be baited with _what_ and
_why_; what is this? what is that? why is a cow’s tail long? why is a
fox’s tail bushy?” said Dr Johnson. This is what children think, though
they say nothing. Oral lessons have their occasional use, and when they
are fitly given it is the children who ask the questions. Perhaps it is
not wholesome or quite honest for a teacher to pose as a source of all
knowledge and to give ‘lovely’ lessons. Such lessons are titillating for
the moment, but they give children the minimum of mental labour, and the
result is much the same as that left on older persons by the reading
of a magazine. We find, on the other hand, that in working through a
considerable book, which may take two or three years to master, the
interest of boys and girls is well sustained to the end; they develop
an intelligent curiosity as to causes and consequences, and are in fact
educating themselves.




