CHAPTER VIII

CERTAIN RELATIONS PROPER TO A CHILD


Geology, mineralogy, physical geography, botany, natural history,
biology, astronomy—the whole circle of the sciences is, as it were, set
with gates ajar in order that a child may go forth furnished, not with
scientific knowledge, but with, what Huxley calls, common information, so
that he may feel for objects on the earth and in the heavens the sort of
proprietary interest which the son of an old house has in its heirlooms.

We are more exacting than the Jesuits. They are content to have a child
till he is seven; but we want him till he is twelve or fourteen, if we
may not have him longer. You may do what you like with him afterwards.
Given this period for the establishing of relations, we may undertake
to prepare for the world a man, vital and vigorous, full of living
interests, available and serviceable. I think we may warrant him even to
pass examinations, because he will know how to put living interest into
the dullest tasks.

=Dynamic Relations.=—But we have not yet done with his relations with
mother earth. There are, what I may call, _dynamic_ relations to be
established. He must stand and walk and run and jump with ease and
grace. He must skate and swim and ride and drive, dance and row and sail
a boat. He should be able to make free with his mother earth and to do
whatever the principle of gravitation will allow. This is an elemental
relationship for the lack of which nothing compensates.

=Power over Material.=—Another elemental relationship, which every
child should be taught and encouraged to set up, is that of power over
material. Every child makes sand castles, mud-pies, paper boats, and
he or she should go on to work in clay, wood, brass, iron, leather,
dress-stuffs, food-stuffs, furnishing-stuffs. He should be able to _make_
with his hands and should take delight in making.

=Intimacy with Animals.=—A fourth relation is to the dumb creation; a
relation of intelligent comprehension as well as of kindness. Why should
not each of us be on friendly terms with the ‘inmates of his house and
garden’? Every child longs for intimacy with the creatures about him; and—

    “He prayeth best, who loveth best
      All things both great and small;
    For the dear God who loveth us,
      He made and loveth all.”

=The Great Human Relationships.=—Perhaps the main part of a child’s
education should be concerned with the great human relationships,
relationships of love and service, of authority and obedience, of
reverence and pity and neighbourly kindness; relationships to kin and
friend and neighbour, to ‘cause’ and country and kind, to the past and
the present. History, literature, archæology, art, languages, whether
ancient or modern, travel and tales of travel; all of these are in one
way or other the record or the expression of persons; and we who are
persons are interested in all persons, for we are all one flesh, and
we are all of one spirit, and whatever any of us does or suffers is
interesting to the rest. If we will approach them with living thought,
living books, if we will only awaken in them the sense of personal
relation, there are thousands of boys and girls to-day capable of
becoming apostles, saviours, great orientalists who will draw the East
and the West together, great archæologists who will make the past alive
for us and make us aware in our souls of men who lived thousands of years
ago.

=The Awakening Idea.=—It rests with us to give the awakening idea and
then to form the habit of thought and of life. Here is an example of what
a youth could do. “Young Rawlinson had” (I quote from the _Academy_)
“from the outset of his career, a taste for the history and antiquities
of Persia, a leaning which he himself attributed to his conversations
with Sir John Malcolm on his first passage to India; and when with
the Shah’s army he chanced to be quartered at Kirmanshah, in Persian
Kurdistan. Close to this stands the Rock of Behistun, bearing on its
face a trilingual inscription which we now know to be due to Darius
Hystaspes, the restorer of Cyrus’ Empire. The cuneiform or wedge-shaped
letters in which it is written had long baffled all attempts to decipher
them. Rawlinson contrived, at the risk of life and limb, to climb the
almost inaccessible face of the rock and to copy the easiest of the
three versions of the inscription. A prolonged study of it enabled him
to pronounce it to be in the Persian language, and, two years later,
he succeeded in discovering the system by which the Persian words were
reproduced in cuneiform characters.” What is the result? “We can now
produce the chronicles of empires, more highly-organised than was
ever any Greek state, going back to dates millennia before that which
our fathers used to assign to the earliest appearance of man upon the
earth. The changes of thought consequent upon these discoveries are
incalculable;” and all are more or less due to Rawlinson’s climb up the
face of the Behistun Rock, which again was due to the awakening of an
idea by his conversation with Sir John Malcolm.

=Human Intelligence limited to Human Interests.=—We are not all Henry
Rawlinsons, but there seems good reason to believe that _the limit to
human intelligence arises largely from the limit to human interests_,
that is, from the failure to establish personal relations on a wide
scale with the persons who make up humanity,—relations of love, duty,
responsibility, and, above all, of interest, _living_ interest, with the
near and the far-off, in time and in place. We hammer away for a dozen
years at one or two languages, ancient or modern, and rarely know them
very well at the end of that time, but directly they become to us the
languages of persons whom we are aching to get at and can only do so
through the medium of their own tongues, there seems no reason why many
of us should not be like the late Sir Richard Burton, able to talk in
almost any known tongue.

=The Full Human Life.=—I think we should have a great educational
revolution once we ceased to regard ourselves as assortments of so-called
faculties and realised ourselves as persons whose great business it is
to get in touch with other persons of all sorts and conditions, of all
countries and climes, of all times, past and present. History would
become entrancing, literature, a magic mirror for the discovery of other
minds, the study of sociology, a duty and a delight. We should tend to
become responsive and wise, humble and reverent, recognising the duties
and the joys of the full human life. We cannot, of course, overtake such
a programme of work, but we can keep it in view; and, I suppose, every
life is moulded upon its ideal. We talk of lost ideals, but perhaps they
are not lost, only changed; when our ideal for ourselves and for our
children becomes limited to prosperity and comfort, we get these, very
likely, for ourselves and for them, but we get no more.

=Duty not within the Scope of Present-day Psychology.=—The psychology of
the hour has had a curious effect upon the sense of duty. Persons who
are no more than a ‘state of consciousness’ cannot be expected to take
up moral responsibilities, except such as appeal to them at the moment.
Duty, in the sense of relations imposed by authority and _due_ to our
fellows, does not fall within the scope of present-day psychology. It
would be interesting to know how many children of about ten years of
age can say the Ten Commandments, and those most clear interpretations
of them which children are taught to call ‘my duty towards God and my
duty towards my neighbour’; or, if they are not members of the Church
of England, whatever explanation their own Church offers of the law
containing the whole duty of man. With the Ten Commandments as a basis,
children used to get a fairly thorough ethical teaching from the Bible.
They knew St Paul’s mandates:—‘Love the brethren,’ ‘Fear God,’ ‘Honour
the King,’ ‘Honour all men,’ ‘Study to be quiet.’ They knew that
thoughts of hatred and contempt were of the nature of murder. They knew
what King Solomon said of the virtuous woman, of the sluggard, of the
fool. Their knowledge was not confined to precepts; from history, sacred
and profane, they were able to illustrate every text. We in England have
not the wealth of moral teaching carved in wood and stone—so that the
unlettered may read and learn—which some neighbouring countries rejoice
in, but our teaching, until the present generation, has been systematic
and thorough.

=Casual Ethical Teaching.=—I appeal to common experience as to whether
this is now the case. We eschew for our children (and we often eschew
wisely) all stories with a moral; their books must be amusing, and we ask
little more; next after that, they must be literary, and then, perhaps, a
little instructive. But we do not look for a moral impulse fitly given.
It is not that we give no ethical teaching, but our teaching is casual.
If we happen on a story of heroism or self-denial, we are glad to point
the moral. But children rarely get now a distinct ethical system resting
on the broad basis of the brotherhood of man. It is something for a child
only to recite—‘My duty towards my neighbour is to love him as myself,’
and ‘to do unto all men as I would that they should do unto me.’ A great
many fine things are said to-day about the brotherhood of man and the
solidarity of the race, but I think we shall look in vain in modern
writings for a sentence which goes to the root of the matter as does this
authoritative code of duty.

=The Moral Relation of Person to Person.=—If we receive it, that the
whole of education consists in the establishment of relations, then, the
relations with our fellow-beings must be of the first importance; and all
associations formed upon any basis except that of ‘my duty towards my
neighbour,’—as upon sympathy in art or literature, for example,—are apt
to degenerate into sentimental bonds; and the power of original thought
appears curiously to depart with that of moral insight. If you ask, ‘But
how are we to get a scheme of ethical teaching for our children?’ I
really do not know, if we choose to forego the Ten Commandments and the
old-fashioned teaching of exposition and example founded upon them. There
are a thousand supplementary ways of giving such teaching; but these are
apt to be casual and little binding if they do not rest upon the solid
foundation of _duty_ imposed upon us by God, and _due_ to each other,
whether we will or no. This moral relation of person to person underlies
all other relations. We owe it to the past to use its gains worthily and
to advance from the point at which it left off. We owe it to the future
to prepare a generation better than ourselves. We owe it to the present
to _live_, to live with all expansion of heart and soul, all reaching out
of our personality towards those relations appointed for us.

=The sense of what is due from us does not come by Nature.=—We owe
knowledge to the ignorant, comfort to the distressed, healing to the
sick, reverence, courtesy and kindness to all men, especially to those
with whom we are connected by ties of family or neighbourhood; and the
sense of these dues does not come by nature. We all know the vapid young
man and the vapid young woman who care for none of these things; but do
we always ask ourselves—why? and whether there are not many children
to-day growing up in good homes as untrained in their moral relations as
are these young people whom we despise and blame, perhaps more than they
deserve, for have they not been neglected children?

=Relations of Oneself with Oneself.=—Another preparation for his
relations in life which we owe to a young person is, that he should be
made familiar with such a working system of psychology or philosophy,
whichever one likes to call it, as shall help him to conduct his
relations with himself and with other people. The world is not ripe,
perhaps, for a _bonâ fide_ science of life, but we are unhappily more
modest than the ancients, who made good use of what they had, and
turned out a Marcus Aurelius, an Epictetus, a Socrates. Neither did
they think that their youth were furnished for life without instruction
in philosophy. Modern scientists have added a great deal to the sum of
available knowledge which should bear on the conduct of those relations
of oneself with oneself which are implied in the terms, self-management,
self-control, self-respect, self-love, self-help, self-abnegation, and
so on. This knowledge is the more important because our power to conduct
our relations with other people depends upon our power of conducting our
relations with ourselves. Every man carries in his own person the key
to human nature, and, in proportion as we are able to use this key, we
shall be tolerant, gentle, helpful, wise and reverent. The person who has
‘given up expecting anything’ of servants or of dependents, of employés,
or of working people, proclaims his ignorance of those springs of conduct
common to us all.

I think we may really take a little credit to ourselves as a Society[7]
for an advance in this direction. Most people associated with us know
something of the treatment of sensations, the direction of the will,
the treatment of temper, the psychology of attention, the desires and
affections which are the springs of conduct, and other practical matters
concerned with the management of one’s life. We hear of people who use
that fine old nursery plan expressed in ‘change your thoughts’ with
method and success in the case of cross, or even delirious, or morbid
patients. We (of the Parents’ Union) feel as if we had a tool in our
hands and knew how to set to work. The principle, anyhow, we perceive to
be right, and, if we blunder in its application, we try again, whether
for ourselves or for our children. We know that ‘one custom overcometh
another,’ and that one idea supplants another. We do not give up a child
to be selfish, or greedy, or lazy. These are cases for treatment; and a
child who has been cured by his mother of some such blemish will not be
slow to believe when he grows up in the possibility of reform for others,
and in the use of simple, practical means.

=Intimacy with Persons of all Classes.=—Sociology is a long word, but
it implies a practical relation with other people which children should
begin to get, and it is a kind of knowledge they are very ready for.
The carpenter, the gardener, the baker, the candlestick maker, are all
delightful persons; and it is surprising how much a child at the seaside
will get to know about boats and sails and fishermen’s lives that will
pass by his unobservant elders. Most working men are on their honour
with children, and every craftsman is a valuable acquaintance to a
child. Later, when his working neighbours come before him in the shape
of ‘causes’ and ‘questions,’ he will see the men and their crafts behind
the veil of words; and in his ‘Book of Trades,’ a _Who’s Who_ for the
million, he will look out for the heading _Recreation_, for shoemaker,
tailor, factory-hand, as well as for the distinguished author and the
member of Parliament. There is nothing like early intimacy for helping
one to know people. That is why what the tub-orator calls ‘the bloated
aristocrat’ knows how to get on with everybody; he has been intimate with
all sorts and conditions of men since his babyhood.

=Fitness as Citizens.=—The value of self-managed clubs and committees,
debating societies, etc., for young people, is becoming more and more
fully recognised. Organising capacity, business habits, and some power of
public speaking, should be a part of our fitness as citizens. To secure
the power of speaking, I think it would be well if the habit of narration
were more encouraged, in place of written composition. On the whole, it
is more useful to be able to speak than to write, and the man or woman
who is able to do the former can generally do the latter.

=Relations with each other as Human Beings.=—But the subject of our
relations with each other as human beings is inexhaustible, and I can
do no more than indicate a point here and there, and state again my
conviction that a system of education should have for its aim, not the
mastery of certain ‘subjects,’ but the establishment of these relations
in as many directions as circumstances will allow.

=Relation to Almighty God.=—I have set before the reader the proposition
that a human being comes into the world, not to develop his faculties
nor to acquire knowledge, nor even to earn his living, but to establish
certain relations; which relations are to him the means of immeasurable
expansion and fulness of living. We have touched upon two groups of these
relations—his relations to the universe of matter and to the world of
men. To complete his education, I think there is but one more relation to
be considered—his relation to Almighty God. How many children are to-day
taught to say at their mother’s knee, to learn from day to day and from
hour to hour, in all its fulness of meaning—‘My duty towards God is to
believe in Him, to fear Him, and to love Him with all my heart, with all
my mind, with all my soul, and with all my strength; to worship Him,
to give Him thanks, to put my whole trust in Him, to call upon Him, to
honour His holy name and His word, and to serve Him truly all the days
of my life’? Whether children are taught their duty towards God in these
or other words matters little; but few of us will venture to say that,
in this short summary, more is demanded than it is our bounden duty and
service to yield. But I fear that many children grow up untaught in these
matters. The idea of _duty_ is not wrought into the very texture of their
souls; and _duty_ to Him who is invisible, which should be the very
foundation of life, is least taught of all. I do not say that children
are allowed to grow up without religious sentiments and religious
emotions, and that they do not say quaint and surprising things, showing
that they have an insight of their own into the higher life.

=Sentiment is not Duty.=—But duty and sentiment are two things. Sentiment
is optional; and young people grow up to think that they _may_ believe in
God, _may_ fear God, _may_ love God in a measure—but that they _must_ do
these things, that there is no choice at all about the love and service
of God, that it is their duty, that which they _owe_, to love Him ‘with
all their heart, with all their mind, with all their soul, with all their
strength,’ these things are seldom taught and understood as they should
be. Even where our sentiment is warm, our religious notions are lax;
and children, the children of good, religious parents, grow up without
that intimate, ever-open, ever-cordial, ever-corresponding relation with
Almighty God, which is the very fulfilment of life; which, whoso hath,
hath eternal life; which, whoso hath not, is, like Coleridge’s ‘lovely
Lady Geraldine,’ ice-cold and dead at heart, however much he may labour
for the free course of all other relations.

    “I want,—am made for,—and must have a God,
    Ere I can be aught, do aught;—no mere Name
    Want,—but the True Thing, with what proves its truth,—
    To wit, a relation from that Thing to me,
    Touching from head to foot:—which Touch I feel,
    And with it take the rest, this Life of ours!”

                                              —_Browning._




