CHAPTER VI

SOME EDUCATIONAL THEORIES EXAMINED


=Theories of Pestalozzi and Froebel.=—It is refreshing to turn to that
school of German educational thought which has produced the two great
apostles, Pestalozzi and Froebel. What we may call the enthusiasm of
childhood, joyous teaching, loving and lovable teachers and happy school
hours for the little people, are among the general gains from this
source. To look a gift horse in the mouth is unworthy, and it would
seem pure captiousness to detect any source of weakness in a system of
psychology to which our indebtedness is so great. But no stream can rise
higher than its source, and it is questionable whether the conception
of children as cherished plants in a cultured garden has not in it an
element of weakness. Are the children too carefully tended? Is Nature
too sedulously assisted? Is the environment too perfectly tempered?
Is it conceivable that the rough-and-tumble of a nursery should lend
itself more to the dignity and self-dependence of the _person_ and to
the evolution of individual character, than that delightful place, a
child-garden? I suppose we have all noticed that children show more keen
intelligence and more independent thought in home-play and home-talk
than one expects of the angelic little beings one sees at school.
I daresay the reader will know Fra Angelico’s picture of ‘The Last
Judgment,’ one of the scenes in which gives us a circle of little monks
(become as little children) dancing round, hand-in-hand, with gracious
angels on their way to Paradise. The little monks are obviously very
happy and very good; but somehow one misses the force of personality;
they do not look as if they were capable of striking out a line for
themselves; and this may be a danger in the Kindergarten.

=Lack the Element of Personality.=—‘Make children happy and they will be
good,’ is absolutely true, but does it develop that strenuousness, the
first condition of virtue, which comes of the contrary axiom—‘Be good
and you will be happy’? Kindergarten teachers are doing beautiful work;
but many of them are hampered by the original metaphor of the _plant_,
which is exactly lacking in that element of personality, the cherishing
and developing of which is a sacred and important part of education. The
philosophic German mind beheld in man a part of the _Cosmos_, which, like
the rest, needed only to be placed in fit conditions to develop according
to its nature.

=The Struggle for Existence, a Part of Life.=—The weak point in the
argument is that man would appear to fall under the laws of two
universes, the material and the spiritual; and that to energise and
resist and repel is the law of his being. It will be said that this
need not apply to the child; that the struggle for existence may well
begin after a happy childhood has been secured; but probably any sort of
transition violates the principles of unity and continuity which should
rule education. No doubt all thoughtful Kindergarten teachers recognise
in what direction the limitations—all men have their limitations—of their
Founder lay, and their practices are levelled up to modern thought. The
general substitution of free brush-drawing, in which the children have
some initiative, for the cramped pencil drawing in chequers of the old
Kindergarten, is an illustration of the modern spirit; but it is well for
us all to remember our origins and our tendencies, that we may recognise
and avoid our dangers.

=Herbartian Psychology.=—I have only space to glance at one more
‘psychology,’ that which is, curiously enough, dividing the American mind
with the school which regards psychology as a ‘natural science,’ and at
which English teachers are beginning to snatch as a drowning man snatches
at a straw. This is the psychology of Herbart, another German philosopher
of the beginning of the last century, contemporary with both Pestalozzi
and Froebel during the best years of his life. His theory of man is wide
as the poles apart from either of those we have already considered;
and there is no denying that it affords a tempting working basis for
education. It is only when we come to examine the Herbartian psychology
in connection with the two or three great thoughts upon which, as we have
seen, the world is being educated, that it is found wanting. Herbart
begins to account for man minus what I have called the _person_.[3]
He allows a soul, but he says, “The soul has no capacity nor faculty
whatever either to receive or to produce anything. It has originally
neither ideas nor feelings nor desires. It knows nothing of itself and
nothing of other things. Further, within it lie no forms of intuition or
thought, no laws of willing and acting, nor any sort of predisposition,
however remote, to all this.”[4] There remain two possibilities for the
soul: an effective _vis inertiæ_, and what Herbart describes as the power
of reacting on an idea; that is to say, the soul itself is no longer
quite as it was after it has thus reacted.

=The Person, an Effect and not a Cause.=—The problem is simplified
anyway. All our complex notions of intellect, will, feeling and so on,
disappear. The soul is thrown open to ideas—a fair field and no favour;
and ideas, each of them a living entity, according to the familiar
Platonic notion, crowd and jostle one another for admission, and for the
best places, and for the most important and valuable coalitions, once
they have entered. They lie below the ‘threshold’ watching a chance to
slip in. They hurry to join their friends and allies upon admission,
they ‘vault’ and they ‘taper,’ they form themselves into powerful
‘apperception masses’ which occupy a more or less permanent place in the
soul; and the soul—what does it do? It is not evident otherwise than as
it affords a stage for this drama of ideas; and the self, the soul or the
_person_, however we choose to call him, is an effect and not a cause, a
result, and not an original fact.

A philosopher who emphasises the potency of ideas does good work in the
cause of education. We get glimpses of a perfect theory—how our function
shall be, to supply the child always with fit ideas, and with the best
ideas; how we shall take care so to select and arrange these ideas that
they shall naturally fly to one another and make strong ‘apperception
masses’ once they have got beyond the ‘threshold’ in the child’s soul.

=A Tempting Vista.=—A fascinating vista is open before us; education
has all things made plain and easy for her use; she has nothing to
do but to select her ideas and turn out a man to her mind. Here is a
tempting scheme of unity and continuity! One might occupy all the classes
in a school for a whole month upon all the ideas that combine in one
‘apperception mass’ with the idea ‘book.’ We might have object-lessons
on the colours, shapes, and sizes of books; more advanced object-lessons
on paper-making and book-binding; practical lessons in book-sewing and
book-binding; lessons, according to the class, on the contents of books,
from A B C and little Bo-Peep to philosophy and poetry. A month! why, a
whole school education might be arranged in groups of ideas which should
combine into one vast ‘apperception mass,’ all clustering about ‘book.’
The sort of thing was done publicly some time ago, in London, _apple_
being the idea round which the ‘apperception mass’ gathered.

=Eliminates Personality.=—If one is to find the principles of unity and
continuity in the _ideas_ presented to the soul, this is all good and
well. But if, as we believe, these principles must emanate from the soul,
or person, himself, this tempting unity may result in the collection of a
mass of heterogeneous and unassimilated information.

=Turns out Duplicates.=—Again, given two souls supplied with precisely
the same ideas, in precisely the same order, and with no other ideas
whatsoever, and we get duplicates of the same person, a possibility which
would demolish once and for ever that great conception, the _solidarity
of the race_. Once more, what does the Herbartian theory of man minister
to our interest in personality, our sense of the _sacredness of the
person_? The person is _non est_, or is the mere sport of the ideas which
take possession of him. He has not so much as a special fitness for one
class of ideas rather than for another; all is casual; and, as for the
_evolution of the individual_, it is not he, but this or that mass of
ideas which possesses him, that expands. The man appears to be no more
than a sort of vessel of transport to carry ideas into their proper
sphere of action. Herbartian psychology is rich in suggestion, but we
cannot take it up as it stands without losing the educational value of
the two or three leading principles which are, as we say, ‘in the air’
for the teaching of mankind.

=Each System fails to meet our Tests.=—I have now examined briefly
the three or four psychologies which hold, more or less, the field of
educational thought. We see that each _advances_ truth, but that neither
expresses the whole truth even so far as to afford a working basis for
educators. So people either work on by rule of thumb, or they borrow
a fragment here and a fragment there as the case appears to demand;
like children with a hard sum whose answer they know, and who try now
division, now multiplication, now subtraction, to make it come right. No
doubt there are also many able psychologists who may not have written
books, but who work out the problems of education, not with a view to the
answer, but according to a code of inherent principles which they have
discerned for themselves.

=A Psychology that meets the Demands upon it.=—What have we to bring
forward in the way of a working psychology which shall meet the demands
I have indicated? We do not claim to be philosophers; we are modest and
practical people looking out for a secure basis for education. It is
just possible that bringing unbiassed minds and a few guiding principles
to the task, we have, not joined the parts of the puzzle, but perceived
dimly how an outline here and an outline there indicate, not so many
separate psychologies, but shadowings forth of a coherent, living,
educational principle destined to assume more and more clearness and
fulness until it is revealed to us at last as the _educational gospel_,
the discovery of which may be the destined reward and triumph of our
age. Let me try to set forth, though with diffidence, what we have done,
knowing that no man and no society can say of educational truth, ‘This is
mine and that is thine,’ for all is common, and none of us can know how
much he gives and how much he takes.

=Educational Truth a Common Possession.=—For years we have worked
definitely and consistently upon a psychology which appears to me fairly
adequate, necessary, and in touch with the thought of our age.[5]
Children brought up on this theory of education, wherever we come across
them, have certain qualities in common. They are curiously vitalised;
not bored, not all alive in the playing-field and dull and inert in the
schoolroom—even when it is that place, proverbial for dulness, a home
schoolroom taught by a governess. There is unity in their lives; they
are not two persons, one with their play-fellows and quite other with
their teachers and elders; but frank, fresh, showing keen interest in
whatever comes in their way. Then, too, there is continuity in their
education. Little children are always eager to know; but the desire for
knowledge seldom survives two or three years of school-life. But these
children begin on lines that go on from the first baby lessons, through
boyhood, girlhood, womanhood, motherhood; there is no transition stage,
but simple, natural, living progress. The claims I venture to make for
these children must rest, not only on the evidence of the few, but on the
principles upon which we work.

=We take Children as Persons.=—In the first place, we take children
seriously as _persons_ like ourselves, only more so; the first question
that comes before us is—What do we understand by a person? We believe
the thinking, invisible soul and acting, visible body to be one in so
intimate a union that—

    “Nor soul helps flesh more now than flesh helps soul.”

If the doctrine of the Resurrection had not been revealed to us, it
would be a necessity, in however unimagined a form, to our conception
of a person. The countenance of our friend with the thousand delicate
changes which express every _nuance_ of feeling; the refinement,
purpose, perception, power, revealed in his hand, the dear familiar
carriage, these are all inseparable from our conception of the person.
Whatever is advanced by the physiologist and the rational psychologist
as to the functions of that most marvellous brain cortex, the seat of
consciousness, as furnishing us with images and impulses, of the motor
nerves as originating action, of the brain as the seat of habit; of
the possibility of educating a child in all becoming habits of act, in
all sweet habits of thought, by taking measures to secure that these
habits become, as it were, a memory of the brain to be awakened by
due stimuli,—all these things we believe and receive; and we believe
further that the possibility of a rational education rests upon this
physiological basis, only fully discovered to us within the present
generation.

=The Person Wills, and Thinks, and Feels.=—But then, we believe the
assumption that all this delicate mechanism is automatic to be gratuitous
and inadequate; it is to be assumed that the _person_ should possess
such vehicle of expression and medium of relation to the outer world.
For the rest, we believe that the _person_ wills and thinks and feels;
is always present, though not always aware of himself; is without parts
or faculties; whatever he does, _he_ does, all of him, whether he take
a walk or write a book. It is so much the habit to think of the person
as a dual being, flesh and spirit, when he is, in truth, one, that it is
necessary to clear our minds on this subject. The person is one and not
several, and he is no more compact of ideas on the one hand than he is
of nervous and muscular tissues on the other. That he requires nutriment
of two kinds is no proof that he is two individuals. Pleasant and
well-cooked food makes man of a cheerful countenance, and wine gladdens
the heart of man, and we all know the spiritual refreshment of a needed
meal. On the other hand, we all know the lack-lustre eye and pallid
countenance of the well-fed who receive none of that other nutriment
which we call ideas; quick and living thought is as necessary for the
full and happy development of the body as it is for that of the soul.

=An Adequate Doctrine.=—Holding this view, we believe that our
educational doctrine is _adequate_, because, while following the progress
of biological psychology with avidity, and making use of every gain that
presents itself, and while following with equal care the advance of
philosophic thought, we recognise that each of these sees the chameleon
in a different light, that the person includes both and is more than
both; and, if our educational creed is by no means conclusive, we think
it is not narrow, because we have come across no problem of life or mind
the solution of which is shut out from us by any dogma of ours. We cannot
say that our doctrine is _necessary_, but we do say that some educational
theory which shall include the whole nature of man and the results of
scientific research, in the same or a greater degree, is necessary. We
find ourselves, too, in touch with those three great ideas which seem
to me to be the schoolmasters of the world at the present moment. The
_person_ of the child is sacred to us; we do not swamp his individuality
in his intelligence, in his conscience, or even in his soul; perhaps one
should add to-day, or even in his physical development. The person is all
these and more. We safeguard the initiative of the child and we realise
that, in educational work, we must take a back seat; the teacher, even
when the teacher is the parent, is not to be too much to the front. There
is no more facile way of swamping character and individuality than by
that idol of the ‘fifties’—_personal influence_.

=Education the Science of Relations.=—We consider that _education is the
science of relations_, or, more fully, that education considers what
relations are proper to a human being, and in what ways these several
relations can best be established; that a human being comes into the
world with capacity for many relations; and that we, for our part,
have two chief concerns—first, to put him in the way of forming these
relations by presenting the right idea at the right time, and by forming
the right habit upon the right idea; and, secondly, by not getting in the
way and so preventing the establishment of the very relations we seek to
form.

=Teaching must not be Obtrusive.=—Half the teaching one hears and sees
is more or less obtrusive. The oral lesson and the lecture, with their
accompanying notes, give very little scope for the establishment of
relations with great minds and various minds. The child who learns his
science from a text-book, though he go to Nature for illustrations,
and he who gets his information from object-lessons, has no chance of
forming relations with things as they are, because his kindly obtrusive
teacher makes him believe that to know _about_ things is the same thing
as knowing them personally; though every child knows that to know about
Prince Edward is by no means the same thing as knowing the boy-prince.
We study in many ways the art of standing aside. People sometimes write
that the books set in our school constitute much of its usefulness; they
do not always see that the choice of books, which implies the play of
various able minds directly on the mind of the child, is a great part of
that education which consists in the establishment of relations.

=The Art of Standing Aside.=—I have even known of teachers who have
thought well to compose the songs and poems which their children use.
Think of it! not even our poets are allowed to interpose between the poor
child and the probably mediocre mind of the teacher. The art of standing
aside to let a child develop the relations proper to him is the fine art
of education, when the educator perceives the two things he _must_ do and
how to do these two things. The evolution of the individual is a natural
sequence of the opening up of relations.

How we labour towards _the solidarity of the race_ I hope to show more
fully, later. But, for example, we do not endeavour to give children
outlines of ancient history, but to put them in living touch with a
thinker who lived in those ancient days. We are not content that they
should learn the history of their own country alone; some living idea
of contemporaneous European history, anyway, we try to get in; that the
history we teach may be the more living, we work in, _pari passu_, some
of the literature of the period and some of the best historical novels
and poems that treat of the period; and so on with other subjects.

There is nothing new in all this; what we venture to claim is that our
work is unified and vitalised by a comprehensive theory of education and
a sound basis of psychology.




