CHAPTER XI

SOME UNCONSIDERED ASPECTS OF INTELLECTUAL TRAINING

1. Show that we are somewhat law-abiding in matters physical and moral.

2. That we are not so in matters intellectual.

3. What are the three ultimate facts which are not open to question?

4. Show that one or other of the three is always matter of debate.

5. What three fixed points of thought do we attain when we realise that
God is, self is, and the world is?

6. Why is it necessary to recognise the limitations of reason?

7. Describe the involuntary action of reason.

8. Show, by examples, (_a_) what the function of reason is, and (_b_)
what the function of reason is not.

9. Show, by examples, that wars, persecutions, and family feuds are due
to the notion that, what reason demonstrates is right and true.

10. Why should a child be taught the limitations of his own reason?

11. What mistake is commonly made regarding intellect and knowledge?

12. Show that the world is educated by knowledge given ‘in repasts.’

13. How would you characterise our own era as regards the knowledge given
to us?

14. How did the mediæval Church recognise the divine origin of knowledge?

15. Why is nothing so practical as a great idea?

16. Show the importance of forming intellectual habits.

17. Show that we trust blindly to disciplinary studies for the formation
of such habits.

18. Name and describe half-a-dozen intellectual habits in which a child
should be trained.

19. Show that progress in the intellectual as in the Christian life
depends upon meditation.

20. Show that a child must have daily sustenance of living ideas. How do
we err in this respect?

21. Make some remarks upon the literature proper for children.

22. Illustrate the fact that the intellectual development of children is
independent.

23. By what law do children appropriate nourishing ideas?

24. What, then, is the part of parents and teachers?

25. What failing on the part of parents is often fatal to intellectual
growth?

26. Write a few remarks on each of the subjects suggested in connection
with the intellectual life of children.

27. What was the educational aim of Plato?


CHAPTER XII

SOME UNCONSIDERED ASPECTS OF MORAL TRAINING

1. What are the three principles which underlie the educational thought
proposed in these volumes?

2. What principle is universally acknowledged as the basis of moral
teaching?

3. How does authority work?

4. ‘A man can but act up to his lights’—discuss this fallacy.

5. Define the limits of authority.

6. What is the consequence of arbitrary action?

7. What old contention as to the sanctions of morality is exercising men
now?

8. Show that Socrates had to contend with the popular doctrine of to-day
in other forms.

9. What is the necessary issue of this teaching?

10. How should children be taught that duty can exist only as that which
we owe to God?

11. Show that morals do not come by nature.

12. That a certain rough and ready morality does come by heredity and
environment.

13. How do we get an educated conscience?

14. Show that children are born neither moral nor immoral.

15. Show the danger of spasmodic moral efforts.

16. Where shall we look for the basis of our moral teaching?

17. What do we owe to the poets in this regard?

18. How did the mediæval Church provide moral object lessons?

19. Illustrate our failure in this respect.

20. Why should children have the inspiration of high ideals?

21. Show the value of biography in this connection.

22. Name any virtues with which the poets inspire us.

23. Make a suggestion with regard to the culling of mottoes.

24. How may parents and teachers help children to the habit of sweet
thoughts?

25. Enumerate and discuss some of the virtues which children should be
trained to develop.

26. Distinguish between ‘being good’ and loving God.


