CHAPTER II

DOCILITY AND AUTHORITY IN THE HOME AND THE SCHOOL

PART II.—_HOW AUTHORITY BEHAVES_


=Mistakes made on Principle.=—Mr Augustus Hare has, apparently, what
somebody calls a _bad_ memory, _i.e._ one which keeps a faithful record
of every slight and offence that had been done to him since the day
he was born! For this reason _The Story of My Life_[1] is not quite
pleasant reading, though it is full of interesting details. But all is
fish that comes to our net. We have seldom had a more instructive record
of childhood, even if we must allow that the instruction comes to us on
the lines of what not to do. The fine character and beautiful nature
of Mrs Augustus Hare have been known to the world since the _Memorials
of a Quiet Life_ were published by this very son; and when we find how
this lady misinterpreted the part of mother to her adopted and dearly
beloved son, we know that we are not reading of the mistakes of an
unworthy or even of a commonplace woman. Mrs Hare always acted upon
principle, and when she erred, the principle was in fault. She confounded
the two principles of authority and autocracy. She believed that there
was some occult virtue in arbitrary action on the part of a parent,
and that a child must be the better in proportion as he does as he is
bidden—the more outrageous the bidding the better the training. Here is
an example of what a loving mother may force herself to do:—“Hitherto,
I had never been allowed anything but roast mutton and rice pudding for
dinner. Now all was changed. The most delicious puddings were talked
of—_dilated_ on—until I became, not greedy, but exceedingly curious
about them. At length _le grand moment_ arrived. They were put on the
table just before me, and then, just as I was going to eat some of them,
they were snatched away, and I was told to get up and carry them off
to some poor person in the village. I remember that, though I did not
really in the least care about the dainties, I cared excessively about
Lea’s wrath at the fate of her nice puddings, of which, after all, I was
most innocent.” Here is another arbitrary ruling:—“Even the pleasures
of this home-Sunday, however, were marred in the summer, when my mother
gave in to a suggestion of Aunt Esther that I should be locked in the
vestry of the church between the services. Miserable, indeed, were the
three hours which—provided with a sandwich for dinner—I had weekly to
spend there; and, though I did not expect to see ghosts, the utter
isolation of Hurstmonceaux church, far away from all haunts of men, gave
my imprisonment an unusual eeriness. Sometimes I used to clamber over
the tomb of the Lords Dacre, which rises like a screen against one side
of the vestry, and be stricken with vague terrors by the two grim white
figures lying upon it in the silent desolation, in which the scamper of
a rat across the floor seemed to make a noise like a whirlwind.... It was
a sort of comfort to me, in the real church-time, to repeat vigorously
all the worst curses in the Psalms, those in which David showed his most
appalling degree of malice, and apply them to Aunt Esther & Co. As all
the Psalms were extolled as beatific, and the Church of England used them
constantly for edification, their sentiments were all right, I supposed.”

And yet how wise this good mother is when she trusts to her own instinct
and insight rather than to a fallacious principle:—“I find in giving
any order to a child, it is always better not to _look_ to see if he
obeys, but to take it for granted that it will be done. If one appears to
doubt the obedience, there is occasion given for the child to hesitate,
‘Shall I do it or no?’ If you seem not to question the possibility of
non-compliance, he feels a trust committed to him to keep and fulfils
it. It is best never to repeat a command, never to answer the oft-asked
question ‘Why?’”

=Authority distinguished from Autocracy.=—Mrs Hare, like many another
ruler, would appear to have erred, not from indolence, and certainly not
from harshness, but because she failed to define to herself the nature
of the authority she was bound to exercise. Autocracy is defined as
independent or self-derived power. Authority, on the other hand, we may
qualify as not being self-derived and not independent. The centurion in
the Gospels says: “I also am a man set under authority, having under me
soldiers, and I say unto one, ‘Go,’ and he goeth; to another, ‘Come,’ and
he cometh; and to my servant, ‘Do this,’ and he doeth it.”

Here we have the powers and the limitations of authority. The centurion
is set under authority, or, as we say, authorised, and, for that reason,
he is able to say to one, ‘go,’ to another, ‘come,’ and to a third, ‘do
this,’ in the calm certainty that all will be done as he says, because
he holds his position for this very purpose—to secure that such and such
things shall be accomplished. He himself is a servant with definite
tasks, though they are the tasks of authority. This, too, is the position
that our Lord assumes; He says: “I came not to do mine own will, but
the will of Him that sent me.” That is His commission and the standing
order of His life, and for this reason He spake as one having authority,
knowing Himself to be commissioned and supported.

=Behaviour of Autocracy.=—Authority is not uneasy; captious, harsh
and indulgent by turns. This is the action of autocracy, which is
self-sustained as it is self-derived, and is impatient and resentful,
on the watch for transgressions, and swift to take offence. Autocracy
has ever a drastic penal code, whether in the kingdom, the school, or
the family. It has, too, many commandments. ‘Thou shalt’ and ‘thou shalt
not,’ are _chevaux de frise_ about the would-be awful majesty of the
autocrat. The tendency to assume self-derived power is common to us all,
even the meekest of us, and calls for special watchfulness; the more
so, because it shows itself fully as often in remitting duties and in
granting indulgences as in inflicting punishments. It is flattering when
a child comes up in the winning, coaxing way the monkeys know how to
assume, and says, ‘_Please_ let me stay at home this morning, only this
once!’ The next stage is, ‘I don’t want to go out,’ and the next, ‘I
won’t!’ and the home or school ruler, who has no principle behind his
own will, soon learns that a child can be autocratic too—autocratic and
belligerent to an alarming extent.

=Behaviour of Authority.=—Authority is neither harsh nor indulgent.
She is gentle and easy to be entreated in all matters immaterial, just
because she is immovable in matters of real importance; for these, there
is always a fixed principle. It does not, for example, rest with parents
and teachers to dally with questions affecting either the health or
the duty of their children. They have no authority to allow children
in indulgences—in too many sweetmeats, for example—or in habits which
are prejudicial to health; nor to let them off from any plain duty
of obedience, courtesy, reverence, or work. Authority is alert; she
knows all that is going on and is aware of tendencies. She fulfils the
apostolic precept—“He that ruleth (let him do it), with diligence.” But
she is strong enough to fulfil that other precept also, “He that showeth
mercy (let him do it), with cheerfulness”; timely clemency, timely
yielding, is a great secret of strong government. It sometimes happens
that children, and not their parents, have right on their side: a claim
may be made or an injunction resisted, and the children are in opposition
to parent or teacher. It is well for the latter to get the habit of
swiftly and imperceptibly reviewing the situation; possibly, the children
may be in the right, and the parent may gather up his wits in time to
yield the point graciously and send the little rebels away in a glow of
love and loyalty.

=Qualities proper to a Ruler.=—Nobody understood this better than Queen
Elizabeth, who contrived to make a curious division of her personality
and be, at the same time, a model ruler and, as a woman, full of the
weaknesses of her sex. It has been well said that she knew when to yield
and how to yield. Her adroitness in getting over many a dangerous crisis
has been much praised by historians; but, possibly, this saving grace was
not adroitness so much as the tact born of qualities proper to all who
are set in authority—the meekness of one who has been given an appointed
work, the readiness to take counsel with herself and with others, the
perception that she herself was not the be-all and the end-all of her
functions as a queen, but that she existed for her people, and the quick
and tender open-minded sympathy which enabled her to see their side of
every question as well as her own—indeed, in preference to her own. These
are the qualities proper to every ruler of a household, a school, or a
kingdom. With these, parents will be able to order and control a fiery
young brood full of energy and vitality, as Elizabeth was, to manage the
kingdom when the minds of men were in a ferment of new thought, and life
was intoxicating in the delightfulness of the possibilities it offered.

=Mechanical and Reasonable Obedience.=—It is a little difficult to
draw the line between mechanical and reasonable obedience. ‘I teach
my children obedience by the time they are one year old,’ the writer
heard a very successful mother remark; and, indeed, that is the age
at which to begin to give children the ease and comfort of the habit
of obeying lawful authority. We know Mr Huxley’s story of the retired
private who was carrying home his Sunday’s dinner from the bakehouse.
A sergeant passed by who recognised the man’s soldierly gait, and was
bent on a practical joke. ‘Attention!’ he cried, and the man stood at
attention while his mutton and potatoes rolled in the gutter. Now, this
kind of obedience is a mere question of nerves and muscles, a habit of
the brain tissue with which the moral consciousness has nothing to do.
It is a little the fashion to undervalue any but reasonable obedience,
as if we were creatures altogether of mind and spirit, or creatures
whose bodies answer as readily to the ruling of the spirit as does the
ship to the helm. But, alas for our weakness! this description fits us
only in proportion as our bodies have been trained to the discipline
of unthinking mechanical obedience. We all know the child who is fully
willing to do the right thing so far as mind is concerned, but with whom
bodily _vis inertiæ_ is strong enough to resist a very torrent of good
intentions and good resolutions; and if we wish children to be able, when
they grow up, to keep under their bodies and bring them into subjection,
we must do this _for_ them in their earlier years.

=Response of Docility to Authority, a Natural Function.=—So far as the
daily routine of small obediences goes, we help them thus to fulfil a
natural function—the response of docility to authority. It may be said
that a child who has acquired the habit of involuntary obedience has
proportionately lost power as a free moral agent; but, as the acts of
obedience in question are very commonly connected with some physical
effort, as, ‘Make haste back,’ ‘Sit straight,’ ‘Button your boots
quickly,’—they belong to the same educational province as gymnastic
exercises, the object of which is the masterly use of the body as a
machine capable of many operations. Now, to work a machine such as a
typewriter or a bicycle, one must, before all things, have practice;
one must have got into the way of working it involuntarily, without
giving any thought to the matter: and to give a child this power over
himself—first in response to the will of another, later, in response to
his own, is to make a man of him.

=The Habit of Prompt Obedience.=—It is an old story that the failures in
life are not the people who lack good intentions; they are those whose
physical nature has not acquired the habit of prompt and involuntary
obedience. The man who can make himself do what he wills has the world
before him, and it rests with parents to give their children this
self-compelling power as a mere matter of habit. But is it not better
and higher, it may be asked, to train children to act always in response
to the divine mandate as it makes itself heard through the voice of
conscience? The answer is, that in doing this we must not leave the other
undone. There are few earnest parents who do not bring the power of
conscience to bear on their children, and there are emergencies enough in
the lives of young and old when we have to make a spiritual decision upon
spiritual grounds—when it rests with us to choose the good and refuse
the evil, consciously and voluntarily, because it is God’s will that we
should.

=The Effort of Decision.=—But it has been well said by a celebrated
preacher that the effort of decision is the greatest effort of life. We
find it so ourselves; shall we take this line of action or the other,
shall we choose this or the other quality of carpet, send our boy to
this or the other school? We all know that such questions are difficult
to settle, and the wear and tear of nervous tissue the decision costs
is evidenced often enough by the nervous headache it leaves behind. For
this reason it is, we may reverently believe, that we are so marvellously
and mercifully made that most of our decisions arrive, so to speak, of
themselves: that is, ninety-nine out of a hundred things we do, are done,
well or ill, as mere matters of habit. With this wonderful provision in
our tissues for recording repeated actions and reproducing them upon
given stimuli—a means provided for easing the burden of life, and for
helping us to realise the gay happiness which appears to be the divine
intention for us so far as we become like little children—it is startling
and shocking that there are many children of thoughtful parents whose
lives are spent in day-long efforts of decision upon matters which it is
their parents’ business to settle for them. Maud is nervous, excitable,
has an over-active brain, is too highly organised, grows pale, acquires
nervous tricks. The doctor is consulted, and, not knowing much about the
economy of the home, decides that it is a case of over-pressure. Maud
must do no lessons for six months; change of air is advised, and milk
diet. Somehow the prescription does not answer, the child’s condition
does not improve; but the parents are slow to perceive that it is not the
soothing routine of lessons which is exhausting the little girl, but the
fact that she goes through the labour of decision twenty times a day, and
not only that, but the added fatigue of a contest to get her own way.
Every point in the day’s routine is discussed, nothing comes with the
comforting ease of a matter of course; the child always prefers to do
something else, and commonly does it. No wonder the poor little girl is
worn out.

=Authority avoids Cause of Offence.=—On the other hand, children are
before all things reasonable beings, and to some children of acute
and powerful intelligence, an arbitrary and apparently unreasonable
command is cruelly irritating. It is not advisable to answer children
categorically when they want to know the why for every command, but wise
parents steer a middle course. They are careful to form habits upon which
the routine of life runs easily, and, when the exceptional event requires
a new regulation, they may make casual mention of their reasons for
having so and so done; or, if this is not convenient and the case is a
trying one, they give the children the reason for all obedience—“for this
is right.” In a word, authority avoids, so far as may be, giving cause of
offence.

=Authority is Alert.=—Another hint as to the fit use of authority may
be gleaned from the methods employed in a well-governed state. The
importance of _prevention_ is fully recognised: police, army, navy, are
largely preventive forces; and the home authority, too, does well to
place its forces on the Alert Service. It is well to prepare for trying
efforts: ‘We shall have time to finish this chapter before the clock
strikes seven’; or, ‘we shall be able to get in one more round before
bedtime.’ Nobody knows better than the wise mother the importance of
giving a child time to collect himself for a decisive moment. This time
should be spent in finishing some delightful occupation; every minute of
idleness at these critical junctures goes to the setting up of the _vis
inertiæ_, most difficult to overcome because the child’s will power is in
abeyance. A little forethought is necessary to arrange that occupations
do come to an end at the right moment; that bedtime does not arrive in
the middle of a chapter, or at the most exciting moment of a game. In
such an event authority, which looks before and after, _might_ see its
way to allow five minutes’ grace, but would not feel itself empowered to
allow a child to dawdle about indefinitely before saying good-night.

=Who gave thee this Authority?=—We need not add that authority is just
and faithful in all matters of promise-keeping; it is also considerate,
and that is why a good mother is the best home-ruler; she is in touch
with the children, knows their unspoken schemes and half-formed desires,
and where she cannot yield, she diverts; she does not crush with a
sledge-hammer, an instrument of rule with which a child is somehow never
very sympathetic.

We all know how important this, of changing children’s thoughts,
diverting, is in the formation of habit. Let us not despise the day
of small things nor grow weary in well-doing; if we have trained our
children from their earliest years to prompt mechanical obedience, well
and good; we reap our reward. If we have not, we must be content to lead
by slow degrees, by ever-watchful efforts, by authority never in abeyance
and never aggressive, to ‘the joy of self-control,’ the delight of proud
chivalric obedience which will hail a command as an opportunity for
service. It is a happy thing that the ‘difficult’ children who are the
readiest to resist a direct command are often the quickest to respond to
the stimulus of an idea. The presentation of quickening ideas is itself a
delicate art, which I have, however, considered elsewhere.

I am not proposing a one-sided arrangement, all the authority on the one
part and all the docility on the other; for never was there a child who
did not wield authority, if only over dolls or tin soldiers. And we of
the ruling class, so far as the nursery and schoolroom go, are we not
fatally docile in yielding obedience to anyone who will take the trouble
to tell us we had better do this or that? We need not be jealous for the
independence of children: that will take care of itself.

To conclude: authority is not only a gift, but a grace; and,

    “As every rainbow hue is light,
    So every grace is love.”

Authority is that aspect of love which parents present to their children;
parents know it is love, because to them it means continual self-denial,
self-repression, self-sacrifice: children recognise it as love, because
to them it means quiet rest and gaiety of heart. Perhaps the best aid to
the maintenance of authority in the home is for those in authority to
ask themselves daily that question which was presumptuously put to our
Lord—“Who gave Thee this authority?”




