CHAPTER XIII

SOME UNCONSIDERED ASPECTS OF RELIGIOUS EDUCATION

1. Show how the principle of authority bears on religious teaching.

2. In what ideas do the children of our day need especially to be brought
up?

3. How do certain questions ‘in the air’ militate against the sense of
authority?

4. In what respects does authority work like a good and just national
government?

5. Discuss authority in connection with punishment.

6. Discuss each of the various themes suggested in connection with the
subject of authority in the religious life.

7. Show that lines of habit are as important for the religious as for the
physical, moral, and intellectual life.

8. How would you endeavour to keep a child in the habit of the thought of
God?

9. Discuss the question of reverent attitudes.

10. How would you use ‘because of the angels’ in this connection?

11. Show the importance of regularity in time and place in children’s
prayers.

12. Why should not their evening prayers be left till bedtime?

13. What is to be said of little text-books?

14. Show the danger of losing the narrative teaching of the Scriptures.

15. Why should not children be encouraged in long readings or long
prayers?

16. How should the habit of praise be fostered?

17. Show the value of the habit of Sunday-keeping, and describe a child’s
Sunday.

18. Write your reflections on each of the themes suggested in connection
with the habits of the religious life.

19. Show the importance of selecting the inspiring ideas we propose to
give children in the things of the Divine life.

20. What other point demands our care?

21. What vitalising idea is of first importance in the teaching of
children?

22. How should children be taught that the essence of Christianity is
devotion to a Person?

23. Why is it necessary to teach children that there is a Saviour of the
world?

24. What teaching would you give them about the work of the Holy Spirit?


CHAPTER XIV

A MASTER-THOUGHT

1. What is the motto of the Parents’ Union?

2. Show that this motto is a master-thought.

3. Why is ‘education is an atmosphere’ the clause of the motto that
pleases us most?

4. What is the result if this _part_ be taken for the _whole_?

5. What defect in education leads to _ennui_ and the desire to be amused
by shows.

6. What was the unconscious formula of the eighteenth century?

7. What was the result of this one-sided view of education?

8. Show that the idea of the development of the faculties also rests upon
a one-sided notion.

9. What is the tendency of an education grounded upon the development of
faculties?

10. Should it be our aim to produce specialists? Why not?

11. Show what manner of education results in a sound and well-balanced
mind.

12. Show that the mediæval Church understood, better than we, that
‘education is a life.’

13. Sketch the scheme of educational philosophy to be found on the walls
of the ‘Spanish Chapel’ of S. Maria Novella.

14. Show how this educational creed unifies life.

15. What does Coleridge say of the origin of great ideas of nature?

16. What does Michael Angelo write to his friend of the need for a diet
of great ideas?

17. What is the special teaching vouchsafed to men to-day?

18. What views are people apt to take with regard to this teaching?

19. What does Huxley say about ideas in science?

20. How does the teaching of Simone Memmi and Coleridge relieve us from
anxiety and make clear our perplexities?

21. How does Coleridge describe Botany, as that science existed in his
day?

22. What has evolution, the key-word of our age, done for this and other
perplexities?

23. But what has been the object of pursuit among philosophers for three
thousand years?

24. How did Heraklitos attempt to solve the problem?

25. How did Demokritos?

26. Show that some knowledge of history and philosophy should give us
pause in using the key of evolution.

27. Show that personality remains, and is not resolvable by this key.

28. Why is it necessary for parents and teachers to consider their
attitude towards this question?

29. What are the four attitudes which it is possible to take up?

30. What gains will the children derive if their teachers adopt the
last-mentioned of these?

31. What two things are incumbent upon us with regard to the great ideas
by which the world is being taught?

32. Show the danger of making too personal a matter of education.

33. If education is a world-business, show that we must have a guiding
idea about it.

34. What ideas should regulate the curriculum of a boy or girl under
fourteen?

35. Show the importance of good books and many books for the use of
children.

36. Why may we not choose or reject certain ‘subjects’ arbitrarily?


