CHAPTER XV

SCHOOL-BOOKS AND HOW THEY MAKE FOR EDUCATION


=Line upon Line.=—The theme of ‘School-Books’ is not a new one, and I
daresay the reader will find that I have said before what I shall say
now. But we are not like those men of Athens who met to hear and to
tell some new thing; and he will, I know, bear with me because he will
recognise how necessary it is to repeat again and again counsels which
are like waves beating against the rock of an accepted system of things.
But, in time, the waves prevail and the rock wears away; so we go to work
with good hope. Let me introduce what I have to say about school-books by
a little story from an antiquated source.

=An Incident of Schoolgirl Life.=—Frederika Bremer, in her novel of
_The Neighbours_ (published 1837), tells an incident of schoolgirl life
(possibly a bit of autobiography), with great spirit. Though it is rather
long, I think the reader will thank me for it—the little episode advances
what I have to say better than could any duller arguments of my own.

The heroine says:—“I was then sixteen, and, fortunately for my restless
character, my right shoulder began to project at the time. Gymnastics
were then in fashion as remedies against all manner of defects, and
my parents determined to let me try gymnastics. Arrayed in trimmed
pantaloons, a _Bonjour_ coat of green cloth and a little morning cap with
pink ribbon, I made my appearance one day in an assemblage of from thirty
to forty figures dressed almost the same as myself, who were merrily
swarming about a large saloon, over ropes, ladders, and poles. It was
a strange and novel scene. I kept myself in the background the first
day, and learned from my governess the ‘bending of the back’ and the
‘exercises of the arms and legs.’ The second day I began to be intimate
with some of the girls, the third I vied with them on ropes and ladders,
and ere the close of the second week I was the leader of the second
class, and began to encourage them to all manner of tricks.

“At that time I was studying Greek history; their heroes and their heroic
deeds filled my imagination even in the gymnastic school. I proposed to
my band to assume masculine and antique names and, in this place, to
answer to no other than such as Agamemnon, Epaminondas, etc. For myself
I chose the name of Orestes, and called my best friend in the class,
Pylades. There was a tall thin girl, with a Finlandish accent, whom I
greatly disliked, chiefly on account of the disrespect for me and my
ideas which she manifested without reserve; ... from this arose fresh
cause for quarrels.

“Although in love with the Greek history, I was no less taken with the
Swedish. Charles XII. was my idol, and I often entertained my friends
in my class with narration of his deeds till my own soul was on fire
with the most glowing enthusiasm. Like a shower of cold water, Darius
(the tall girl, whose name was Britsa) one day came into the midst of
us, and opposed me with the assertion that the Czar Peter I. was a much
greater man than Charles XII. I accepted the challenge with blind zeal
and suppressed rage. My opponent brought forward a number of facts with
coolness and skill, in support of her opinion, and when I, confuting all
her positions, thought to exalt my victorious hero to the clouds, she was
perpetually throwing Bender and Pultawa in my way. O Pultawa! Pultawa!
many tears have fallen over thy bloody battlefield, but none more bitter
than those which I shed in secret when I, like Charles himself, suffered
a defeat there. Fuel was added to the flame until—‘I challenge you, I
demand satisfaction,’ cried I to Darius, who only laughed and said,
‘Bravo, bravo!’ ... I exclaimed, ‘You have insulted me shamefully, and I
request that you ask my pardon in the presence of the whole class, and
acknowledge that Charles XII. was a greater man than Czar Peter, or else
you shall fight with me, if you have any honour in your breast and are
not a coward.’ Britsa Kaijsa blushed, but said with detestable coolness:
‘Ask pardon indeed? I should never dream of such a thing. Fight? O, yes,
I have no objection! but where and with what? With pins, think you,
or’—‘With the sword if you are not afraid, and on this very spot. We
can meet here half an hour before the rest; arms I shall bring with me;
Pylades is my second and you shall appoint your own!’ ... Next morning
when I had entered the spacious saloon, I found my enemy already there
with her second. Darius and I saluted each other proudly and distantly.
I gave her the first choice of the swords. She took one and flourished
it about quite dexterously, as if she had been accustomed to the use of
it. I saw myself (in imagination) already stabbed to the heart.... ‘Czar
Peter _was_ a great man,’ cried Darius. ‘Down with him! long life to
Charles XII.!’ I cried, bursting into a furious rage. I placed myself in
an attitude of defence. Darius did the same.... Our swords clashed one
against the other, and in the next moment I was disarmed and thrown on
the ground. Darius stood over me and I believed my last hour had arrived.
How astonished was I, however, when my enemy threw her sword away from
her, took me by the hand and lifted me up, whilst she cheerfully cried:
‘Well, now you have satisfaction; let us be good friends again; you are
a brave little body!’ At this moment a tremendous noise was heard at the
door and in rushed the fencing master and three teachers. My senses now
forsook me.”

I hope the reader is not among the naughty children who read the fable
and skip the moral; for, whatever is to follow, is, in fact, the moral of
this pretty incident.

=How did the Girls get their Enthusiasm?=—What was it, we wonder, in
their school-books that these Swedish maidens found so exciting? There
is no hint of other than _school_ reading. In the first place we may
conclude it was _books_. The oral lesson for young children, the lecture
for older, had not been invented in the earlier years of the last
century. We use books in our schoolrooms; but one does not hear of wild
enthusiasm, ungovernable excitement, over the tabulated events of the
history books, the tabulated facts of the science primers. Those Swedish
girls must have used books of another sort; and it is to our interest to
find out of what sort. As records would be hard to come by, we must look
for information to the girls themselves; not that we can summon them to
give a direct answer, but if we can get at what _they_ were, we shall be
able to make a good guess at what should fire their souls.

=What manner of Book sustains the Life of Thought?=—The story discloses
no more than that they were intelligent girls, probably the children of
intelligent parents. But that is enough for our purpose. The question
resolves itself into—What manner of book will find its way with upheaving
effect into the mind of an intelligent boy or girl? We need not ask what
the girl or boy likes. _She_ very often likes the twaddle of goody-goody
story books, _he_ likes condiments, highly-spiced tales of adventure. We
are all capable of liking mental food of a poor quality and a titillating
nature; and possibly such food is good for us when our minds are in need
of an elbow-chair; but our spiritual life is sustained on other stuff,
whether we be boys or girls, men or women. By spiritual I mean that which
is not corporeal; and which, for convenience’ sake, we call by various
names—the life of thought, the life of feeling, the life of the soul.

It is curious how every inquiry, superficial as it may seem to
begin with, leads us to fundamental principles. This simple-seeming
question—what manner of school-books should our boys and girls use?—leads
us straight to one of the two great principles which bottom educational
thought.

=The School-Books of the Publishers.=—I believe that spiritual life,
using spiritual in the sense I have indicated, is sustained upon only one
manner of diet—the diet of ideas—the living progeny of living minds. Now,
if we send to any publisher for his catalogue of school books, we find
that it is accepted as the nature of a school-book that it be drained dry
of living thought. It may bear the name of a thinker, but then it is the
abridgment of an abridgment, and all that is left for the unhappy scholar
is the dry bones of his subject denuded of soft flesh and living colour,
of the stir of life and power of moving. Nothing is left but what Oliver
Wendell Holmes calls the ‘mere brute fact.’

It cannot be too often said that information is not education. You may
answer an examination question about the position of the Seychelles and
the Comoro Islands without having been anywise nourished by the fact of
these island groups existing in such and such latitudes and longitudes;
but if you follow Bullen in _The Cruise of the Cachelot_, the names
excite that little mental stir which indicates the reception of real
knowledge.

=Reason for Oral Teaching.=—Intelligent teachers are well aware of the
dry-as-dust character of school books, so they fall back upon the ‘oral’
lesson, one of whose qualities must be that it is not _bookish_. Living
ideas can be derived only from living minds, and so it occasionally
happens that a vital spark is flashed from teacher to pupil. But
this occurs only when the subject is one to which the teacher has
given _original_ thought. In most cases the oral lesson, or the more
advanced lecture, consists of information got up by the teacher from
various books, and imparted in language, a little pedantic, or a little
commonplace, or a little reading-made-easy in style. At the best, the
teacher is not likely to have vital interest in, and, consequently,
original thought upon, a wide range of subjects.

=Limitations of Teachers.=—We wish to place before the child open doors
to many avenues of instruction and delight, in each one of which he
should find quickening thoughts. We cannot expect a school to be manned
by a dozen master-minds, and even if it were, and the scholar were taught
by each in turn, it would be much to his disadvantage. What he wants of
his teacher is moral and mental discipline, sympathy and direction; and
it is better, on the whole, that the training of the pupil should be
undertaken by one wise teacher than that he should be passed from hand to
hand for this subject and that.

=Our aim in Education is to give a Full Life.=—We begin to see what we
want. Children make large demands upon us. We owe it to them to initiate
an immense number of interests. ‘Thou hast set my feet in a large room,’
should be the glad cry of every intelligent soul. Life should be all
_living_, and not merely a tedious passing of time; not all doing or
all feeling or all thinking—the strain would be too great—but, all
living; that is to say, we should be in touch wherever we go, whatever
we hear, whatever we see, with some manner of vital interest. We cannot
_give_ the children these interests; we prefer that they should never
say they have learned botany or conchology, geology or astronomy. The
question is not,—how much does the youth _know_? when he has finished
his education—but how much does he _care_? and about how many orders of
things does he care? In fact, how large is the room in which he finds his
feet set? and, therefore, how full is the life he has before him?

I know you may bring a horse to the water, but you cannot make him drink.
What I complain of is that we do _not_ bring our horse to the water. We
give him miserable little text-books, mere compendiums of facts, which
he is to learn off and say and produce at an examination; or we give him
various knowledge in the form of warm diluents, prepared by his teacher
with perhaps some grains of living thought to the gallon. And all the
time we have books, books teeming with ideas fresh from the minds of
thinkers upon every subject to which we can wish to introduce children.

=We undervalue Children.=—The fact is, we undervalue children. The
notion that an infant is a huge oyster, who by slow degrees, and more
and more, develops into that splendid intellectual and moral being, a
full-grown man or woman, has been impressed upon us so much of late years
that we believe intellectual spoon-meat to be the only food for what we
are pleased to call ‘little minds.’ It is nothing to us that William
Morris read his first Waverley Novel when he was four and had read the
whole series by the time he was seven. He did not die of it, but lived
and prospered; unlike that little Richard, son of John Evelyn, who died
when he was five years and three days old, a thing not to be wondered at
when we read that he had ‘a strong passion for Greek, could turn English
into Latin and _vice versâ_ with the greatest ease,’ had ‘a wonderful
disposition to Mathematics, having by heart divers propositions of
Euclid’; but I quote little Richard (nobody could ever have called him
Dick) by way of warning and not of example.

Macaulay seems to have begun life as a great reader. We know the
delightful story of how, when Hannah More called on his parents, he, a
little boy of four, came forward with pretty hospitality to say that if
she ‘would be good enough to come in’ he would bring her ‘a glass of old
spirits.’ He explained afterwards that ‘Robinson Crusoe often had some.’

=Children of the Last Generation.=—But we may dismiss these precocious
or exceptional children. All we ask of them is to remind us that our
grandfathers and grandmothers recognised children as reasonable beings,
persons of mind and conscience like themselves; but, needing their
guidance and control, as having neither knowledge nor experience.
Witness the queer old children’s books which have come down to us; these
addressed children as, before all things, reasonable, intelligent,
and responsible persons. This is the note of home-life in the last
generation. So soon as the baby realised his surroundings, he found
himself morally and intellectually responsible.

=Children as they are.=—And children have not altered. This is how we
find them—with intelligence more acute, logic more keen, observing powers
more alert, moral sensibilities more quick, love and faith and hope more
abounding; in fact, in all points like as we are, only more so; but
absolutely ignorant of the world and its belongings, of us and our ways,
and, above all, of how to control and direct and manifest the infinite
possibilities with which they are born.

=Our Work, to give vitalising Ideas.=—Knowing that the brain is the
physical seat of habit and that conduct and character, alike, are the
outcome of the habits we allow; knowing, too, that an inspiring idea
initiates a new habit of thought, and hence, a new habit of life; we
perceive that the great work of education is to inspire children with
vitalising ideas as to every relation of life, every department of
knowledge, every subject of thought; and to give deliberate care to
the formation of those habits of the good life which are the outcome
of vitalising ideas. In this great work we seek and assuredly find the
co-operation of the Divine Spirit, whom we recognise, in a sense rather
new to modern thought, as the supreme Educator of mankind in things that
have been called secular, fully as much as in those that have been called
sacred.




