CHAPTER IX

A GREAT EDUCATIONALIST

(_A REVIEW_)


=We look to Germany for Educational Reform.=—We in England require, every
now and then, to pull ourselves together, and to ask what they are doing
on the Continent in the way of education. We still hark back to the older
German educational reformers. We may not know much of Comenius, Basedow,
Ratich; we do know something of Pestalozzi and Froebel; but how much do
we know of the thought of Johann Friedrich Herbart, the lineal successor
of these, who has largely displaced his predecessors in the field of
Pedagogics?

=Herbartian Thought the most advanced on the Continent.=—How entirely
German educators work upon Herbart, and Herbart only, is proved by the
existence of a Herbartian educational literature greatly more extensive
than the whole of our English educational literature put together.

A little volume on the _Outlines of Pedagogics_,[8] by Professor W. Rein,
of the University of Jena, is offered to us by the translators, C. C. and
Ida J. Van Liew, as a brief introduction to the study of Herbart and his
school, the author making due allowance for the advances that have been
made in the decades that have elapsed since Herbart’s death.

As Herbart and his interpreters represent the most advanced school of
educational thought on the Continent, it will, perhaps, be interesting to
the reader to make a slight comparison between the educational philosophy
I am trying to set forth, and the school of thought which exercises such
immense influence in Germany.

=Comparison with P.N.E.U. Thought.=—One of the most characteristic
features of Herbart’s thinking, and that feature of it which constitutes
a new school of educational thought, is, that he rejects the notion of
separate mental faculties. The earlier reformers, notably Pestalozzi and
Froebel, divide the faculties up with something of the precision of a
phrenologist, and a chief business of education is, according to them,
‘to develop the faculties.’

=The Development of the Faculties.=—There is a certain pleasing neatness
in this idea which is very attractive. We want to know, definitely, what
we have to do. Why, develop the perceptive faculties here, with the
conceptive there, the judgment in this lesson, the affections in the
other, until you have covered the whole ground, giving each so-called
faculty its due share of developmental exercise! But, say the followers
of Herbart, we have changed all that. The mind, like Wordsworth’s cloud,
moves altogether when it moves at all.

=We, like Herbart, discard the ‘Faculties.’=—Now this appears to be but
a slight fundamental difference, but it is one upon the recognition of
which education changes front. The whole system of beautifully organised
lessons, whose object is to develop this or that faculty, is called in
question; for the _raison d’être_ of specialised intellectual gymnastics
is gone when we no longer recognise particular ‘muscles’ of the mind to
be developed. The aim of education must be something quite other, and, if
the aim is other, the methods must be altered, for what is method but _a
way to an end_? So far we are entirely with Herbart; we do not believe in
the ‘faculties’; therefore we do not believe in the ‘development of the
faculties’; therefore we do not regard lessons as instruments for this
‘development’: in fact, our whole method of procedure is altered.

=Pervasiveness of Dominant Ideas.=—Again, we are with the philosopher in
his recognition of the force of an idea, and especially of those ideas
which are, as we phrase it, in the air at any given moment. “Both the
circle of the family and that of social intercourse are subjected to
forces that are active in the entire social body, and that penetrate
the entire atmosphere of human life in invisible channels. No one knows
whence these currents, these ideas arise; but they are there. They
influence the moods, the aspirations, and the inclinations of humanity,
and no one, however powerful, can withdraw himself from their effects;
no sovereign’s command makes its way into their depths. They are often
born of a genius to be seized upon by the multitude that soon forgets
their author; then the power of the thought that has thus become active
in the masses again impels the individual to energetic resolutions: in
this manner it is constantly describing a remarkable circle. Originating
with those that are highly gifted, these thoughts permeate all society,
reaching, in fact, not only its adult members, but also through these
its youth, and appearing again in other highly gifted individuals in whom
they will perhaps have been elevated to a definite form.

“Whether the power of these dominant ideas is greater in the individual,
or in the body of individuals as a whole, is a matter of indifference
here. Be that as it may, it cannot be denied that their effect upon the
one is manifested in a reciprocal action upon the other, and that their
influence upon the younger generation is indisputable.”

=The Zeitgeist.=—We entirely agree that no one can escape the influence
of this Zeitgeist, and that the Zeitgeist is, in fact, one of the most
powerful of the occult educational influences, and one which parents and
all who have the training of children will do well to reckon with in the
adjustment of their work.

=The Child’s Schoolmasters.=—Nature, family, social intercourse, this
Zeitgeist, the Church and the State, thus Professor Rein, as interpreting
Herbart, sums up the schoolmasters under whose influences every child
grows up; a suggestive enumeration we should do well to consider.
‘_Erziehung ist Sache der Familien; von da geht sie aus und dahin kehrt
sie grössenteils zurück_,’ says Herbart. He considers, as do we, that
by far the most valuable part of education is carried on in the family,
because of the union of all the members under a common parentage, of the
feeling of dependence upon a head, of the very intimate knowledge to be
gained of the younger members.

=A Noble Piety.=—“The members of the family look confidently to the
head; and this sense of dependence favours, at the same time, the proper
reception of that which is dearest to mankind, namely, the religious
feeling. If the life of the family is permeated by a noble piety, a
sincere religious faith will take root in the hearts of the children.
Faithful devotion to the guide of the youth also calls forth faithful
devotion to Him who controls human destinies—a thought which Herbart
expresses so beautifully in the words—‘To the child, the family should be
the symbol of the order in the world; from the parents one should derive
by idealisation the characteristics of the deity.’”

=A Mediæval Conception of Education.=—This idea of all education
springing from and resting upon our relation to Almighty God is one
which we have ever laboured to enforce. We take a very distinct stand
upon this point. We do not merely give a _religious_ education, because
that would seem to imply the possibility of some other education, a
secular education, for example. But we hold that all education is
divine, that every good gift of knowledge and insight comes from above,
that the Lord the Holy Spirit is the supreme educator of mankind, and
that the culmination of all education (which may, at the same time, be
reached by a little child) is that personal knowledge of and intimacy
with God in which our being finds its fullest perfection. We hold, in
fact, that great conception of education held by the mediæval Church, as
pictured upon the walls of the Spanish chapel in Florence. Here we have
represented the descent of the Holy Ghost upon the Twelve, and directly
under them, fully under the illuminating rays, are the noble figures
of the seven liberal arts, Grammar, Rhetoric, Logic, Music, Astronomy,
Geometry, Arithmetic, and under these again the men who received and
expressed, so far as the artist knew, the initial idea in each of these
subjects; such men as Pythagoras, Zoroaster, Euclid, whom _we_ might call
pagans, but whom the earlier Church recognised as divinely taught and
illuminated.

=The Family Principle.=—Here follows a passage which we do more than
endorse, for it contains the very _raison d’être_ of our society. “The
education of the children will always remain the holiest and highest
of all family duties. The welfare, civilisation, and culture of a
people depend essentially upon the degree of success that attends the
education in the homes. The family principle is the point at which both
the religious and educational life of a people centres, and about which
it revolves. It is a force in comparison with which every sovereign’s
command appears powerless.”

By the way, we are inclined to think that Dr Rein’s mention of
Rousseau is a little misleading. It is true that in _Emil_ the parents
are supplanted, but, notwithstanding that fact, perhaps no other
educationalist has done so much to awaken parents to their great work
as educators. After investigating the conditions of home training, Dr
Rein proceeds to a discussion of schools (_a_) as they exist in Germany;
(_b_) as they exist in his own ideal, a discussion which should be most
interesting to parents.

=Uncertainty as to the Purpose of Education.=—Teleology, _i.e._ the
theory of the purpose of education, falls next under discussion in
an extremely instructive chapter. It is well we should know the vast
uncertainty which exists on this fundamental point. As a matter of fact,
few of us know definitely what we propose to ourselves in the education
of our children. We do not know what it is possible to effect, and, as
a man does not usually compass more than he aims at, the results of our
education are very inadequate and unsatisfactory.

=Some Attempts to fix the Purpose of Education.=—“Shall the educator
follow Rousseau and educate a man of nature in the midst of civilised
men? In so doing, as Herbart has shown, we should simply repeat from the
beginning the entire series of evils that have already been surmounted.
Or shall we turn to Locke and prepare the pupil for the world which is
customarily in league with worldlings? We should then arrive at the
standpoint of Basedow, and aim to educate the pupil so that he would
become a truly useful member of human society. Of course we should always
be harassed with the secret doubt as to whether this is the ideal purpose
after all, and whether we are not at times directly enjoined to place the
pupil at variance with the usage and customary dealings of the world. If
we reflect that an endless career is open to man for his improvement, we
realise that only that education, whose aims are always the highest, can
hope to reach the lofty goals that mark this career.

“Therefore an ideal aim must be present in the mind of the educator.
Possibly he can obtain information and help from Pestalozzi, whose nature
evinced such ideal tendencies. Pestalozzi wished the welfare of mankind
to be sought in the harmonious cultivation of _all_ powers. If one only
knew what is to be understood by a multiplicity of mental powers, and
what is meant by the _harmony_ of various powers. These phrases sound
very attractive, but give little satisfaction. The purely _formal_ aims
of education will appeal just as little to the educator: ‘Educate the
pupil to independence’; or, ‘Educate the pupil to be his own educator’;
or, ‘Educate the pupil so that “it” will become better than “its”
educator.’ (_Hermann and Dorothea_, Hector and Astyanax in the _Iliad_.)
Such and similar attempts to fix the purpose of education are abundant
in the history of pedagogy; but they do not bring us nearer the goal. In
their formal character they do not say, for example, of what kind the
independence shall be, what content it shall have, what aims it shall
have in view, or in what directions its course shall lie. For the pupil
that has become independent can use his freedom rightly for good just as
well as misuse it for evil.”

=Herbart’s Theory, Ethical.=—Herbart’s own theory of education, so far
as we may venture to formulate it, is strictly ethical as opposed to
intellectual, that is, the development and sustenance of the intellect
is of secondary importance to the educator for two reasons: character
building is the matter of first importance to human beings; and this
because, (_a_) train character and intellectual ‘development’ largely
takes care of itself, and (_b_) the lessons designed for intellectual
culture have high ethical value, whether stimulating or disciplinary.
This is familiar ground to us: we too have taught, in season and out of
season, that the formation of character is the aim of the educator. So
far, we are at one with the philosopher; but, may we venture to say it?
we have arrived, through the study of Physiology, at the definiteness of
aim which he desires but does not reach.

=Obscurity of Psychology.=—We must appeal, he says, to Psychology, but
then, he adds, “of course we cannot expect a concordant answer from all
psychologists; and in view of the obscurity which still prevails in this
sphere, the different views as to the nature of the human soul and the
extraordinary difficulty with which the empirical method of investigation
meets, an absolutely indubitable explanation can hardly be expected.”

=Two Luminous Principles.=—This is doubtless true of Psychology alone,
but of Psychology illuminated by Physiology we have another tale to tell.
It is the study of that border-land betwixt mind and matter, the brain,
which yields the richest results to the educator. For the brain is the
seat of habit: the culture of habit is, to a certain extent, physical
culture: the discipline of habit is at least a third part of the great
whole which we call education, and here we feel that the physical science
of to-day has placed us far in advance of the philosopher of fifty years
ago. We hold with him entirely as to the importance of great formative
ideas in the education of children, but we add to our ideas, habits, and
we labour to form habits upon a physical basis. Character is the result
not merely of the great ideas which are given to us, but of the habits
which we labour to form _upon those ideas_. We recognise both principles,
and the result is a wide range of possibilities in education, practical
methods, and a definite aim. We labour to produce a human being at his
best physically, mentally, morally, and spiritually, with the enthusiasms
of religion, of the good life, of nature, knowledge, art, and manual
work; and we do _not_ labour in the dark.

I have ventured to indicate in a former chapter what appears to me the
root-defect of the educational philosophy of this great thinker—that
it tends to eliminate personality, and therefore leads to curious
futilities in teaching. It is therefore the more gratifying to observe
that certain fundamental ideas, long the property of the world, which we
have embraced in our scheme of thought, appealed with equal force to so
great and original a thinker as Herbart.




