CHAPTER X

SOME UNCONSIDERED ASPECTS OF PHYSICAL TRAINING


Perhaps never since the days of the Olympian games has more attention
been paid to physical culture than it receives in England to-day.
But possibly this physical cult suffers from the want of unity and
sanctity of purpose which nullifies to a considerable extent most of our
educational efforts.

=Does our Physical Culture make Heroes?=—We want to turn out ‘a fine
animal,’ a man or woman with a fine physique and in good condition,
and we get what we lay ourselves out for. The development, in women
especially, within the last twenty years, is amazing. I heard it
remarked the other day that the stiff little brocaded dresses of our
great-grandmothers, which are kept here and there, appear to have
belonged to little women, while the grandmothers we are rearing to-day
promise to be daughters of Anak. So far, so good. All the same, it is
questionable whether we are making heroes; and this was the object of
physical culture among the early Greeks, anyway. Men must be heroes, or
how could they fulfil the heavy tasks laid upon them by the gods? Heroes
are not made in a day; therefore, the boy was trained from his infancy
in heroic exercises, and the girl brought up to be the mother of heroes.
Flashes of the heroic temper seem to remain to this day in that little
country with a great history. ‘Your son has behaved like a hero,’ was
said to the mother of a soldier who fell some years ago. ‘That’s what I
bore him for,’ was the reply. Englishmen, too, can die, but it is not so
certain that they can live, like heroes. The object of the fine physical
culture that English youths and maidens receive is, too often, the
poor and narrow one that they may get the most, especially the most of
physical enjoyment, out of life; and so young people train their bodies
to hardships, and pamper them with ease and self-indulgence, by turns,
the one and the other being for their own pleasure; the pampering being
the more delightful after the period of training, the training itself
rather a pleasant change from the softness of pampering.

=A Serviceable Body, the End of Physical Culture.=—Some of our young
people prefer to endure hardness all the time, and go off in the
Berserker spirit to find adventures; but even this is not the best that
might be done. The object of athletics and gymnastics should be kept
steadily to the front; enjoyment is good by the way, but is not the end;
the end is the preparation of a body, available from crown to toe, for
whatever behest ‘the gods’ may lay upon us. It is a curious thing that
we, in the full light of Revelation, have a less idea of vocation and
of preparation for that vocation than had nations of the Old World with
their ‘few, faint and feeble’ rays of illumination as to the meaning and
purpose of life. ‘Ye _are_ your own,’ is perhaps the unspoken thought of
most young persons—your own, and free to do what you like with your own.
Therefore, excess in sports, excess in easy-going pleasure, excess in
study, excess in desultory reading, excess of carelessness in regard to
health, any excess that we have a mind to, is lawful to us if only it is
expedient. This loose morality with regard to our physical debts, without
touching actual vice, which is probably on the decline, is the reason why
the world does not get all that it should out of splendid material.

=Ye are not Your Own.=—But if children are brought up from the first with
this magnet—‘Ye are _not_ your own’; the divine Author of your being has
given you life, and a body finely adapted for His service; He gives you
the work of preserving this body in health, nourishing it in strength,
and training it in fitness for whatever special work He may give you to
do in His world,—why, young people themselves would readily embrace a
more Spartan regimen; they would desire to be available, and physical
transgressions and excesses, however innocent they seem, would be
self-condemned by the person who felt that he was trifling with a trust.

It would be good work to keep to the front this idea of living under
authority, training under authority, serving under authority, a
discipline of life readily self-embraced by children, in whom the heroic
impulse is always strong. We would not reduce the pleasures of childhood
and youth by an iota; rather we would increase them, for the disciplined
life has more power of fresh enjoyment than is given to the unrestrained.
Neither is it lawful for parents to impose any unnecessary rigours upon
their children; this was the error of the eighteenth century and of the
early decades of our own age, when hunger, cold, and denial, which was
by no means self-denial, were supposed wholesome for children. All we
claim is that every young person shall be brought up under the sense of
_authority_ in the government, management, and training of his body. The
sense that health is a duty, and that any trifling with health, whether
vicious or careless, is really of the nature of suicide, springs from
this view—that life is held in trust from a supreme Authority.

Direct teaching or reading on such subjects as the following might be
profitable to parents and teachers on the one hand and to boys and girls
on the other:—

Greek games and Greek heroes.

How a child may be trained to his physical responsibilities.

The vocation of the body.

‘Innocent’ excesses.

Unlawful and lawful home discipline.

The heroic impulse.

The training afforded by games.

Athletics, their use and abuse.

Parental authority in physical matters.

The right uses of self-denial.

The government, management, and training of the body.

The duty of health.

=Use of Habit in Physical Training.=—It is well that a child should be
taught to keep under his body and bring it into subjection, first, to the
authority of his parents and, later, to the authority of his own will;
and always, because no less than this is due, to the divine Authority
in whom he has his being. But to bring ourselves under authority at all
times would require a constantly repeated effort of thought and will
which would make life too laborious. Authority must be sustained by
habit. We all know something of the genesis of a habit, and most of us
recognise its physical basis, _i.e._ that frequently-repeated thoughts or
acts leave some sort of register in the brain tissue which tends to make
the repetition of such thoughts, at first easy, and at last automatic.
In all matters of physical exercise it is obvious to us that—do a thing
a hundred times and it becomes easy, do a thing a thousand times and it
becomes mechanical, as easy to do as not. This principle is abundantly
applied in cricket, boating, golf, cycling, all the labours we delight
in. But there is an outfit of half-physical, half-moral habits of life
which the playing-field tends to form, but which are apt to be put on and
off with the flannels if they are not steadily and regularly practised
in the home life also. These are the habitudes which it is the part of
parents to give their children, and, indeed, they do form part of the
training of all well brought-up young people; but it is well not to lose
sight of this part of our work.

=Self-restraint.=—Self-restraint in indulgences is a habit which most
educated mothers form with care. Children are well and agreeably fed, and
they do not hanker after a bit of this and a taste of the other. Whether
one or two sweetmeats a day are allowed, or whether they go without
any, well brought-up children do not seem to mind. It is the children
of cottage homes who, even when they are comfortably fed and clothed,
keep the animal instinct of basking in the heat of the fire. But there
is perhaps danger lest the habits of the nursery and schoolroom should
lapse in the case of older boys and girls. It is easy to get into the
way of lounging in an armchair with a novel in the intervals between
engagements which are, in fact, amusements. This sort of thing was a
matter of conscience with an older generation; lethargic, self-indulgent
intervals were not allowed. When people were not amusing themselves
healthfully, they were occupying themselves profitably; and, little as we
may think of the crewel-work our grandmothers have left behind, it was
better for them morally and physically than the relaxed muscles and mind
of the novel and the lounge. No doubt the bodily fatigue which follows
our more active exercises has something to say in the matter, but it is a
grave question whether bodily exercises of any kind should be so frequent
and so excessive as to leave us without mental and moral vigour in the
intervals.

=Self-control.=—Self-control in emergencies is another habit of the
disciplined life in which a child should be trained from the first; it
is the outcome of a general habit of self-control. We all see how ice
accidents, boat accidents, disasters by fire (like a late melancholy
event in Paris), might be minimised in their effects if only one person
present were under perfect self-control, which implies the power of
organising and controlling others. But the habit of holding oneself well
in hand, the being impervious to small annoyances, cheerful under small
inconveniences, ready for action with what is called ‘presence of mind’
in all the little casualties of the hour—this is a habit which should be
trained in the nursery. If children were sent into the world with this
part of their panoply complete, we should no longer have the spectacle of
the choleric Briton and of the nervous and fussy British lady at every
foreign _doûane_; people would not jostle for the best places at a
public function; the mistresses of houses would not be fretted and worn
out by the misdoings of their maids; the thousand little sorenesses of
social life would be soothed, if children were trained to bear little
hurts to body and mind without sign. ‘If you are vexed, don’t show it,’
is usually quite safe teaching, because every kind of fretfulness,
impatience, resentfulness, and nervous irritability generally, grows
with expression and passes away under self-control. It is worth while to
remember that the physical signs promote the mental state just as much as
the mental state causes the physical signs.

=Self-discipline.=—The discipline of habit is never complete until it
becomes self-discipline in habits. It is not a trifle that even the
nursery child messes his feeder, spills his milk, breaks his playthings,
dawdles about his small efforts. The well-trained child delights to bring
himself into good habits in these respects. He knows that to be cleanly,
neat, prompt, orderly, is so much towards making a man of him, and man
and hero are in his thought synonymous terms. Supposing that good habits
have not been set up at home, parents look to school life to supply the
omission; but the habits practised in school and relaxed at home, because
‘it’s holidays now, you know,’ do not really become habits of the life.

=Local Habits.=—The fact that habits have a tendency to become local,
that in one house a child will be neat, prompt, diligent; in another
untidy, dawdling, and idle, points to the necessity for self-discipline
on the part of even a young child.

    “Self-reverence, self-knowledge, self-control,
    These three alone lead life to sovereign power.”

This subject of training in becoming habits is so well understood amongst
us that I need only add that such habits are not fully formed so long as
supervision is necessary. At first, a child wants the support of constant
supervision, but, by degrees, he is left to do the thing he ought of his
own accord. Habits of behaviour, habits of deportment, habits of address,
tones of voice, etc., all the habits of a gentleman-like bearing and a
kind and courteous manner, fall under this head of self-discipline in
bodily habits.

    “When first thou camest—such a courtesy
    Spake through the limbs and in the voice—I knew
    For one of those who eat in Arthur’s hall.”

=Alertness.=—Many a good man and woman thinks regretfully of the
opportunities in life they have let slip through a certain physical
inertness. They missed the chance of doing some little service, or some
piece of courtesy, because they did not see in time. It is well to bring
up children to think it is rather a sad failure if they miss a chance
of going a message, opening a door, carrying a parcel, any small act
of service that presents itself. They should be taught to be equally
alert to seize opportunities of getting knowledge; it is the nature of
children to regard each grown-up person they meet as a fount of knowledge
on some particular subject; let their training keep up the habit of
eager inquiry. Success in life depends largely upon the cultivation of
alertness to seize opportunities, and this is largely a physical habit.
We all know how opportunity is imaged—a figure flying past so rapidly
that there is no means of catching him but, in advance, by the forelock
which overhangs his brow.

=Quick Perception.=—Closely connected with that of alertness is the
habit of quick perception as to all that is to be seen, heard, felt,
tasted, smelt in a world which gives illimitable information through our
five gateways of knowledge. Mr Grant, in his most interesting studies
of Neapolitan character, describes the training of a young Camorrist
(the Camorra is a dangerous political faction; and, ill as we may think
of the ends of such training, the means are well worth recording).
“The great object of this part of his training was to teach him to
observe habitually with minuteness and accuracy, and it was conducted in
something like the following manner. When walking through the city the
Camorrist would suddenly pause and ask, ‘How was the woman dressed who
sat at the door of the fourth house in the last street?’ or, ‘What were
the two men talking about whom we met at the corner of the last street
but three?’ or, ‘Where was cab 234 ordered to drive to?’ or perhaps it
would be, ‘What is the height of that house and the breadth of its upper
window?’ or, ‘Where does that man live?’” This habit, again largely a
physical habit, of quick perception has been dwelt upon in other aspects.
All that now need be urged is that the quickness of observation natural
to a child should not be relied upon; in time, and especially as school
studies press upon him, his early quickness deserts the boy, but the
trained habit of seeing all that is to be seen, hearing all that is to be
heard, remains through life. I have not space to go further into these
habitudes of body, which become also, mental and moral habitudes, but
perhaps reading and reflection and direct teaching on such subjects as
the following would be useful:—

Self-control in emergencies.

Self-restraint in indulgences.

Self-discipline in habits.

Alertness to seize opportunities.

Promptness and vigour in bodily exercises.

Quick perception as to that which is to be seen, heard, felt, tasted,
smelt.

=Stimulating Ideas.=—A habit becomes morally binding in proportion to
the inspiring power of the _idea_ which underlies it. When I was a child
I used to have a book full of moral aphorisms from the Greek and Latin
classics, translated. These fine rolling sentences, full of matter, made,
I recollect, a great impression on me; and one can understand that the
Greek or Roman boy, brought up on this strong meat, developed virtues in
regard to which we are a little slack. In like manner the early Church
personified and typified in a thousand ways the three evangelical and
four cardinal virtues and the opposing seven deadly sins. We shall have
to revive this kind of teaching if we would have children undertake the
labour of the discipline of habit, a discipline that we can do no more
than initiate.

=Fortitude.=—Touch the right spring and children are capable of an
amazing amount of steady effort. I know a little boy of ten who set
himself the task of a solitary race of three miles every day in the
hot summer holidays because he was to compete in a race when he went
back to school; and this, not because he cared much about sports, but
because his eldest brother had always distinguished himself in them,
and he must do the same. When we think how little power we have to do
the tiresome things we set ourselves to do every day, we appreciate the
self-compelling power a child can use, given a strong enough impulse.
The long name, Fortitude, would have its effect on the little boy in
the dentist’s hands. It is good to know that it is a manly and knightly
virtue to be strong to bear pain and inconvenience without making any
sign. The story of the Spartan boy and the fox will still wake an echo;
and the girl who finds it a fine thing to endure hardness will not make
a fuss about her physical sensations. She will be pained for the want of
fortitude which called forth the reproof, ‘Could ye not watch with me one
hour?’ and will brace herself to bear, that she may be able to serve.
Portia, the wife of Brutus, gave a fair test of her quality when she
wounded her tender flesh to prove that she was fit to share her husband’s
counsels.

=Service.=—Service is another knightly quality which a child should be
nerved for by heroic examples until he grudges to let slip an opportunity.

=Courage.=—Courage, too, should be something more than the impulse of
the moment; it is a natural fire to be fed by heroic example and by the
teaching that the thing to be done is always of more consequence than the
doer.

=Prudence.=—Prudence, too, is a condition of knightly service, whether
to our kind or to our kin, and courage without prudence is recklessness;
but, in this connection of bodily service, prudence is largely concerned
with the duty of health. I have heard of a boy at a school where a
good deal of hygienic teaching was given, getting quite anxious and
overcharged with the care of his own health. This meaner kind of caution
is not worthy to be called prudence, which should regard every physical
power as a means of service and of conflict, and should think it a shame
by any foolhardiness to make any part of the body unable for its due
service.

=Chastity.=—For Chastity we can have no impulse higher than ‘Your bodies
are the temples of the Holy Ghost’; but how inadequately do we present
the thought! The inspiring ideas which should sustain all physical
culture and training are very numerous, and teaching on such subjects as
Chastity, Fortitude, Courage, Constancy, Prudence, Temperance, with the
consideration of heroic examples, should strengthen the hands of parents
and teachers for the better physical culture of their charges. Parents
would do well to see to it that they turn out their children fit for
service, not only by observing the necessary hygienic conditions, but by
bringing their bodies under rule, training them in habits and inspiring
them with the ideas of knightly service.




