CHAPTER IV

SOME OF THE RIGHTS OF CHILDREN AS PERSONS


=Children should be Free in their Play.=—We have considered the wisdom
and duty of ‘a wise passiveness,’ ‘a masterly inactivity,’ in the
bringing up of children. It remains to glance in detail at the various
points in a child’s life, where this principle should govern us. And,
first, as regards children’s _play_. There is a little danger in these
days of much educational effort that children’s play should be crowded
out, or, what is from our present point of view the same thing, should
be prescribed for and arranged until there is no more freedom of choice
about play than that about work. We do not say a word against the
educational value of games. We know that many things are learned in the
playing-fields; that the qualities which we associate with the name of
Englishman are largely the product of the laws of the games; and there
is a pretty steady effort being made to bring these same forces to bear
upon girls, that they, too, may grow up with the law-abiding principle,
the moral stamina, and the resourcefulness, which are more or less the
outcome of the education carried on in the playing-fields.

=Organised Games are not Play.=—But organised games are not _play_
in the sense we have in view. Boys and girls must have time to invent
episodes, carry on adventures, live heroic lives, lay sieges and carry
forts, even if the fortress be an old armchair; and in these affairs the
elders must neither meddle nor make. They must be content to know that
they do not understand, and, what is more, that they carry with them a
chill breath of reality which sweeps away illusions. Think what it must
mean to a general in command of his forces to be told by some intruder
into the play-world to tie his shoe-strings! There is an idea afloat that
children require to be taught to play—to play at being little fishes and
lambs and butterflies. No doubt they enjoy these games which are made for
them, but there is a serious danger. In this matter the child who goes
too much on crutches never learns to walk; he who is most played with by
his elders has little power of inventing plays for himself; and so he
misses that education which comes to him when allowed to go his own way
and act,

    “As if his whole vocation
    Were endless imitation.”

=Personal Initiative in Work.=—In their _work_, too, we are too apt to
interfere with children. We all know the delight with which any scope
for personal initiative is hailed, the pleasure children take in doing
anything which they may do their own way; anything, in fact, which allows
room for skill of hand, play of fancy, or development of thought. With
our present theories of education it seems that we cannot give much scope
for personal initiative. There is so much task-work to be done, so many
things that must be, not learned, but learned _about_, that it is only
now and then a child gets the chance to produce himself in his work. But
let us use such opportunities as come in our way. A very interesting and
instructive educational experiment on these lines has lately been tried
at the School Field, Hackney, where Mr Sargent got together some eighty
boys and girls under the conditions of an ordinary elementary school,
except that the school was supported, not by the Education Department nor
by the rates, but by the founder. The results seem to have been purely
delightful; the children developed an amazing capacity for drawing,
perhaps because so soon as they were familiar with the outlines of the
flower and foliage of a given plant, for example, they were encouraged
to form designs with these elements. The really beautiful floral designs
produced by these girls and boys, after quite a short art training, would
surprise parents whose children have been taught drawing for years with
no evident result. These School Field children developed themselves a
great deal on their school magazine also, for which they wrote tales and
poems, and essays, not prescribed work, but self-chosen. The children’s
thought was stimulated, and they felt they had it in them to say much
about a doll’s ball, Peter, the school cat, or whatever other subject
struck their fancy. ‘They felt their feet,’ as the nurses say of children
when they begin to walk; and our non-success in education is a good deal
due to the fact that we carry children through their school work and do
not let them feel their feet.

=Children must Stand or Fall by their own Efforts.=—In another way,
more within our present control, we do not let children alone enough in
their work. We prod them continually and do not let them stand or fall
by their own efforts. One of the features, and one of the disastrous
features, of modern society, is that, in our laziness, we depend upon
prodders and encourage a vast system of prodding. We are prodded to our
social duties, to our charitable duties, and to our religious duties. If
we pay a subscription to a charity, we expect the secretary to prod us
when it becomes due. If we attend a meeting, do we often do so of our
own spontaneous will, or because somebody asks us to go and reminds us
half a dozen times of the day and the hour? Perhaps it is a result of the
hurry of the age that there is a curious division of labour, and society
falls into those who prod and those who are prodded. Not that anybody
prods in all directions, nor that anybody else offers himself entirely
as a pincushion. It is more true, perhaps, to say that we all prod, and
that we are all prodded. Now, an occasional prick is stimulating and
wholesome, but the _vis inertiæ_ of human nature is such that we would
rather lean up against a wall of spikes than not lean at all. What we
must guard against in the training of children is the danger of their
getting into the habit of being prodded to every duty and every effort.
Our whole system of school policy is largely a system of prods. Marks,
prizes, exhibitions, are all prods; and a system of prodding is apt to
obscure the meaning of _must_ and _ought_ for the boy or girl who gets
into the habit of mental and moral lolling up against his prods.

=Boys and Girls are generally Dutiful.=—It would be better for boys
and girls to suffer the consequences of not doing their work, now and
then, than to do it because they are so urged and prodded on all hands
that they have no volition in the matter. The more we are prodded the
lazier we get, and the less capable of the effort of will which should
carry us to, and nearly carry us through, our tasks. Boys and girls
are, on the whole, good, and desirous to do their duty. If we expect
the tale of bricks to be delivered at the due moment without urging or
entreating, rewarding or punishing, in nine cases out of ten we shall
get what we look for. Where many of us err is in leaning too much to our
own understanding and our own efforts, and not trusting sufficiently to
the dutiful impulse which will carry children through the work they are
expected to do.

=Children should Choose their own Friends.=—With regard to the choice
of friends and companions, again, we should train children so that we
should be able to honour them with a generous confidence; and if we give
them such confidence we shall find that they justify it. If Fred has
made a companion of Harry Jones, and Harry is not a nice boy, Fred will
find the fact out as soon as his mother if he is let alone, and will
probably come for advice and help as to the best way of getting out of
an intimacy which does not really please him. But if Harry is boycotted
by the home authorities and made the object of various prohibitions and
exclusions, why Fred, if he be a generous boy, will feel in honour bound
to take his comrade’s part, and an intimacy which might have been easily
dropped becomes cemented. Ethel will not see the reason why she, as the
daughter of a professional man, may not make a friend of Maud, who sits
beside her at school and is the daughter of a tradesman. But these minor
matters must be left to circumstances, and the mother who brings forward
questions of class, appearance, etc., as affecting her children’s choice
of friends, does her best to create that obtuseness as to vital points of
character which is the cause of most shipwrecked lives. In this matter,
as in all others, the parent’s inactivity must be masterly; that is, the
young people should read approval or disapproval very easily, and should
be able to trace one or the other to general principles of character and
conduct, though nothing be said or done or even looked in disparagement
of the ally of the hour.

=Should be free to Spend their own Pocket-Money.=—In the spending of
pocket-money is another opportunity for initiative on the children’s part
and for self-restraint on that of the parents. No doubt the father who
doles out the weekly pocket-money and has never given his children any
large thoughts about money—as to how the smallest income is divisible
into the share that we give, and the share that we keep, and the share
that we save for some object worth possessing, to be had, perhaps, after
weeks or months of saving; as to the futility of buying that we may eat,
an indulgence that we should rarely allow ourselves, and never except
for the pleasure of sharing with others; as to how it is worth while
to think twice before making a purchase, with the lesson before us of
_Rosamund and the Purple Jar_—such a father cannot expect his children
to think of money in any light but as a means to self-indulgence. But
talks like these should have no obvious and immediate bearing on the
weekly pocket-money; that should be spent as the children like, they
having been instructed as to how they should like to spend it. By degrees
pocket-money should include the cost of gloves, handkerchiefs, etc.,
until, finally, the girl who is well on in her teens should be fit to
be trusted with her own allowance for dress and personal expenses. The
parents who do not trust their young people in this matter, after having
trained them, are hardly qualifying them to take their place in a world
in which the wise, just, and generous spending of money is a great test
of character.

=Should form their own Opinions.=—We have only room to mention one more
point in which all of us, who have the care of young people, would do
well to practise a wise ‘letting alone.’ There are burning questions in
the air, seething opinions in men’s minds: as to religion, politics,
science, literature, art, as regards every kind of social effort, we
are all disposed to hold strenuous opinions. The person who has not
kept himself in touch with the movement of the thought of the world in
all these matters has little cause to pride himself. It is our duty to
form opinions carefully, and to hold them tenaciously in so far as the
original grounds of our conclusions remain unshaken. But what we have no
right to do, is to pass these opinions on to our children. We all know
that nothing is easier than to make vehement partisans of young people,
in any cause heartily adopted by their elders. But a reaction comes, and
the swinging of the pendulum is apt to carry them to a point of thought
painfully remote from our own. The mother of the Newmans was a devoted
Evangelical, and in their early years passed her opinions over to her
sons, ready-made; believing, perhaps, that the line of thought they
received from her was what they had come to by their own thinking. But
when they are released from the domination of their mother’s opinions,
one seeks anchorage in the Church of Rome, and another will have no
restriction as to his freedom of thought and will, and chooses to shape
for himself his own creed or negation of a creed. Perhaps this pious
mother would have been saved some anguish if she had given her children
the living principles of the Christian faith, which are not matters of
opinion, and allowed them to accept her particular practice in their
youth without requiring them to take their stand on Evangelical opinions
as offering practically the one way of salvation.

In politics, again, let children be fired with patriotism and instructed
in the duties of citizenship, but, if they can be kept out of the party
strife of an election, well for them. Children are far more likely to
embrace the views of their parents, when they are ripe to form opinions,
if these have not been forced upon them in early youth when their lack of
knowledge and experience makes it impossible for them to form opinions
at first hand. Only by ‘masterly inactivity,’ ‘wise passiveness,’ able
‘letting alone,’ can a child be trained—

    “To reverence his conscience as his king.”

=Spontaneity.=—We all admire spontaneity, but this grace, even in
children, is not an indigenous wild-flower. In so far as it is a grace,
it is the result of training,—of pleasant talks upon the general
principles of conduct, and wise ‘letting alone’ as to the practice of
these principles. To parents, who have in their hands the making of
family customs, it belongs especially to beware—

    “Lest one good custom should corrupt the world.”




