CHAPTER XXII

SUGGESTIONS TOWARDS A CURRICULUM

PART III.—_THE LOVE OF KNOWLEDGE_


=The Use of Books makes for Short Hours.=—Considering that under the
head of ‘Education by Books’ some half-dozen groups of subjects are
included, with several subjects in each group, the practical teacher
will be inclined to laugh at what will seem to him Education in Utopia.
In practice, however, we find that the use of books makes for short
hours. No book-work or writing, no preparation or report, is done in the
_Parents’ Review_ School, except between the hours of 9 and 11.30 for the
lowest class, to 9 and 1 for the highest, with half an hour’s interval
for drill, etc.

From one to two hours, according to age and class, are given in the
afternoons to handicrafts, field-work, drawing, etc.; and the evenings
are absolutely free, so that the children have leisure for hobbies,
family reading, and the like. We are able to get through a greater
variety of subjects, and through more work in each subject, in a shorter
time than is usually allowed, because children taught in this way get the
habit of close attention and are carried on by steady interest.

=‘Utilitarian’ Education.=—I should be inclined to say of education, as
Mr Lecky says of morals, that “the Utilitarian theory is profoundly
immoral.” To educate children for any immediate end—towards commercial
or manufacturing aptitude, for example—is to put a premium upon general
ignorance with a view to such special aptitude. The greater includes
the less, but the less does not include the greater. Excellent work of
whatever kind is produced by a person of character and intelligence, and
we who teach cannot do better for the nation than to prepare such persons
for its uses. He who has intelligent relations with life will produce
good work.

=Relations and Interests.=—I have throughout spoken of ‘_Relations_,’
and not of ‘_Interests_,’ because interests may be casual, unworthy,
and passing. Everyone, even the most ignorant, has interests of a sort;
while to make valid any one relation, implies that knowledge has begun
in, at any rate, that one direction. But the defect in our educational
thought is that we have ceased to realise that knowledge is vital; and,
as children and adults, we suffer from underfed minds. This intellectual
inanition is, no doubt, partly due to the fact that educational theorists
systematically depreciate knowledge. Such theorists are, I think,
inclined to attach more importance to the working of the intellectual
machinery than to the output of the product; that is, they feel it to be
more important that a child should _think_ than that he should _know_.
My contention is rather that he cannot _know_ without having _thought_;
and also that he cannot think without an abundant, varied, and regular
supply of the material of knowledge. We all know how the reading of a
passage may stimulate in us thought, inquiry, inference, and thus get
for us in the end some added knowledge. The depreciation of which I
speak is by no means of set purpose, nor is it even realised; but the
more education presents itself as a series of psychological problems, the
greater will be the tendency to doctor, modify, and practically eliminate
_knowledge_;—that knowledge, which is as the air, and the food, and
the exercise, the whole life of the mind of man. In giving ‘education’
without abundant knowledge, we are as persons who should aim at physical
development by giving the maximum of exercise with the minimum of food.
The getting of knowledge and the getting of delight in knowledge are the
ends of a child’s education; and well has said one of our prophets, “that
there should one man die ignorant who had capacity for knowledge, this I
call a tragedy.”

To sum up, I believe that our efforts at intellectual education commonly
fail from six causes:—

=Causes of Failure.=—(_a_) The oral lesson, which at its worst is very
poor twaddle, and at its best is far below the ordered treatment of
the same subject by an original mind in the right book. (The right
books exist, old and new, in countless numbers, but very great care
is necessary in the choice, as well as much experience of the rather
whimsical tastes and distastes of children.)

(_b_) The lecture, commonly gathered from various books in rapid notes
by the teacher; and issuing in hasty notes, afterwards written out, and
finally crammed up by the pupils. The lecture is often careful, thorough,
and well-illustrated; but is it ever equal in educational value to direct
contact with the original mind of one able thinker who has written his
book on the subject? Arnold, Thring, Bowen, we know, lectured with great
effect, but then each of them lectured on only a few subjects, and each
lecture was as the breaking out of a spring of slowly gathered knowledge.
We are not all Arnolds or even Bowens.

(_c_) The text-book, compressed and re-compressed from one or many
big books. These handbooks are of two kinds—the frankly dry and
uninteresting, which enumerate facts and details; and the easy and
beguiling. I think we are safe in saying that there is _no educational
value_ in either sort of text-book.

(_d_) The debauchery of the mind which comes of exciting other desires to
do the work of the inherent and fully adequate desire of knowledge.

(_e_) In elementary schools, the dependence upon apparatus and
illustrative appliances which have a paralysing effect on the mind.

(_f_) Again in elementary schools, the use of ‘Readers,’ which, however
well selected, cannot have the value of consecutive works.

=Education by Books.=—For the last twelve years we have tried the plan
of bringing children up on _Books_ and _Things_, and, on the whole, the
results are pleasing. The _average_ child studies with ‘delight.’ We
do not say he will remember all he knows, but, to use a phrase of Jane
Austen’s, he will have had his ‘imagination warmed’ in many regions of
knowledge.

=Blind Alleys.=—May I digress for a moment to raise a warning note
against the following of blind alleys, whether in our educational
thought or our methods. We do not, in the sphere of education, find
hidden treasure by casual digging in the common roadways. Believing
in evolution, we perceive that ideas also have their pedigree and
their progeny and follow their own laws of generation. A learned and
thoughtful Chinese will abstract himself from the outer world, separate
himself from the ideas of others, and, when he has arrived at a due
state of vacuity, take his writing-brushes and produce out of his inner
consciousness—not anything that he has ever seen or heard of, or even
imagined—but some hieroglyph of curves, rather pleasing and presentable
if he happen to be an artist. This disconnected production he arbitrarily
invests with the character of a symbol, and his fellows are willing to
receive it as such, and it is duly hung in his Hall of Tablets.[23] Some
of us perhaps know the flowing curves which stand for ‘happiness’ in this
language of symbols.

Now, all this is very engaging, and the Western mind is ready enough to
succumb to the charm of such fancies. But does it not offer a key to that
baffling problem we call China? Here we have a vast people with some
high moral qualities, of astute and sometimes profound intelligence,
whose civilisation has for thousands of years remained to all appearance
_stationary_. Is the cause, perhaps, a tendency to follow intellectual
futilities, blind alleys, in every direction? These people do not realise
that method implies an end perceived, a way to that end, and step by
step progress in the way; nor do they perceive that a notion becomes
a fruitful idea only upon the impact of an idea from without. A fine
Celestial arrogance assures them of their right to casual finds; hence,
they do not progress, but remain in all things as they were.

Now, here is the danger that besets us in education. We seize upon
ambidexterity, upon figures drawn with the compasses without intention,
upon ‘child study’ as applied to mind, upon terrible agglutinations
which we call ‘apperception masses,’ upon intellectual futilities in
a hundred directions, each of which will, we hope, give us the key to
education. We may perceive the futility of such notions by applying
the test of progress. Are they the way to anything, and, if so, to
what? Let us, out of reverence for the children, be modest; let us not
stake their interests on the hope that this or that new way would lead
to great results if people had only the courage to follow it. It is
exciting to become a pioneer; but, for the children’s sake, it may be
well to constrain ourselves to follow those roads only by which we know
that persons have arrived, or those newer roads which offer evident and
assured means of _progress towards a desired end_. Self-will is not
permitted to the educationalist; and he may not take up fads.

=An Educated Child.=—Knowledge is, no doubt, a comparative term, and the
knowledge of a subject possessed by a child would be the ignorance of a
student. All the same, there is such a thing as an educated child—a child
who possesses a sound and fairly wide knowledge of a number of subjects,
all of which serve to interest him; such a child studies with ‘delight.’

=Children delight in School, but not for Love of Knowledge.=—It will be
said with truth that most children delight in school; they delight in
the stimulus of school life, in the social stir of companionship; they
are emulous, eager for reward and praise; they enjoy the thousand lawful
interests of school life, including the attractive personality of such
and such a teacher; but it seems doubtful whether the love of knowledge,
in itself and for itself, is usually a powerful motive with the young
scholar. The matter is important, because, of all the joyous motives
of school life, the love of knowledge is the only abiding one; the only
one which determines the scale, so to speak, upon which the person will
hereafter live. My contention is, to repeat what has been said, that all
children have a capacity for and a latent love of knowledge; and, that
knowledge concerning persons and States can best be derived from books,
and should be got by the children out of their own books.

In a hundred biographies there are hints of boys and girls who have grown
up on books; and there is no doubt that in many schools the study of
books is the staple of the work. This probably is the principle which
keeps our great public schools perennially alive; they live, so far as
they do live, upon books. The best public schoolboy is a fine product;
and perhaps the worst has had his imagination touched by ideas; yet most
of us recognise that the public school often fails, in that it launches
the average and dull boy ignorant upon the world because the curriculum
has been too narrow to make any appeal to him. And we must remember, that
if a young person leave school at seventeen or eighteen without having
become a diligent and delighted reader, it is tolerably certain that
he will never become a reader. It may be, however, that the essential
step in any reform of public schools should come in the shape of due
_preparation_ upon a wide curriculum, dealt with intelligently, between
the ages of six and twelve.

=An Educational Revolution.=—I add appendices to show, (_a_) how a wide
curriculum and the use of many books work in the _Parents’ Review_
School; (_b_) what progress a pupil of twelve should have made under
such conditions; and (_c_) what use is made of oral lessons. Should the
reader consider that the children in question prove their right of entry
to several fields of knowledge, that they show a distinct appetite for
such knowledge, that thought and power of mind develop upon the books
we read, as they do not and cannot upon the lectures we hear; should he
indeed be convinced of the truth of what I have advanced, I think he will
see that, not an educational reform here and there, but an EDUCATIONAL
REVOLUTION is before us to which every one of us is bound to put his hand.

=The Children’s Magna Carta.=—My plea is, and I think I have justified
it by experience, that many doors shall be opened to boys and girls
until they are at least twelve or fourteen, and always the doors of good
houses, (‘Education,’ says Taine, ‘is but a card of invitation to noble
and privileged salons’); that they shall be introduced to no subject
whatever through compendiums, abstracts, or selections; that the young
people shall learn what history is, what literature is, what life is,
from the living books of those who know. I know it can be done, because
it is being done on a considerable scale.

If conviction has indeed reached us, the Magna Carta of children’s
intellectual liberty is before us. The need is immediate, the means are
evident. This, at least, I think we ought to claim, that, up to the age
of twelve, all boys and girls shall be educated on some such curriculum,
with some such _habit_ of _Books_ as we have been considering.[24]




Appendices




APPENDIX I

_Questions for the Use of Readers_[25]


