CHAPTER III

‘MASTERLY INACTIVITY’


=Increased Sense of Responsibility.=—It would be an interesting task for
a literary expert to trace the stages of ethical thought marked by the
uses, within living memory, of the word _responsibility_. People, and
even children, were highly responsible in the fifties and sixties, but
then it was for their own character, conduct, and demeanour. It is not at
all certain that we hold ourselves responsible in this matter to the same
degree. We are inclined to accept ourselves as inevitable, to make kindly
allowance for our own little ways and peccadilloes, and are, perhaps,
wanting in that wholesome sense of humour, ‘the giftie’ which should “gie
us

    “To see oursels as ithers see us.”

=A Sign of Moral Progress.=—If we take ourselves more easily, however,
we take other people more seriously. The sense of responsibility still
rests upon us with a weight ‘heavy as frost’; we have only shifted it to
the other shoulder. The more serious of us are quite worn with the sense
of what we owe to those about us, near and far off. Men carry the weight
more easily than women, because, for most of them, each day brings work
that must be done, and they have less time than women to think anxiously
about their relations with, and duties to, others. By the way, it is
rather a note of the time that the translators of the Revised Version
have given us—‘Be not _anxious_ for your life,’ instead of the older
rendering. But, if women feel the wear of responsibility for others
more constantly, let but a burning question arise—the condition of East
London, Home Rule, massacres in Armenia—and men feel it more intensely
and passionately. This sharpened sense is not a malady of the age, but a
sign of the times.

To those of us who believe we are all at school and have our lessons set
as we are fit to take them in, this general sense of responsibility for
others is an encouraging sign that we are being taught from above, and
are, on the whole, getting on.

=Parental Responsibility.=—If we all feel ourselves responsible for the
distressed, the suffering, the sick, the feeble in body or mind, the
deficient, the ignorant, and—would that we all felt this particular
burden more—for the heathen, there is one kind of responsibility which
is felt by thoughtful people with almost undue acuteness. Parental
responsibility is, no doubt, the educational note of the day. People
feel that they _can_ bring up their children to be something more than
themselves, that they _ought_ to do so, and that they _must_; and it is
to this keen sense of higher parental duty that the Parents’ Union owes
its successful activity.

=Anxiety the Note of a Transition Stage.=—Every new power, whether
mechanical or spiritual, requires adjustment before it can be used to
the full. In the scientific world there is always a long pause between
the first dawn of a great discovery—as the Röntgen rays, for example—and
the moment when it is applied to the affairs of everyday life with full
effect and without the displacement of other powers whose functions are
just as important and as necessary. We should regard with suspicion
any attempt to make the Röntgen rays supply the place of stethoscope,
thermometer, and all other clinical apparatus. Just so is it in the moral
sphere. Our keener sense of responsibility arises from a new development
of altruistic feeling—we have greater power of loving and wider scope for
our love; we are more leavened by the Spirit of Christ, even when we do
not recognise the source of our fuller life. But to perceive that there
is much which we ought to do and not to know exactly what it is, nor how
to do it, does not add to the pleasure of life or to ease in living. We
become worried, restless, anxious; and in the transition stage between
the development of this new power and the adjustment which comes with
time and experience, the fuller life, which is certainly ours, fails to
make us either happier or more useful.

=A Fussy and Restless Habit.=—It is by way of an effort towards this
adjustment of power that I wish to bring before parents and teachers
the subject of ‘masterly inactivity.’ We ought to do so much for our
children, and are able to do so much for them, that we begin to think
everything rests with us and that we should never intermit for a moment
our conscious action on the young minds and hearts about us. Our
endeavours become fussy and restless. We are too much with our children,
‘late and soon.’ We try to dominate them too much, even when we fail to
govern, and we are unable to perceive that wise and purposeful letting
alone is the best part of education. But this form of error arises from
a defect of our qualities. We may take heart. We _have_ the qualities,
and all that is wanted is adjustment; to this we must give our time and
attention.

‘=Masterly Inactivity.=’—A blessed thing in our mental constitution is,
that once we receive an idea, it will work itself out, in thought and
act, without much after-effort on our part; and, if we admit the idea of
‘masterly inactivity’ as a factor in education, we shall find ourselves
framing our dealings with children from this standpoint, without much
conscious effort. But we must get clearly into our heads what we mean by
masterly inactivity. Carlyle’s happy phrase has nothing in common with
the _laisser allez_ attitude that comes of thinking ‘what’s the good?’
and still further is it removed from the sheer indolence of mind that
lets things go their way rather than take the trouble to lead them to any
issue. It indicates a fine healthy moral pose which it is worth while for
us to analyse. Perhaps the idea is nearly that conveyed in Wordsworth’s
even more happy phrase, ‘wise passiveness.’ It indicates the power to
act, the desire to act, and the insight and self-restraint which forbid
action. But there is, from our point of view at any rate, a further idea
conveyed in ‘masterly inactivity.’ The mastery is not over ourselves
only; there is also a sense of authority, which our children should be as
much aware of when it is inactive as when they are doing our bidding. The
sense of authority is the _sine quâ non_ of the parental relationship,
and I am not sure that without that our activities or our inactivity will
produce any great results. This element of strength is the backbone of
our position. ‘We could an’ if we would,’ and the children know it. They
are free under authority, which is liberty; to be free without authority
is license.

=The Element of Good Humour.=—The next element in the attitude of
masterly inactivity is good humour—frank, cordial, natural, good humour.
This is quite a different thing from overmuch complacency, and a general
giving-in to all the children’s whims. The one is the outcome of
strength, the other of weakness, and children are very quick to see the
difference. ‘Oh, mother, may we go blackberrying this afternoon, instead
of lessons?’ The masterly ‘yes’ and the abject ‘yes’ are quite different
notes. The first makes the holiday doubly a delight; the second produces
a restless desire to gain some other easy victory.

=Self-confidence.=—The next element is confidence. Parents should trust
themselves more. Everything is not done by restless endeavour. The mere
blessed fact of the parental relationship and of that authority which
belongs to it, by right and by nature, acts upon the children as do
sunshine and shower on a seed in good soil. But the fussy parent, the
anxious parent, the parent who explains overmuch, who commands overmuch,
who excuses overmuch, who restrains overmuch, who interferes overmuch,
even the parent who is with the children overmuch, does away with the
dignity and simplicity of that relationship which, like all the best and
most delicate things in life, suffer by being asserted or defended.

=The fine, easy way of Fathers.=—Fathers are, sometimes, more happy than
mothers in assuming that fine easy way with their children which belongs
of right to their relationship, but this is only because the father is
occupied with many things, and the mother is apt to be too much engrossed
with her children. It is a little humiliating to the best of us to see a
careless, rather a selfish mother, whose children are her born slaves and
run to do her bidding with delight. The moral is, not that all mothers
should be careless and selfish, but that they should give their children
the ease of a good deal of letting alone, and should not oppress the
young people with their own anxious care. The small person of ten who
wishes to know if her attainments are up to the average for her age,
or he who discusses his bad habits with you and the best way of curing
them, is displeasing, because one feels instinctively that the child is
occupied with cares which belong to the parent only. The burden of their
children’s training must be borne by the parents alone. But let them bear
it with easy grace and an erect carriage, as the Spanish peasant bears
her water-jar.

=Confidence in the Children.=—Not only confidence in themselves, but
confidence in their children, is an element of the masterly inactivity,
which I venture to propose to parents as a ‘blue teapot’ for them ‘to
live up to.’ Believe in the relation of parent and child, and trust the
children to believe in it and fulfil it on their part. They will do so if
they are not worried.

=Omniscience of Parents and Teachers.=—Parents and teachers must, of
course, be omniscient; their children expect this of them, and a mother
or father who can be hoodwinked is a person easy to reckon with in the
mind of even the best child. For children are always playing a game—half
of chance, half of skill; they are trying how far they can go, how much
of the management of their own lives they can get for the taking, and how
much they must leave in the hands of the stronger powers. Therefore the
mother who is not _up to_ children is at their mercy, and need expect
no quarter. But she must see without watching, know without telling, be
on the alert always, yet never obviously, fussily, so. This open-eyed
attitude must be sphinx-like in its repose. The children must know
themselves to be let alone, whether to do their own duty or to seek their
own pleasure. The constraining power should be present, but passive,
so that the child may not feel himself hemmed in without choice. That
free-will of man, which has for ages exercised faithful souls who would
prefer to be compelled into all righteousness and obedience, is after all
a pattern for parents. The child who is good because he must be so, loses
in power of initiative more than he gains in seemly behaviour. Every
time a child feels that he chooses to obey of his own accord, his power
of initiative is strengthened. The bearing-rein may not be used. When it
occurs to a child to reflect on his behaviour, he should have that sense
of liberty which makes his good behaviour appear to him a matter of his
own preference and choice.

=‘Fate’ and ‘Free-will.’=—This is the freedom which a child enjoys who
has the confidence of his parents as to his comings and goings and
childish doings, and who is all the time aware of their authority. He is
brought up in the school proper for a being whose life is conditioned by
‘fate’ and ‘free-will.’ He has liberty, that is, with a sense of _must_
behind it to relieve him of that unrest which comes with the constant
effort of decision. He is free to do as he ought, but knows quite well in
his secret heart that he is not free to do that which he ought not. The
child who, on the contrary, grows up with no strong sense of authority
behind all his actions, but who receives many exhortations to be good and
obedient and what not, is aware that he may choose either good or evil,
he may obey or not obey, he may tell the truth or tell a lie; and, even
when he chooses aright, he does so at the cost of a great deal of nervous
wear and tear. His parents have removed from him the support of their
authority in the difficult choice of right-doing, and he is left alone
to make that most trying of all efforts, the effort of decision. Is the
distinction between being free to choose the right at one’s own option,
and not free to do the wrong, too subtle to be grasped, too elusive to be
practical? It may be so, but it is precisely the distinction which we are
aware of in our own lives so far as we keep ourselves consciously under
the divine governance. We are free to go in the ways of right living, and
have the happy sense of liberty of choice, but the ways of transgressors
are hard. We are aware of a restraining hand in the present, and of sure
and certain retribution in the future. Just this delicate poise is to be
aimed at for the child. He must be treated with full confidence, and must
feel that right-doing is his own free choice, which his parents trust him
to make; but he must also be very well aware of the deterrent force in
the background, watchful to hinder him when he would do wrong.

=The Component Parts of Masterly Inactivity.=—We have seen that
authority, good humour, confidence, both self-confidence and confidence
in the children, are all contained in masterly inactivity, but these are
not all the parts of that whole. A sound mind in a sound body is another
factor. If the sound body is unattainable, anyway, get the sound mind.
Let not the nervous, anxious, worried mother think that this easy, happy
relation with her children is for her. She may be the best mother in the
world, but the thing that her children will get from her in these vexed
moods is a touch of her nervousness—most catching of complaints. She
will find them fractious, rebellious, unmanageable, and will be slow to
realise that it is her fault; not the fault of her act but of her state.

=Serenity of a Madonna.=—It is not for nothing that the old painters,
however diverse their ideas in other matters, all fixed upon one quality
as proper to the pattern Mother. The Madonna, no matter out of whose
canvas she looks at you, is always serene. This is a great truth, and
we should do well to hang our walls with the Madonnas of all the early
Masters if the lesson, taught through the eye, would reach with calming
influence to the heart. Is this a hard saying for mothers in these
anxious and troubled days? It may be hard, but it is not unsympathetic.
If mothers could learn to do for themselves what they do for their
children when these are overdone, we should have happier households.
Let the mother go out to play! If she would only have courage to let
everything go when life becomes too tense, and just take a day, or half a
day, out in the fields, or with a favourite book, or in a picture gallery
looking long and well at just two or three pictures, or in bed, _without
the children_, life would go on far more happily for both children and
parents. The mother would be able to hold herself in ‘wise passiveness’
and would not fret her children by continual interference, even of hand
or eye—she would let them be.

=Leisure.=—Another element is leisure. Sometimes events hurry us, and
sometimes—is it not true?—we like the little excitement of a rush. The
children like it, too, at first. Father’s birthday is coming, and Nellie
must recite a poem for him; the little _fête_ has only been thought of a
week in advance, and Nellie is seized at all sorts of odd moments to have
some lines of the recitation crammed into her. At first she is pleased
and important, and goes joyously to the task; but by-and-by it irks her;
she is cross and naughty, is reproached for want of love for father,
sheds tears over her verses, and, though finally the little performance
may be got through very well, Nellie has suffered physically and morally
in doing what, if it had been thought of a month beforehand, would have
been altogether wholesome and delightful. Still worse for the children is
it when mother or teacher has a ‘busy’ day. Friends are coming, or the
family wardrobe for the summer must be seen to, or drawers and cupboards
must be turned out, or an examination is at hand. Anyway, it is one of
those fussy, busy days which we women rather delight in. We do more than
we can ourselves, our nerves are ‘on end,’ what with the fatigue and what
with the little excitement, and everybody in the house or the school is
uncomfortable. Again, the children take advantage, so we say; the real
fact being that they have caught their mother’s mood and are fretful and
tiresome. Nerve storms in the nursery are the probable result of the
mother’s little ebullition of nervous energy. Leisure for themselves and
a sense of leisure in those about them is as necessary to children’s well
being, as it is to the strong and benign parental attitude of which I am
speaking.

=Faith.=—Other ingredients go to the making of the delectable compound we
call ‘masterly inactivity,’ but space will allow me to speak of only one
more. That highest form of confidence, known to us as faith, is necessary
to full repose of mind and manner. When we recognise that God does not
make over the bringing up of children absolutely even to their parents,
but that He works Himself, in ways which it must be our care not to
hinder, in the training of every child, then we shall learn passiveness,
humble and wise. We shall give children space to develop on the lines of
their own characters in all right ways, and shall know how to intervene
effectually to prevent those errors which, also, are proper to their
individual characters.

Let us next consider a few of the various phases of children’s lives
in which parents and teachers would do well to preserve an attitude of
‘masterly inactivity.’




