CHAPTER XV

SCHOOL-BOOKS, AND HOW THEY MAKE FOR EDUCATION

1. What ideas do we get from the incident quoted from _The Neighbours_?

2. What manner of books sustains the life of thought?

3. What have you to say of the ‘school-books’ of the publishers?

4. Why do intelligent teachers fall back upon oral lessons?

5. Mention some of the disadvantages of these.

6. What questions should we ask about a youth who has finished his
education?

7. Wherein lies the error of our educational system?

8. Show that we undervalue children, and therefore educate them amiss.

9. What was the note of home-life in the last generation?

10. How would you describe children as they are?

11. Show that our great work is to give them vitalising ideas.


CHAPTER XVI

HOW TO USE SCHOOL-BOOKS

1. What question must we ask concerning a subject of instruction?

2. What do you understand by disciplinary subjects?

3. What danger attends the blind use of these?

4. What idea should prove an ‘open sesame’ to many vitalising studies?

5. Illustrate the fact that the Bible is the great source of moral
impressions.

6. What impressions were made on De Quincey by his nursery Bible readings?

7. In what ways did the liturgy appeal to him?

8. Why should a child _dig_ for his own knowledge?

9. What are the uses of the oral lesson and the lecture?

10. Why should children use living books for themselves?

11. What is the mark of a fit book?

12. How shall we know if children enjoy a book?

13. What should the teacher do towards the teaching given by the book?

14. In what ways must children labour over their books?

15. What is the simplest way of dealing with a paragraph or chapter?

16. Why should preparation consist of a single careful reading?

17. Mention some other ways of using books.

18. What mechanical devices might children use in their studies?

19. What does the teacher do towards the preparation of a lesson?

20. What is the danger of too many disciplinary devices?

21. Why are we in some danger of neglecting books?


CHAPTER XVII

EDUCATION IS THE SCIENCE OF RELATIONS: WE ARE EDUCATED BY OUR INTIMACIES

1. What are our three educational instruments, and why are we confined to
these?

2. Why may we not encroach upon the personality of children?

3. In what ways may we temper life too much for children?

4. What example of fairy-lore serving as a screen and shelter does
Wordsworth give us in _The Prelude_?

5. What have you to say of the spontaneous living of children?

6. On what does fulness of living depend?

7. Distinguish between the relation of ideas to ideas and the relation of
persons to the ideas proper for them.

8. Show that the object of education is not to make something of the
child, but to put the child in touch with all that concerns him.

9. Describe the self-education of an infant. What does Wordsworth tell us
on this point?

10. What is our part in his education?

11. What is our common error; what are its results?

12. Distinguish between business and desire.

13. What attempts were made to teach Ruskin to ride, and what does he
think of those attempts?

14. What indictment does he bring against the limitations of his
condition?

15. Why should those parents especially who are villa-dwellers learn much
from _Præterita_?

16. Enumerate Wordsworth’s opportunities for forming dynamic relations.

17. Show that these came naturally in the course of things.


