CHAPTER XXI

SUGGESTIONS TOWARDS A CURRICULUM

(_For Children under Twelve_)

PART II.—_SCHOOL-BOOKS_


=Books that supply the Sustenance of Ideas.=—Mr H. G. Wells has put
his finger on the place when he says that the selection of the right
school-books is a great function of the educator. I am not at all sure
that his remedy is the right one—or that a body of experts and a hundred
thousand pounds would, in truth, provide the manner of school-books that
reach children. They are kittle cattle, and, though they will plod on
obediently over any of the hundreds of dry-as-dust volumes issued by the
publishers under the heading of ‘School Books,’ or of ‘Education,’ they
keep all such books in the outer court, and allow them no access to their
minds. A book may be long or short, old or new, easy or hard, written by
a great man or a lesser man, and yet be the _living_ book which finds
its way to the mind of a young reader. The expert is not the person to
choose; the children themselves are the experts in this case. A single
page will elicit a verdict; but the unhappy thing is, this verdict is
not betrayed; it is acted upon in the opening or closing of the door
of the mind. Many excellent and admirable school-books appreciated by
masters are on the Index Expurgatorius of the schoolboy; and that is why
he takes nothing in and gives nothing out. The master must have it in him
to distinguish between twaddle and simplicity, and between vivacity and
life. For the rest, he must experiment or test the experiments of others,
being assured of one thing—that a book serves the ends of education only
as it is vital. But this subject has been treated at some length in an
earlier chapter.

=Books and Oral Teaching.=—Having found the right book, let the master
give the book the lead and be content himself with a second place. The
lecture _must be subordinated to the book_. The business of the teacher
is to put his class in the right attitude towards their book by a word
or two of his own interest in the matter contained, of his own delight
in the manner of the author. But boys get knowledge only as they dig for
it. Labour prepares the way for assimilation, that mental process which
converts information into knowledge; and the effort of taking in the
sequence of thought of his author is worth to the boy a great deal of
oral teaching.

Do teachers always realise the paralysing and stupefying effect that a
flood of talk has upon the mind? The inspired talk of an orator no doubt
wakens a response and is listened to with tense attention; but few of us
claim to be inspired, and we are sometimes aware of the difficulty of
holding the attention of a class. We blame ourselves, whereas the blame
lies in the instrument we employ—the more or less diluted oral lesson
or lecture, in place of the living and arresting book. We cannot do
without the oral lesson—to introduce, to illustrate, to amplify, to sum
up. My stipulation is that oral lessons should be few and far between,
and that the child who has to _walk_ through life,—and has to find his
intellectual life in books or go without,—shall not be first taught to go
upon _crutches_.

=The Use of Appliances.=—For the same reason, that is, that we may not
paralyse the mental vigour of children, we are very chary in the use of
appliances (except such as the microscope, telescope, magic lantern,
etc.). I once heard a schoolmaster, who had a school in a shipbuilding
town, say that he had demanded and got from his committee a complete
sectional model of a man-of-war. Such a model would be of use to his boys
when they begin to work in the Yards, but during their school years I
believe the effect would be stultifying, because the mind is not able to
conceive with an elaborate model as basis. I recently visited M. Bloch’s
admirable ‘Peace and War’ show at Lucerne. Torpedoes were very fully
illustrated by models, sectional diagrams, and what not, but I was not
enlightened. I asked my neighbour at dinner to explain the principle; he
took up his spectacle case as an illustration, and after a few sentences
my intelligence had grasped what was distinctive in a torpedo. This
gentleman turned out to have been in the War Office and to have had
much concern with torpedoes. The power in the teacher of illustrating
by inkpot and ruler or any object at hand, or by a few lines on the
blackboard, appears to me to be of more use than the most elaborate
equipment of models and diagrams; these things stale on the senses and
produce a torpor of thought the moment they are presented.

=The Co-ordination of Studies.=—Another point, the co-ordination of
studies is carefully regulated without any reference to the clash of
ideas on the threshold or their combination into apperception masses;
but solely with reference to the natural and inevitable co-ordination
of certain subjects. Thus, in readings on the period of the Armada, we
should not devote the contemporary arithmetic lessons to calculations as
to the amount of food necessary to sustain the Spanish fleet, because
this is an arbitrary and not an inherent connection; but we should read
such history, travels, and literature as would make the Spanish Armada
live in the mind.

=Our Aim in Education.=—Our aim in education is to give children vital
interests in as many directions as possible—to set their feet in a large
room—because the crying evil of the day is, it seems to me, intellectual
inanition.

Believing that he is in the world to lay hold of all that he can of those
possessions which endure; that full, happy living, expansion, expression,
resourcefulness, power of initiative, serviceableness—in a word,
character, for him, depends upon how far he apprehends the relationships
proper to him and how many of them he seizes, we should be gravely uneasy
when his education leaves a young person with prejudices and caring for
‘events’ (in the sporting sense) rather than with interests and pursuits.
Principles, we believe, the best of our young people have and bring away
from their schools fully as much as from their homes. Our educational
shortcomings seem to be intellectual rather than moral.

=Education by Things.=—Education should be by _Things_ and by _Books_.
Ten years ago education by _Things_ was little thought of except in the
games of public schools. To-day, a great reform has taken place, and the
worth of education by _Things_ is recognised everywhere. Disciplinary
exercises, artistic handicrafts, are seen to make for education as truly
as do geography and Latin. ‘Nature study’ has come in later, but has come
with a rush. If that Sikh quoted by Cornelia Sorabji[21] should visit us
again ten years hence, it is to be hoped he would not then say of us,
“The very thoughts of the people are merchandise; they have not learned
the common language of Nature.” The teaching of Science is receiving
enormous attention; and the importance of education in this kind need
not be enforced here. Works of art are, here and there, allowed their
chance with boys and girls, and we shall look more and more to this means
of education. What everyone knows it is unnecessary to repeat; and such
general attention is given to education by Things, and this is carried
on so far on right lines, that I have nothing to add to the general
knowledge of this subject.

=Education by Books.=—The great educational failure we have still to
deal with is in the matter of _Books_. We know that _Books_ store the
knowledge and thought of the world; but the mass of knowledge, the
multitude of books, overpower us, and we think we may select here and
there, from this book and that, fragments and facts of knowledge, to be
dealt out, whether in the little cram book or the oral lesson.

Sir Philip Magnus, in a recent address on Headwork and Handwork in
Elementary Schools, says some things worth pondering. Perhaps he gives
his workshop too big a place in the school of the future, but certainly
he puts his finger on the weak point in the work of both elementary and
secondary schools—the ‘getting by heart scraps of knowledge, fragments
of so-called science.’ And we are with him in the emphasis he lays upon
_reading and writing_; it is through these that even school ‘studies’
shall become ‘for delight.’ Writing, of course, comes of reading,
and nobody can write well who does not read much. Sir Philip Magnus
says,[22] speaking of the schools of the future:—“We shall no longer
require children to learn by constant repetition, scraps of history,
geography, and grammar, nor try to teach them fragments of so-called
science. The daily hours devoted to these tasks will be applicable to
the creation of mental aptitudes, and will be utilised in showing the
children how to obtain knowledge for themselves.... In future the main
function of education will be to train our hands and our sense organs
and intellectual faculties, so that we may be placed in a position of
advantage for seeking knowledge.... The scope of the lessons will be
enlarged. Children will be taught to read in order that they may desire
to read, and to write that they may be able to write.... It will be
the teacher’s aim to create in his pupils a desire for knowledge, and
consequently a love of reading, and to cultivate in them, by a proper
selection of lessons, the pleasure which reading may be made to yield.
The main feature of the reading lesson will be to show the use of books,
how they may be consulted to ascertain what other people have said or
done, and how they may be read for the pleasure they afford. The storing
of the memory with facts is no part of elementary school work.... It is
not enough that a child should learn how to write, he must know _what_
to write. He must learn to describe clearly what he has heard or seen,
to transfer to written language his sense-impressions, and to express
concisely his own thoughts.”

We should like to add a word to Sir Philip Magnus’s conception,
emphasising the _habit_ of reading as a chief acquirement of school life.
It is only those who have read who do read.

=The Question of a Curriculum.=—In regard to a curriculum, may I
enforce what I have said in an earlier chapter? Perhaps the main
part of a child’s education should be concerned with the great human
relationships. History, literature, art, languages (whether ancient or
modern), travel—all of these are the record or expression of persons;
so is science, so far as it is the history of discoveries, the record
of observations, that is, so far as it is to be got out of books.
Essentially, however, science falls under the head of _Education by
Things_, and is too large a subject to be dealt with, by the way.
Before all these ranks _Religion_, including our relations of worship,
loyalty, love and service to God; and next in order, perhaps, the
intimate interpersonal relations implied in such terms as self-knowledge,
self-control. Knowledge in these several kinds is due to children; for
there seems reason to believe that the limit to human intelligence
coincides with the limit to human interests; that is, that a normal
person of poor and narrow intelligence is so because the interests proper
to him have not been called into play. The curriculum which should
give children their due falls into some six or eight groups—Religion,
Philosophy (?), History, Languages, Mathematics, Science, Art, Physical
Exercises, and Manual Crafts.

=Religion.=—For _Religion_ it is, no doubt, to the Bible itself we must
go, as the great storehouse of spiritual truth and moral impressions. A
child might, in fact, receive a liberal education from the Bible alone,
for _The Book_ contains within itself a great literature.

There was a time when ‘National Schools’ brought up their scholars on
one of the three great bodies of ancient classical literature which
the Western world possesses, and which we include under the one name,
Bible; and, perhaps, there has been some falling off both in national
intelligence and character since the Bible has been practically deposed
for the miscellaneous ‘Reader.’ It is not possible or desirable to revert
to old ways in this matter; but we should see to it that children derive
as much intellectual, as well as moral and religious, nutriment from
books as they did when their studies ranged from the story of Joseph to
the Epistles of St Paul.

=History.=—In History, boys and girls of twelve to fourteen should
have a fairly intimate knowledge of English history, of contemporary
French history, and of Greek and Roman history—the last, by way of
biography;—perhaps nothing outside of the Bible has the educational
value of Plutarch’s _Lives_. The wasteful mistake often made in teaching
English history is to carry children of, say, between nine and fourteen
through several small compendiums, beginning with _Little Arthur_;
whereas their intelligence between those ages is equal to steady work on
one considerable book.

=Language.=—In Language, by twelve, they should have a fair knowledge
of English grammar, and should have read some literature. They should
have more or less power in speaking and understanding French, and
should be able to read a fairly easy French book; the same with German,
but considerably less progress; and in Latin, they should be reading
‘Fables,’ if not ‘Cæsar,’ and perhaps ‘Virgil.’

=Mathematics.=—I need not touch upon the subject of Mathematics. It is
receiving ample attention, and is rapidly becoming an instrument for
living teaching in our schools.

‘=Practical Instruction.=’—To turn to the question of practical
instruction, under the heads of ‘Science, Drawing, Manual and Physical
Training,’ etc., I can do no more here than repeat our convictions. We
believe that education under these four heads is due to every child of
whatever class; and, for boys and girls under twelve, probably the same
general curriculum would be suitable for all. I have nothing to add to
the sound ideas as to the teaching of each of these subjects which are
now common property.

=Science.=—In _Science_, or rather, nature study, we attach great
importance to _recognition_, believing that the power to recognise and
name a plant or stone or constellation involves classification and
includes a good deal of knowledge. To know a plant by its gesture and
habitat, its time and its way of flowering and fruiting; a bird by its
flight and song and its times of coming and going; to know when, year
after year, you may come upon the redstart and the pied fly-catcher,
means a good deal of interested observation, and of, at any rate, the
material for science. The children keep a dated record of what they
see in their nature note-books, which are left to their own management
and are not corrected. These note-books are a source of pride and joy,
and are freely illustrated by drawings (brushwork) of twig, flower,
insect, etc. The knowledge necessary for these records is not given
in the way of teaching. On one afternoon in the week, the children (of
the Practising School) go for a ‘nature walk’ with their teachers. They
notice for themselves, and the teacher gives a name or other information
as it is asked for, and it is surprising what a range of knowledge a
child of nine or ten acquires. The teachers are careful _not_ to make
these nature walks an opportunity for scientific instruction, as we wish
the children’s attention to be given to observation with very little
direction. In this way they lay up that store of ‘common information’
which Huxley considered should precede science teaching; and, what is
much more important, they learn to know and delight in natural objects
as in the familiar faces of friends. The nature-walk should not be made
the occasion to impart a sort of _Tit-Bits_ miscellany of scientific
information. The study of science should be pursued in an ordered
sequence, which is not possible or desirable in a walk. It seems to me a
_sine quâ non_ of a living education that all school children of whatever
grade should have one half-day in the week, _throughout the year_, in the
fields. There are few towns where country of some sort is not accessible,
and every child should have the opportunity of watching, from week to
week, the procession of the seasons.

Geography, geology, the course of the sun, the behaviour of the clouds,
weather signs, all that the ‘open’ has to offer, are made use of in
these walks; but all is incidental, easy, and things are noticed as they
occur. It is probable that in most neighbourhoods there are naturalists
who would be willing to give their help in the ‘nature walks’ of a given
school.

We supplement this direct ‘nature walk’ by occasional object-lessons,
as, on the hairs of plants, on diversity of wings, on the sorts of
matters taken up in Professor Miall’s capital books; but our main
dependence is on _books_ as an adjunct to out-of-door work—Mrs Fisher’s,
Mrs Brightwen’s, Professor Lloyd Morgan’s, Professor Geikie’s, Professors
Geddes’ and Thomson’s (the two last for children over fourteen), etc.,
etc. In the books of these and some other authors the children are put in
the position of the original observer of biological and other phenomena.
They learn what to observe, and make discoveries for themselves, original
so far as they are concerned. They are put in the right attitude of mind
for scientific observations and deductions, and their keen interest is
awakened. We are extremely careful not to burden the verbal memory with
scientific nomenclature. Children learn of pollen, antennæ, and what not,
incidentally, when the thing is present and they require a name for it.
The children who are curious about it, and they only, should have the
opportunity of seeing with the microscope any minute wonder of structure
that has come up in their reading or their walks; but a good lens is a
capital and almost an indispensable companion in field work. I think
there is danger in giving _too_ prominent a place to education by Things,
enormous as is its value; a certain want of atmosphere is apt to result,
and a deplorable absence of a standard of comparison and of the principle
of veneration. ‘We are the people!’ seems to be the note of an education
which is not largely sustained on _books_ as well as on _things_.

=Drawing.=—In pictorial art we eschew mechanical aids such as chequers,
lines of direction, etc., nor do we use the blacklead pencil, which
lends itself rather to the copying of linear work than to the free
rendering of objects. The children work always from the round, whether
in charcoal or brushwork. They produce, also, illustrations of tales or
poems, which leave much to seek in the matter of drawing, and are of
little value as art instruction, but are useful imaginative exercises.

=Picture Talks.=—We attach a good deal of value to what we call picture
talks, that is:—a reproduction of a suitable picture, by Millet,
for example, is put into the children’s hands, and they study it by
themselves. Then, children of from six to nine describe the picture,
giving all the details and showing by a few lines on the blackboard where
is such a tree or such a house; judging if they can the time of day;
discovering the story if there be one. The older children add to this
some study of the lines of composition, light and shade, the particular
style of the master; and reproduce from memory certain details. The
object of these lessons is that the pupils should learn how to appreciate
rather than how to produce.

But there is no space for further details of a curriculum which is more
fully illustrated in an appendix.




