



School Education




_‘Home Education’ Series_

By CHARLOTTE M. MASON


_Each Volume 3s. 6d. net_

      I. HOME EDUCATION.
     II. PARENTS AND CHILDREN.
    III. SCHOOL EDUCATION.
     IV. ESSAYS IN PRACTICAL EDUCATION.
      V. OURSELVES, OUR SOULS AND BODIES.

  KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER, & CO., LTD.
  DRYDEN HOUSE
  43 GERRARD STREET, LONDON, W.




                         _‘Home Education’ Series_

                                VOLUME III.

                             School Education

                                    By
                            Charlotte M. Mason

                             _SECOND EDITION_

                                  LONDON
                 KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER, & CO., LTD.
                     DRYDEN HOUSE, GERRARD STREET, W.
                                   1907

       _The rights of translation and of reproduction are reserved_




                                   _TO_

                            Henrietta Franklin

                       THIS VOLUME IS AFFECTIONATELY
                        INSCRIBED, IN VERY GRATEFUL
                   RECOGNITION, NOT ONLY OF HER GENEROUS
                     LIFE’S LABOUR GIVEN TO THE SPREAD
                       OF CERTAIN EDUCATIONAL IDEAS,
                         BUT ALSO OF HER SINGULAR
                              APPREHENSION OF
                                THOSE IDEAS




[Illustration: FOR THE CHILDRENS SAKE]

    “O maraviglia! che come altrui piacque
      l’umile pianta, cotal si rinacque
    Subitamente là onde la svelse.”




We read in the _Purgatorio_, Canto I., how Virgil was directed to prepare
Dante for his difficult ascent:

    “Va dunque, e fa che tu costui ricinghe
      d’un giunco schietto, e che gli lavi il viso
      si che ogni sucidume quindi stinghe:
    ...
    Questa isoletta intorno ad imo ad imo,
      laggiu, cola dove la batte l’onda,
      porta de’ giunchi sopra il molle limo.
    Null’ altra pianta, che facesse fronda
      o indurasse, vi puote aver vita,
      pero che alle percosse non seconda.
    ...
    Venimmo poi in sul litro diserto,
    ...
    Quivi mi cinse si come altrui piacque:
      o maraviglia! che qual egli scelse
      l’umile pianta, cotal si rinacque
    Subitamente là onde la svelse.”

    “Go, then, and see thou gird this one about
    With a smooth rush, and that thou wash his face,
    So that thou cleanse away all stain therefrom.
    ...
    This little island round about its base,
    Below there, yonder where the billow beats it,
    Doth rushes bear upon its washy ooze;
    No other plant that putteth forth the leaf,
    Or that doth indurate, can there have life,
    Because it yieldeth not unto the shocks.
    ...
    Then came we down upon the desert shore.
    ...
    There he begirt me as the other pleased;
    O marvellous! for even as he culled
    The humble plant, such it sprang up again
    Suddenly there where he uprooted it.”

                                               (LONGFELLOW’S TRANSLATION.)




Preface to the ‘Home Education’ Series


The educational outlook is rather misty and depressing both at home
and abroad. That science should be a staple of education, that the
teaching of Latin, of modern languages, of mathematics, must be reformed,
that nature and handicrafts should be pressed into service for the
training of the eye and hand, that boys and girls must learn to write
English and therefore must know something of history and literature;
and, on the other hand, that education must be made more technical and
utilitarian—these, and such as these, are the cries of expedience with
which we take the field. But we have no unifying principle, no definite
aim; in fact, no philosophy of education. As a stream can rise no higher
than its source, so it is probable that no educational effort can rise
above the whole scheme of thought which gives it birth; and perhaps this
is the reason of all the ‘fallings from us, vanishings,’ failures, and
disappointments which mark our educational records.

Those of us, who have spent many years in pursuing the benign and
elusive vision of Education, perceive that her approaches are regulated
by a law, and that this law has yet to be evoked. We can discern its
outlines, but no more. We know that it is pervasive; there is no part of
a child’s home-life or school-work which the law does not penetrate. It
is illuminating, too, showing the value, or lack of value, of a thousand
systems and expedients. It is not only a light, but a measure, providing
a standard whereby all things, small and great, belonging to educational
work must be tested. The law is liberal, taking in whatsoever things are
true, honest, and of good report, and offering no limitation or hindrance
save where excess should injure. And the path indicated by the law is
continuous and progressive, with no transition stage from the cradle
to the grave, except that maturity takes up the regular self-direction
to which immaturity has been trained. We shall doubtless find, when we
apprehend the law, that certain German thinkers—Kant, Herbart, Lotze,
Froebel—are justified; that, as they say, it is ‘necessary’ to believe in
God; that, therefore, the knowledge of God is the principal knowledge,
and the chief end of education. By one more character shall we be able
to recognise this perfect law of educational liberty when it shall be
made evident. It has been said that ‘The best idea which we can form of
absolute truth is that it is able to meet every condition by which it can
be tested.’ This we shall expect of our law—that it shall meet every test
of experiment and every test of rational investigation.

Not having received the tables of our law, we fall back upon Froebel or
upon Herbart; or, if we belong to another School, upon Locke or Spencer;
but we are not satisfied. A discontent is it a divine discontent? is
upon us; and assuredly we should hail a workable, effectual philosophy
of education as a deliverance from much perplexity. Before this great
deliverance comes to us it is probable that many tentative efforts will
be put forth, having more or less of the characters of a philosophy;
notably, having a central idea, a body of thought with various members
working in vital harmony.

Such a theory of education, which need not be careful to call itself a
system of psychology, must be in harmony with the thought movements of
the age; must regard education, not as a shut-off compartment, but as
being as much a part of life as birth or growth, marriage or work; and it
must leave the pupil attached to the world at many points of contact. It
is true that educationalists are already eager to establish such contact
in several directions, but their efforts rest upon an axiom here and an
idea there, and there is no broad unifying basis of thought to support
the whole.

Fools rush in where angels fear to tread; and the hope that there may be
many tentative efforts towards a philosophy of education, and that all of
them will bring us nearer to the _magnum opus_, encourages me to launch
one such attempt. The central thought, or rather body of thought, upon
which I found, is the somewhat obvious fact that the child is a _person_
with all the possibilities and powers included in personality. Some of
the members which develop from this nucleus have been exploited from time
to time by educational thinkers, and exist vaguely in the general common
sense, a notion here, another there. One thesis, which is, perhaps, new,
that _Education is the Science of Relations_, appears to me to solve the
question of curriculæ, as showing that the object of education is to put
a child in living touch with as much as may be of the life of Nature
and of thought. Add to this one or two keys to self-knowledge, and the
educated youth goes forth with some idea of self-management, with some
pursuits, and many vital interests. My excuse for venturing to offer a
solution, however tentative and passing, to the problem of education
is twofold. For between thirty and forty years I have laboured without
pause to establish a working and philosophic theory of education; and
in the next place, each article of the educational faith I offer has
been arrived at by inductive processes; and has, I think, been verified
by a long and wide series of experiments. It is, however, with sincere
diffidence that I venture to offer the results of this long labour;
because I know that in this field there are many labourers far more able
and expert than I—the ‘angels’ who fear to tread, so precarious is the
footing!

But, if only _pour encourager les autres_, I append a short synopsis of
the educational theory advanced in the volumes of the ‘Home Education
Series.’ The treatment is not methodic, but incidental; here a little,
there a little, as seemed to me most likely to meet the occasions of
parents and teachers. I should add that in the course of a number of
years the various essays have been prepared for the use of the Parents’
Educational Union in the hope that that Society might witness for a more
or less coherent body of educational thought.

    “The consequence of truth is great; therefore the judgment of
    it must not be negligent.”

1. Children are born _persons_.

2. They are not born either good or bad, but with possibilities for good
and evil.

3. The principles of authority on the one hand and obedience on the
other, are natural, necessary and fundamental; but—

4. These principles are limited by the respect due to the personality of
children, which must not be encroached upon, whether by fear or love,
suggestion or influence, or undue play upon any one natural desire.

5. Therefore we are limited to three educational instruments—the
atmosphere of environment, the discipline of habit, and the presentation
of living ideas.

6. By the saying, EDUCATION IS AN ATMOSPHERE, it is not meant that a
child should be isolated in what may be called a ‘child environment,’
especially adapted and prepared; but that we should take into account
the educational value of his natural home atmosphere, both as regards
persons and things, and should let him live freely among his proper
conditions. It stultifies a child to bring down his world to the
‘child’s’ level.

7. By EDUCATION IS A DISCIPLINE, is meant the discipline of habits
formed definitely and thoughtfully, whether habits of mind or body.
Physiologists tell us of the adaptation of brain structure to habitual
lines of thought—_i.e._, to our habits.

8. In the saying that EDUCATION IS A LIFE, the need of intellectual and
moral as well as of physical sustenance is implied. The mind feeds on
ideas, and therefore children should have a generous curriculum.

9. But the mind is not a receptacle into which ideas must be dropped,
each idea adding to an ‘apperception mass’ of its like, the theory upon
which the Herbartian doctrine of interest rests.

10. On the contrary, a child’s mind is no mere _sac_ to hold ideas; but
is rather, if the figure may be allowed, a spiritual _organism_, with an
appetite for all knowledge. This is its proper diet, with which it is
prepared to deal, and which it can digest and assimilate as the body does
food-stuffs.

11. This difference is not a verbal quibble. The Herbartian doctrine lays
the stress of education—the preparation of knowledge in enticing morsels,
presented in due order—upon the teacher. Children taught upon this
principle are in danger of receiving much teaching with little knowledge;
and the teacher’s axiom is, ‘What a child learns matters less than how he
learns it.’

12. But, believing that the normal child has powers of mind that fit him
to deal with all knowledge proper to him, we must give him a full and
generous curriculum; taking care, only, that the knowledge offered to him
is vital—that is, that facts are not presented without their informing
ideas. Out of this conception comes the principle that,—

13. EDUCATION IS THE SCIENCE OF RELATIONS; that is, that a child has
natural relations with a vast number of things and thoughts: so we must
train him upon physical exercises, nature, handicrafts, science and art,
and upon _many living_ books; for we know that our business is, not to
teach him all about anything, but to help him to make valid as many as
may be of—

                  ‘Those first-born affinities
    That fit our new existence to existing things.’

14. There are also two secrets of moral and intellectual self-management
which should be offered to children; these we may call the Way of the
Will and the Way of the Reason.

15. _The Way of the Will._—Children should be taught—

    (_a_) To distinguish between ‘I want’ and ‘I will.’

    (_b_) That the way to will effectively is to turn our thoughts
    from that which we desire but do not will.

    (_c_) That the best way to turn our thoughts is to think of or
    do some quite different thing, entertaining or interesting.

    (_d_) That, after a little rest in this way, the will returns
    to its work with new vigour.

    (This adjunct of the will is familiar to us as _diversion_,
    whose office it is to ease us for a time from will effort,
    that we may ‘will’ again with added power. The use of
    suggestion—even self-suggestion—as an aid to the will, is to be
    deprecated, as tending to stultify and stereotype character. It
    would seem that spontaneity is a condition of development, and
    that human nature needs the discipline of failure as well as of
    success.)

16. _The Way of the Reason._—We should teach children, too, not to ‘lean’
(too confidently) ‘unto their own understanding,’ because the function of
reason is, to give logical demonstration (_a_) of mathematical truth; and
(_b_) of an initial idea, accepted by the will. In the former case reason
is, perhaps, an infallible guide, but in the second it is not always a
safe one; for whether that initial idea be right or wrong, reason will
confirm it by irrefragable proofs.

17. Therefore children should be taught, as they become mature enough to
understand such teaching, that the chief responsibility which rests on
them as persons is the acceptance or rejection of initial ideas. To help
them in this choice we should give them principles of conduct and a wide
range of the knowledge fitted for them.

These three principles (15, 16 and 17) should save children from some of
the loose thinking and heedless action which cause most of us to live at
a lower level than we need.

18. We should allow no separation to grow up between the intellectual
and ‘spiritual’ life of children; but should teach them that the divine
Spirit has constant access to their spirits, and is their continual
helper in all the interests, duties and joys of life.

    _The ‘Home Education’ Series is so called from the title of the
    first volume, and not as dealing, wholly or principally, with
    ‘Home’ as opposed to ‘School’ education._




Preface


The intention of the following volume is to offer some suggestions
towards a curriculum for boys and girls under twelve. A curriculum,
however, is not an independent product, but is linked to much else by
chains of cause and consequence; and the manner of curriculum I am
anxious to indicate is the outcome of a scheme of educational thought,
the adoption of which might, I believe, place educational work generally
upon a sounder footing.

The fundamental principles of docility and authority have been considered
in the first place because they _are_ fundamental; but, for that very
reason, they should be present but not in evidence: we do not expose
the foundations of our house. Not only so, but these principles must be
conditioned by respect for the personality of children; and, in order
to give the children room for free development on the lines proper to
them, it is well that parents and teachers should adopt an attitude of
‘masterly inactivity.’

Having considered the relations of teachers and taught, I have touched
upon those between education and current thought. Education should be
in the flow, as it were, and not shut up in a watertight compartment.
Perhaps, reverence for personality as such, a sense of the solidarity
of the race, and a profound consciousness of evolutionary progress, are
among the elements of current thought which should help us towards an
educational ideal.

In considering the training of children under the convenient divisions of
physical, mental, moral, and religious, I have not thought it necessary
to enlarge upon matters of common knowledge and general acceptance, but
have dwelt upon aspects of training under each heading which are likely
to be overlooked. Under the phrase, ‘Education is a life,’ I have tried
to show how necessary it is to sustain the intellectual life upon ideas,
and, as a corollary, that a school-book should be a medium for ideas,
and not merely a receptacle for facts. That normal children have a
natural desire for, and a right of admission to, all fitting knowledge,
appears to me to be suggested by the phrase, ‘Education is the science of
relations.’

These considerations clear the ground towards that of a curriculum.

The sort of curriculum I have in view should educate children upon
_Things_ and _Books_. Current thought upon the subject of education
by _Things_ is so sound and practical, and so thoroughly carried into
effect, that I have not thought it necessary to dwell much here upon
this part of education. Our great failure seems to me to be caused by
the fact that we do not form the _habit of reading books that are worth
while_ in children while they are at school and are under twelve years of
age. The free use of books implies correct spelling and easy and vigorous
composition without direct teaching of these subjects.

The Appendices show, I think, that such use of books in education works
out well in practice, and is a great saving of time and labour to both
teacher and pupils, especially relieving both of the deadly dull labour
wasted on ‘_corrections_.’

The much-diluted, or over-condensed, teaching of the oral lesson, or
the lecture, gives place to the well thought out, consecutive treatment
of the right book, a _living_ book in which facts are presented as the
outcome of ideas.

Children taught in this way are remarkable for their keenness after
knowledge, and do well afterwards in any examination for which they may
have to prepare; and, what is of much more consequence, are prepared
to take their full share of all that life offers of intellectual and
practical interests.

    AMBLESIDE, _November 1904_.

_Will the reader kindly substitute ‘teachers’ for ‘parents’ when the
former title suits the case?_




Contents


                                                                      PAGE

                                CHAPTER I

              DOCILITY AND AUTHORITY IN THE HOME AND SCHOOL

    Better relations between children and their elders—The
    elder generation of parents, autocratic—Arbitrary rule not
    always a failure—But truer educational thought results in
    worthier character—Doctrine of the infallible reason—Leads
    to the dethronement of authority—Authority not inherent,
    but deputed—‘Quick as thought’—The notion of the finality
    of human reason intolerable—Authority and docility,
    fundamental principles—Work of rationalistic philosophers,
    inevitable—Authority, vested in the office,                          1

                                CHAPTER II

            DOCILITY AND AUTHORITY IN THE HOME AND THE SCHOOL

                     _Part II.—How Authority Behaves_

    Mistakes made on principle—Authority distinguished
    from autocracy—Behaviour of ‘autocracy’—Behaviour of
    ‘authority’—Qualities proper to a ruler—Mechanical and
    reasonable obedience—Response of docility to authority, a
    natural function—The habit of prompt obedience—The effort
    of decision—Authority avoids cause of offence—Authority is
    alert—Who gave thee this authority?                                 13

                               CHAPTER III

                          ‘MASTERLY INACTIVITY’

    Increased sense of responsibility—A sign of moral
    progress—Parental responsibility—Anxiety the note of a
    transition stage—A fussy and restless habit—‘Masterly
    inactivity’—The element of good humour—Self-confidence—The
    fine, easy way of fathers—Confidence in the
    children—Omniscience of parents and teachers—‘Fate’ and
    ‘free-will’—The component parts of masterly inactivity—Serenity
    of a Madonna—Leisure—Faith,                                         25

                                CHAPTER IV

                SOME OF THE RIGHTS OF CHILDREN AS PERSONS

    Children should be free in their play—Organised games are not
    play—Personal initiative in work—Children must stand or fall by
    their own efforts—Boys and girls are generally dutiful—Children
    should choose their own friends—Should be free to spend their
    own pocket-money—Should form their own opinions—Spontaneity,        36

                                CHAPTER V

                PSYCHOLOGY IN RELATION TO CURRENT THOUGHT

    Educational thought in the eighteenth century—General
    dissatisfaction with education—Psychologies are many—Conditions
    of an adequate system—Sacredness of the person—The evolution
    of the individual—The solidarity of the race—The best thought
    is common thought—Locke’s ‘states of consciousness’—Does not
    provide for the evolution of the person—Modern physiological
    psychology—‘Unjustifiable materialism’—Psychology ‘a
    phrase of diffidence’—We become devitalised—This system
    inadequate—Unnecessary—Inharmonious—Evolution is checked,           44

                                CHAPTER VI

                    SOME EDUCATIONAL THEORIES EXAMINED

    Theories of Pestalozzi and Froebel—Lack the element
    of personality—The struggle for existence a part of
    life—Herbartian psychology—The person an effect and not a
    cause—A tempting vista—Eliminates personality—Turns out
    duplicates—Each system fails to meet our tests—A psychology
    that meets the demands upon it—Educational truth a common
    possession—We take children as persons—The person wills and
    thinks and feels—An adequate doctrine—Education the science of
    relations—Teaching must not be obtrusive—The art of standing
    aside,                                                              56

                               CHAPTER VII

                     AN ADEQUATE THEORY OF EDUCATION

    A human being—_His capacities_—_His limitations_—_His
    education_—The behaviour of ideas—No one can beget an idea by
    himself—Certain persons attract certain ideas—The idea that
    ‘strikes’ us—Expansion and activity of the person—Story of
    Kaspar Hauser—What Nature does for a child—The child has every
    power that will serve him—Fulness of living depends on the
    establishment of relations—The power of recognition—Æsthetic
    appreciation—First-hand knowledge—Appreciative knowledge and
    exact knowledge—How a child sets up a new relation,                 68

                               CHAPTER VIII

                   CERTAIN RELATIONS PROPER TO A CHILD

    Dynamic relations—Power over material—Intimacy with animals—The
    great human relationships—The awakening idea—Human intelligence
    limited by human interests—The full human life—Duty not within
    the scope of present-day psychology—Casual ethical teaching—The
    moral relation of person to person—The sense of what is due
    from us does not come by Nature—Relations of oneself with
    oneself—Intimacy with persons of all classes—Fitness as
    citizens—Relations with each other as human beings—Relation to
    Almighty God—Sentiment is not duty,                                 79

                                CHAPTER IX

                          A GREAT EDUCATIONALIST

                                _A Review_

    We look to Germany for educational reform—Herbartian thought
    the most advanced on the Continent—Comparison with P.N.E.U.
    thought—The development of the ‘faculties’—We, like Herbart,
    discard the ‘faculties’—Pervasiveness of dominant ideas—The
    Zeitgeist—The child’s schoolmasters—A noble piety—A mediæval
    conception of education—The family principle—Uncertainty as to
    the purpose of education—Some attempts to fix—Herbart’s theory,
    ethical—Obscurity of psychology—Two luminous principles,            91

                                CHAPTER X

              SOME UNCONSIDERED ASPECTS OF PHYSICAL TRAINING

    Does our physical culture make heroes?—A
    serviceable body the end of physical culture—‘Ye
    are not your own’—Use of habit in physical
    training—Self-restraint—Self-control—Self-discipline—Local
    habits—Alertness—Quick perception—Stimulating
    ideas—Fortitude—Service—Courage—Prudence—Chastity,                 101

                                CHAPTER XI

            SOME UNCONSIDERED ASPECTS OF INTELLECTUAL TRAINING

    We are law-abiding in matters physical and moral—Not so
    in matters intellectual—Three ultimate facts, not open to
    question—Limitations of reason—Reason brings logical proof
    of any idea we entertain—Another fallacy—intellect man’s
    peculiar sphere, knowledge his proper discovery—Great
    eras come from time to time—Nothing so practical as great
    ideas—The formation of intellectual habits—We trust blindly to
    disciplinary subjects—Some intellectual habits—Meditation—The
    sustenance of living ideas—Children’s literature—Independent
    intellectual development of children—Self-selection and
    self-appropriation—Inherited parsimony in lesson-books—Plato’s
    educational aim,                                                   113

                               CHAPTER XII

               SOME UNCONSIDERED ASPECTS OF MORAL TRAINING

    Three foundation principles—Authority the basis of moral
    teaching—Principles not rules—Limitations of authority—Duty
    can exist only as that which we _owe_—Morals do not come
    by nature—Children born neither moral nor immoral—Moral
    teaching—Of the poets—Ethical teaching of the Middle
    Ages—We have no authoritative teaching—High ideals—Value
    of biography—Of patriotic poems—Mottoes—The habit of sweet
    thoughts—Virtues in which children should be trained,              126

                               CHAPTER XIII

             SOME UNCONSIDERED ASPECTS OF RELIGIOUS EDUCATION

    Authority in religious education—Questions in the air—How
    authority works—The habits of the religious life—Habit of the
    thought of God—Reverent attitudes—Regularity in devotions—The
    habit of reading the Bible—Children formalists by nature—The
    habit of praise—The habit of Sunday-keeping—Inspiring ideas
    of the religious life—The fatherhood of God—The kingship of
    Christ—Our Saviour—The indwelling of the Holy Ghost,               137

                               CHAPTER XIV

                             A MASTER-THOUGHT

    A motto—Nineteenth-century formula, Education is an
    atmosphere—Results in inanition—And _ennui_—Eighteenth-century
    formula, Education is a life, results in intellectual
    exhaustion—Education is the cultivation of faculties,
    leads to abnormal developments—Education has three
    faces—Education is a life, one of these—A creed which
    unifies life—The diet of great ideas—Science, _the_ teaching
    vouchsafed to men to-day—Evolution, the master-thought of
    our age—The ages have sought for a unifying principle—But
    personality remains—Attitude of parents and teachers towards
    evolution—Education is a world business—A captain idea for us,
    Education is the science of relations—A wide curriculum—We may
    not choose or reject subjects arbitrarily,                         148

                                CHAPTER XV

               SCHOOL-BOOKS AND HOW THEY MAKE FOR EDUCATION

    Line upon line—An incident of schoolgirl life—How did the girls
    get their enthusiasm?—What manner of book sustains the life of
    thought—The ‘school-books’ of the publishers—Reason for oral
    teaching—Limitations of teachers—Our aim in education is to
    give a full life—We undervalue children—Children of the last
    generation—Children as they are—Our work, to give vitalising
    ideas,                                                             164

                               CHAPTER XVI

                         HOW TO USE SCHOOL-BOOKS

    Disciplinary subjects of instruction—‘Open sesame’—The Bible,
    the great storehouse of moral impressions—Effect of our liturgy
    on a child—Principles on which to select school-books—Marks
    of a fit book—How to use the right books—Children must
    labour—Value of narration—A single careful reading—Other ways
    of using books—The teacher’s part—Disciplinary devices must not
    come between children and the soul of the book,                    174

                               CHAPTER XVII

        EDUCATION THE SCIENCE OF RELATIONS: WE ARE EDUCATED BY OUR
                INTIMACIES: _THE PRELUDE_ AND _PRÆTERITA_

    Only three educational instruments—Our limitations—We temper
    life too much for the children—Fairy lore, a screen and
    shelter—Spontaneous living—On what does fulness of living
    depend?—The child, a person—An infant’s self-education—Our
    part, to remove obstructions and to give stimulus—Our
    error—‘Business and desire’—The setting up of dynamic
    relations—Ruskin’s indictment of the limitations of his
    condition—Wordsworth’s recognition of his opportunities,           182

                              CHAPTER XVIII

                    WE ARE EDUCATED BY OUR INTIMACIES

                      _Part II.—Further Affinities_

    Affinity for material: Ruskin’s opportunities—Intimacy with
    natural objects—Ruskin’s flower-studies—His pebble studies—A
    life-shaping intimacy—Insatiate delight in books, Ruskin’s,
    Wordsworth’s—‘_They must_ have their food’ of romance—Children
    must range at will among books—Words, ‘a passion and a
    power’—Ruskin’s _local_ historic sense—Living touch with
    the past necessary—Wordsworth and Ruskin aloof from the
    past—Knowledge learned in schools—Comradeship,                     194

                               CHAPTER XIX

                    WE ARE EDUCATED BY OUR INTIMACIES

                           _Part III.—Vocation_

    Turner’s ‘call’ to Ruskin—Sincere work—Initiation—Nature,
    a passion—The calling of a poet—The education of the
    little prig—Children have affinities and should have
    relations—Education not desultory—Strenuous effort and
    reverence—Comradeship has duties—The angel troubles the still
    pool—The highest relationship,                                     204

    AN EDUCATIONAL MANIFESTO,                                          216

                                CHAPTER XX

                     SUGGESTIONS TOWARDS A CURRICULUM

                      (_For Children under Twelve_)

                                _Part I._

    Summary of preceding chapters—Some preliminary
    considerations—We take too much upon us—A definite
    aim—Education objective, not subjective—Interests—Educational
    unrest—A unifying principle—Education should give knowledge
    touched with emotion—Education is the science of relations—Is
    there such a thing as the ‘child-mind’?—Knowledge
    _versus_ information—Children have a natural craving for
    knowledge—Children must be educated on books,                      215

                               CHAPTER XXI

                     SUGGESTIONS TOWARDS A CURRICULUM

                      (_For Children under Twelve_)

                         _Part II.—School-books_

    Books that supply the sustenance of ideas—Books and
    oral teaching—The use of appliances—The co-ordination
    of studies—Our aim in education—Education by
    things—Education by books—The question of a
    curriculum—Religion—History—Language—Mathematics—‘Practical
    instruction’—Science—Drawing—Picture talks,                        228

                               CHAPTER XXII

                     SUGGESTIONS TOWARDS A CURRICULUM

                    _Part III.—The Love of Knowledge_

    The use of books makes for short hours—‘Utilitarian’
    education—Relations and interests—Causes of failure—Intelligent
    education—Blind alleys—An educated child—Children delight
    in school, but not for love of knowledge—An educational
    revolution—The children’s Magna Carta,                             240

                                APPENDICES

      I. QUESTIONS FOR THE USE OF READERS,                             248

     II. SOME SPECIMENS OF EXAMINATION WORK DONE IN A SCHOOL IN
           WHICH THE PUPILS ARE EDUCATED UPON BOOKS AND THINGS,        271

    III. WHAT A CHILD SHOULD KNOW AT TWELVE,                           300

     IV. EXAMINATION OF A CHILD OF TWELVE ON THE WORK OF A TERM,       302

      V. HOW ORAL LESSONS ARE USED,                                    329

    INDEX,                                                             360




School Education




CHAPTER I

DOCILITY AND AUTHORITY IN THE HOME AND THE SCHOOL


=Better Relations between Children and their Elders.=—All of us who have
accepted education as our _métier_ are keenly alive to the signs of the
times as they are to be read in the conduct and manners of children.
Upon one thing, anyway, we may congratulate ourselves with unmixed
satisfaction: the relations between children and parents, and indeed
between children and their grown-up friends generally, are far more
intimate, frank and friendly than such relations used to be. There does
not seem to be any longer that great gulf fixed between child thought
and grown-up thought, which the older among us once tried to cross with
frantic but vain efforts. The heads of the house, when we were little,
were autocratic as the Czars of all the Russias. We received everything
at their hands, from bread and milk to mother’s love, with more or
less gratitude, but with invariable docility. If they had stubborn
questionings as to whether was better for us, this or that, they kept
them to themselves. For us, everything was decreed, and all decrees were
final. There were rebellious children, perhaps, as one in a score, or
one in a hundred, but then these were rebellious with the fine courage
of Milton’s Satan: they dared everything and set themselves up in bold
opposition. These were the open rebels who would, sooner or later, come
to a bad end; so we were told and so we secretly believed. For the
others, there was no middle course. They were brought under rule, and
that rule was arbitrary and without appeal.

=The Elder Generation of Parents, Autocratic.=—This is how children were
brought up some forty or fifty years ago, and even young parents of
to-day have, in many cases, grown up under a _régime_, happy, loving and
wise very likely, but, before all things, arbitrary. There were what the
Scotch would call ‘ill-guided’ homes, where the children did what was
right in their own eyes. These will always exist so long as there are
weak and indolent parents, unconcerned about their responsibilities. But
the exceptions went to prove the rule; and the rule and tradition, in
most middle-class homes, was that of well-ordered and governed childhood.
Every biography, that issues from the press, of the men and women who
made their mark during the first half of the century, is a case in point.
John Stuart Mill, Ruskin, the Lawrences, Tennyson, almost everyone who
has made for himself a distinguished name, grew up under a martinet rule.
Only the other day we heard of an instance, the recollection of which
had survived for seventy years. A boy of twelve or thirteen had been out
shooting rabbits. He came home in the early darkness of a bitterly cold
winter evening. His father asked him by which gate he had entered the
park. ‘By (such a) gate.’ ‘Did you shut it?’ ‘I don’t recollect.’ ‘Go and
see’; and the boy went, though he was already tired out, and the gate
in question was more than a mile from the house. Such an incident would
scarcely happen to-day; the boy would protest, plead his own benumbed
fatigue, and suggest that a man should be sent to shut the gate, if,
as did not appear from the story, it was important that it should be
shut at all. Yet this was a kind father, whom his children both loved
and honoured; but arbitrary rule and unquestioning obedience were the
habits of the household. Nor is this notion of domestic government quite
obsolete yet. I heard the other day of a Scotch father who confined
his daughter of eighteen to her room for a week on account of some, by
no means serious, breach of discipline. The difference is, that where
you find an arbitrary parent now, he is a little out of touch with the
thought and culture of the day; while, a few decades ago, parents were
arbitrary of set principle and in proportion as they were cultivated and
intelligent.

=Arbitrary Rule not always a Failure.=—It cannot be said that this
arbitrary rule was entirely a failure. It turned out steadfast, capable,
able, self-governed, gentle-mannered men and women. In our less hopeful
moments, we wonder as we watch the children of our day whether they will
prove as good stuff as their grandfathers and their fathers. But we need
not fear. The evolution of educational thought is like the incoming of
the tide. The wave comes and the wave goes and you hardly know whether
you are watching ebb or flow; but let an hour elapse and then judge.

=But truer Educational Thought results in Worthier Character.=—After
all allowances for ebb and flow, for failure here and mistake there,
truer educational thought must of necessity result in an output of more
worthy character. For one thing, this very arbitrariness arose from
limitations. Parents knew that they must govern. Righteous Abraham, who
ruled his house, was their ensample; and it is far easier to govern from
a height, as it were, than from the intimacy of close personal contact.
But you cannot be quite frank and easy with beings who are obviously of
a higher and of another order than yourself; at least, you cannot when
you are a little boy. And here we have one cause of the inscrutable
reticence of children. At the best of times they carry on the busy
traffic of their own thoughts all to themselves. We can all recollect
the pathetic misgivings of our childish days which a word would have
removed, but which yet formed the secret history of years of our lives.
Mrs Charles, in her autobiography, tells us how her childhood was haunted
by a distressing dream. She dreamed that she had lost her mother and
hunted for her in vain for hours in the rooms and endless corridors of
a building unknown to her. Her distress was put down to fear of ‘the
dark’ and she never told her tender mother of this trouble of the night.
Probably no degree of loving intimacy will throw the closed doors of the
child’s nature permanently ajar, because, we may believe, the burden
of the mystery of all this unintelligible world falls early upon the
conscious soul, and each of us must beat out his conception of life for
himself. But it is much to a child to know that he may question, may talk
of the thing that perplexes him, and that there is comprehension for his
perplexities. Effusive sympathy is a mistake, and bores a child when it
does not make him silly. But just to know that you can ask and tell is a
great outlet, and means, to the parent, the power of direction, and to
the child, free and natural development.

=Doctrine of the Infallible Reason.=—With the advance of one line of
educational insight, we have, alas, to note the receding of another and a
most important principle. Early in the century, authority was everything
in the government of the home, and the docility of the children went
without saying, that is, always excepting the few rebellious spirits.
However little we may be aware of the fact, the direction of philosophic
thought in England has had a great deal to do with the relations of
parents and children in every home. Two centuries ago Locke promulgated
the doctrine of the infallible reason. That doctrine accepted, individual
reason becomes the ultimate authority, and every man is free to do that
which is right in his own eyes. Provided, Locke would have added, that
the reason be fully trained, and the mind instructed as to the merits
of the particular case; but such proviso was readily lost sight of, and
the broad principle remained. The old Puritanic faith and the elder
traditions for the bringing up of children, as well as Locke’s own
religious feelings and dutiful instincts, were too strong for the new
philosophy in England; but in France there was a soil prepared for the
seed. Locke was eagerly read because his opinions jumped with the thought
of the hour. His principles were put into practice, his conclusions
worked out to the bitter end, and thoughtful writers consider that this
religious and cultivated English gentleman cannot be exonerated from a
share of the guilt of the atrocities of the French Revolution.

=Leads to the Dethronement of Authority.=—We in the twentieth century
have lost some of the safeguards that held good in the seventeenth, and
we have our own, perhaps greater, philosopher, who carries the teaching
of Locke to the inevitable conclusions which the earlier thinker shirked.
Mr Herbert Spencer proclaims, as they did in France, the apotheosis
of Reason. He sees, as they saw in France, that the principle of the
infallible reason is directly antagonistic to the idea of authority. He
traces this last idea to its final source and justification. So long as
men acknowledge a God, they of necessity acknowledge authority, supreme
and deputed. But, says Mr Spencer, in effect, every man finds his own
final authority in his own reason. This philosopher has the courage
of his convictions; he perceives, as they did in France, that the
enthronement of the human reason is the dethronement of Almighty God. He
teaches, by processes of exhaustive reasoning, that—

    “We sit unowned upon our burial sod,
    And know not whence we come nor whose we be.”

From the dethronement of the divine, follows the dethronement of all
human authority, whether it be of kings and their deputies over nations,
or of parents over families. Every act of authority is, we are taught, an
infringement of the rights of man or of child. Children are to be brought
up from the first self-directed, doing that which is right in their own
eyes, governed by the reason which is to be trained, by experience
of right and wrong, in the choosing of the right course. Life has its
penalties for those who transgress the laws of reason, and the child
should be permitted to learn these laws through the intervention of these
penalties. But ‘thou shalt’ and ‘thou shalt not’ are to be eliminated
from the vocabulary of parents. So complete and detailed is Mr Spencer’s
scheme for the emancipation of children from rule, that he objects to
the study of languages on the ground that the rules of grammar are a
transgression of the principle of liberty.

=Authority not Inherent, but Deputed.=—Mr Spencer’s work on education is
so valuable a contribution to educational thought that many parents read
it and embrace it, as a whole, without perceiving that it is a part, and
a carefully worked out part, of a scheme of philosophy with which perhaps
they are little in sympathy. They accept the philosopher’s teaching when
he bids them bring up children without authority in order to give them
free room for self-development; without perceiving, or perhaps knowing,
that it is the labour of the author’s life to eliminate the idea of
authority from the universe, that he repudiates the authority of parents
because it is a link in the chain which binds the universe to God. For
it is indeed true that none of us has a right to exercise authority, in
things great or small, except as we are, and acknowledge ourselves to
be, deputed by the one supreme and ultimate Authority. When we take up
this volume on education, small as it is, easy reading as it is, we must
bear in mind that we have put ourselves under the lead of a philosopher
who overlooks nothing, who regards the least important things from the
standpoint of their final issue, and who would not have the little child
do as he is bid lest he should learn, as a man, to obey that authority,
other than himself, which we believe to be Divine.

‘=Quick as Thought.=’—The influence of his rationalistic philosophy is by
no means confined to those who read this author’s great works, or even to
those who read his manual on education. ‘Quick as thought’ is a common
phrase, but it would be interesting to know how quick thought is, to have
any measure for the intensity, vitality, and velocity of an idea, for the
rate of its progress in the world. One would like to know how soon an
idea, conceived in the study, becomes the common property of the man in
the street, who regards it as his own possession, and knows nothing of
its source. We have no such measures; but there is hardly a home, of even
the lowest stage of culture, where this theory of education has not been
either consciously adopted or rejected, though the particular parents in
question may never have heard of the philosopher. An idea, once launched,
is ‘in the air,’ so we say. As is said of the Holy Spirit, we know not
whence it comes, nor whither it goes.

=The Notion of the Finality of Human Reason Intolerable.=—But, because
philosophic thought is so subtle and permeating an influence, it is our
part to scrutinise every principle that presents itself. Once we are able
to safeguard ourselves in this way, we are able to profit by the wisdom
of works which yet rest upon what we regard as radical errors. It seems
not improbable that the early years of this very century may thus see the
advent of England’s truly great philosopher, who shall not be confined by
the limitations of rationalistic or of materialistic thought. Men have
become weary of themselves. The notion of the finality of human reason
has grown an intolerable limitation. Nothing less than the Infinite will
satisfy the spirit of a man. We again recognise that we are made for God,
and have no rest until we find Him; and philosophic thought, at home and
abroad, has, to some degree, left these channels high and dry, and is
running in other courses, towards the Infinite and the Divine.

=Authority and Docility, Fundamental Principles.=—One of the first
efforts of this reconstructive thought, which is building us once more
a temple for our spirits, a house not made with hands, is to restore
Authority to its ancient place as an ultimate fact, no more to be
accounted for than is the principle of gravitation, and as binding and
universal in the moral world as is that other principle in the natural.
Fitting in to that of authority, as the ball fits the socket to make
a working joint, is the other universal and elemental principle of
Docility, and upon these two hang all possibilities of law and order,
government and progress, among men. Mr Benjamin Kidd, in his _Social
Evolution_, has done much for the recognition of these two fundamental
principles. Why a football team should obey its captain, an army its
commanding officer; why a street crowd should stand in awe of two or
three policemen; why property should be respected, when it is the many
who want and the few who have; why, in a word, there should be rule and
not anarchy in the world—these are the sorts of questions Mr Kidd sets
himself to answer. He turns to Reason for her reply, and she has none
to give. Her favourite argument is that the appeal to self-interest is
final; that we do, individually and collectively, whatever is shown to be
for our advantage. But when that company went down in the ‘Royal George,’
standing at ‘Attention!’ because that was the word of command; when the
Six Hundred rode ‘into the valley of death’ because—

    “Theirs not to make reply,
    Theirs not to reason why,
    Theirs but to do and die,”

—the subtlest reasoning can find no other motive than the single and
simple one of authority acting upon docility. These men had been told to
do these things, and, therefore, they did them. That is all. And that
they did well, we know; our own heart is the witness. We speak of such
deeds as acts of heroism, but it is well to notice that these splendid
displays of human nature at its best resolve themselves for the most part
into acts of obedience to the word of authority. The abuse of authority
gives us the slave and the despot, but slavery and despotism could not
exist except that they are founded upon elemental principles in human
nature. We all have it in us to serve or to rule as occasion demands. To
dream of liberty, in the sense of every man his own sole governor, is as
futile as to dream of a world in which apples do not necessarily drop
from the tree, but may fly off at a tangent in any direction.

=Work of Rationalistic Philosophers, Inevitable.=—What is Authority? The
question shows us how inevitable in the evolution of thought has been
the work of the rationalistic philosophers. It is to them we owe our
deliverance from the autocrat, whether on the throne or in the family.
Their work has been to assert and prove that every human soul is born
free, that liberty is his inalienable right, and that an offence against
the liberty of a human being is a capital offence. This also is true.
Parents and teachers, because their subjects are so docile and so feeble,
are tempted more than others to the arbitrary temper, to say—Do thus and
thus because I bid you. Therefore they, more than others, owe a debt of
gratitude to the rationalistic school for holding, as they do, a brief
for human freedom, including the freedom of children in a family. It
would seem to be thus that God educates the world. It is not only one
good custom, but one infallible principle, which may ‘corrupt a world.’
Some such principle stands out luminous in the vision of a philosopher;
he sees it is truth; it takes possession of him and he believes it to be
the whole truth, and urges it to the point of _reductio ad absurdum_.
Then the principle at the opposite pole of thought is similarly
illuminated and glorified by a succeeding school of thought; and, later,
it is discerned that it is not by either principle, but by both, that men
live.

=Authority, vested in the Office.=—It is by these countercurrents, so to
speak, of mind forces that we have been taught to rectify our notion of
authority. Easily within living memory we were upon dangerous ground.
We believed that authority was vested in persons, that arbitrary action
became such persons, that slavish obedience was good for the others. This
theory of government we derived from our religion; we believed in the
‘divine right’ of kings and of parents because we believed that the very
will of God was an arbitrary will. But we have been taught better; we
know now that authority is vested in the office and not in the person;
that the moment it is treated as a personal attribute it is forfeited.
We know that a person in authority is a person authorised; and that he
who is authorised is _under_ authority. The person under authority holds
and fulfils a trust; in so far as he asserts himself, governs upon the
impulse of his own will, he ceases to be authoritative and authorised,
and becomes arbitrary and autocratic. It is autocracy and arbitrary
rule which must be enforced, at all points, by a penal code; hence the
confusion of thought which exists as to the connection between authority
and punishment. The despot rules by terror; he punishes right and left to
uphold his unauthorised sway. The person who is vested with authority, on
the contrary, requires no rigours of the law to bolster him up, because
authority is behind him; and, before him, the corresponding principle of
docility.




