CHAPTER XVII

EDUCATION, THE SCIENCE OF RELATIONS: WE ARE EDUCATED BY OUR INTIMACIES:
THE _PRELUDE_ AND _PRÆTERITA_


    “But who shall parcel out
    His intellect by geometric rules,
    Split like a province into round and square?
    Who knows the individual hour in which
    His habits were first sown, even as a seed?
    Who that shall point as with a wand and say,
    ‘This portion of the river of my mind
    Came from yon fountain’?”—_Prelude._

I need not again insist upon the nature of our educational tools. We
know well that “Education is an atmosphere, a discipline, a life.” In
other words, we know that parents and teachers should know how to make
sensible use of a child’s _circumstances_ (atmosphere) to forward his
sound education; should train him in the discipline of the _habits_ of
the good life; and should nourish his life with _ideas_, the food upon
which personality waxes strong.

=Only Three Educational Instruments.=—These three we believe to be the
only instruments of which we may make lawful use in the upbringing of
children; and any short cut we take by trading on their sensibilities,
emotions, desires, passions, will bring us and our children to grief.
The reason is plain; habits, ideas, and circumstances are external, and
we may all help each other to get the best that is to be had of these;
but we may not meddle directly with the personality of child or man. We
may not work upon his vanity, his fears, his love, his emulation, or
anything that is his by very right, anything that goes to make him a
person.

=Our Limitations.=—Most thinking people are in earnest about the
bringing-up of children; but we are in danger of taking too much upon us,
and of not recognising the limitations which confine us to the outworks
of personality. Children and grown-up persons are the same, with a
difference; and a thoughtful writer has done us good service by carefully
tracing the method of our Lord’s education of the Twelve.

“Our Lord,” says this author, “reverenced whatever the learner had in
him of his own, and was tender in fostering this native growth.... Men,
in His eyes, were not mere clay in the hands of the potter, matter to be
moulded to shape. They were organic beings, each growing from within,
with a life of his own—a personal life which was exceedingly precious
in His and His Father’s eyes—and He would foster this growth so that it
might take after the highest type.”[14]

=We temper Life too much for Children.=—I am not sure that we let life
and its circumstances have free play about children. We temper the wind
too much to the lambs; pain and sin, want and suffering, disease and
death—we shield them from the knowledge of these at all hazards. I do
not say that we should wantonly expose the tender souls to distress,
but that we should recognise that life has a ministry for them also;
and that Nature provides them with a subtle screen, like that of its
odour to a violet, from damaging shocks. Some of us will not even let
children read fairy tales because these bring the ugly facts of life
too suddenly before them. It is worth while to consider Wordsworth’s
experience on this point. Indeed I do not think we make enough use of
two such priceless boons to parents and teachers as the educational
autobiographies we possess of the two great philosophers, Wordsworth and
Ruskin.

=Fairy Lore a Screen and Shelter.=—The former tells us how, no sooner had
he gone to school at Hawkshead, than the body of a suicide was recovered
from Esthwaite Lake; a ghastly tale, but full of comfort as showing how
children are protected from shock. The little boy was there and saw it
all;—

        “Yet no soul-debasing fear,
    Young as I was, a child not nine years old,
    Possessed me, for my inner eye had seen
    Such sights before, among the shining streams
    Of fairyland, the forests of romance:
    Their spirit hallowed the sad spectacle
    With decoration of ideal grace;
    A dignity, a smoothness, like the works
    Of Grecian art, and purest poesy.”

It is delightful to know, on the evidence of a child who went through it,
that a terrible scene was separated from him by an atmosphere of poetry—a
curtain woven of fairy lore by his etherealising imagination.

But we may run no needless risks, and must keep a quiet, matter-of-fact
tone in speaking of fire, shipwreck, or any terror. There are children
to whom the thought of Joseph in the pit is a nightmare; and many of us
elders are unable to endure a ghastly tale in newspaper or novel. All I
would urge is a natural treatment of children, and that they be allowed
their fair share of life, such as it is; prudence and not panic should
rule our conduct towards them.

=Spontaneous Living.=—The laws of habit are, we know, laws of God, and
the forming of good and the hindering of evil habits are among the
primary duties of a parent. But it is just as well to be reminded that
habits, whether helpful or hindering, only come into play occasionally,
while a great deal of spontaneous living is always going on towards which
we can do no more than drop in vital ideas as opportunity occurs. All
this is old matter, and I must beg the reader to forgive me for reminding
him again that our educational instruments remain the same. We may not
leave off the attempt to form good habits with tact and care, to suggest
fruitful ideas, without too much insistence, and to make wise use of
circumstances.

=On what does Fulness of Living depend?=—What is education after all? An
answer lies in the phrase—_Education is the Science of Relations_. I do
not use this phrase, let me say once more, in the Herbartian sense—that
things are related to each other, and we must be careful to pack the
right things in together, so that, having got into the brain of a boy,
each thing may fasten on its cousins, and together they may make a strong
clique or ‘apperception mass.’ What we are concerned with is the fact
that we personally have relations with all that there is in the present,
all that there has been in the past, and all that there will be in the
future—with all above us and all about us—and that fulness of living,
expansion, expression, and serviceableness, for each of us, depend upon
how far we apprehend these relationships and how many of them we lay hold
of.

George Herbert says something of what I mean:—

      “Man is all symmetry,
    Full of proportions, one limb to another,
        And _all to all the world besides_;
        Each part may call the farthest brother,
    For head with foot hath private amity,
        And _both with moons and tides_.”[15]

Every child is heir to an enormous patrimony, heir to all the ages,
inheritor of all the present. The question is, what are the formalities
(educational, not legal) necessary to put him in possession of that which
is his? You perceive the point of view is shifted, and is no longer
subjective, but objective, as regards the child.

=The Child a Person.=—We do not talk about developing his faculties,
training his moral nature, guiding his religious feelings, educating him
with a view to his social standing or his future calling. The joys of
‘child-study’ are not for us. We take the child for granted, or rather,
we take him as we find him—a person with an enormous number of healthy
affinities, embryo attachments; and we think it is our chief business
to give him a chance to make the largest possible number of these
attachments valid.

=An Infant’s Self-Education.=—An infant comes into the world with a
thousand such embryonic feelers, which he sets to work to fix with
amazing energy:—

                      “The Babe,
    Nursed in his Mother’s arms, who sinks to sleep
    Rocked on his Mother’s breast; who with his soul
    Drinks in the feelings of his Mother’s eye!
    For him, in one dear Presence, there exists
    A virtue which irradiates and exalts
    Objects through widest intercourse of sense.
    No outcast he, bewildered and depressed:
    Along his infant veins are interfused
    The gravitation and the filial bond
    Of nature that connects him with the world.”[16]

He attaches his being to mother, father, sister, brother, ‘nanna,’ the
man in the street whom he calls ‘dada,’ cat and dog, spider and fly;
earth, air, fire, and water attract him perilously; his eyes covet light
and colour, his ears sound, his limbs movement; everything concerns him,
and out of everything he gets—

                        “That calm delight
    Which, if I err not, surely must belong
    To those first-born affinities that fit
    Our new existence to existing things,
    And, in our dawn of being, constitute
    The bond of union between life and joy.”[16]

He gets also, when left to himself, the real knowledge about each thing
which establishes his relation with that particular thing.

=Our Part, to remove Obstructions and to give Stimulus.=—Later, we step
in to educate him. In proportion to the range of living relationships we
put in his way, will he have wide and vital interests, fulness of joy in
living. In proportion as he is made aware of the laws which rule every
relationship, will his life be dutiful and serviceable: as he learns
that no relation with persons or with things, animate or inanimate, can
be maintained without strenuous effort, will he learn the laws of work
and the joys of work. Our part is to remove obstructions and to give
stimulus and guidance to the child who is trying to get into touch with
the universe of things and thoughts which belongs to him.

=Our Error.=—Our deadly error is to suppose that we are his showman to
the universe; and, not only so, but that there is no community at all
between child and universe unless such as we choose to set up. We are
the people! and if we choose that a village child’s education should be
confined to the ‘three R’s,’ why, what right has he to ask for more? If
_life_ means for him his Saturday night in the ale-house, surely that is
not our fault! If our own boys go through school and college and come out
without quickening interests, without links to the things that are worth
while, we are not sure that it is our fault either. We resent that they
should be called ‘muddied oafs’ because we know them to be fine fellows.
So they are, splendid stuff which has not yet arrived at the making!

=Business and Desire.=—Quoth Hamlet,—

    “Every man hath business and desire.”

Doubtless that was true in the spacious days of great Elizabeth; for
us, we have business, but have we desire? Are there many keen interests
soliciting us outside of our necessary work? Perhaps not, or we should be
less enslaved by the vapid joys of Ping-Pong, Patience, Bridge, and their
like. The fact is that ‘interests’ are not to be taken up on the spur of
the moment; they spring out of affinities we have found and laid hold of.
Or, in the words of an old writer: “In worldly and material things, what
is Used is spent; in intellectual and spiritual things, what is not Used
is not Had.”

Supposing we have realised that we must make provision for the future of
our children otherwise than by safe investments, the question remains,
how to set about it.

=The Setting-up of Dynamic Relations.=—We say a child should have what we
will call _Dynamic Relations_ with earth and water, must run and leap and
dance, must ride and swim. This is how _not_ to do it, as set forth in
_Præterita_:—

    “And so on to Llanberis and up Snowdon.... And if only then my
    father and mother had seen the real strengths and weaknesses of
    their little John; if they had given me but a shaggy scrap of
    a Welsh pony, and left me in charge of a good Welsh guide, and
    of his wife, if I needed any coddling, they would have made a
    man of me there and then.... If only! But they could no more
    have done it than thrown me like my cousin Charles into Croydon
    Canal, trusting me to find my way out by the laws of nature.
    Instead, they took me back to London; my father spared time
    from his business hours, once or twice a week, to take me to a
    four-square, sky-lighted, sawdust-floored prison of a riding
    school in Moorfields, the smell of which, as we turned in at
    the gate of it, was a terror and horror and abomination to me:
    and there I was put on big horses that jumped and reared, and
    circled, and sidled, and fell off them regularly whenever they
    did any of these things; and was a disgrace to my family, and
    a burning shame and misery to myself, till at last the riding
    school was given up on my spraining my right hand fore-finger
    (it has never come straight again since); and a well-broken
    Shetland pony bought for me, and the two of us led about the
    Norwood roads by a riding master with a leading string.

    “I used to do pretty well as long as we went straight, and then
    get thinking of something and fall off as we turned a corner.
    I might have got some inkling of a seat in heaven’s good time,
    if no fuss had been made about me, nor inquiries instituted
    whether I had been off or on; but as my mother the moment I
    got home made searching scrutiny into the day’s disgraces, I
    merely got more nervous and helpless after every tumble; and
    this branch of my education was at last abandoned, my parents
    consoling themselves as best they might, in the conclusion that
    my not being able to learn to ride was the sign of my being a
    singular genius.”

=Ruskin’s Indictment of the Limitations of his Condition.=—Ruskin
suffered from the malady of his condition. He was of the suburban
dwellers of the rich middle class who think, not wisely but too much,
about the bringing up of their children, who choke a good deal of life
with care and coddling, and are apt to be persuaded that their children
want no outlets but such as it occurs to them to provide. Suburban life
is a necessity, but it is also a misfortune, because, in a rich suburb,
people live too much with their own sort. They are cut off from the small
and the great, from labour, adventure, and privation. Let me recommend
all rich educated parents who live in suburbs to read _Præterita_.
With all his chivalrous loyalty to his parents, Ruskin has left here a
grave indictment, not of them, but of the limitations of his condition.
One hears the cry of the child, like that of Laurence Sterne’s caged
starling—‘I can’t get out, I can’t get out’—repeated from page to page.

You will say, whatever were the faults of his education, _Ruskin_ emerged
from it, such as it was; and _we_ look for no more. But it is not for
us to say how much greater an apostle among men even Ruskin would have
become had he been allowed his right of free living as a child. And it
may be, on the other hand, safe to admit that not every child, born and
bred in a villa, will certainly be another Ruskin!

We cannot follow Mr Ruskin further in the setting up of the dynamic
relations proper to him, because his parents forbade, and nothing
happened. His mother, he says, ‘never allowed me to go to the edge
of a pond or be in the same field with a pony.’ But he notes ‘with
thankfulness the good I got out of the tadpole-haunted ditch in Croxted
Lane.’ Camberwell Green had a pond, and, he says, ‘it was one of the
most valued privileges of my early life to be permitted by my nurse to
contemplate this judicial pond with awe from the other side of the way.’

=Wordsworth’s Recognition of his Opportunities.=—Wordsworth tells us of
a much more rough-and-tumble bringing up. When he was nine, he was sent
to the Grammar School in the little village of Hawkshead and lodged with
Dame Tyson in the cottage many of us know; and found most things, at
home and abroad, congenial to his soul. He had no lessons in riding and
skating, hockey and tennis; but no doubt the other boys made it plain to
the little chap that he must do as they did or be thought a fool. But
then he went to school a hardy youngster; his mother had let her little
boy _live_:—

    “Oh, many a time have I, a five years’ child,
    In a small mill-race severed from his stream,
    Made one long bathing of a summer’s day;
    Basked in the sun, and plunged, and basked again.”

Of his childhood, he says:—

    “Fair seed-time had my soul, and I grew up
    Fostered alike by beauty and by fear.”

Ere he had told ten birthdays, he was transplanted to that ‘belovèd Vale’
of which he says:—

            “There were we let loose
    For sports of wider range.”

What was there those Hawkshead boys did not do! He tells us of times,—

              “When I have hung
    Above the raven’s nest, by knots of grass
    And half-inch fissures in the slippery rock
    But ill-sustained, and almost (so it seemed)
    Suspended by the blast that blew amain,
    Shouldering the naked crag.”

The boys skated:—

              “All shod with steel,
    We hissed along the polished ice in games
    Confederate, imitative of the chase
    And woodland pleasures,—the resounding horn,
    The pack loud chiming, and the hunted hare.”

They played:—

    “From week to week, from month to month, we lived
    A round of tumult. Duly were our games
    Prolonged in summer till the daylight failed.”

They boated:—

              “When summer came,
    Our pastime was, on bright half-holidays,
    To sweep along the plain of Windermere
    With rival oars....
              In such a race
    So ended disappointment could be none,
    Uneasiness, or pain, or jealousy:
    We rested in the shade, all pleased alike,
    Conquered and conqueror.”

The young Wordsworth, too, had his essays on horseback when he and his
schoolmates came back rich from the half-yearly holidays and hired
horses from ‘the courteous innkeeper,’ and off they went, ‘proud to curb,
and eager to spur on, the galloping steed’; and then, the home-coming:—

              “Through the walls we flew
    And down the valley, and, a circuit made
    In wantonness of heart, through rough and smooth
    We scampered homewards.”




