CHAPTER VI

SOME EDUCATIONAL THEORIES EXAMINED

1. What do we owe to the Schools of Pestalozzi and Froebel?

2. What is the source of weakness in their conceptions?

3. Compare ‘make children happy and they will be good’ with ‘be good and
you will be happy.’

4. Show the fundamental error of regarding man merely as part of the
_Cosmos_.

5. Show that the struggle for existence is a part of life even to a child.

6. That any sort of transition violates the principles of unity and
continuity.

7. Why is the Herbartian theory tempting?

8. Show that this theory treats the person as an effect and not a cause.

9. Show that the functions of education are overrated by it.

10. Show that this system of psychology is not in harmony with current
thought in three particulars.

11. Show that educational truth is a common possession.

12. What are the characteristics of a child who is being adequately
educated?

13. What, roughly speaking, is expressed in the word _person_?

14. Show how a person is like Wordsworth’s ‘cloud.’

15. Describe an adequate doctrine of education.

16. Show how it is in touch with the three great ideas which are now
moving in men’s minds.

17. What would you say of personal influence in education?

18. What is implied in saying, _Education is the science of relations_?

19. Why must teaching not be obtrusive?

20. What attitude on the teacher’s part arises from the recognition of a
child as a person?


CHAPTER VII

AN ADEQUATE THEORY OF EDUCATION

1. Give, roughly, a definition of a human being.

2. What would you say of his capacities?

3. What of his limitations?

4. What are the two functions of a human being under education?

5. Upon what physical process does education depend?

6. What do we know, or guess, of the behaviour of ideas?

7. What appears to be the law of the generation of ideas?

8. Why do different ideas appeal to different minds? Illustrate by a
figure.

9. Have we any reason for believing that an idea is able to make an
impression upon matter?

10. Mention some of the reflex actions by which we respond to an idea
which strikes us.

11. How does spirit correspond with spirit, human or divine?

12. Is a child born equipped with ideas?

13. What is the field open to the educationalist?

14. What may we learn from the fairly well accredited story of the ‘Child
of Nuremberg’?

15. What does nature, unassisted, do for a child?

16. Show that the normal child has every power that will serve him.

17. In how far does fulness of living depend on the establishment of
relations?

18. Show that in our common way of treating science, for instance, we
maim a natural affinity.

19. Why should a child be taught to recognise the natural things about
him?

20. How may he be helped to appreciate beauty?

21. Why should he begin with a first-hand knowledge of science?

22. Show that appreciation and exact knowledge each has its season.


