CHAPTER XI

SOME UNCONSIDERED ASPECTS OF INTELLECTUAL TRAINING


=We are Law-abiding in Matters Physical and Moral.=—We all recognise that
we are under the reign of law so far as our bodies go. We know that ‘put
your finger in the fire and it will be burnt,’ ‘sit in a draught and you
will catch cold,’ ‘live a vigorous and temperate life and health will be
your reward.’ That law attends our steps with its penalties and rewards
in all matters physical we know very well. Some of us go further and have
a personal sense of the Lawgiver in matters of sickness and health. In
sickness especially we feel that God is dealing with us, and we endeavour
to lay ourselves open to the lesson of the hour. In moral matters, too,
we live under the law. We may forget ourselves, but we have compunctions
and are aware of penalties.

=Not so in Matters Intellectual.=—But in matters intellectual we are
disposed to stand upon our rights. Here we recognise no authority, abide
by no law. Every man is free to his own opinion, however casually formed.
Every man kindles his own ‘lights,’ and thinks that no more is expected
of him than to live up to those lights. In fact our attitude with regard
to our own intellectual processes leads to that disturbing sense of
duality which causes the shipwreck of many lives, the distressing unrest
of others, and the easy drifting of many more. Our thinking is not a
separate thing from our conduct and our prayers, or even from our bodily
well-being. Man is not several entities. He is one spirit (visibly
expressed in bodily form), with many powers. He can work and love and
pray and live righteously, but all these are the outcome of the manner of
thoughts he thinks.

=Three Ultimate Facts—Not open to Question.=—There are two directions
in which we commit intellectual offences against the law, and oppose
ourselves to authority. In the first place we are disposed to regard
everything by turns as an open question. We forget that there are three
ultimate postulates which the thought of man can neither prove nor
disprove, though in every age it has played uneasily about one or the
other. God, Self, and the World, are the three fixed points of thought.
The active Western mind, with each new evolution of scientific thought,
finds again and again that there is no place for God in the world; nay,
so active and pleasant is the conception of self that an important school
of philosophy has demonstrated that the real world is no more than a
simulacrum, a mirage, as it were, projected from the conscious self.
The more passive Eastern mind, is, on the contrary, inclined to regard
selfhood as a passing phase in a state of absorption or reabsorption by
deity. But when we learn to realise that—God is, Self is, the World is,
with all that these existences imply, quite untouched by any thinking of
ours, unprovable, and self-proven,—why, we are at once put into a more
humble attitude of mind. We recognise that above us, about us, within
us, there are ‘more things ... than are dreamt of in our philosophy.’ _We
realise ourselves as persons, we have a local habitation, and we live
and move and have our being in and under a supreme authority._ It is not
well we should take it for granted that everybody knows these things.
Perhaps we all have a hearsay acquaintance with, but very few of us have
a realising knowledge of, these ultimate facts.

=Limitations of Reason.=—A second direction in which it is well that
we should recognise our limitations is with regard to the nature and
function of what we call our reason, and should, perhaps, describe more
accurately as our power of reasoning. We all know how often we go to bed
with a difficult question to settle. We say we will sleep upon it, and,
in the morning, behold, the whole question has worked itself into shape:
we see all its bearings and know just how to act. We are so accustomed
to take wonders as matters of course, mere everyday events, that it does
not occur to us to be surprised. We even say, the mind is clearer after
sleep, regardless of the fact that we have no labour of thinking at all
in the morning; all comes straight of itself. When we come to think of
it, most of our decisions arrive in this unlaborious way. We really
cannot say that we have thought such and such a matter out: the decision
comes to us in a flash, by an intuition, what you will. The subject is a
large one, but all I care to stipulate for here is that children should
be taught to know that much of our reasoning and so-called thinking is
involuntary,—is as much a natural function as is the circulation of our
blood, and that this very fact points to the limitations of reason.

=Reason brings Logical Proof of any Idea we Entertain.=—We, personally,
might or might not be trusted to come to a morally right conclusion from
any premise we entertain. But the reasoning power, acting in a more or
less mechanical and involuntary manner, does not necessarily work towards
the morally right conclusion. All that reason does for us is to prove,
logically, any idea we choose to entertain. For example, as we have said,
important schools (Eastern and Western) of philosophy entertain the
idea that there is no actual real world independent of man’s conception
thereof. The logical proofs of this premise pour in upon their minds
in such volume that a considerable literature exists to prove an idea
which on the face of it appears absurd. We all know that, entertain a
notion that a servant is dishonest, that a friend is false, that a dress
is unbecoming, and some power within us, unconsciously to us, sets to
work to collect evidence and bring irrefragable proof of the position we
have chosen to take up. This is the history of wars and persecutions and
family feuds all over the world. How necessary then that a child should
be instructed to understand the limitations of his own reason, so that
he will not confound logical demonstration with eternal truth, and will
know that the important thing to him is the ideas he permits himself
to entertain, and not by any means the conclusions he draws from these
ideas, because these latter are self-evolved.

=A Third Fallacy—Intellect Man’s Peculiar Sphere, Knowledge his Proper
Discovery.=—A third fallacy which lies at the root of our thinking, and
therefore, of our education, is, that while nature, morals, and theology
may be more or less divine in their origin and relations, not only is
intellect man’s proper and peculiar sphere, but knowledge,—the knowledge
of witty inventions, of man and nature, of art and literature, of the
heavens above and the earth beneath,—all this knowledge is man’s proper
discovery. He has found it out himself, thought it out for himself,
observed, reasoned, collected, laboured, gathered his forces, altogether
of his own will and for his own ends and as an independent agent. Now,
this pride of intellect also comes of the arrogance of man; not only
in our age, which, I venture to think, is the very best age the world
has ever seen, but in all time, it is our nature to lift up our heads
and say, ‘We are the people; before us there were none like unto us,
neither shall there be any more after us.’ But when we come to ourselves
we realise that our Author and Father has not in this way made over any
single vast realm of our lives into our own hands.

=Great Eras come from Time to Time.=—The knowledge that comes to us is
given us in repasts, so to speak. Great eras of scientific discovery or
literary activity or poetic insight or artistic interpretation come to
the world from time to time; and then there is a long interval for the
assimilation of the new knowledge or the new thought. After that, the
world is taken by storm by the rise of another constellation of its great
intellects; and yet we do not discern the signs of the times nor realise
that thus our God is bringing us up in knowledge, which is also divine,
just as much as in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. The mediæval
Church recognised this great truth—as Mr Ruskin has eloquently pointed
out, showing how the ‘Captain Figures,’ the inventors, as it were, of
grammar and music, astronomy and geometry, arithmetic and logic, all
spake that which was in them under the direct outpouring of the Holy
Spirit, even though none of them had any such revelation of the true
God as we recognise. What a revolution should we have in our methods
of education if we could once conceive that dry-as-dust subjects like
grammar and arithmetic should come to children, living with the life of
the Holy Spirit, who, we are told, ‘shall teach you all things.’

=Nothing so Practical as Great Ideas.=—It may occur to some readers to
consider that such lines of thought as I have suggested are perhaps
interesting but not practical. Believe me, nothing is so practical as
a great idea, because nothing produces such an abundant outcome of
practical effort. We must not turn the cold shoulder to philosophy.
Education is no more than applied philosophy—our effort to train children
according to the wisdom that is in us; and not according to the last
novelty in educational ideas.

‘Man, know thyself,’ is a counsel which we might render, ‘Child, know
thyself, and thy relations to God and man and nature’; and to give their
children this sort of preparation for life it is necessary that parents
should know something of the laws of mind and of the source of knowledge.

=The Formation of Intellectual Habits.=—The second part of our
subject—the formation of intellectual habits—need not occupy us long. We
know that the possession of some half-dozen such habits makes up what is
well called ability. They make a man able to do that which he desires to
do with his mental powers, and to labour at the cost of not a tenth part
of the waste of tissue which the same work would exact of a person of
undisciplined mental habits. We know, too, that the habits in question
are acquired through training and are not bestowed as a gift. Genius
itself, we have been told, is an infinite capacity for taking pains; we
would rather say, is the habit of taking infinite pains, for every child
is born with the capacity.

=We trust blindly to Disciplinary Subjects.=—We trust perhaps a little
blindly to the training which certain subjects give in certain mental
habits. The classics, we consider, cultivate in one direction, the
mathematics, in another, science, in a third. So they do, undoubtedly, so
far as each of these subjects is concerned; but possibly not in forming
the general habits of intellectual life which we expect to result. Remove
the mathematician from his own field and he is not more exact or more on
the spot than other men; indeed he is rather given to make a big hole for
the cat and a little hole for the kitten! The humanities do not always
make a man humane, that is, liberal, tolerant, gentle, and candid, as
regards the opinions and status of other men. The fault does not lie in
any one of these or in any other of the disciplinary subjects, but in our
indolent habit of using each of these as a sort of mechanical contrivance
for turning up the soil and sowing the seed. There is no reprieve for
parents. It rests with them, even more than with the schoolmaster and his
curriculum, to form those mental habits which shall give intellectual
distinction to their children throughout their lives.

=Some Intellectual Habits.=—I need not refer again to the genesis of
a habit; but perhaps most of us set ourselves more definitely to form
physical and moral than we do to form intellectual habits. I will only
mention a few such, which should be matters of careful training during
the period of childhood:—_Attention_, the power of turning the whole
force of the mind upon the subject brought before it: _Concentration_,
which differs from attention in that the mind is actively engaged on
some given problem rather than passively receptive: _Thoroughness_,
the habit of dissatisfaction with a slipshod, imperfect grasp of
a subject, and of mental uneasiness until a satisfying measure of
knowledge is obtained;—this habit is greatly encouraged by a reference
to an encyclopædia, to clear up any doubtful point, when it turns up:
_Intellectual Volition_, the power, that is, of making ourselves think
of a given subject at a given time;—most of us know how trying our
refractory minds are in this matter, but, if the child is accustomed to
take pleasure in the effort as effort, the man will find it easy to make
himself think of what he will: _Accuracy_, which is to be taught, not
only through arithmetic, but through all the small statements, messages,
and affairs of daily life: _Reflection_, the ruminating power which is so
strongly developed in children and is somehow lost with much besides of
the precious cargo they bring with them into the world. There is nothing
sadder than the way we allow intellectual impressions to pass over the
surface of our minds, without any effort to retain or assimilate.

=Meditation.=—I can mention only one more invaluable habit. Mr Romanes
consulted Darwin about the conduct of his intellectual life. ‘Meditate,’
was the answer, and we are told that the younger scientist set great
store on this advice. Meditation is also a habit to be acquired, or
rather preserved, for we believe that children are born to meditate, as
they are to reflect; indeed, the two are closely allied. In reflecting
we ruminate on what we have received. In meditating we are not content
to go over the past, we allow our minds to follow out our subject to
all its issues. It has long been known that progress in the Christian
life depends much upon meditation; intellectual progress, too, depends,
not on mere reading or the laborious getting up of a subject which we
call study, but on that active surrender of all the powers of the mind
to the occupation of the subject in hand, which is intended by the word
meditation. It would be easy for any of us to suggest to himself a dozen
more important intellectual habits, the consideration of which should be
profitable and stimulating.

=The Sustenance of Living Ideas.=—The intellectual life, like every
manner of spiritual life, has but one food whereby it lives and grows—the
sustenance of living ideas. It is not possible to repeat this too often
or too emphatically, for perhaps we err more in this respect than
any other in bringing up children. We feed them upon the white ashes
out of which the last spark of the fire of original thought has long
since died. We give them second-rate story books, with stale phrases,
stale situations, shreds of other people’s thoughts, stalest of stale
sentiments. They complain that they know how the story will end! But
that is not all; they know how every dreary page will unwind itself. I
saw it stated the other day that children do not care for poetry, that
a stirring narrative in verse is much more to their taste. They do like
the tale, no doubt, but poetry appeals to them on other grounds, and
Shelley’s _Skylark_ will hold a child entranced sooner than any moving
anecdote. As for children’s art, we hang the nursery with ‘Christmas
Number’ pictures, and their books are illustrated on a lower level
still. In regard to book illustrations, we are improving a little, but
still there is room.

=Children’s Literature.=—The subject of ‘Children’s Literature’ has been
well threshed out, and only one thing remains to be said,—children have
no natural appetite for twaddle, and a special literature for children is
probably far less necessary than the book-sellers would have us suppose.
Out of any list of ‘the hundred best books,’ I believe that seventy-five
would be well within the range of children of eight or nine. They would
delight in _Rasselas_, _Eöthen_ would fascinate them as much as _Robinson
Crusoe_, the _Faëry Queen_, with its allegory and knightly adventures
and sense of free moving in woodland scenery, would exactly fall in with
their humour. What they want is to be brought into touch with living
thought of the best, and their intellectual life feeds upon it with
little meddling on our part.

=Independent Intellectual Development of Children.=—We do not
sufficiently recognise the independent intellectual development of
children which it is our business to initiate and direct, but not to
control or dominate. I know a little girl of nine who pined every day
because the poems of Tennyson which she loved best were not to be found
in the volumes of the larger works, which were all the house she was
visiting at afforded. She literally missed her favourite poems as a
child would miss a meal; and why not? The intellectual appetite is just
as actual and just as exigeant as bodily hunger; more so, alas, in
some cases. Miss Martineau has a charming story[9] of the intellectual
awakening of “a schoolboy of _ten_ who laid himself down, back uppermost,
with Southey’s _Thalaba_ before him, on the first day of the Easter
holidays, and turned over the leaves, notwithstanding his inconvenient
position, as fast as if he were looking for something, till in a few
hours it was done, and he was off with it to the public library, bringing
back the _Curse of Kehama_. Thus he went on with all Southey’s poems
and some others through his short holidays, scarcely moving voluntarily
all those days except to run to the library. He came out of the process
so changed that none of his family could help being struck by it. The
expression of his eye, the cast of his countenance, his use of words,
and his very gait were changed. In ten days he had advanced years in
intelligence; and I have always thought that this was the turning-point
of his life. His parents wisely and kindly let him alone, aware that
school would presently put an end to all excess in the new indulgence.”

As there is no religious conversion for the child who has always been
brought up in the conscious presence of God, so parents who have always
satisfied the intellectual craving of their children must needs forego
the delight of watching a literary awakening. A little girl brought up
on temperance principles, who said, ‘I am so sorry my father isn’t a
drunkard,’ that she might rejoice in his reformation, put the case for us
very plainly.

=Self-selection and Self-appropriation.=—Given a bountiful repast of
ideas, the process of natural selection soon begins. Tennyson with his—

    “Our elm tree’s ruddy-hearted blossom-flake is fluttering down,”

    “Ruby-budded lime,”

    “Black as ash-buds in the front of March,”

has done more to make field botanists than ever the Science and Art
Department was able to undo with its whole apparatus of lectures and
examinations.

Here, again, Browning gives us a poet’s impulse to a nature student:—

    “By boulder stones where lichens mock
    The marks on a moth, and small ferns fit
    Their teeth to the polished block.”

Ideas of nature, of life, love, duty, heroism,—these children find and
choose for themselves from the authors they read, who do more for their
education than any deliberate teaching; just for this reason, that these
vital ideas are self-selected and self-appropriated.

I shall touch later upon the burning question of a curriculum which shall
furnish children, not with dry bones of fact, but with fact clothed upon
with the living flesh, breathed into by the vital spirit of quickening
ideas. A teacher objected the other day that it was difficult to teach
from Freeman’s _Old English History_, because there were so many stories;
not perceiving that the stories were the living history, while all the
rest was dead.

=Inherited Parsimony in Lesson-Books.=—I should like to say here that a
sort of unconscious, inherited parsimony, coming down to us from the days
when incomes were smaller and books were fewer, sometimes causes parents
to restrict their children unduly in the matter of lesson-books—living
books, varied from time to time, and not thumbed over from one schoolroom
generation to another until the very sight of them is a weariness to the
flesh. But the subject of the intellectual sustenance of children upon
ideas is so large and important that I must content myself with bald
suggestions. Further considered, such subjects as the following might be
useful:—

(1) Children’s tastes in Fiction, in Poetry, in books of Travel and
Adventure, in History, in Biography (most stimulating subject).

(2) Ideas of life and conduct that children assimilate from their reading.

(3) Ideas of duty assimilated in the same way.

(4) Ideas of nature that children seize.

(5) The leading, vitalising ideas in subjects of school study, as
geography, grammar, history, astronomy, Cæsar’s Commentaries, etc., etc.

Let me again refer the reader to Mr Ruskin’s description of the ‘Captain
Figures’ at the head of each of the Liberal Arts, in his account of
the Spanish Chapel; and conclude with a wise sentence of Coleridge’s
concerning the method of Plato, which should be always present to the
minds of persons engaged in the training of children:—

=Plato’s Educational Aim.=—“He desired not to assist in storing the
passive mind with the various sorts of knowledge most in request, as if
the human soul were a mere repository or banqueting room, but to place
it in such relations of circumstance as should gradually excite its
vegetating and germinating powers to produce new fruits of thought, new
conceptions and imaginations and ideas.”




