CHAPTER XIX

WE ARE EDUCATED BY OUR INTIMACIES

PART III.—_VOCATION_


I might trace the consummation of various other affinities in these two
illustrious subjects, but space fails; I can only indicate the joy of
pursuing the acquaintanceship, followed by the endless occupation for
mind and heart, in that high intimacy which we call the _Vocation_ of
each of these men of genius.

=Turner’s Call to Ruskin.=—Ruskin’s ‘career,’ to use our own common and
expressive figure, began when,—

    “On my thirteenth (?) birthday, 8th February 1832, my father’s
    partner, Mr Henry Telford, gave me Rogers’s Italy, and
    determined the main tenor of my life.... I had no sooner cast
    my eyes on the Turner vignettes than I took them for my only
    masters, and set myself to imitate them as far as I possibly
    could by fine pen shading....

    “My father at last gave me, not for a beginning of a Turner
    collection, but for a specimen of Turner’s work, which was
    all—as it was supposed—I should ever need or aspire to possess,
    the ‘Richmond Bridge, Surrey.’”

Again, anent his purchase of Turner’s ‘Harlech’:—

    “Whatever germs of better things remained in me, were then all
    centred in this love of Turner. It was not a piece of painted
    paper, but a Welsh castle and village, and Snowdon in blue
    cloud, that I bought for my seventy pounds.”

=Sincere Work.=—Not until he is twenty-two does he produce what he
considers his first sincere drawing:—

    “One day on the road to Norwood, I noticed a bit of ivy round
    a thorn stem, which seemed, even to my critical judgment, not
    ‘ill-composed,’ and proceeded to make a light and shade pencil
    study of it in my grey paper pocket-book, carefully, as if it
    had been a bit of sculpture, liking it more and more as I drew.
    When it was done, I saw that I had virtually lost all my time
    since I was twelve years old, because no one had ever told me
    to draw what was really there!”

=Initiation.=—Later, follows the story of his true initiation:—

    “I took out my book and began to draw a little aspen tree, on
    the other side of the cart-road, carefully.... Languidly, but
    not idly, I began to draw it; and as I drew, the langour passed
    away, the beautiful lines insisted on being traced, without
    weariness. More and more beautiful they became as each rose
    out of the rest and took its place in the air. With wonder
    increasing every instant, I saw that they composed themselves
    by finer laws than any known of men. At last the tree was
    there, and everything that I had thought before about trees
    nowhere.... ‘He hath made everything beautiful in His time’
    became for me thenceforward the interpretation of the bond
    between the human mind and all visible things.”

=Nature a Passion.=—Let us intrude into the consummation of one more
intimacy. Already the boy has made acquaintance with mountains; he is
now to have his first sight of the Alps. He, his father, his mother, and
his cousin Mary, went out to walk the first Sunday evening after their
arrival on the garden terrace of Schaffhausen, and—

    “Suddenly—behold—beyond! There was no thought in any of us for
    a moment of their being clouds. They were clear as crystal,
    sharp on the pure horizon sky, and already tinged with rose
    by the setting sun. Infinitely beyond all that we had ever
    thought or dreamed—the seen walls of lost Eden could not have
    been more beautiful to us; not more awful, round heaven, the
    walls of sacred death. It is not possible to imagine, in any
    time of the world, a more blessed entrance into life, for a
    child of such temperament as mine.”

How shall we venture to trace the growth of that austere, most gracious
and enthralling intimacy with Nature which was to Wordsworth the
master-light of all his seeing? He unfolds to us—

    “The simple ways in which my childhood walked;
    Those chiefly that first led me to the love
    Of rivers, woods, and fields. The passion yet
    Was in its birth, sustained as might befall
    By nourishment that came unsought.”

We cannot trace every step of the growth of this ethereal passion,
but only take a phase of it here and there. The boy and some of his
schoolfellows were boating on Windermere in the late evening, and they
left one of their number, ‘the Minstrel of the Troop,’ on a small island:—

    “And rowed off gently, while he blew his flute
    Alone upon the rock—oh, then, the calm
    And dead still water lay upon my mind
    Even with a weight of pleasure, and the sky,
    Never before so beautiful, sank down
    Into my heart, and held me like a dream!
    Thus were my sympathies enlarged, and thus
    Daily the common range of visible things
    Grew dear to me: already I began
    To love the sun; a boy, I loved the sun,
    Not as I since have loved him, as a pledge
    And surety of our earthly life, a light
    Which we behold and feel we are alive;
    Not for his bounty to so many worlds—
    But for this cause, that I had seen him lay
    His beauty on the morning hills, had seen
    The western mountain touch his setting orb.”

=The Calling of a Poet.=—We may take one more look at this marvellous
boy, who, become a man, held that every child, as he, is born a poet:—

          “My seventeenth year was come,
    ... I, at this time,
    Saw blessings spread around me like a sea.
    Thus while the days flew by, and years passed on,
    From nature and her overflowing soul
    I had received so much, that all my thoughts
    Were steeped in feeling; I was only then
    Contented, when with bliss ineffable
    I felt the sentiment of Being spread
    O’er all that moves and all that seemeth still;
    O’er all that, lost beyond the reach of thought
    And human knowledge, to the human eye
    Invisible, yet liveth to the heart;
    O’er all that leaps and runs, and shouts and sings,
    Or beats the gladsome air; o’er all that glides
    Beneath the wave, yea, in the wave itself,
    And mighty depth of waters.
    ... If I should fail with grateful voice
    To speak of you, ye mountains, and ye lakes
    And sounding cataracts, ye mists and winds
    That dwell among the hills where I was born.
    If in my youth I have been pure in heart,
    If, mingling with the world, I am content
    With my own modest pleasures, and have lived
    With God and nature communing, removed
    From little enmities and low desires,
    The gift is yours.”

=The Education of the Little Prig.=—Before taking leave of the _Prelude_,
may I introduce Wordsworth’s sketch of the ‘child-studied’ little prig
of his days—days of much searching of heart and of many theories on the
subject of education?—

                  “That common sense
    May try this common system by its fruits,
    Leave let me take to place before her sight
    A specimen pourtrayed with faithful hand.
    Full early trained to worship seemliness,
    This model of a child is never known
    To mix in quarrels; that were far beneath
    Its dignity; with gifts he bubbles o’er
    As generous as a fountain; selfishness
    May not come near him, nor the little throng
    Of flitting pleasures tempt him from his path;
    The wandering beggars propagate his name,
    Dumb creatures find him tender as a nun,
    And natural or supernatural fear,
    Unless it leaps upon him in a dream,
    Touches him not. To enhance the wonder, see
    How arch his notices, how nice his sense
    Of the ridiculous; ... he can read
    The inside of the earth, and spell the stars;
    He knows the policies of foreign lands;
    Can string you names of districts, cities, towns,
    The whole world over, tight as beads of dew
    Upon a gossamer thread; he sifts, he weighs;
    All things are put to question; he must live
    Knowing that he grows wiser every day,
    Or else not live at all, and seeing too
    Each little drop of wisdom as it falls
    Into the dimpling cistern of his heart:
    For this unnatural growth the trainer blame,
    Pity the tree....
    Meanwhile old grandame earth is grieved to find
    The playthings, which her love designed for him,
    Unthought of: in their woodland beds the flowers
    Weep, and the river sides are all forlorn.
    Oh! give us once again the wishing-cap
    Of Fortunatus, and the invisible coat
    Of Jack the Giant-killer, Robin Hood,
    And Sabra in the forest with St George!
    The child, whose love is here, at least, doth reap
    One precious gain, that he forgets himself.”

=Children have Affinities and should have Relations.=—I cannot stop here
to gather any more of the instruction and edification contained in those
two great educational books, _The Prelude_ and _Præterita_. It is enough
for the present if they have shown us in what manner children attach
themselves to their proper affinities, given opportunity and liberty.
Our part is to drop occasion freely in the way, whether in school or at
home. Children should have relations with earth and water, should run and
leap, ride and swim, should establish the relation of maker to material
in as many kinds as may be; should have dear and intimate relations with
persons, through present intercourse, through tale or poem, picture or
statue; through flint arrow-head or modern motor-car: beast and bird,
herb and tree, they must have familiar acquaintance with. Other peoples
and their languages must not be strange to them. Above all they should
find that most intimate and highest of all Relationships,—the fulfilment
of their being.

This is not a bewildering programme, because, in all these and more
directions, children have affinities; and a human being does not fill his
place in the universe without putting out tendrils of attachment in the
directions proper to him. We must get rid of the notion that to learn the
‘three R’s’ or the Latin grammar well, a child should learn these and
nothing else. It is as true for children as for ourselves that, the wider
the range of interests, the more intelligent is the apprehension of each.

=Education not Desultory.=—But I am not preaching a gospel for the
indolent and proclaiming that education is a casual and desultory matter.
Many great authors have written at least one book devoted to education;
and _Waverley_ seems to me to be Scott’s special contribution to our
science. Edward Waverley, we are told, ‘was permitted in a great measure
to learn as he pleased, when he pleased, and what he pleased.’ That he
did please to learn and that his powers of apprehension were uncommonly
quick, would appear to justify this sort of education. But wavering he
was allowed to grow up, and ‘Waverley’ he remained; instability and
ineffectiveness marked his course. The manner of his education and its
results are thus shortly set forth:—

    “Edward would throw himself with spirit upon any classical
    author of which his preceptor proposed the perusal, make
    himself master of the style so far as to understand the story,
    and, if that pleased or interested him, he finished the
    volume. But it was in vain to attempt fixing his attention on
    critical distinctions of philology, upon the difference of
    idiom, the beauty of felicitous expression, or the artificial
    combinations of syntax. ‘I can read and understand a Latin
    author,’ said young Edward, with the self-confidence and rash
    reasoning of fifteen, ‘and Scaliger or Bentley could not do
    much more.’ Alas! while he was thus permitted to read only for
    the gratification of his amusement, he foresaw not that he was
    losing for ever the opportunity of acquiring habits of firm
    and assiduous application, of gaining the art of controlling,
    directing, and concentrating the powers of his mind for earnest
    investigation—an art far more essential than even that intimate
    acquaintance with classical learning which is the primary
    object of study.”

_Waverley_ but illustrates, what Mr Ruskin says in plain words; that our
youth—whatever we make of it—abides with us to the end:—

    “But so stubborn and chemically inalterable the laws of the
    prescription were, that now, looking back from 1886 to that
    brook shore of 1837, whence I could see the whole of my youth,
    I find myself in nothing whatsoever _changed_. Some of me is
    dead, more of me is stronger. I have learned a few things,
    forgotten many. In the total of me, I am but the same youth,
    disappointed and rheumatic.”

=Strenuous Effort and Reverence.=—We have seen in Ruskin and Wordsworth
the strenuous attention—condition of receptiveness—which made each
of them a producer after his kind; and whosoever will play the game,
whether it be cricket or portrait painting, must learn the rules with
all diligence and get skill by his labour. It is true, ‘the labour we
delight in physics pain,’ but it is also true that we cannot catch hold
of any one of the affinities that are in waiting for us without strenuous
effort and without reverence. A bird-lover, one would say, has chosen
for himself an easy joy; but no: your true bird-lover is out of doors by
four in the morning to assist at the levée of the birds; nay, is he not
in Hyde Park by 2.30 a.m. to see—the kingfisher, no less! He lies in wait
in secret places to watch the goings on of the feathered peoples, travels
far afield to make a new acquaintance in the bird-world; in fact, gives
to the study of birds attention, labour, love, and reverence. He gets joy
in return, so is perhaps little conscious of effort; but the effort is
made all the same.

=Comradeship has Duties.=—To take one more instance of an
affinity—comradeship. Most of us have serious thoughts about friendship;
but we are apt to take comradeship, fellowship, very casually, and to
think it is sufficiently maintained if we meet for parties, games,
picnics, or what not. Public school boys generally learn better; they
know that comradeship means much cheerful give-and-take, chaff, help,
unsparing criticism; if need be, the taking or giving of serious reproof;
loyalty each to each, plucky and faithful leading, staunch following,
truth-speaking; the power to see others put first without chagrin, and to
bear advancement without conceit. Here, too, are calls for attention,
labour, love, and reverence; but, again, labour is swallowed up in
delight.

=The Angel troubles the Still Pool.=—One more point. We are steadfast to
the affinities we take hold of, till death do us part, or longer. And
here let me say a word as to the ‘advantages’ (?) which London offers
in the way of masters and special classes. I think it is most often the
still pool which the angel comes down to trouble: a steady unruffled
course of work without so-called advantages lends itself best to that
‘troubling’ of the angel—the striking upon us of what Coleridge calls
‘the Captain Idea,’ which initiates a tie of affinity.

=The Highest Relationship.=—Neither _The Prelude_ nor _Præterita_
lends itself to the study of the highest Relationship, the profoundest
Intimacy, which awaits the soul of man. I think I cannot do better than
close with an extract from a little book[18] which tells the spiritual
history of _Brother Lawrence_, a lay Brother among the barefooted
Carmelites, at Paris, in the seventeenth century.

    “The first time I saw _Brother Lawrence_ was upon the 3rd of
    August, 1666. He told me that God had done him a singular
    favour in his conversion at the age of eighteen. That in the
    winter, seeing a tree stripped of its leaves, and considering
    that within a little time the leaves would be renewed, and
    after that the flower and fruit appear, he received a high view
    of the Providence and Power of God, which has never since been
    effaced from his soul. That this view had perfectly set him
    loose from the world, and kindled in him such a love for God,
    that he could not tell whether it had increased in about forty
    years that he had lived since. That he had been footman to M.
    Fieubert, the treasurer, and that he was a great awkward fellow
    who broke everything. That he had desired to be received into
    a monastery, thinking he would there be made to smart for his
    awkwardness and the faults he should commit, and so he should
    sacrifice to God his life, with its pleasures: but that God had
    disappointed him, he having met with nothing but satisfaction
    in that state.... That with him the set times of prayer were
    not different from other times; that he retired to pray,
    according to the directions of his Superior, but that he did
    not want such retirement, nor ask for it, because his greatest
    business did not divert him from God.... That the greatest
    pains or pleasures of this world were not to be compared
    with what he had experienced of both kinds in a spiritual
    state; so that he was careful for nothing and feared nothing,
    desiring but one only thing of God, viz., that he might not
    offend Him.... That he had so often experienced the ready
    succours of Divine Grace upon all occasions, that from the same
    experience, when he had business to do, he did not think of it
    beforehand; but when it was time to do it he found in God, as
    in a clear mirror, all that was fit for him to do. That of late
    he had acted thus, without anticipating care; but before the
    experience above mentioned he had used it in his affairs. When
    outward business diverted him a little from the thought of God,
    a fresh remembrance coming from God invested his soul, and so
    inflamed and transported him that it was difficult for him to
    contain himself, that he was more united to God in his outward
    employments than when he left them for devotion in retirement.”

    “I want,—am made for,—and must have a God,
    Ere I can be aught, do aught;—no mere Name
    Want, but the True Thing, with what proves its truth,—
    To wit, a relation from that Thing to me
    Touching from head to foot:—which Touch I feel,
    And with it take the rest, this Life of Ours!”

                                              —_Browning._


AN EDUCATIONAL MANIFESTO

“_Studies serve for Delight, for Ornament, and for Ability._”

Every child has a right of entry to several fields of knowledge.

Every normal child has an appetite for such knowledge.

This appetite or desire for knowledge is a sufficient stimulus for all
school work, if the knowledge be fitly given.

There are four means of destroying the desire for knowledge:—

    (_a_) Too many oral lessons, which offer knowledge in a diluted
    form, and do not leave the child free to deal with it.

    (_b_) Lectures, for which the teacher collects, arranges, and
    illustrates matter from various sources; these often offer
    knowledge in too condensed and ready prepared a form.

    (_c_) Text-books compressed and re-compressed from the big book
    of the big man.

    (_d_) The use of emulation and ambition as incentives to
    learning in place of the adequate desire for, and delight in,
    knowledge.

Children can be most fitly educated on _Things_ and _Books_. Things,
_e.g._:—

    i. Natural obstacles for physical contention, climbing,
    swimming, walking, etc.

    ii. Material to work in—wood, leather, clay, etc.

    iii. Natural objects _in situ_—birds, plants, streams, stones,
    etc.

    iv. Objects of art.

    v. Scientific apparatus, etc.

The value of this education by _Things_ is receiving wide recognition,
but intellectual education to be derived from _Books_ is still for the
most part to seek.

Every scholar of six years old and upwards should study with ‘delight’
_his own, living_, books on every subject in a pretty wide curriculum.
Children between six and eight must for the most part have their books
read to them.

This plan has been tried with happy results for the last twelve years in
many home schoolrooms, and some other schools.

By means of the free use of books the mechanical difficulties of
education—reading, spelling, composition, etc.—disappear, and studies
prove themselves to be ‘for delight, for ornament, and for ability.’

There is reason to believe that these principles are workable in all
schools, Elementary and Secondary; that they tend in the working to
simplification, economy, and discipline.




