CHAPTER XVIII

WE ARE EDUCATED BY OUR INTIMACIES

PART II.—_FURTHER AFFINITIES_


=Affinity for Material: Ruskin’s Opportunities.=—Of the _Affinity for
Material_, the joy of handling and making, Wordsworth says little, but
Ruskin sent out feelers in this direction which began with ‘two boxes of
well-cut wooden bricks’ and culminated, perhaps, in the road-making of
the Oxford days:—

    “I was afterwards,” he says, “gifted with a two-arched bridge,
    admirable in fittings of voussoir and keystone, and adjustment
    of the level courses of masonry with bevelled edges, into which
    they dovetailed in the style of Waterloo Bridge. Well-made
    centrings, and a course of inlaid steps down to the water,
    made this model largely, as accurately, instructive: and I was
    never weary of building, _un_-building—(it was too strong to be
    thrown down, but had always to be _taken_ down)—and re-building
    it.”

We know how he busied himself with making a small dam and reservoir at
both the Herne Hill and Denmark Hill homes; and how, while still a boy,
he scrubbed down, with pail of water and broom, the dirty steps of an
Alpine hotel, because they offended his mother. We feel that in this
direction, again, his nature cried aloud for opportunities.

=Intimacy with Natural Objects.=—We do not hear much of the intimacy
of either boy with _Natural Objects_, such as birds and flowers; but
here, again, we feel that Ruskin was deprived of opportunity. His flower
friends were garden dwellers; and could anything be more pathetic than
this: “My chief prayer for the kindness of heaven, in its flowerful
seasons, was that the frost might not touch the almond blossom.”[17]

Wordsworth appears to have waited for his intimacy with wild-flowers
until he could say of his sister Dorothy, “She gave me eyes, she gave
me ears.” Birds, as we have seen, he knew through the wicked joy of
birdsnesting; but not only so, that day when the wild cavalcade rode to
Furness Abbey, he marked—

              “That simple wren
    Which one day sang so sweetly in the nave
    Of the old church, that....
              I could have made
    My dwelling-place, and lived for ever there
    To hear such music.”

=Ruskin’s Flower Studies.=—If Ruskin had not, as a child, a wide
acquaintance with the flowers of the field, he made up, perhaps, by the
enormous attention he gave to such as came in his way; and, just as his
toy bricks and his bridge gave him his initiation in the principles of
architecture, so, perhaps, his early flower studies resulted in his
power of seeing and expressing detail. He says of flowers: “My whole
time passed in staring at them or into them. In no morbid curiosity,
but in admiring wonder, I pulled every flower to pieces till I knew all
that could be seen of it with a child’s eyes; and used to lay up little
treasures of seeds, by way of pearls and beads,—never with any thought
of sowing them.” He complains that books on Botany were harder than the
Latin Grammar.

=His Pebble Studies.=—“Had there been anybody then to teach me anything
about plants or pebbles,” he says, “it had been good for me.” He loved
the pebbles of the Tay, and followed up his acquaintance with pebbles at
Matlock. “In the glittering white broken spar, speckled with galena, by
which the walks of the hotel garden were made bright, and in the slopes
of the pretty village, and in many a happy walk along its cliffs, I
pursued my mineralogical studies on fluor, calcite, and the ores of lead,
and with indescribable rapture when I was allowed to go into a cave.”

=A Life-shaping Intimacy.=—Later we find him going up Snowdon, “of which
ascent I remember, as the most exciting event, the finding for the
first time in my life a real ‘mineral’ for myself, a piece of copper
pyrites!” This eagerly sought acquaintance with pebbles resulted in the
life-shaping intimacy with minerals to which we owe _The Ethics of the
Dust_.

=Insatiate Delight in a Book—Ruskin’s.=—As for _Books_, we are told how
Ruskin grew up upon the Waverley Novels, on Pope’s Homer’s _Iliad_, many
of Shakespeare’s plays, and much else that is delightful; but he does
not give us an instance of the sort of thing we are looking for—the
sudden keen, insatiate delight in a book which means kinship—until he is
introduced to Byron. His first acquaintance with Byron he puts “about the
beginning of the teen period”:—

    “But very certainly, by the end of this year 1834, I knew
    my Byron pretty well all through, all but Cain, Werner, the
    Deformed Transformed, and Vision of Judgment, none of which
    I could understand, nor did papa and mamma think it would be
    well I should try to.... So far as I could understand it, I
    rejoiced in all the sarcasm of Don Juan. But my firm decision,
    as soon as I got well into the later cantos of it, that Byron
    was to be my master in verse, as Turner in colour, was made
    of course in that gosling (or say cygnet) epoch of existence,
    without consciousness of the deeper instincts that prompted
    it: only two things I consciously recognised, that his truth
    of observation was the most exact, and his chosen expression
    the most concentrated, that I had yet found in literature....
    But the thing wholly new and precious to me in Byron was his
    measured and living _truth_—measured, as compared with Homer;
    and living, as compared with everybody else.... He taught me
    the meaning of Chillon and of Meillerie, and bade me seek first
    in Venice—the ruined homes of Foscari and Falieri.... Byron
    told me of, and reanimated for me, the real people whose feet
    had worn the marble I trod on.”

=Wordsworth’s.=—This is how Wordsworth took to his books:—

    “A precious treasure had I long possessed,
    A little yellow canvas-covered book,
    A slender abstract of the Arabian tales;
    And, from companions in a new abode,
    When first I learnt, that this dear prize of mine
    Was but a block hewn from a mighty quarry—
    That there were four large volumes, laden all
    With kindred matter, ’twas to me, in truth,
    A promise scarcely earthly....
    And when thereafter to my father’s house
    The holidays returned me, there to find
    That golden store of books which I had left,
    What joy was mine! How often ...
                        have I lain
    Down by thy side, O Derwent! murmuring stream,
    On the hot stones, and in the glaring sun,
    And there have read, devouring as I read,
    Defrauding the day’s glory, desperate!”

=“They must have their Food” of Romance.=—Nor can I omit the counsel that
follows:—

    “A gracious spirit o’er this earth presides,
    And o’er the heart of man: invisibly
    It comes, to works of unreproved delight,
    And tendency benign, directing those
    Who care not, know not, think not what they do.
    The tales that charm away the wakeful night
    In Araby romances; legends penned
    For solace by dim light of monkish lamps;
    Fictions, for ladies of their love, devised
    By youthful squires; adventures endless, spun
    By the dismantled warrior in old age,
    Out of the bowels of those very schemes
    In which his youth did first extravagate;
    These spread like day, and something in the shape
    Of these will live till man shall be no more.
    Dumb yearnings, hidden appetites, are ours,
    And _they must_ have their food. Our childhood sits,
    Our simple childhood, sits upon a throne
    That hath more power than all the elements.”

=Children must range at will among Books.=—And this other counsel:—

    “Rarely and with reluctance would I stoop
    To transitory themes; yet I rejoice,
    And, by these thoughts admonished, will pour out
    Thanks with uplifted heart, that I was reared
    Safe from an evil which these days have laid
    Upon the children of the land, a pest
    That might have dried me up, body and soul....
    Where had we been, we two, belovèd Friend!
    If in the season of unperilous choice,
    In lieu of wandering, as we did, though vales
    Rich with indigenous produce, open ground
    Of fancy, happy pastures ranged at will,
    We had been followed, hourly watched, and noosed.
    Each in his several melancholy walk.”

=Words, ‘a Passion and a Power.’=—Later, follows the story of his first
enthralment by poetry:—

                    “Twice five years
    Or less I might have seen, when first my mind
    With conscious pleasure opened to the charm
    Of words in timeful order, found them sweet
    For their own _sakes_, a passion and a power;
    And phrases pleased me chosen for delight,
    For pomp, or love. Oft, in the public roads
    Yet unfrequented, while the morning light
    Was yellowing the hill tops, I went abroad
    With a dear friend, and for the better part
    Of two delightful hours we strolled along
    By the still borders of the misty lake,
    Repeating favourite verses with one voice,
    Or conning more, as happy as the birds
    That round us chaunted.”

=Ruskin’s Local Historic Sense.=—The awakening of the _Historic Sense_ in
Ruskin appears to be always, and here is a great lesson for us, connected
with places: that historic interest and æsthetic delight are one with
him, is another thing to take note of. We have seen how Byron served
him in this way. Again, he tells us of the “three centres of my life’s
thought, Rouen, Geneva, and Pisa, which have been tutoresses of all I
know and were mistresses of all I did from the first moments I entered
their gates.” These came later, but Abbeville “was entrance for me into
immediately healthy labour and joy.... My most intense happinesses have
of course been among mountains. But for cheerful, unalloyed, unwearying
pleasure, the getting sight of Abbeville on a fine summer afternoon,
jumping out in the courtyard of the Hôtel de l’Europe and rushing down
the street to see St Wulfran again before the sun was off the towers,
are things to cherish the past for—to the end.”

=Living Touch with the Past necessary.=—But Ruskin’s want of living
touch with the past, except as such touch was given by the newly
discovered history of a place he happened to be in, is shown in his first
impressions of Rome:—

    “My stock of Latin learning, with which to begin my studies
    of the city, consisted of the two first books of Livy, never
    well known, and the names of places remembered without ever
    looking where they were on a map; Juvenal, a page or two of
    Tacitus, and in Virgil the burning of Troy, the story of Dido,
    the episode of Euryalus, and the last battle. Of course, I
    had nominally read the whole Æneid, but thought most of it
    nonsense. Of later Roman history, I had read English abstracts
    of the imperial vices, and supposed the malaria in the Campagna
    to be the consequence of the Papacy. I had never heard of a
    good Roman Emperor, or a good Pope; was not quite sure whether
    Trajan lived before Christ or after, and would have thanked,
    with a sense of relieved satisfaction, anybody who might
    have told me that Marcus Antoninus was a Roman philosopher
    contemporary with Socrates.... We of course drove about the
    town, and saw the Forum, Coliseum, and so on. I had no distinct
    idea what the Forum was or ever had been, or how the three
    pillars, or the seven, were connected with it, or the Arch of
    Severus.... What the Forum or Capitol had been, I did not in
    the least care; the pillars of the Forum I saw were on a small
    scale, and their capitals rudely carved, and the houses above
    them nothing like so interesting as the side of any close in
    the ‘auld toun’ of Edinburgh.”

=Wordsworth and Ruskin, aloof from the Past.=—Wordsworth, too, stood
aloof. He was aware of

    “Old, unhappy, far-off things
    And battles long ago;”

but the past of nations did not enthral him; even the throes of the
French Revolution, to judge by what he tells us in the _Prelude_,
hardly shook him to his foundation, though he took a walking tour on the
Continent at the moment when, as he himself says—

    “As if awaked from sleep, the nations hailed
    Their great expectancy.”

But for him—

          “I looked upon these things
    As from a distance; heard and saw and felt,
    Was touched, but with no intimate concern.”

=Knowledge learned in Schools.=—As for the _Knowledge learned in
Schools_, Ruskin gives us rather dry details of his experiences in
Euclid, the Latin grammar, and the like, but neither boy appears to have
been ‘stung with the rapture of a sudden thought’ in the course of his
lessons, unless Hawkshead Grammar School can take this to itself:—

                “Many are our joys
    In youth, but oh! what happiness to live
    When every hour brings palpable access
    Of knowledge, when all knowledge is delight,
    And sorrow is not there!”

But the praise of the unfolding of the seasons follows, and I am afraid
it is the lore they brought with them that the poet had in his mind’s eye.

=Comradeship.=—We have all been interested in the late Mr Rhodes’s
illuminating will, and I suppose most mothers and most masters have
pondered the four groups of qualifications for scholarships. In (3) we
have ‘fellowship,’ in (4) ‘instincts to lead and take an interest in
his schoolmates.’ It is well that a talent for _Comradeship_ should
be brought before us in this prominent way as a _sine quâ non_. Here
is the rock upon which Ruskin’s education split, as he was sadly
aware; he never knew the joys of comradeship. Having spoken of ‘peace,
obedience, faith; these three for chief good; next to these the habit of
fixed attention with both eyes and mind,’ as the main blessings of his
childhood, he goes on to enumerate ‘the equally dominant calamities’:—

    “First, that I had nothing to love. My parents were—in a
    sort—visible powers of nature to me, no more loved than the
    sun and the moon: only I should have been annoyed and puzzled
    if either of them had gone out; (how much, now, when both
    are darkened!)—still less did I love God; not that I had any
    quarrel with Him, or fear of Him; but simply found what people
    told me was His service, disagreeable; and what people told me
    was His book, not entertaining. I had no companions to quarrel
    with neither; nobody to assist, and nobody to thank. Not a
    servant was ever allowed to do anything for me, but what it was
    their duty to do; and why should I have been grateful to the
    cook for cooking, or the gardener for gardening?... My present
    verdict, therefore, on the general tenor of my education at
    that time, must be, that it was at once too formal and too
    luxurious; leaving my character at the most important moment
    for its construction, cramped indeed, but not disciplined; and
    only by protection innocent, instead of by practice virtuous.”

Wordsworth, on the contrary, as we have seen, lived the life of his
schoolfellows with entire _abandon_. He was with a crowd of his mates
or he was with a friend, and was only alone in those moments of deeper
intimacy which we shall speak of presently. The simple life of his
‘belovèd Vale’ took such hold on his tenacious northern nature that
not Cambridge, nor London, nor (as we have seen) Europe in its time of
convulsion, could displace the earlier images or give new direction to
his profoundest thought.

Scott laid claim to ‘intimacy with all ranks of my countrymen from the
Scottish peer to the Scottish ploughman,’ and—we get the Waverley
Novels. Wordsworth was satisfied to know the fine-natured peasant folk
of his own dales, and poet-souls like his own. Perhaps such limitations
went to the making of the poet of plain living and high thinking; but
limitations are hazardous.




