CHAPTER XIV

A MASTER-THOUGHT


=A Motto.=—Some of my readers will know the Parents’ Union motto,
‘Education is an atmosphere, a discipline, a life,’ especially well in
the neat diagrammatic form in which it appears on the covers of our
Library books. I am told that we, as a society, are destined to live by
our motto. A notable educationalist writes to me, in connection with
public education: ‘There is more need than ever for such a view of
education as that embodied in the memorable words which are the motto of
the _Parents’ Review_.’ An inspiring motto must always be a power, but
to live _upon_ the good repute of our motto, and to live _up_ to it and
_in_ it, are two different things, and I am afraid the Parents’ Union
has much and continual thinking and strenuous living to face, if it
proposes to stand before the world as interpreting and illustrating these
‘memorable words.’ But we are not a faint-hearted body; we _mean_, and
mean intensely; and to those who purpose the best, and endeavour after
the best, the best arrives.

=Nineteenth-Century Formula, Education is an Atmosphere.=—Meantime,
we sometimes err, I think, in taking a part for the whole, and a part
of a part for the whole of that part. Of the three clauses of our
definition, that which declares that ‘education is an atmosphere’ pleases
us most, perhaps, because it is the most inviting to the _laissez aller_
principle of human nature. By the way, we lose something by substituting
‘environment’ (that blessed word, Mesopotamia!) for atmosphere. The
latter word is symbolic, it is true, but a symbol means more to us all
than the name of the thing signified. We think of fresh air, pure,
bracing, tonic,—of the definite act of breathing which must be fully
accomplished; and we are incited to do more and mean more in the matter
of our children’s surroundings if we regard the whole as an atmosphere,
than if we accept the more literal ‘environment.’

=Results in Inanition.=—But, supposing that ‘Education is an atmosphere’
brings a fresh and vigorous thought to our minds, suppose that it means
to us, for our children, sunshine and green fields, pleasant rooms and
good pictures, schools where learning is taken in by the gentle act of
inspiration, followed by the expiration of all that which is not wanted,
where charming teachers compose the children by a half-mesmeric effluence
which inclines them to do as others do, be as others are,—suppose that
all this is included in our notion of ‘Education is an atmosphere,’ may
we not sit at our ease and believe that all is well, and that the whole
of education has been accomplished? No; because though we cannot live
_without_ air, neither can we live _upon_ air, and children brought up
upon ‘environment’ soon begin to show signs of inanition; they have
little or no healthy curiosity, power of attention, or of effort; what is
worse, they lose spontaneity and initiative; they expect life to drop
into them like drops into a rain-tub, without effort or intention on
their part.

=And Ennui.=—This notion, that education is included in environment,
or, at the best, in atmosphere, has held the ground for a generation
or two, and it seems to me that it has left its mark upon our public
and our private lives. We are more ready to be done unto than to do; we
do not care for the labour of ordering our own lives in this direction
or in that; they must be conducted for us; a press of engagements must
compel us into what next, and what next after. We crave for spectacular
entertainment, whether in the way of pageants in the streets, or
spectacles on the boards. Even Shakespeare has come to be so much
the occasion for gorgeous spectacles that what the poet says is of
little moment compared with the show a play affords. There is nothing
intentionally vicious in all this; it is simply our effort to escape
from the _ennui_ that results from a one-sided view of education,—that
education is an atmosphere _only_.

=Eighteenth-Century Formula, Education is a Life, results in Intellectual
Exhaustion.=—A still more consuming _ennui_ set in at the end of the
eighteenth century, and that also was the result of a partial view of
education. ‘Education is a life’ was the (unconscious) formula then; and
a feverish chase after ideas was the outcome. It is pathetic to read
how Madame de Staël and her coterie, or that ‘blue-stocking’ coterie
which met at the Hôtel Rambouillet, for example, went little to bed,
because they could not sleep; and spent long nights in making character
sketches of each other, enigmas, anagrams, and other futilities of the
intellect, and met again (some of them) at early breakfast to compose and
sing little airs, upon little themes. We may be as much inclined to yawn
in each other’s faces as they were, but, anyway, if we sin as they did
by excess in one direction, there is less wear and tear in a succession
of shows than in their restless pursuit of inviting notions. Still, the
beginning of the nineteenth century has its lessons for the beginning of
the twentieth. They erred, as we do, because they did not understand the
science of the proportion of things. We are inclined to say, ‘Education
is environment’; they would say, ‘Education is ideas.’ The truth includes
both of these, and a third definition introducing another side, a third
aspect, of education.

=Education is the Cultivation of Faculties, leads to Abnormal
Developments.=—The third conceivable view, ‘Education is a discipline,’
has always had its votaries, and has them still. That the discipline of
the habits of the good life, both intellectual and moral, forms a good
third of education, we all believe. The excess occurs when we imagine
that certain qualities of character and conduct run out, a prepared
product like carded wool, from this or that educational machine,
mathematics or classics, science or athletics; that is, when the notion
of the development of the so-called faculties takes the place of the more
physiologically true notion of the formation of intellectual habits. The
difference does not seem to be great; but two streams that rise within a
foot of one another may water different countries and fall into different
seas, and a broad divergence in practice often arises from what appears
to be a small difference in conception, in matters educational. The
father of Plutarch had him learn his Homer that he might get heroic
ideas of life. Had the boy been put through his Homer as a classical
grind, as a machine for the development of faculty, a pedant would have
come out, and not a man of the world in touch with life at many points,
capable of bringing men and affairs to the touchstone of a sane and
generous mind. It seems to me that this notion of the discipline which
should develop ‘faculty’ has tended to produce rather one-sided men, with
the limitations which belong to abnormal development. An artist told
me the other day that the condition of successful art is absorption in
art, that the painter must think pictures, paint pictures, nothing but
pictures. But when art was great, men were not mere artists. Quentin
Matsys wrought in iron and painted pictures and did many things besides.
Michael Angelo wrote sonnets, designed buildings, painted pictures;
marble was by no means his only vehicle of expression. Leonardo wrote
treatises, planned canals, played instruments of music, did a hundred
things, and all exquisitely. But then, the idea of the development of
faculty, and the consequent discipline, had not occurred to these great
men or their guardians.

=Education has Three Faces.=—Having safe-guarded ourselves from the
notion that education has only one face, we may go on to consider how
‘education is a life,’ without the risk of thinking that we are viewing
more than one side of the subject.

=Education is a Life, one of these.=—It has been said that ‘man doth not
live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth
of God’; and the augustness of the occasion on which the words were
spoken has caused us to confine their meaning to what we call the life
of the soul; when, indeed, they include a great educational principle
which was better understood by the mediæval Church than by ourselves. May
I be allowed once again to describe a painting in which the educational
creed of many of us is visibly expressed? The reader is, probably,
familiar with the frescoes on the walls of the so-called Spanish Chapel
of the church of S. Maria Novella. The philosophy of the Middle Ages
dealt, as we know, with theology as its subject-matter; and, while there
is much ecclesiastical polity with which we have little sympathy pictured
on the remaining walls, on one compartment of wall and roof we have a
singularly satisfying scheme of educational thought. At the highest point
of the picture we see the Holy Ghost descending in the likeness of a
dove; immediately below, in the upper chamber are the disciples who first
received His inspiration; below, again, is the promiscuous crowd of all
nationalities who are brought indirectly under the influence of that
first outpouring; and in the foreground are two or three dogs, showing
that the dumb creation was not excluded from benefiting by the new grace.
In the lower compartment of the great design are angelic figures of the
cardinal virtues, which we all trace more or less to divine inspiration,
floating above the seated figures of apostles and prophets, of whom we
know that they ‘spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.’ So far,
this mediæval scheme of philosophy reveals no new thought to persons
instructed in the elements of Christian truth. But below the prophets
and apostles are a series of pictured niches, those to the right being
occupied by the captain figures, the ideal representations, of the
seven Liberal Arts, figures of singular grace and beauty, representing
such familiar matters as grammar, rhetoric, logic, music, astronomy,
geometry, and arithmetic, all of them under the outpouring of the Spirit
of God. Still more liberal is the philosophy which places at the foot
of each of these figures him who was then accepted as the leader and
representative of each several science,—Priscian, Cicero, Aristotle,
Tubal Cain, Zoroaster, Euclid, Pythagoras; men whom a narrower and later
theology would have placed beyond the pale of the Christian religion,
and therefore of the teaching of the Spirit of God. But here all are
represented as under the same divine outpouring which illuminated the
disciples in the upper chamber.

=A Creed which unifies Life.=—Our nature craves after unity. The travail
of thought, which is going on to-day and has gone on as long as we have
any record of men’s thoughts, has been with a view to establishing some
principle for the unification of life. Here we have the scheme of a
magnificent unity. We are apt to think that piety is one thing, that our
intellectual and artistic yearnings are quite another matter, and that
our moral virtues are pretty much matters of inheritance and environment,
and have not much to do with our conscious religion. Hence, there come
discords into our lives, discords especially trying to young and ardent
souls who want to be good and religious, but who cannot escape from the
overpowering drawings of art and intellect and mere physical enjoyment;
they have been taught to consider that these things are, for the most
part, alien to the religious life, and that they must choose one or the
other; they do choose, and the choice does not always fall upon those
things which, in our unscriptural and unphilosophical narrowness, we
call the things of God. Let us bless Taddeo Gaddi and Simone Memmi for
placing before our eyes a creed (copies[12] of which we might all hang
upon our walls), which shows that our piety, our virtue, our intellectual
activities, and, let us add, our physical perfections, are all fed from
the same source, God Himself; are all inspired by the same Spirit,
the Spirit of God. The ages which held this creed were ages of mighty
production in every kind; the princely commerce of Venice was dignified
and sobered by this thought of the divine inspiration of ideas—ideas of
trade, ideas of justice and fair balance and of utility; Columbus went
out to discover a new world, informed by the divine idea, as our own
philosopher, Coleridge, points out, adding that ‘great inventions and
Ideas of Nature presented to chosen minds by a higher power than nature
herself, suddenly unfold as it were in prophetic succession systematic
views destined to produce the most important revolutions in the state
of man.’ When Columbus came back, his new world discovered, people and
princes took it as from God and sang _Te Deum_.

=The Diet of Great Ideas.=—Michael Angelo writes to his friend Vittoria
Colonna, that ‘good Christians always make good and beautiful figures. In
order to represent the adored image of our Lord, it is not enough that a
master should be great and able. I maintain that he must also be a man
of good morals and conduct, if possible a saint, in order that the Holy
Ghost may give him inspiration.’ In truth, a nation or a man becomes
great upon one diet only, the diet of great ideas communicated to those
already prepared to receive them by a higher Power than Nature herself.

=Science, the Teaching vouchsafed to Men to-day.=—I think we[13] hold
amongst us the little leaven which is able to leaven the whole lump.
Let us set ourselves to labour with purpose and passion to restore to
the world, enriched by the additions of later knowledge, that great
scheme of unity of life which produced great men and great work in the
past. Nor need we fear that in endeavouring after some such doctrine of
ideas as may help us in the work of education, we are running counter
to science. Many of us feel, and, I think, rightly, that the teaching
of science is _the_ new teaching which is being vouchsafed to mankind
in our age. Some of us are triumphant, and believe that the elements of
moral and religious struggle are about to be eliminated from life, which
shall run henceforth, whether happy or disastrous, on the easy plane
of the inevitable; others are bewildered and look in vain for a middle
way, a place of reconciliation for science and religion; while others of
us, again, take refuge in repudiating ‘evolution’ and all its works and
nailing our colours to religion, interpreted on our own narrow lines.
Whichever of these lines we take, we probably err through want of faith.

Let us first of all settle it with ourselves that science and religion
cannot, to the believer in God, by any possibility be antagonistic.
Having assured ourselves of this, we shall probably go on to perceive
that the evolution of science is in fact a process of revelation, being
brought about in every case, so far as I am aware, by the process which
Coleridge has so justly described; that is, “that the _Ideas_ of Nature,
presented to chosen minds by a higher power than Nature herself, suddenly
unfold as it were in prophetic succession systematic views destined to
produce the must important revolutions in the state of man.” Huxley
defines the utility of Biology “as helping to give right ideas in this
world, which is, after all,” he goes on to say, “absolutely governed
by ideas, and very often by the wildest and most hypothetical ideas.”
Again, he writes, “those who refuse to go beyond the fact rarely get as
far as the fact; and anyone who has studied the history of science knows
that almost every great step therein has been made by the ‘anticipation
of nature,’ that is, by the invention of hypotheses.” One cannot help
thinking that scientific men would find the unifying principle they are
in search of in the fine saying of Coleridge’s which I have quoted more
than once or twice; so would they stand revealed to themselves as the
mouthpieces, not merely of _the truth_, for which they are so ready to
combat and suffer, but also as the chosen and prepared servants of Him
who is the Truth.

=Evolution, the Master-thought of the Age.=—Few of us can forget
Carlyle’s incomparable picture of the _Tiers État_ waiting for
organisation: “Wise as serpents; harmless as doves: what a spectacle for
France! Six hundred inorganic individuals, essential for its regeneration
and salvation, sit there, on their elliptic benches, longing passionately
towards life.” Less picturesque, but otherwise very much on a par with
this, is Coleridge’s description of Botany, as that science existed
in his own day, waiting for the unifying idea which should give it
organisation. “What,” he says, “is Botany at this present hour? Little
more than an enormous nomenclature; a huge catalogue, _bien arrangé_,
yearly and monthly augmented, in various editions, each with its own
scheme of technical memory and its own conveniences of reference!
The innocent amusement, the healthful occupation, the ornamental
accomplishment of _amateurs_; it has yet to expect the devotion and
energies of the philosopher.” The key-word for the interpretation of
life, both animal and vegetable, has been presented to our generation,
and we cannot make too much of it.

=The Ages have sought for a Unifying Principle.=—We cannot overrate the
enormous repose and satisfaction to the human mind contained in the
idea of evolution. But it is well to remember that for three thousand
years thinkers have been occupied with attempts to explain the world by
means of a single principle, which should also furnish an explanation of
reason and the human soul. Herakleitos and his age thought they had laid
hold of the informing idea in the phrase, ‘The true Being is an eternal
Becoming’: the ‘universal flux of things’ explained all. Demokritos and
his age cried—Eureka! solved the riddle of the universe, with the saying
that ‘nothing exists except atoms moving in vacancy.’ Many times since,
with each epoch-making discovery, has science cried—Eureka! over the one
principle which should explain all things and eliminate Personality.

=But Personality Remains.=—But some little knowledge of history and
philosophy will give us pause. We shall see that each great discovery,
each luminous idea of nature that the world has received hitherto, is
like a bend in a tortuous lake which appears final until your boat
approaches it, and then—behold an opening into further and still further
reaches beyond! And the knowledge of God will give us something more than
the wider outlook which comes of a knowledge of history—the knowledge
that there _is_ what Wordsworth calls the ‘stream of tendency,’ a stream
of immeasurable force in shaping character and events; but there is also
Personality, a power able to turn the ‘stream of tendency’ to its uses,
if also liable to be carried away in its current.

=Attitude of Parents and Teachers towards Evolution.=—If I appear to
dwell on a subject which at first sight appears to have little to
do with the bringing up of children, it is because I think that his
attitude towards the great idea, great lesson, set for his age to grasp,
is a vital part of a parent’s preparation. If parents take no heed of
the great thoughts which move their age, they cannot expect to retain
influence over the minds of their children. If they fear and distrust the
revelations of science, they introduce an element of distrust and discord
into their children’s lives. If, with the mere neophyte of science, they
rush to the conclusion that the last revelation is final, accounts for
all that is in man, and, to say the least, makes God unnecessary and
unknowable, or negligible, they may lower the level of their children’s
living to that struggle for existence—without aspiration, consecration,
and sacrifice—of which we hear so much. If, lastly, parents recognise
every great idea of nature as a new page in the progressive revelation
made by God to men already prepared to receive such idea; if they realise
that the new idea, however comprehensive, is not final nor all-inclusive,
nor to be set in opposition with that personal knowledge of God which
is the greatest knowledge, why, then, their children will grow up in
that attitude of reverence for science, reverence for God, and openness
of mind, which befits us for whom life is a probation and a continual
education. So much for the nutriment of ideas laid on the table of the
world during this particular course of its history.

=Education is a World Business.=—Next, we may have poetry, or art, or
philosophy; we cannot tell; but two things are incumbent upon us,—to keep
ourselves and our children in touch with the great thoughts by which
the world has been educated in the past, and to keep ourselves and them
in the right attitude towards the great ideas of the present. It is our
temptation to make too personal a matter of education, to lose sight of
the fact that education is a world business, that the lessons of the ages
have been duly set, and that each age is concerned, not only with its own
particular page, but with every preceding page. For who feels that he has
mastered a book if he is familiar with only the last page of it? This
brings me to a point I am anxious to bring forward.

We do not sufficiently realise the need for unity of principle in
education. We have no Captain Idea which shall marshal for us the
fighting host of educational ideas which throng the air; so, in default
of a guiding principle, a leading idea, we feel ourselves at liberty to
pick and choose. This man thinks he is free to make science the sum of
his son’s education, the other chooses the classics, a third prefers a
mechanical, a fourth, a commercial programme, a fifth makes bodily health
his cult, and chooses a school which makes the care of health a special
feature of its programme (not that we must allow health to be neglected,
but that, given good general conditions, the less obvious attention their
health receives the better for the boys and girls); and everyone feels
himself at liberty to do that which is right in his own eyes with regard
to the education of his children.

Let it be our negative purpose to discourage in every way we can the
educational faddist, that is, the person who accepts a one-sided notion
in place of a universal idea as his educational guide. Our positive
purpose is to present, in season and out of season, one such universal
idea; that is, that education is the science of relations.

=A Captain Idea for us,—Education is the Science of Relations.=—A
child should be brought up to have relations of force with earth and
water, should run and ride, swim and skate, lift and carry; should know
texture, and work in material; should know by name, and where and how
they live at any rate, the things of the earth about him, its birds and
beasts and creeping things, its herbs and trees; should be in touch with
the literature, art and thought of the past and the present. I do not
mean that he should _know_ all these things; but he should feel, when
he reads of it in the newspapers, the thrill which stirred the Cretan
peasants when the frescoes in the palace of King Minos were disclosed
to the labour of their spades. He should feel the thrill, not from mere
contiguity, but because he has with the past the relationship of living
pulsing thought; and, if blood be thicker than water, thought is more
quickening than blood. He must have a living relationship with the
present, its historic movement, its science, literature, art, social
needs and aspirations. In fact, he must have a wide outlook, intimate
relations all round; and force, _virtue_, must pass out of him, whether
of hand, will, or sympathy, wherever he touches. This is no impossible
programme. Indeed it can be pretty well filled in by the time an
intelligent boy or girl has reached the age of thirteen or fourteen; for
it depends, not upon _how much_ is learned, but upon _how_ things are
learned.

=A Wider Curriculum.=—Give children a wide range of subjects, with
the end in view of establishing in each case some one or more of the
relations I have indicated. Let them learn from first-hand sources of
information—really good books, the best going, on the subject they are
engaged upon. Let them get at the books themselves, and do not let
them be flooded with a warm diluent at the lips of their teacher. The
teacher’s business is to indicate, stimulate, direct and constrain to the
acquirement of knowledge, but by no means to be the fountain-head and
source of all knowledge in his or her own person. The less parents and
teachers talk-in and expound their rations of knowledge and thought to
the children they are educating, the better for the children. Peptonised
food for a healthy stomach does not tend to a vigorous digestion.
Children must be allowed to ruminate, must be left alone with their own
thoughts. They will ask for help if they want it.

=We may not Choose or Reject Subjects.=—You will see at a glance,
with this Captain Idea of establishing relationships as a guide, the
unwisdom of choosing or rejecting this or that subject, as being more
or less useful or necessary in view of a child’s future. We decide, for
example, that Tommy, who is eight, need not waste his time over the Latin
Grammar. We intend him for commercial or scientific pursuits,—what good
will it be to him? But we do not know how much we are shutting out from
Tommy’s range of thought besides the Latin Grammar. He has to translate,
for example,—‘_Pueri formosos equos vident._’ He is a ruminant animal,
and has been told something about that strong Roman people whose speech
is now brought before him. How their boys catch hold of him! How he
gloats over their horses! The Latin Grammar is not mere words to Tommy,
or rather Tommy knows, as we have forgotten, that the epithet ‘mere’ is
the very last to apply to words. Of course it is only now and then that a
notion catches the small boy, but when it does catch, it works wonders,
and does more for his education than years of grind.

Let us try, however imperfectly, to make education a science of
relationships—in other words, try in one subject or another to let the
children work upon living ideas. In this field small efforts are honoured
with great rewards, and we perceive that the education we are giving
exceeds all that we intended or imagined.




