The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Arrow of Gold, by Joseph Conrad


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Arrow of Gold
       a story between two notes


Author: Joseph Conrad



Release Date: August 3, 2009  [eBook #1083]
[This file last updated December 27, 2010]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ARROW OF GOLD***


Transcribed from the 1921 T. Fisher Unwin by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





                                   THE
                              ARROW OF GOLD


                        A STORY BETWEEN TWO NOTES

                                    BY
                              JOSEPH CONRAD

                      Celui qui n’a connu que des hommes
                   polis et raisonnables, ou ne connait pas
                     l’homme, ou ne le connait qu’a demi.

                                                               CARACTERES.

                                * * * * *

                          T. FISHER UNWIN, LTD.
                         LONDON: ADELPHI TERRACE

                                * * * * *

_First published_          _August_ 1919
_Reprinted_              _December_ 1919
_Reprinted_               _October_ 1921

                                  * * * * *

                           ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

                                * * * * *

                                    TO
                              RICHARD CURLE

                                * * * * *




FIRST NOTE


The pages which follow have been extracted from a pile of manuscript
which was apparently meant for the eye of one woman only.  She seems to
have been the writer’s childhood’s friend.  They had parted as children,
or very little more than children.  Years passed.  Then something
recalled to the woman the companion of her young days and she wrote to
him: “I have been hearing of you lately.  I know where life has brought
you.  You certainly selected your own road.  But to us, left behind, it
always looked as if you had struck out into a pathless desert.  We always
regarded you as a person that must be given up for lost.  But you have
turned up again; and though we may never see each other, my memory
welcomes you and I confess to you I should like to know the incidents on
the road which has led you to where you are now.”

And he answers her: “I believe you are the only one now alive who
remembers me as a child.  I have heard of you from time to time, but I
wonder what sort of person you are now.  Perhaps if I did know I wouldn’t
dare put pen to paper.  But I don’t know.  I only remember that we were
great chums.  In fact, I chummed with you even more than with your
brothers.  But I am like the pigeon that went away in the fable of the
Two Pigeons.  If I once start to tell you I would want you to feel that
you have been there yourself.  I may overtax your patience with the story
of my life so different from yours, not only in all the facts but
altogether in spirit.  You may not understand.  You may even be shocked.
I say all this to myself; but I know I shall succumb!  I have a distinct
recollection that in the old days, when you were about fifteen, you
always could make me do whatever you liked.”

He succumbed.  He begins his story for her with the minute narration of
this adventure which took about twelve months to develop.  In the form in
which it is presented here it has been pruned of all allusions to their
common past, of all asides, disquisitions, and explanations addressed
directly to the friend of his childhood.  And even as it is the whole
thing is of considerable length.  It seems that he had not only a memory
but that he also knew how to remember.  But as to that opinions may
differ.

This, his first great adventure, as he calls it, begins in Marseilles.
It ends there, too.  Yet it might have happened anywhere.  This does not
mean that the people concerned could have come together in pure space.
The locality had a definite importance.  As to the time, it is easily
fixed by the events at about the middle years of the seventies, when Don
Carlos de Bourbon, encouraged by the general reaction of all Europe
against the excesses of communistic Republicanism, made his attempt for
the throne of Spain, arms in hand, amongst the hills and gorges of
Guipuzcoa.  It is perhaps the last instance of a Pretender’s adventure
for a Crown that History will have to record with the usual grave moral
disapproval tinged by a shamefaced regret for the departing romance.
Historians are very much like other people.

However, History has nothing to do with this tale.  Neither is the moral
justification or condemnation of conduct aimed at here.  If anything it
is perhaps a little sympathy that the writer expects for his buried
youth, as he lives it over again at the end of his insignificant course
on this earth.  Strange person—yet perhaps not so very different from
ourselves.

A few words as to certain facts may be added.

It may seem that he was plunged very abruptly into this long adventure.
But from certain passages (suppressed here because mixed up with
irrelevant matter) it appears clearly that at the time of the meeting in
the café, Mills had already gathered, in various quarters, a definite
view of the eager youth who had been introduced to him in that
ultra-legitimist salon.  What Mills had learned represented him as a
young gentleman who had arrived furnished with proper credentials and who
apparently was doing his best to waste his life in an eccentric fashion,
with a bohemian set (one poet, at least, emerged out of it later) on one
side, and on the other making friends with the people of the Old Town,
pilots, coasters, sailors, workers of all sorts.  He pretended rather
absurdly to be a seaman himself and was already credited with an
ill-defined and vaguely illegal enterprise in the Gulf of Mexico.  At
once it occurred to Mills that this eccentric youngster was the very
person for what the legitimist sympathizers had very much at heart just
then: to organize a supply by sea of arms and ammunition to the Carlist
detachments in the South.  It was precisely to confer on that matter with
Doña Rita that Captain Blunt had been despatched from Headquarters.

Mills got in touch with Blunt at once and put the suggestion before him.
The Captain thought this the very thing.  As a matter of fact, on that
evening of Carnival, those two, Mills and Blunt, had been actually
looking everywhere for our man.  They had decided that he should be drawn
into the affair if it could be done.  Blunt naturally wanted to see him
first.  He must have estimated him a promising person, but, from another
point of view, not dangerous.  Thus lightly was the notorious (and at the
same time mysterious) Monsieur George brought into the world; out of the
contact of two minds which did not give a single thought to his flesh and
blood.

Their purpose explains the intimate tone given to their first
conversation and the sudden introduction of Doña Rita’s history.  Mills,
of course, wanted to hear all about it.  As to Captain Blunt—I suspect
that, at the time, he was thinking of nothing else.  In addition it was
Doña Rita who would have to do the persuading; for, after all, such an
enterprise with its ugly and desperate risks was not a trifle to put
before a man—however young.

It cannot be denied that Mills seems to have acted somewhat
unscrupulously.  He himself appears to have had some doubt about it, at a
given moment, as they were driving to the Prado.  But perhaps Mills, with
his penetration, understood very well the nature he was dealing with.  He
might even have envied it.  But it’s not my business to excuse Mills.  As
to him whom we may regard as Mills’ victim it is obvious that he has
never harboured a single reproachful thought.  For him Mills is not to be
criticized.  A remarkable instance of the great power of mere
individuality over the young.




PART ONE


CHAPTER I


Certain streets have an atmosphere of their own, a sort of universal fame
and the particular affection of their citizens.  One of such streets is
the Cannebière, and the jest: “If Paris had a Cannebière it would be a
little Marseilles” is the jocular expression of municipal pride.  I, too,
I have been under the spell.  For me it has been a street leading into
the unknown.

There was a part of it where one could see as many as five big cafés in a
resplendent row.  That evening I strolled into one of them.  It was by no
means full.  It looked deserted, in fact, festal and overlighted, but
cheerful.  The wonderful street was distinctly cold (it was an evening of
carnival), I was very idle, and I was feeling a little lonely.  So I went
in and sat down.

The carnival time was drawing to an end.  Everybody, high and low, was
anxious to have the last fling.  Companies of masks with linked arms and
whooping like red Indians swept the streets in crazy rushes while gusts
of cold mistral swayed the gas lights as far as the eye could reach.
There was a touch of bedlam in all this.

Perhaps it was that which made me feel lonely, since I was neither
masked, nor disguised, nor yelling, nor in any other way in harmony with
the bedlam element of life.  But I was not sad.  I was merely in a state
of sobriety.  I had just returned from my second West Indies voyage.  My
eyes were still full of tropical splendour, my memory of my experiences,
lawful and lawless, which had their charm and their thrill; for they had
startled me a little and had amused me considerably.  But they had left
me untouched.  Indeed they were other men’s adventures, not mine.  Except
for a little habit of responsibility which I had acquired they had not
matured me.  I was as young as before.  Inconceivably young—still
beautifully unthinking—infinitely receptive.

You may believe that I was not thinking of Don Carlos and his fight for a
kingdom.  Why should I?  You don’t want to think of things which you meet
every day in the newspapers and in conversation.  I had paid some calls
since my return and most of my acquaintance were legitimists and
intensely interested in the events of the frontier of Spain, for
political, religious, or romantic reasons.  But I was not interested.
Apparently I was not romantic enough.  Or was it that I was even more
romantic than all those good people?  The affair seemed to me
commonplace.  That man was attending to his business of a Pretender.

On the front page of the illustrated paper I saw lying on a table near
me, he looked picturesque enough, seated on a boulder, a big strong man
with a square-cut beard, his hands resting on the hilt of a cavalry
sabre—and all around him a landscape of savage mountains.  He caught my
eye on that spiritedly composed woodcut.  (There were no inane
snapshot-reproductions in those days.)  It was the obvious romance for
the use of royalists but it arrested my attention.

Just then some masks from outside invaded the café, dancing hand in hand
in a single file led by a burly man with a cardboard nose.  He gambolled
in wildly and behind him twenty others perhaps, mostly Pierrots and
Pierrettes holding each other by the hand and winding in and out between
the chairs and tables: eyes shining in the holes of cardboard faces,
breasts panting; but all preserving a mysterious silence.

They were people of the poorer sort (white calico with red spots,
costumes), but amongst them there was a girl in a black dress sewn over
with gold half moons, very high in the neck and very short in the skirt.
Most of the ordinary clients of the café didn’t even look up from their
games or papers.  I, being alone and idle, stared abstractedly.  The girl
costumed as Night wore a small black velvet mask, what is called in
French a “_loup_.”  What made her daintiness join that obviously rough
lot I can’t imagine.  Her uncovered mouth and chin suggested refined
prettiness.

They filed past my table; the Night noticed perhaps my fixed gaze and
throwing her body forward out of the wriggling chain shot out at me a
slender tongue like a pink dart.  I was not prepared for this, not even
to the extent of an appreciative “_Très foli_,” before she wriggled and
hopped away.  But having been thus distinguished I could do no less than
follow her with my eyes to the door where the chain of hands being broken
all the masks were trying to get out at once.  Two gentlemen coming in
out of the street stood arrested in the crush.  The Night (it must have
been her idiosyncrasy) put her tongue out at them, too.  The taller of
the two (he was in evening clothes under a light wide-open overcoat) with
great presence of mind chucked her under the chin, giving me the view at
the same time of a flash of white teeth in his dark, lean face.  The
other man was very different; fair, with smooth, ruddy cheeks and burly
shoulders.  He was wearing a grey suit, obviously bought ready-made, for
it seemed too tight for his powerful frame.

That man was not altogether a stranger to me.  For the last week or so I
had been rather on the look-out for him in all the public places where in
a provincial town men may expect to meet each other.  I saw him for the
first time (wearing that same grey ready-made suit) in a legitimist
drawing-room where, clearly, he was an object of interest, especially to
the women.  I had caught his name as Monsieur Mills.  The lady who had
introduced me took the earliest opportunity to murmur into my ear: “A
relation of Lord X.”  (_Un proche parent de Lord X_.)  And then she
added, casting up her eyes: “A good friend of the King.”  Meaning Don
Carlos of course.

I looked at the _proche parent_; not on account of the parentage but
marvelling at his air of ease in that cumbrous body and in such tight
clothes, too.  But presently the same lady informed me further: “He has
come here amongst us _un naufragé_.”

I became then really interested.  I had never seen a shipwrecked person
before.  All the boyishness in me was aroused.  I considered a shipwreck
as an unavoidable event sooner or later in my future.

Meantime the man thus distinguished in my eyes glanced quietly about and
never spoke unless addressed directly by one of the ladies present.
There were more than a dozen people in that drawing-room, mostly women
eating fine pastry and talking passionately.  It might have been a
Carlist committee meeting of a particularly fatuous character.  Even my
youth and inexperience were aware of that.  And I was by a long way the
youngest person in the room.  That quiet Monsieur Mills intimidated me a
little by his age (I suppose he was thirty-five), his massive
tranquillity, his clear, watchful eyes.  But the temptation was too
great—and I addressed him impulsively on the subject of that shipwreck.

He turned his big fair face towards me with surprise in his keen glance,
which (as though he had seen through me in an instant and found nothing
objectionable) changed subtly into friendliness.  On the matter of the
shipwreck he did not say much.  He only told me that it had not occurred
in the Mediterranean, but on the other side of Southern France—in the Bay
of Biscay.  “But this is hardly the place to enter on a story of that
kind,” he observed, looking round at the room with a faint smile as
attractive as the rest of his rustic but well-bred personality.

I expressed my regret.  I should have liked to hear all about it.  To
this he said that it was not a secret and that perhaps next time we met. . .

“But where can we meet?” I cried.  “I don’t come often to this house, you
know.”

“Where?  Why on the Cannebière to be sure.  Everybody meets everybody
else at least once a day on the pavement opposite the _Bourse_.”

This was absolutely true.  But though I looked for him on each succeeding
day he was nowhere to be seen at the usual times.  The companions of my
idle hours (and all my hours were idle just then) noticed my
preoccupation and chaffed me about it in a rather obvious way.  They
wanted to know whether she, whom I expected to see, was dark or fair;
whether that fascination which kept me on tenterhooks of expectation was
one of my aristocrats or one of my marine beauties: for they knew I had a
footing in both these—shall we say circles?  As to themselves they were
the bohemian circle, not very wide—half a dozen of us led by a sculptor
whom we called Prax for short.  My own nick-name was “Young Ulysses.”

I liked it.

But chaff or no chaff they would have been surprised to see me leave them
for the burly and sympathetic Mills.  I was ready to drop any easy
company of equals to approach that interesting man with every mental
deference.  It was not precisely because of that shipwreck.  He attracted
and interested me the more because he was not to be seen.  The fear that
he might have departed suddenly for England—(or for Spain)—caused me a
sort of ridiculous depression as though I had missed a unique
opportunity.  And it was a joyful reaction which emboldened me to signal
to him with a raised arm across that café.

I was abashed immediately afterwards, when I saw him advance towards my
table with his friend.  The latter was eminently elegant.  He was exactly
like one of those figures one can see of a fine May evening in the
neighbourhood of the Opera-house in Paris.  Very Parisian indeed.  And
yet he struck me as not so perfectly French as he ought to have been, as
if one’s nationality were an accomplishment with varying degrees of
excellence.  As to Mills, he was perfectly insular.  There could be no
doubt about him.  They were both smiling faintly at me.  The burly Mills
attended to the introduction: “Captain Blunt.”

We shook hands.  The name didn’t tell me much.  What surprised me was
that Mills should have remembered mine so well.  I don’t want to boast of
my modesty but it seemed to me that two or three days was more than
enough for a man like Mills to forget my very existence.  As to the
Captain, I was struck on closer view by the perfect correctness of his
personality.  Clothes, slight figure, clear-cut, thin, sun-tanned face,
pose, all this was so good that it was saved from the danger of banality
only by the mobile black eyes of a keenness that one doesn’t meet every
day in the south of France and still less in Italy.  Another thing was
that, viewed as an officer in mufti, he did not look sufficiently
professional.  That imperfection was interesting, too.

You may think that I am subtilizing my impressions on purpose, but you
may take it from a man who has lived a rough, a very rough life, that it
is the subtleties of personalities, and contacts, and events, that count
for interest and memory—and pretty well nothing else.  This—you see—is
the last evening of that part of my life in which I did not know that
woman.  These are like the last hours of a previous existence.  It isn’t
my fault that they are associated with nothing better at the decisive
moment than the banal splendours of a gilded café and the bedlamite yells
of carnival in the street.

We three, however (almost complete strangers to each other), had assumed
attitudes of serious amiability round our table.  A waiter approached for
orders and it was then, in relation to my order for coffee, that the
absolutely first thing I learned of Captain Blunt was the fact that he
was a sufferer from insomnia.  In his immovable way Mills began charging
his pipe.  I felt extremely embarrassed all at once, but became
positively annoyed when I saw our Prax enter the café in a sort of
mediaeval costume very much like what Faust wears in the third act.  I
have no doubt it was meant for a purely operatic Faust.  A light mantle
floated from his shoulders.  He strode theatrically up to our table and
addressing me as “Young Ulysses” proposed I should go outside on the
fields of asphalt and help him gather a few marguerites to decorate a
truly infernal supper which was being organized across the road at the
Maison Dorée—upstairs.  With expostulatory shakes of the head and
indignant glances I called his attention to the fact that I was not
alone.  He stepped back a pace as if astonished by the discovery, took
off his plumed velvet toque with a low obeisance so that the feathers
swept the floor, and swaggered off the stage with his left hand resting
on the hilt of the property dagger at his belt.

Meantime the well-connected but rustic Mills had been busy lighting his
briar and the distinguished Captain sat smiling to himself.  I was
horribly vexed and apologized for that intrusion, saying that the fellow
was a future great sculptor and perfectly harmless; but he had been
swallowing lots of night air which had got into his head apparently.

Mills peered at me with his friendly but awfully searching blue eyes
through the cloud of smoke he had wreathed about his big head.  The slim,
dark Captain’s smile took on an amiable expression.  Might he know why I
was addressed as “Young Ulysses” by my friend? and immediately he added
the remark with urbane playfulness that Ulysses was an astute person.
Mills did not give me time for a reply.  He struck in: “That old Greek
was famed as a wanderer—the first historical seaman.”  He waved his pipe
vaguely at me.

“Ah!  _Vraiment_!”  The polite Captain seemed incredulous and as if
weary.  “Are you a seaman?  In what sense, pray?”  We were talking French
and he used the term _homme de mer_.

Again Mills interfered quietly.  “In the same sense in which you are a
military man.”  (_Homme de guerre_.)

It was then that I heard Captain Blunt produce one of his striking
declarations.  He had two of them, and this was the first.

“I live by my sword.”

It was said in an extraordinary dandified manner which in conjunction
with the matter made me forget my tongue in my head.  I could only stare
at him.  He added more naturally: “2nd Reg.  Castille, Cavalry.”  Then
with marked stress in Spanish, “_En las filas legitimas_.”

Mills was heard, unmoved, like Jove in his cloud: “He’s on leave here.”

“Of course I don’t shout that fact on the housetops,” the Captain
addressed me pointedly, “any more than our friend his shipwreck
adventure.  We must not strain the toleration of the French authorities
too much!  It wouldn’t be correct—and not very safe either.”

I became suddenly extremely delighted with my company.  A man who “lived
by his sword,” before my eyes, close at my elbow!  So such people did
exist in the world yet!  I had not been born too late!  And across the
table with his air of watchful, unmoved benevolence, enough in itself to
arouse one’s interest, there was the man with the story of a shipwreck
that mustn’t be shouted on housetops.  Why?

I understood very well why, when he told me that he had joined in the
Clyde a small steamer chartered by a relative of his, “a very wealthy
man,” he observed (probably Lord X, I thought), to carry arms and other
supplies to the Carlist army.  And it was not a shipwreck in the ordinary
sense.  Everything went perfectly well to the last moment when suddenly
the _Numancia_ (a Republican ironclad) had appeared and chased them
ashore on the French coast below Bayonne.  In a few words, but with
evident appreciation of the adventure, Mills described to us how he swam
to the beach clad simply in a money belt and a pair of trousers.  Shells
were falling all round till a tiny French gunboat came out of Bayonne and
shooed the _Numancia_ away out of territorial waters.

He was very amusing and I was fascinated by the mental picture of that
tranquil man rolling in the surf and emerging breathless, in the costume
you know, on the fair land of France, in the character of a smuggler of
war material.  However, they had never arrested or expelled him, since he
was there before my eyes.  But how and why did he get so far from the
scene of his sea adventure was an interesting question.  And I put it to
him with most naïve indiscretion which did not shock him visibly.  He
told me that the ship being only stranded, not sunk, the contraband cargo
aboard was doubtless in good condition.  The French custom-house men were
guarding the wreck.  If their vigilance could be—h’m—removed by some
means, or even merely reduced, a lot of these rifles and cartridges could
be taken off quietly at night by certain Spanish fishing boats.  In fact,
salved for the Carlists, after all.  He thought it could be done. . . .

I said with professional gravity that given a few perfectly quiet nights
(rare on that coast) it could certainly be done.

Mr. Mills was not afraid of the elements.  It was the highly inconvenient
zeal of the French custom-house people that had to be dealt with in some
way.

“Heavens!” I cried, astonished.  “You can’t bribe the French Customs.
This isn’t a South-American republic.”

“Is it a republic?” he murmured, very absorbed in smoking his wooden
pipe.

“Well, isn’t it?”

He murmured again, “Oh, so little.”  At this I laughed, and a faintly
humorous expression passed over Mills’ face.  No.  Bribes were out of the
question, he admitted.  But there were many legitimist sympathies in
Paris.  A proper person could set them in motion and a mere hint from
high quarters to the officials on the spot not to worry over-much about
that wreck. . . .

What was most amusing was the cool, reasonable tone of this amazing
project.  Mr. Blunt sat by very detached, his eyes roamed here and there
all over the café; and it was while looking upward at the pink foot of a
fleshy and very much foreshortened goddess of some sort depicted on the
ceiling in an enormous composition in the Italian style that he let fall
casually the words, “She will manage it for you quite easily.”

“Every Carlist agent in Bayonne assured me of that,” said Mr. Mills.  “I
would have gone straight to Paris only I was told she had fled here for a
rest; tired, discontented.  Not a very encouraging report.”

“These flights are well known,” muttered Mr. Blunt.  “You shall see her
all right.”

“Yes.  They told me that you . . . ”

I broke in: “You mean to say that you expect a woman to arrange that sort
of thing for you?”

“A trifle, for her,” Mr. Blunt remarked indifferently.  “At that sort of
thing women are best.  They have less scruples.”

“More audacity,” interjected Mr. Mills almost in a whisper.

Mr. Blunt kept quiet for a moment, then: “You see,” he addressed me in a
most refined tone, “a mere man may suddenly find himself being kicked
down the stairs.”

I don’t know why I should have felt shocked by that statement.  It could
not be because it was untrue.  The other did not give me time to offer
any remark.  He inquired with extreme politeness what did I know of South
American republics?  I confessed that I knew very little of them.
Wandering about the Gulf of Mexico I had a look-in here and there; and
amongst others I had a few days in Haiti which was of course unique,
being a negro republic.  On this Captain Blunt began to talk of negroes
at large.  He talked of them with knowledge, intelligence, and a sort of
contemptuous affection.  He generalized, he particularized about the
blacks; he told anecdotes.  I was interested, a little incredulous, and
considerably surprised.  What could this man with such a boulevardier
exterior that he looked positively like, an exile in a provincial town,
and with his drawing-room manner—what could he know of negroes?

Mills, sitting silent with his air of watchful intelligence, seemed to
read my thoughts, waved his pipe slightly and explained: “The Captain is
from South Carolina.”

“Oh,” I murmured, and then after the slightest of pauses I heard the
second of Mr. J. K. Blunt’s declarations.

“Yes,” he said.  “_Je suis Américain_, _catholique et gentil-homme_,” in
a tone contrasting so strongly with the smile, which, as it were,
underlined the uttered words, that I was at a loss whether to return the
smile in kind or acknowledge the words with a grave little bow.  Of
course I did neither and there fell on us an odd, equivocal silence.  It
marked our final abandonment of the French language.  I was the one to
speak first, proposing that my companions should sup with me, not across
the way, which would be riotous with more than one “infernal” supper, but
in another much more select establishment in a side street away from the
Cannebière.  It flattered my vanity a little to be able to say that I had
a corner table always reserved in the Salon des Palmiers, otherwise Salon
Blanc, where the atmosphere was legitimist and extremely decorous
besides—even in Carnival time.  “Nine tenths of the people there,” I
said, “would be of your political opinions, if that’s an inducement.
Come along.  Let’s be festive,” I encouraged them.

I didn’t feel particularly festive.  What I wanted was to remain in my
company and break an inexplicable feeling of constraint of which I was
aware.  Mills looked at me steadily with a faint, kind smile.

“No,” said Blunt.  “Why should we go there?  They will be only turning us
out in the small hours, to go home and face insomnia.  Can you imagine
anything more disgusting?”

He was smiling all the time, but his deep-set eyes did not lend
themselves to the expression of whimsical politeness which he tried to
achieve.  He had another suggestion to offer.  Why shouldn’t we adjourn
to his rooms?  He had there materials for a dish of his own invention for
which he was famous all along the line of the Royal Cavalry outposts, and
he would cook it for us.  There were also a few bottles of some white
wine, quite possible, which we could drink out of Venetian cut-glass
goblets.  A _bivouac_ feast, in fact.  And he wouldn’t turn us out in the
small hours.  Not he.  He couldn’t sleep.

Need I say I was fascinated by the idea?  Well, yes.  But somehow I
hesitated and looked towards Mills, so much my senior.  He got up without
a word.  This was decisive; for no obscure premonition, and of something
indefinite at that, could stand against the example of his tranquil
personality.



