CHAPTER III


On our return from that expedition we came gliding into the old harbour
so late that Dominic and I, making for the café kept by Madame Léonore,
found it empty of customers, except for two rather sinister fellows
playing cards together at a corner table near the door.  The first thing
done by Madame Léonore was to put her hands on Dominic’s shoulders and
look at arm’s length into the eyes of that man of audacious deeds and
wild stratagems who smiled straight at her from under his heavy and, at
that time, uncurled moustaches.

Indeed we didn’t present a neat appearance, our faces unshaven, with the
traces of dried salt sprays on our smarting skins and the sleeplessness
of full forty hours filming our eyes.  At least it was so with me who saw
as through a mist Madame Léonore moving with her mature nonchalant grace,
setting before us wine and glasses with a faint swish of her ample black
skirt.  Under the elaborate structure of black hair her jet-black eyes
sparkled like good-humoured stars and even I could see that she was
tremendously excited at having this lawless wanderer Dominic within her
reach and as it were in her power.  Presently she sat down by us, touched
lightly Dominic’s curly head silvered on the temples (she couldn’t really
help it), gazed at me for a while with a quizzical smile, observed that I
looked very tired, and asked Dominic whether for all that I was likely to
sleep soundly to-night.

“I don’t know,” said Dominic, “He’s young.  And there is always the
chance of dreams.”

“What do you men dream of in those little barques of yours tossing for
months on the water?”

“Mostly of nothing,” said Dominic.  “But it has happened to me to dream
of furious fights.”

“And of furious loves, too, no doubt,” she caught him up in a mocking
voice.

“No, that’s for the waking hours,” Dominic drawled, basking sleepily with
his head between his hands in her ardent gaze.  “The waking hours are
longer.”

“They must be, at sea,” she said, never taking her eyes off him.  “But I
suppose you do talk of your loves sometimes.”

“You may be sure, Madame Léonore,” I interjected, noticing the hoarseness
of my voice, “that you at any rate are talked about a lot at sea.”

“I am not so sure of that now.  There is that strange lady from the Prado
that you took him to see, Signorino.  She went to his head like a glass
of wine into a tender youngster’s.  He is such a child, and I suppose
that I am another.  Shame to confess it, the other morning I got a friend
to look after the café for a couple of hours, wrapped up my head, and
walked out there to the other end of the town. . . . Look at these two
sitting up!  And I thought they were so sleepy and tired, the poor
fellows!”

She kept our curiosity in suspense for a moment.

“Well, I have seen your marvel, Dominic,” she continued in a calm voice.
“She came flying out of the gate on horseback and it would have been all
I would have seen of her if—and this is for you, Signorino—if she hadn’t
pulled up in the main alley to wait for a very good-looking cavalier.  He
had his moustaches so, and his teeth were very white when he smiled at
her.  But his eyes are too deep in his head for my taste.  I didn’t like
it.  It reminded me of a certain very severe priest who used to come to
our village when I was young; younger even than your marvel, Dominic.”

“It was no priest in disguise, Madame Léonore,” I said, amused by her
expression of disgust.  “That’s an American.”

“Ah!  _Un Americano_!  Well, never mind him.  It was her that I went to
see.”

“What!  Walked to the other end of the town to see Doña Rita!”  Dominic
addressed her in a low bantering tone.  “Why, you were always telling me
you couldn’t walk further than the end of the quay to save your life—or
even mine, you said.”

“Well, I did; and I walked back again and between the two walks I had a
good look.  And you may be sure—that will surprise you both—that on the
way back—oh, Santa Madre, wasn’t it a long way, too—I wasn’t thinking of
any man at sea or on shore in that connection.”

“No.  And you were not thinking of yourself, either, I suppose,” I said.
Speaking was a matter of great effort for me, whether I was too tired or
too sleepy, I can’t tell.  “No, you were not thinking of yourself.  You
were thinking of a woman, though.”

“_Si_.  As much a woman as any of us that ever breathed in the world.
Yes, of her!  Of that very one!  You see, we women are not like you men,
indifferent to each other unless by some exception.  Men say we are
always against one another but that’s only men’s conceit.  What can she
be to me?  I am not afraid of the big child here,” and she tapped
Dominic’s forearm on which he rested his head with a fascinated stare.
“With us two it is for life and death, and I am rather pleased that there
is something yet in him that can catch fire on occasion.  I would have
thought less of him if he hadn’t been able to get out of hand a little,
for something really fine.  As for you, Signorino,” she turned on me with
an unexpected and sarcastic sally, “I am not in love with you yet.”  She
changed her tone from sarcasm to a soft and even dreamy note.  “A head
like a gem,” went on that woman born in some by-street of Rome, and a
plaything for years of God knows what obscure fates.  “Yes, Dominic!
_Antica_.  I haven’t been haunted by a face since—since I was sixteen
years old.  It was the face of a young cavalier in the street.  He was on
horseback, too.  He never looked at me, I never saw him again, and I
loved him for—for days and days and days.  That was the sort of face he
had.  And her face is of the same sort.  She had a man’s hat, too, on her
head.  So high!”

“A man’s hat on her head,” remarked with profound displeasure Dominic, to
whom this wonder, at least, of all the wonders of the earth, was
apparently unknown.

“_Si_.  And her face has haunted me.  Not so long as that other but more
touchingly because I am no longer sixteen and this is a woman.  Yes, I
did think of her, I myself was once that age and I, too, had a face of my
own to show to the world, though not so superb.  And I, too, didn’t know
why I had come into the world any more than she does.”

“And now you know,” Dominic growled softly, with his head still between
his hands.

She looked at him for a long time, opened her lips but in the end only
sighed lightly.

“And what do you know of her, you who have seen her so well as to be
haunted by her face?” I asked.

I wouldn’t have been surprised if she had answered me with another sigh.
For she seemed only to be thinking of herself and looked not in my
direction.  But suddenly she roused up.

“Of her?” she repeated in a louder voice.  “Why should I talk of another
woman?  And then she is a great lady.”

At this I could not repress a smile which she detected at once.

“Isn’t she?  Well, no, perhaps she isn’t; but you may be sure of one
thing, that she is both flesh and shadow more than any one that I have
seen.  Keep that well in your mind: She is for no man!  She would be
vanishing out of their hands like water that cannot be held.”

I caught my breath.  “Inconstant,” I whispered.

“I don’t say that.  Maybe too proud, too wilful, too full of pity.
Signorino, you don’t know much about women.  And you may learn something
yet or you may not; but what you learn from her you will never forget.”

“Not to be held,” I murmured; and she whom the quayside called Madame
Léonore closed her outstretched hand before my face and opened it at once
to show its emptiness in illustration of her expressed opinion.  Dominic
never moved.

I wished good-night to these two and left the café for the fresh air and
the dark spaciousness of the quays augmented by all the width of the old
Port where between the trails of light the shadows of heavy hulls
appeared very black, merging their outlines in a great confusion.  I left
behind me the end of the Cannebière, a wide vista of tall houses and
much-lighted pavements losing itself in the distance with an extinction
of both shapes and lights.  I slunk past it with only a side glance and
sought the dimness of quiet streets away from the centre of the usual
night gaieties of the town.  The dress I wore was just that of a sailor
come ashore from some coaster, a thick blue woollen shirt or rather a
sort of jumper with a knitted cap like a tam-o’-shanter worn very much on
one side and with a red tuft of wool in the centre.  This was even the
reason why I had lingered so long in the café.  I didn’t want to be
recognized in the streets in that costume and still less to be seen
entering the house in the street of the Consuls.  At that hour when the
performances were over and all the sensible citizens in their beds I
didn’t hesitate to cross the Place of the Opera.  It was dark, the
audience had already dispersed.  The rare passers-by I met hurrying on
their last affairs of the day paid no attention to me at all.  The street
of the Consuls I expected to find empty, as usual at that time of the
night.  But as I turned a corner into it I overtook three people who must
have belonged to the locality.  To me, somehow, they appeared strange.
Two girls in dark cloaks walked ahead of a tall man in a top hat.  I
slowed down, not wishing to pass them by, the more so that the door of
the house was only a few yards distant.  But to my intense surprise those
people stopped at it and the man in the top hat, producing a latchkey,
let his two companions through, followed them, and with a heavy slam cut
himself off from my astonished self and the rest of mankind.

In the stupid way people have I stood and meditated on the sight, before
it occurred to me that this was the most useless thing to do.  After
waiting a little longer to let the others get away from the hall I
entered in my turn.  The small gas-jet seemed not to have been touched
ever since that distant night when Mills and I trod the black-and-white
marble hall for the first time on the heels of Captain Blunt—who lived by
his sword.  And in the dimness and solitude which kept no more trace of
the three strangers than if they had been the merest ghosts I seemed to
hear the ghostly murmur, “_Américain_, _Catholique et gentilhomme_.
_Amér. . . _”  Unseen by human eye I ran up the flight of steps swiftly
and on the first floor stepped into my sitting-room of which the door was
open . . . “_et gentilhomme_.”  I tugged at the bell pull and somewhere
down below a bell rang as unexpected for Therese as a call from a ghost.

I had no notion whether Therese could hear me.  I seemed to remember that
she slept in any bed that happened to be vacant.  For all I knew she
might have been asleep in mine.  As I had no matches on me I waited for a
while in the dark.  The house was perfectly still.  Suddenly without the
slightest preliminary sound light fell into the room and Therese stood in
the open door with a candlestick in her hand.

She had on her peasant brown skirt.  The rest of her was concealed in a
black shawl which covered her head, her shoulders, arms, and elbows
completely, down to her waist.  The hand holding the candle protruded
from that envelope which the other invisible hand clasped together under
her very chin.  And her face looked like a face in a painting.  She said
at once:

“You startled me, my young Monsieur.”

She addressed me most frequently in that way as though she liked the very
word “young.”  Her manner was certainly peasant-like with a sort of
plaint in the voice, while the face was that of a serving Sister in some
small and rustic convent.

“I meant to do it,” I said.  “I am a very bad person.”

“The young are always full of fun,” she said as if she were gloating over
the idea.  “It is very pleasant.”

“But you are very brave,” I chaffed her, “for you didn’t expect a ring,
and after all it might have been the devil who pulled the bell.”

“It might have been.  But a poor girl like me is not afraid of the devil.
I have a pure heart.  I have been to confession last evening.  No.  But
it might have been an assassin that pulled the bell ready to kill a poor
harmless woman.  This is a very lonely street.  What could prevent you to
kill me now and then walk out again free as air?”

While she was talking like this she had lighted the gas and with the last
words she glided through the bedroom door leaving me thunderstruck at the
unexpected character of her thoughts.

I couldn’t know that there had been during my absence a case of atrocious
murder which had affected the imagination of the whole town; and though
Therese did not read the papers (which she imagined to be full of
impieties and immoralities invented by godless men) yet if she spoke at
all with her kind, which she must have done at least in shops, she could
not have helped hearing of it.  It seems that for some days people could
talk of nothing else.  She returned gliding from the bedroom hermetically
sealed in her black shawl just as she had gone in, with the protruding
hand holding the lighted candle and relieved my perplexity as to her
morbid turn of mind by telling me something of the murder story in a
strange tone of indifference even while referring to its most horrible
features.  “That’s what carnal sin (_pêché de chair_) leads to,” she
commented severely and passed her tongue over her thin lips.  “And then
the devil furnishes the occasion.”

“I can’t imagine the devil inciting me to murder you, Therese,” I said,
“and I didn’t like that ready way you took me for an example, as it were.
I suppose pretty near every lodger might be a potential murderer, but I
expected to be made an exception.”

With the candle held a little below her face, with that face of one tone
and without relief she looked more than ever as though she had come out
of an old, cracked, smoky painting, the subject of which was altogether
beyond human conception.  And she only compressed her lips.

“All right,” I said, making myself comfortable on a sofa after pulling
off my boots.  “I suppose any one is liable to commit murder all of a
sudden.  Well, have you got many murderers in the house?”

“Yes,” she said, “it’s pretty good.  Upstairs and downstairs,” she
sighed.  “God sees to it.”

“And by the by, who is that grey-headed murderer in a tall hat whom I saw
shepherding two girls into this house?”

She put on a candid air in which one could detect a little of her peasant
cunning.

“Oh, yes.  They are two dancing girls at the Opera, sisters, as different
from each other as I and our poor Rita.  But they are both virtuous and
that gentleman, their father, is very severe with them.  Very severe
indeed, poor motherless things.  And it seems to be such a sinful
occupation.”

“I bet you make them pay a big rent, Therese.  With an occupation like
that . . .”

She looked at me with eyes of invincible innocence and began to glide
towards the door, so smoothly that the flame of the candle hardly swayed.
“Good-night,” she murmured.

“Good-night, Mademoiselle.”

Then in the very doorway she turned right round as a marionette would
turn.

“Oh, you ought to know, my dear young Monsieur, that Mr. Blunt, the dear
handsome man, has arrived from Navarre three days ago or more.  Oh,” she
added with a priceless air of compunction, “he is such a charming
gentleman.”

And the door shut after her.



