CHAPTER VIII.

P. 211, § 113. Self-relation--(sich) auf sich beziehen.

P. 213, § 115. The 'laws of thought' is the magniloquent title given
in the Formal Logic since Kant's day to the principles or maxims
(_principia_, Grundsätze) which Kant himself described as 'general and
formal criteria of truth.' They include the so-called principle of
contradiction, with its developments, the principle of identity and
excluded middle: to which, with a desire for completeness, eclectic
logicians have added the Leibnizian principle of the reason. Hegel
has probably an eye to Krug and Fries in some of his remarks. The
three laws may be compared and contrasted with the three principles,
--homogeneity, specification, and continuity of forms, in Kant's
_Kritik d. r. Vern._ p. 686.

P. 217, § 117. Leibniz, _Nouveaux Essais,_ Liv. ii. ch. 27, § 3 (ed.
Erdmann, p. 273: cf. fourth Letter to Clarke). _Il n'y a point deux
individus indiscernables. Un gentilhomme d'esprit de mes amis, en
parlant avec moi en présence de Madame l'Electrice dans le jardin de
Herrenhausen, crut qu'il trouverait bien deux feuilles entièrement
semblables. Madame l'Electrice l'en défia, et il courut longtems en
vain pour en chercher._

The principle of individuation or indiscernibility is: 'If two
individuals were perfectly alike and equal and, in a word,
indistinguishable by themselves, there would be no principle of
individuation: (Leibniz, ed. Erdm. p. 277) _Poser deux choses
indiscernables est poser la même chose sous deux noms_ (p. 756).
_Principium individuationis idem est quod absolutae specificationis quâ
res ita sit determinata, ut ab aliis omnibus distingui possit._

P. 221, § 119. Polarity. Schelling, ii. 489. 'The law of Polarity is a
universal law of nature'; cf. ii. 459: 'It is a first principle of a
philosophic theory of nature to have a view (in the whole of nature),
on polarity and dualism.' But he adds (476), 'It is time to define
more accurately the concept of polarity.' So Oken, _Naturphilosophie_:
§76: 'A force consisting of two principles is called Polarity.' § 77:
'Polarity is the first force which makes its appearance in the world.'
§ 81: 'The original movement is a result of the original polarity.'

P. 223, § 119. Cf. Fichte, ii. 53. 'To everything but this the
logically trained thinker can rise. He is on his guard against
contradiction. But, in that case, how about the possibility of the
maxim of his own logic that we can think no contradiction. In some way
he must have got hold of contradiction and thought it, or he could
make no communications about it. Had such people only once regularly
asked themselves how they came to think the _merely_ possible or
contingent (the not-necessary), and how they actually do so! Evidently
they here leap through a not-being, not-thinking, &c, into the utterly
unmediated, self-initiating, free,--into beënt non-being,--in short,
the above contradiction, as it was laid down. With consistent thinkers
the result of this incapacity is nothing but the utter abolition of
freedom,--the most absolute fatalism and Spinozism.

P. 227, §121. Leibniz (ed. Erdmann, p. 515). 'The principle of _la
raison déterminante_ is that nothing ever occurs without there being a
cause for it, or at least a determinant reason, _i.e._ something which
may serve to render a reason _à priori_ why that is existent rather
than in any other way. This great principle holds good in all events.'
Cf. p. 707. 'The principle of "sufficient reason" is that in virtue
of which we consider that no fact could be found true or consistent,
no enunciation truthful, without there being a sufficient reason why
it is so and not otherwise.... When a truth is necessary, we can find
the reason of it by analysis, resolving it into simpler ideas and
truths, until we come to primitive ideas.... But the sufficient reason
ought also to be found in contingent truths or truths of fact, _i.e._
in the series of things spread through the universe of creatures,
or the resolution into particular reasons might go into a limitless
detail: ... and as all this detail embraces only other antecedent, or
more detailed contingencies, ... the sufficient or final (_dernière_)
reason must be outside the succession or series of this detail of
contingencies, however infinite it might be. And it is thus that the
final reason of things must be in a "necessary substance," in which the
detail of the changes exists only _eminenter,_ as in the source,--and
it is what we call God.' _(Monadology_ §§ 32-38.)

Hence the supremacy of final causes. Thus _Opp._ ed. Erdmann, p. 678:
_Ita fit ut efficientes causae pendeant a finalibus, et spiritualia
sint natura priora materialibus._ Accordingly he urges, p. 155, that
final cause has not merely a moral and religious value in ethics and
theology, but is useful even in physics for the detection of deep-laid
truths. Cf. p. 106: _C'est sanctifier la Philosophie que de faire
couler ses ruisseaux de la fontaine des attributs de Dieu. Bien loin
d'exclure les causes finales et la considération d'un être agissant
avec sagesse, c'est de là qu'il faut tout déduire en Physique._ Cf.
also _Principes de la Nature_ (Leibn. ed. Erdm. p. 716): 'It is
surprising that by the sole consideration of efficient causes or
of matter, we could not render a reason for those laws of movement
discovered in our time. _Il y faut recourir aux causes finales_.'

P. 228, § 121 Socrates. The antitheses between Socrates and the
Sophists belongs in the main to the Platonic dialogues,--not co the
historical Socrates. It is the literary form in which the philosophy of
Plato works out its development through the criticism of contemporary
opinions and doctrines. And even in Plato's writings the antagonism is
very unlike what later interpretations have made out of it.

P. 231, § 124. Thing by itself (thing in itself) the Ding:an:sich.

P. 235, § 126. Cf. _Encycl._ § 334 (_Werke,_ viii. 1. p. 411). 'In
empirical chemistry the chief object is the _particularity_ of the
matters and products, which are grouped by superficial abstract
features which make impossible any system in the special detail. In
these lists, metals, oxygen, hydrogen, &c.--metalloids, sulphur,
phosphorus appear side by side as _simple_ chemical bodies on the same
level. The great physical variety of these bodies must of itself create
a prepossession against such coordination; and their chemical origin,
the process from which they issue, is clearly no less various. But
in an equally chaotic way, more abstract and more real processes are
put on the same level. If all this is to get scientific form, every
product ought to be determined according to the grade of the concrete
and completely developed process from which it essentially issues, and
which gives it its peculiar significance; and for that purpose it is
not less essential to distinguish grades in abstractness or reality
of the process. Animal and vegetable substances in any case belong
to a quite other order: so little can their nature be understood from
the chemical process, that they are rather destroyed in it, and only
the way of their death is apprehended. These substances, however,
ought above all to serve to counter-act the metaphysic predominant
in chemistry as in physics,--the ideas or rather wild fancies of the
_unalterability of matters_ under all circumstances, as well as the
categories of the _composition_ and the _consistence_ of bodies from
such matters. We see it generally admitted that chemical matters lose
in combination the _properties_ which they show in separation: and yet
we find the idea prevailing that they are the same things _without_ the
properties as they are _with_ them,--so that as things _with_ these
properties they are not results of the process.'--Cf. _Werke,_ vii. a.
372: 'Air does not consist of oxygen and nitrogen: but these are the
forms under which air is put,' cf. _ib._403.

P. 241, § 131. Fichte's _Sonnenklarer Bericht_ appeared in 1801.

P. 247, § 136. Herder's _Gott: Gespräche über Spinoza's System,_ 1787,
2nd ed. 1800. 'God is, in the highest and unique sense of the word,
Force, _i.e._ the primal force of all forces, the soul of all souls'
(p. 63), 'All that we call matter, therefore, is more or less animate:
it is a realm of efficient forces. One force predominates: otherwise
there were no _one,_ no whole' (p. 207). 'The supreme being (Daseyn)
could give its creatures nothing higher than being. (_Theophron._) But,
my friend, being and being, however simple in the concept, are in their
estate very different; and what do you suppose, Philolaus, marks its
grades and differences? (_Phil._) Nothing but forces. In God himself
we found no higher conception; but all his forces were only one. The
supreme force could not be other than supreme goodness and wisdom,
ever-living, ever-active. (_Theoph._) Now you yourself see, Philolaus,
that the supreme, or rather the All (for God is not a supreme unit in
a scale of beings like himself), could not reveal himself otherwise
than in the universe as active. In him nothing could slumber, and what
he expressed was himself. He is before everything, and everything
subsists in him: the whole world an expression, an appearance of his
ever-living, ever-acting forces' (p. 200).

'It was the mistake of Spinoza,' says Herder, 'to be unduly influenced
by the Cartesian phraseology. Had he chosen the conception of force and
effect, everything would have gone easier, and his system become much
more distinct and coherent. 'Had he developed the conception of power,
and the conception of matter, he must in conformity with his system
necessarily have come to the conception of forces, which work as well
in matter as in organs of thinking: he would in that case have regarded
power and thought as forces, _e.g._ as one.' (Cf. H. Spencer, 'Force,
the Ultimate of Ultimates.' First Princ. p 169)

According to Rosenkranz (_Leben Hegels,_ p. 223) there exists in
manuscript a criticism by Hegel on the second edition of Herder's
_God._ Herder's Dialogue belongs to the controversy aroused by Jacobi's
letters on Spinoza.

P. 250, § 136. Newton. Leibniz charges him with the view that God needs
from time to time _remonter sa montre,_ otherwise it would cease going:
that his machine requires to be cleaned (_décrasser_) by extraordinary
aid' (ed. Erdm. p. 746).

P. 252, § 140. The verses quoted occur in Goethe's _Werke_ ii. 376,
under the heading Allerdings. Originally the first four lines appeared
in Haller's poem _Die menschlichen Tugenden_ thus--

    Ins Innre der Natur bringt sein erschaffner Geist:
    Zu glücklich, wenn sie noch die äußre Schale weist!

    (To nature's heart there penetrates no mere created mind:
    Too happy if she but display the outside of her rind.)

Hegel--reading weizt for weist--takes the second line as

    Too happy, if he can but know the outside of her rind.

Goethe's attack upon a vulgar misuse of the lines belongs to his
dispute with the scientists. His verses appeared in 1820 as _Heiteres
Reimstück_ at the end of Heft 3 _zur Morphologie,_--of which the
closing section is entitled _Freundlicher Zuruf_ (_Werke_ xxvii. 161),
as follows:--

    "Ins Innre der Natur,"
    O du Philister!--
    "Dringt kein erschaffner Geist."
    .    .    .    .    .    .
    "Glückselig! wem sie nur
    Die äußre Schale weis't."
    Das hör' ich sechzig Jahre wiederholen,
    Ich fluche drauf, aber verstohlen:
    Sage mir taufend tausendmale:
    Alles giebt sie reichlich und gern;
    Natur hat weder Stern
    Noch Schale,
    Alles ist sie mit einem Male.

[The last seven lines may be thus paraphrased in continuation:

    I swear--of course but to myself--as rings within my ears
    That same old warning o'er and o'er again for sixty years,
    And thus a thousand thousand times I answer in my mind:
    --With gladsome and ungrudging hand metes nature from her store:
    She keeps not back the core,
    Nor separates the rind,
    But all in each both rind and core has evermore combined.]

P. 254, § 140. Plato and Aristotle: cf. Plato, _Phaedrus,_ 247 A
(φθόνoς γὰρ ξω θείον χόρoυ ἴσταται); _Timaeus,_ 29 E; and Aristotle,
_Metaph._ i. 2. 22.

P. 256, § 140. Goethe: _Sämmtl. Werke,_ iii. 203 (_Maxime und
Reflexionen_). Gegen große Vorzüge eines Andern giebt es kein
Rettungsmittel als die Liebe. Cf. Schiller to Goethe, 2 July, 1796.
'How vividly I have felt on this occasion ... that against surpassing
merit nothing but Love gives liberty' (daß es dem Vortrefflichen
gegenüber seine Freiheit giebt als die Liebe).

'Pragmatic.' This word, denoting a meddlesome busybody in older English
and sometimes made a vague term of abuse, has been in the present
century used in English as it is here employed in German.

According to Polybius, ix. I. 2, the πραγματικὸς τρόπος τῆς ἱστορίας
is that which has a directly utilitarian aim. So Kant, _Foundation of
Metaph. of Ethic (Werke,_ viii. 41, note): 'A history is pragmatically
composed when it renders prudent, _i.e._ instructs the world how it may
secure its advantage better or at least as well as the ages preceding.'
Schelling (v. 308) quotes in illustration of pragmatic history-writing
the words of Faust to Wagner (Goethe, xi. 26):

    Was ihr den Geist der Zeiten heisst,
    Das ist im Grund der herren eigner Geist,,
    In dem die Zeiten sich bespiegeln.

Cf. also Hegel, _Werke,_ ix. 8. 'A second kind of reflectional history
is the pragmatic. When we have to do with the past and are engaged
with a distant world, the mind sees rising before it a present, which
it has from its own action as a reward for its trouble. The events are
different; but their central and universal fact, their structural
plan is identical. This abolishes the past and makes the event
present. Pragmatic reflections, however abstract they be, are thus in
reality the present, and vivify the tales of the past with the life of
to-day.--Here too a word should specially be given to the moralising
and the moral instructions to be gained through history,--for which it
was often studied.... Rulers, statesmen, nations, are especially bidden
learn from the experience of history. But what experience and history
teach is that nations and governments never have learned anything from
history, or acted upon teaching which could have been drawn from it.'

Cf. Froude: _Divorce of Catherine,_ p. 2. 'The student (of history)
looks for an explanation (of political conduct) in elements which he
thinks he understands--in pride, ambition, fear, avarice, jealousy, or
sensuality.'

P. 257, § 141. Cf. Goethe, xxiii, 298. 'What is the outside of an
organic nature but the ever-varied phenomenon of the inside? This
outside, this surface is so exactly adapted to a varied, complex,
delicate, inward structure that it thus itself becomes an inside:
both aspects, the outside and the inside, standing in most direct
correlation alike in the quietest existence and in the most violent
movement.'

P. 260, § 143. Kant, _Kritik der reinen Vernunft,_ 2nd ed. p. 266.

P. 269, § 147. Cf. Schelling, _Werke,_ v. 290 (cf. iii. 603). 'There
are three periods of history, that of nature, of destiny, and of
providence. These three ideas express the same identity, but in a
different way. Destiny too is providence, but recognised in the real,
as providence, is also destiny, but beheld (angeschaut) in the ideal.'

P. 275, § 151. On the relation between Spinoza and Leibniz cf. Hegel,
_Werke,_ iv. 187-193. It would be a mistake, however, to represent
Leibniz as mainly engaged in a work of conscious antagonism to Spinoza.

P. 277, § 153. Jacobi.--Jacobi (like Schopenhauer) insists specially on
the distinction between grounds (Gründe)--which are formal, logical,
and verbal, and causes (Ursachen)--which carry us into reality and
life and nature. To transform the mere _Because_ into the _cause_
we must (he says) pass from logic and the analytical understanding
to experience and the inner life. Instead of the timelessness of
simultaneity which characterises the logical relation cf ground and
consequent, the nexus of cause and effect introduces the element
of time,--thereby acquiring reality (Jacobi, _Werke,_ iii. 452).
The conception of Cause--meaningless as a mere category of abstract
thought--gets reality as a factor in experience, ein Erfahrungsbegriff,
and is immediately given to us in the consciousness of our own
causality (Jacobi, _Werke,_ iv. 145-158). Cf. Kant, _Kritik der reinen
Vern._ p. 116.

P. 283, § 158. The _Amor intellectualis Dei_ (Spinoza, _Eth._ v. 32)
is described as a consequence of the third grade of cognition, viz.
the _scientia intuitiva_ which 'proceeds from an adequate idea of the
formal essence of certain attributes of God to the adequate cognition
of the essence of things (ii. 40, Schol. 2). From it arises (v.
27), the highest possible _acquiescentia mentis,_ in which the mind
contemplates all things _sub specie aeternitatis_ (v. 29), knows itself
to be in God and sees itself and all things in their divine essence.
But this intellectual love of mind towards God is part of the infinite
love wherewith God loves himself (v. 36) 'From these things we clearly
understand in what our salvation or blessedness or liberty consists: to
wit, in the constant and eternal love towards God, or in the love of
God towards men' (Schol. to v. 36).


