CHAPTER IV.

P. 80, § 38. The verses (forming part of the advice which
Mephistopheles, personating Faust, gives to the recently-arrived
pupil) stand in the original in a different order: beginning "Dann hat
er die Theile in seiner Hand," &c. The meaning of these and the two
preceding lines is somewhat as follows, in versification even laxer
than Goethe's:--

    If you want to describe life and gather its meaning,
    To drive out its spirit most be your beginning,
    Then though fast in your hand lie the parts one by one
    The spirit that linked them, alas! is gone.
    And 'Nature's Laboratory' is only a name
    That the chemist bestows on't to hide his own shame.

One may compare _Wilhelm Meister's Wanderjahre,_ iii. 3, where it is
remarked, in reference to some anatomical exercises: 'You will learn
ere long that building-up is more instructive than tearing-down,
combining more than separating, animating the dead more than killing
again what was killed already.... Combining means more than separating:
reconstructing more than onlooking.' The first part of _Faust_ appeared
1808: the _Wanderjahre,_ 1828-9.

P. 82, § 39. The article on the 'Relation of scepticism to philosophy,
an exposition of its various modifications, and comparison of the
latest with the ancient'--in form a review of G. E. Schulze's
_Criticism of Theoretical Philosophy_'--was republished in vol. xvi. of
Hegel's _Werke_ (vol. i. of the _Vermischte Schriften_).

P. 87, § 42. In an earlier review of Kant's work (_Werke,_ i. 83) on
Glauben und Wissen (an article in Sendling and Hegel's _Journal_)
Hegel attaches more weight to a factor in the critical theory of
knowledge, here neglected. Kant, he says, has--within the limits
allowed by his psychological terms of thought--'put (in an excellent
way) the _à priori_ of sensibility into the original identity and
multiplicity, and that as transcendental imagination in the "higher
power" of an immersion of unity in multiplicity: whilst Understanding
(Verstand) he makes to consist in the elevation to universality of this
_à priori_ synthetic unity of sensibility,--whereby this identity is
invested with a comparative antithesis to the sensibility: and Reason
(Vernunft) is presented as a still higher power over the preceding
comparative antithesis, without however this universality and infinity
being allowed to go beyond the stereotyped formal pure infinity.
This genuinely rational construction by which, though the bad name
"faculties" is left, there is in truth presented a single identity
of them all, is transformed by Jacobi into a series of faculties,
_resting_ one upon another.'

P. 87, § 42. Fichte: cf. _Werke,_ i. 420: 'I have said before, and
say it here again, that my system is no other than the Kantian. That
means: it contains the same view of facts, but in its method is quite
independent of the Kantian exposition.' 'Kant, up to now, is a closed
book.'--i. 442. There are two ways of critical idealism. 'Either' (as
Fichte) 'it actually deduces from the fundamental laws of intelligence,
that system of necessary modes of action, and with it, at the same
time, the objective conceptions thus arising, and thus lets the whole
compass of our conceptions gradually arise under the eyes of the reader
or hearer; or' (like Kant and his unprogressive disciples) 'it gets
hold of these laws from anywhere and anyhow, as they are immediately
applied to objects, therefore on their lowest grade (--on this grade
they are called _categories),_ and then asseverates that it is by
these that objects are determined and arranged.' And i. 478: 'I know
that the categories which Kant laid down are in no way _proved_ by
him to be conditions of self-consciousness, but only said to be so:
I know that space and time and what in the original consciousness is
inseparable from them and fills them both, are still less deduced as
such conditions, for of them it is not even said expressly--as of the
categories--that they are so, but only inferentially. But I believe
quite as surely that I know that Kant had the thought of such a system:
that everything he actually propounds are fragments and results of this
system; and that his statements have meaning and coherence only on this
presupposition.' Cf. viii. 362.

P. 89, § 42. Transcendental unity of self-consciousness. Kant's _Kritik
der reinen Vernunft,_ § 16: 'The _I think_ must be able to accompany
all my ideas.... This idea is an act of spontaneity. ... I name it
pure apperception ... or original apperception ... because it is that
self-consciousness which can be accompanied by none further. The unity
of it I also call the transcendental unity of self-consciousness, in
order to denote the possibility of cognition _à priori_ from it.'

P. 92, § 44. _Caput mortuum:_ a term of the Alchemists to denote the
non-volatile precipitate left in the retort after the spirit had been
extracted: the fixed or dead remains, 'quando spiritus animam sursum
vexit.'

P. 92, § 45. Reason and Understanding. In the Wolfian School (_e.g._
in Baumgarten's _Metaphysik,_ § 468) the term intellect (Verstand)
is used of the general faculty of higher cognition, while _ratio_
(Vernunft) specially denotes the power of seeing distinctly the
connexions of things. So Wolff (_Vernünftige Gedanken von Gott, &c._ §
277) defines Verstand as 'the faculty of distinctly representing the
possible,' and Vernunft (§ 368) as 'the faculty of seeing into the
connexion of truths.' It is on this use of _Reason_ as the faculty of
inference that Kant's use of the term is founded: though it soon widely
departs from its origin. For upon the 'formal' use of reason as the
faculty of syllogising, Kant superinduces a transcendental use as a
'faculty of _principles_,' while the understanding is only 'a faculty
of _rules.'_ 'Reason,' in other words, 'itself begets conceptions,'
and 'maxims, which it borrows neither from the senses nor from the
understanding.' (_Kritik d. r. Vern., Dialektik,_ Einleit. ii. A.) And
the essential aim of Reason is to give unity to the various cognitions
of understanding. While the unity given by understanding is 'unity of
a possible experience,' that sought by reason is the discovery of an
unconditioned which will complete the unity of the former (_Dial._
Einleit. iv), or of 'the totality of the conditions to a given
conditioned.' (_Dial,_ vii.)

It is this distinction of the terms which is dominant in Fichte and
Hegel, where Verstand is the more practical intellect which seeks
definite and restricted results and knowledges, while Vernunft is
a deeper and higher power which aims at completeness. In Goethe's
more reflective prose we see illustrations of this usage: _e.g.
Wilh. Meister's Wanderjahre,_ i. it is said to be the object of
the 'reasonable' man 'das entgegengesetzte zu überschauen und in
Uebereinstimmung zu bringen': or Bk. ii. Reasonable men when they have
devised something verständig to get this or that difficulty out of the
way, &c. Goethe, in his _Sprüche in Prosa_ (896), _Werke,_ iii. 281,
says 'Reason has for its province the thing in process (das Werdende),
understanding the thing completed (das Gewordene): the former does not
trouble itself about the purpose, the latter asks not whence. Reason
takes delight in developing; understanding wishes to keep everything as
it is, so as to use it.' (Similarly in Eckermann's Convers. Feb. 13,
1829.) Cf. Oken, Naturphilosophie, § 2914. Verstand ist Microcosmus,
Vernunft Macrocosmus.

Kant's use of the term Reason, coupled with his special view of
Practical Reason and his use of the term Faith (Glaube), leads on to
the terminology of Jacobi. In earlier writings Jacobi had insisted on
the contrast between the superior authority of feeling and faith (which
are in touch with truth) and the mechanical method of intelligence and
reasoning (Verstand and Vernunft). At a later period however he changed
and fixed the nomenclature of his distinction. What he had first called
Glaube he latterly called Vernunft,--which is in brief a 'sense for
the supersensible'--an intuition giving higher and complete or total
knowledge--an immediate apprehension of the real and the true. As
contrasted with this reasonable faith or feeling, he regards Verstand
as a mere faculty of inference or derivative knowledge, referring one
thing to another by the rule of identity.

This distinction which is substantially reproduced by Coleridge
(though with certain clauses that show traces of Schellingian
influence) has connexions--like so much else in Jacobi--with the
usage of Schopenhauer, 'Nobody,' says Jacobi, 'has ever spoken of an
animal Vernunft: a mere animal Verstand however we all know and speak
of.' (Jacobi's _Werke,_ iii. 8.) Schopenhauer repeats and enforces
the remark. All animals possess, says Schopenhauer, the power of
apprehending causality, of cognising objects: a power of immediate and
intuitive knowledge of real things: this is Verstand. But Vernunft,
which is peculiar to man, is the cognition of _truth_ (not of reality):
it is an abstract judgment with a sufficient reason (_Welt als W._ i. §
6).

One is tempted to connect the modern distinction with an older one
which goes back in its origin to Plato and Aristotle, but takes form in
the Neo-Platonist School, and enters the Latin world through Boëthius.
_Consol. Phil._ iv. 6: _Igitur uti est ad intellectum ratiocinatio,
ad id quod est id quod gignitur, ad aeternitatem tempus,_ and in v.
4 there is a full distinction of _sensus, imaginatio, ratio_ and
_intelligentia_ in ascending order. _Ratio_ is the discursive knowledge
of the idea (_universali consideratione perpendit): intelligentia_
apprehends it at once, and as a simple _forma (pura mentis acie
contuetur)_: [cf. Stob. _Ed._ i. 826-832: Porphyr. _Sentent._15].
Reasoning belongs to the human species, just as intelligence to the
divine alone. Yet it is assumed--in an attempt to explain divine
foreknowledge and defend freedom--that man may in some measure place
himself on the divine standpoint (v. 5).

This contrast between a higher mental faculty (_mens_) and a lower
(_ratio_) which even Aquinas adopts from the interpretation of
Aristotle (_Summa Theol._ i. 79, 9) is the favourite weapon in the
hands of mysticism. After the example of Dionysius Areop., Nicolaus of
Cusa, Reuchlin, and other thinkers of the Renaissance depreciate mere
discursive thought and logical reasoning. It is the inner _mens_--like
a simple ray of light--penetrating by an immediate and indivisible
act to the divine--which gives us access to the supreme science. This
_simplex intelligentia,--_ superior to imagination or reasoning--as
Gerson says, _Consid. de Th._ 10, is sometimes named _mens,_ sometimes
_Spiritus,_ the light of intelligence, the shadow of the angelical
intellect, the divine light. From Scotus Erigena to Nicolas of Cusa
one tradition is handed down: it is taken up by men like Everard Digby
(in his _Theoria Analytica_) and the group of Cambridge Platonists and
by Spinoza in the seventeenth century, and it reappears, profoundly
modified, in the German idealism between 1790 and 1820.

P. 99, § 48. 'Science of Logic'; Hegel's large work on the subject,
published between 1812-16. The discussions on the Antinomies belong
chiefly to the first part of it.

P. 102, § 50. 'Natural Theology,' here to be taken in a narrower sense
than in p. 73, where it is equivalent to Rational Theology in general.
Here it means 'Physico-theology'--the argument from design in nature.

P. 103, § 50. Spinoza--defining God as 'the union of thought with
extension.' This is not verbally accurate; for according to _Ethica,_
i. pr. 11, God, or the substance, consists of infinite attributes,
each of which expresses the eternal and infinite essence. But Spinoza
mentions of 'attributes' only two: _Ethica,_ ii. pr. 1. I Thought is
an attribute of God: pr. 2, Extension is an attribute of God. And he
adds, _Ethica,_ i. pr. 10, Schol. 'All the attributes substance has
were always in it together, nor can one be produced by another.' And
in _Ethica,_ ii. 7. Sch. it is said: 'Thinking substance and extended
substance is one and the same substance which is comprehended now under
this, now under that attribute.'

P. 110, § 54. 'Practical in the true sense of the word.' Cf. Kant,
_Werke,_ Ros. and Sch. i. 581: 'A great misunderstanding, exerting an
injurious influence on scientific methods, prevails with regard to what
should be considered "practical" in such sense as to justify its place
in practical philosophy. Diplomacy and finance, rules of economy no
less than rules of social intercourse, precepts of health and dietetic
of the soul no less than the body, have been classed as practical
philosophy on the mere ground that they all contain a collection of
practical propositions. Hut although such practical propositions
differ in mode of statement from the theoretical propositions which
have for import the possibility of things and the exposition of their
nature, they have the same content. "Practical," properly so called,
are only those propositions which relate to _Liberty_ under laws. All
others whatever are nothing but the theory of what pertains to the
_nature_ of things--only that theory is brought to bear on the way in
which the things may be produced by us in conformity with a principle;
_i.e._ the possibility of the things is presented as the result of
a voluntary action which itself too may be counted among physical
causes.' And Kant, _Werke,_ iv. 10. 'Hence a sum of practical precepts
given by philosophy does not form a special part of it (co-ordinate
with the theoretical) merely because they are practical. Practical
they might be, even though their principle were wholly derived from
the theoretical knowledge of nature,--as _technico-practical_ rules.
They are practical in the true sense, when and because their principle
is not borrowed from the nature-conception (which is always sensuously
conditioned) and rests therefore on the supersensible, which the
conception of liberty alone makes knowable by formal laws. They are
therefore ethico-practical, _i.e._ not merely _precepts and rules_ with
this or that intention, but laws without antecedent reference to ends
and intentions.'

P. 111, § 54. Eudaemonism. But there is Eudaemonism and Eudaemonism;
as Cf. Hegel, _Werke,_ i. 8. 4 The time had come when the infinite
longing away beyond the body and the world had reconciled itself
with the reality of existence. Yet the reality which the soul was
reconciled to--the objective which the subjectivity recognised--was
actually only empirical existence, common world and actuality.... And
though the reconciliation was in its heart and ground sure and fast,
it still needed an objective form for this ground: the very necessity
of nature made the blind certitude of immersion in the reality of
empirical existence seek to provide itself with a justification and a
good conscience. This reconciliation for consciousness was found in the
Happiness-doctrine: the fixed point it started from being the empirical
subject, and what it was reconciled to, the vulgar actuality, whereon
it might now confide, and to which it might surrender itself without
sin. The profound coarseness and utter vulgarity, which is at the basis
of this happiness-doctrine, has its only elevation in its striving
after justification and a good conscience, which however can get no
further than the objectivity of mere intellectualism.

'The dogmatism of eudaemonism and of popular philosophy (Aufklärung)
therefore did not consist in the fact that it made happiness and
enjoyment the supreme good. For if Happiness be comprehended as an
_Idea,_ it ceases to be something empirical and casual--as also to be
anything sensuous. In the supreme existence, reasonable act (Thun) and
supreme enjoyment are one. So long as supreme blessedness is supreme
_Idea_ it matters not whether we try to apprehend the supreme existence
on the side of its ideality,--which, as isolated may be first called
reasonable act--or on the side of its reality--which as isolated may
be first called enjoyment and feeling. For reasonable act and supreme
enjoyment, ideality and reality are both alike in it and identical.
Every philosophy has only one problem--to construe supreme blessedness
as supreme Idea. So long as it is by reason that supreme enjoyment is
ascertained, the distinguishability of the two at once disappears:
for this comprehension and the infinity which is dominant in act, and
the reality and finitude which is dominant in enjoyment, are taken up
into one another. The controversy with happiness becomes a meaningless
chatter, when happiness is known as the blessed enjoyment of the
eternal intuition. But what was called eudaemonism meant--it must
be said--an empirical happiness, an enjoyment of sensation, not the
eternal intuition and blessedness.'

P. 112, § 55. Schiller. _Ueber die aesthetische Erziehung des
Menschen_(1795), 18th letter. 'Through beauty the sensuous man is led
to form and to thought; through beauty the intellectual man is led back
to matter and restored to the sense-world. Beauty combines two states
which are opposed to one another.' Letter 25. 'We need not then have
any difficulty about finding a way from sensuous dependence to moral
liberty, after beauty has given a case where liberty can completely
co-exist with dependence, and where man in order to show himself an
intelligence need not make his escape from matter. If--as the fact
of beauty teaches--man is free even in association with the senses,
and if--as the conception necessarily involves--liberty is something
absolute and supersensible, there can no longer be any question how
he comes to elevate himself from limitations to the absolute: for
in beauty this has already come to pass.' Cf. _Ueber Anmuth und
Würde_(1793). 'It is in a beautiful soul, then, that sense and reason,
duty and inclination harmonize; and grace is their expression in the
appearance. Only in the service of a beautiful soul can nature at the
same time possess liberty.' (See Bosanquet's _History of Aesthetic._)

P. 115, § 60. The quotation in the note comes from § 87 of the _Kritik
der Urtheilskraft_ (_Werke,_ ed. Ros. and Sch. iv. 357).

P. 120, § 60. Fichte, _Werke,_ i. 279. 'The principle of life and
consciousness, the ground of its possibility, is (as has been shown)
certainly contained in the Ego: yet by this means there arises no
actual life, no empirical life in time--and another life is for us
utterly unthinkable. If such an actual life is to be possible, there
is still needed for that a special impulse (Aufstoss) striking the
Ego from the Non-ego. According to my system, therefore, the ultimate
ground of all actuality for the Ego is an original action and re-action
between the Ego and something outside it, of which all that can be said
is that it must be completely opposed to the Ego. In this reciprocal
action nothing is brought into the Ego, nothing foreign imported;
everything that is developed from it _ad infinitum_ is developed from
it solely according to its own laws. The Ego is merely put in motion by
that opposite, so as to act; and without such a first mover it would
never have acted; and, as its existence consists merely in action, it
would not even have existed. But the source of motion has no further
attributes than to set in motion, to be an opposing force which as such
is only felt.

'My philosophy therefore is realistic. It shows that the consciousness
of finite natures cannot at all be explained, unless we assume a force
existing independently of them, and completely opposed to them;--on
which as regards their empirical existence they are dependent. But
it asserts nothing further than such an opposed force, which is
merely _felt,_ but not _cognised,_ by finite beings. All possible
specifications of this force or non-ego, which may present themselves
_ad infinitum_ in our consciousness, my system engages to deduce from
the specifying faculty of the Ego....

'That the finite mind must necessarily assume outside it something
absolute (a Ding:an:sich), and yet must on the other hand acknowledge
that this something only exists for the mind (is a necessary noümenon):
this is the circle which may be infinitely expanded, but from which the
finite mind can never issue.' Cf. Fichte's _Werke,_ i. 248, ii. 478.


