CHAPTER II.

P. 31, § 19. Truth:--as early as _Werke,_ i. 82, _i.e._ 1801, Hegel had
come--perhaps influenced by the example of Jacobi--to the conclusion
that 'Truth is a word which, in philosophical discourse, deserves to be
used only of the certainty of the Eternal and non-empirical Actual.'
(And so Spinoza, ii. 310.)

P. 32. 'The young have been flattered'--_e.g._ by Fichte, _Werke,_ i.
435: 'Hence this science too promises itself few proselytes amongst men
already formed: if it can hope for any at all, it hopes for them rather
from the young world, whose inborn force has not yet been ruined in the
laxity of the age.'

P. 38, § 20. What Kant actually said (_Kritik der reinen Vernunft:
Elementarlehre,_ § 16), was 'The _I think_ must be able to accompany
all my conceptions' (Vorstellungen). Here, as often elsewhere. Hegel
seems to quote from memory,--with some shortcoming from absolute
accuracy.

From this point Fichte's idealism takes its spring, _e.g. Werke,_ ii.
505: 'The ground of all certainty,--of all consciousness of fact in
life, and of all demonstrative knowledge in science, is this: _In_ and
_with_ the single thing we affirm (setzen) (and whatever we affirm is
necessarily something single) we also affirm the absolute totality as
such.... Only in so far as we have so affirmed anything, is it certain
for us,--from the single unit we have comprehended under it away to
every single thing in the infinity we shall comprehend under it,--from
the one individual who has comprehended it, to all individuals who
will comprehend it.... Without this absolute "positing" of the absolute
totality in the individual, we cannot (to employ a phrase of Jacobi's)
come to bed and board.'

'Obviously therefore you enunciate not the judgment of a single
observation, but you embrace and "posit" the sheer infinitude and
totality of all possible observations:--an infinity which is not at
all compounded out of finites, but out of which, conversely, the
finites themselves issue, and of which finite things are the mere
always-uncompleted analysis. This--how shall I call it, procedure,
positing, or whatever you prefer--this "manifestation" of the absolute
totality, I call intellectual vision (Anschauung). I regard it--just
because I cannot in any way get beyond intelligence--as immanent in
intelligence, and name it so far egoity (Ichheit),--not objectivity
and not subjectivity, but the absolute identity of the two:--an
egoity, however, which it was to be hoped would not be taken to mean
individuality. There lies in it, what you' (he is addressing Reinhold,
who here follows Bardili)' call a repetibility _ad infinitum._ For me,
therefore, the essence of the finite is composed of an immediate vision
of the absolutely timeless infinite (with an absolute identity of
subjectivity and objectivity), and of a separation of the two latter,
and an analysis (continued _ad infinitum_) of the infinite. In that
analysis consists the temporal life: and the starting-point of this
temporal life is the separation into subject and object, which through
the intellectual vision (intuition) are still both held together.'

P. 44, § 22, _the mere fact of conviction._ Cf. _Rechtsphilosophie,_
§ 140 (_Werke,_ viii. 191): 'Finally the mere conviction which holds
something to be right is given out as what decides the morality of
an action. The good we will to do not yet having any content, the
principle of conviction adds the information that the subsumption of an
action under the category of good is purely a personal matter. If this
be so, the very pretence of an ethical objectivity is utterly lost. A
doctrine like this is closely allied with the self-styled philosophy
which denies that the true is cognoscible: because for the Will,
truth--_i.e._ the rationality of the Will--lies in the moral laws.
Giving out, as such a system does, that the cognition of the true is an
empty vanity, far transcending the range of science (which recognises
only appearance), it must, in the matter of conduct, also find its
principle in the apparent; whereby moral distinctions are reduced to
the peculiar theory of life held by the individual and to his private
conviction. At first no doubt the degradation into which philosophy has
thus sunk seems an affair of supreme indifference, a mere incident in
the futilities of the scholastic world: but the view necessarily makes
itself a home in ethics, which is an essential part of philosophy; and
it is then in the actual world that the world learns the true meaning
of such theories.

'As the view spreads that subjective conviction, and it alone, decides
the morality of an action, it follows that the charge of hypocrisy,
once so frequent, is now rarely heard. You can only qualify wickedness
as hypocrisy on the assumption that certain actions are inherently
and actually misdeeds, vices, and crimes, and that the defaulter
necessarily is aware of them as such, because he is aware of and
recognises the principles and outward acts of piety and honesty, even
in the pretence to which he misapplies them. In other words, it was
generally assumed as regards immorality that it is a duty to know the
good, and to be aware of its distinction from the bad. In any case it
was an absolute injunction which forbade the commission of vicious and
criminal acts, and which insisted on such actions being imputed to the
agent, so far as he was a man, not a beast. But if the good heart,
the good intention, the subjective conviction, are set forth as the
true sources of moral worth, then there is no longer any hypocrisy, or
immorality at all: for whatever one does, he can always justify it by
the reflection on it of good aims and motives; and by the influence of
that conviction it is good. There is no longer anything _inherently_
vicious or criminal: instead of the frank and free, hardened and
unperturbed sinner, comes the person whose mind is completely justified
by intention and conviction. My good intention in my act, and my
conviction of its goodness, make it good. We speak of judging and
estimating an _act._ But on this principle it is only the aim and
conviction of the agent--his faith--by which he ought to be judged.
And that not in the sense in which Christ requires faith in objective
truth, so that for one who has a bad faith, _e.g._ a conviction bad
in its content, the judgment to be pronounced must be bad, _e.g._
conformable to this bad content. But faith here means only fidelity to
conviction. Has the man (we ask) in acting kept true to his conviction?
It is formal subjective conviction on which alone the obligation of
duty is made to depend.

'A principle like this, where conviction is expressly made something
subjective, cannot but suggest the thought of possible error, with the
further implied presupposition of an absolutely-existing law. But the
law is no agent: it is only the actual human being who acts; and in the
aforesaid principle the only question in estimating human actions is
how far he has received the law into his conviction. If, therefore, it
is not the actions which are to be estimated and generally measured by
that law, it is impossible to see what the law is for, and what end it
can serve. Such a law is degraded to a mere outside letter, in fact an
empty word; which is only made a law, _i.e._ invested with obligatory
force, by my conviction.

'Such a law may claim its authority from God or the State: it may even
have the authority of tens of centuries during which it served as
the bond that gave men, with all their deed and destiny, subsistence
and coherence. And these are authorities in which are condensed the
convictions of countless individuals. And for me to set against that
the authority of my single conviction--for as my subjective conviction
its sole validity is authority--that self-conceit, monstrous as it at
first seems, is, in virtue of the principle that subjective conviction
is to be the rule, pronounced to be no self-conceit at all.

'Even if reason and conscience--which shallow science and bad sophistry
can never altogether expel--admit, with a noble illogicality, that
error is possible, still by describing crime and wickedness as
only an error we minimise the fault. For to err is human:--Who has
not been mistaken on one point or another, whether he had fresh or
pickled cabbage for dinner, and about innumerable things more or less
important? But the difference of more or less importance disappears if
everything turns on the subjectivity of conviction and on persistency
in it. But the said noble illogicality which admits error to be
possible, when it comes round to say that a wrong conviction is only an
error, really only falls into a further illogicality--the illogicality
of dishonesty. One time conviction is made the basis of morality and
of man's supreme value, and is thus pronounced the supreme and holy.
Another time all we have to do with is an error: my conviction is
something trivial and casual, strictly speaking something outside,
that may turn out this way or that. And, really, my being convinced
_is_ something supremely trivial? if I cannot _know_ truth, it is
indifferent how I think; and all that is left to my thinking is that
empty good,--a mere abstraction of generalisation.

'It follows further that, on this principle of justification by
conviction, logic requires me, in dealing with the way others act
against my action, to admit that, so far as they in their belief and
conviction hold my actions to be crimes, they are quite in the right.
On such logic not merely do I gain nothing, I am even deposed from the
post of liberty and honour into a situation of slavery and dishonour.
Justice--which in the abstract is mine as well as theirs--I feel only
as a foreign subjective conviction, and in the execution of justice I
fancy myself to be only treated by an external force.'

P. 44, § 23. Selbstdenken--to think and not merely to read or listen is
the recurrent cry of Fichte (_e.g. Werke,_ ii. 329). According to the
editors of _Werke,_ xv. 582, the reference here is to Schleiermacher
and to his Monologues. Really it is to the Romantic principle in
general, especially F. Schlegel.

P. 45, § 23. 'Fichte' _Werke,_ ii, 404: 'Philosophy
(Wissenschaftslehre), besides (for the reason above noted that it has
no auxiliary, no vehicle of the intuition at all, except the intuition
itself), elevates the human mind higher than any geometry can It gives
the mind not only attentiveness, dexterity, stability, but at the same
time absolute independence, forcing it to be alone with itself, and
to live and manage by itself. Compared with it, every other mental
operation is infinitely easy; and to one who has been exercised in
it nothing comes hard. Besides as it prosecutes all objects of human
lore to the centre it accustoms the eye to hit the proper point at
first glance' in everything presented to it, and to prosecute it
undeviatingly For such a practical philosopher therefore there can be
nothing dark, complicated, and confused, if only he is acquainted with
the object of discussion. It comes always easiest to him to construct
everything afresh and _ab initio,_ because he carries within him plans
for every scientific edifice. He finds his way easily, therefore, in
any complicated structure. Add to this the security and confidence of
glance which he has acquired in philosophy--the guide which conducts in
all _raisonnement_ and the imperturbability with which his eye meets
every divergence from the accustomed path and every paradox. It would
be quite different with all human concerns, if men could only resolve
to believe their eyes. At present they inquire at their neighbours and
at antiquity what they really see, and by this distrust in themselves
errors are eternalised. Against this distrust the possessor of
philosophy is for ever protected. In a word, by philosophy the mind
of man comes to itself, and from henceforth rests on itself without
foreign aid, and is completely master of itself, as the dancer of his
feet, or the boxer of his hands.'

P. 45, § 23. Aristotle, _Metaph._ i. 2, 19 (cf. _Eth._ x. 7). See also
_Werke,_ xiv. 280 _seqq._

P. 46, § 24. Schelling's expression, 'petrified intelligence.' The
reference is to some verses of Schelling in _Werke,_ iv. 546 (first
published in _Zeitschrift für speculative Physik,_ 1800). We have no
reason to stand in awe of the world, he says, which is a tame and quiet
beast--

    Sterft zwar ein Riesengeist darinnen,
    Ist aber versteinert mit allen Sinnen;
    In todten und lebendigen Dingen
    Thut nach Bewustseyn mächtig ringen.

In human shape he at length awakes from the iron sleep, from the long
dream: but as man he feels himself a stranger and exile; he would
fain return to great Nature; he fears what surrounds him and imagines
spectres, not knowing he might say of Nature to himself--

    Ich bin der Gott, den sie im Busen hegt,
    Der Geist, der sich in allem bewegt:
    Vom frühsten Ringen dunkler Kräfte
    Bis zum Erguss der ersten Lebenssäfte,
    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
    herauf zu des Gedankens Jugendkraft
    Wodurch Natur verjüngt sich wieder schafft,
    Ist eine kraft, ein Wechselspiel und Weben,
    Ein Trieb und Drang nach immer höherm Leben.

Cf. Oken, _Naturphilosophie,_§ 2913: 'A natural body is a thought of
the primal act, turned rigid and crystallised,--a word of God.'

Phrases of like import are not infrequent in Schelling's works (about
1800-1), _e.g. Werke,_1. Abth. iii. 341: 'The dead and unconscious
products of nature are only unsuccessful attempts to "reflect" itself;
so-called dead nature is in all cases an immature intelligence'
(unreife Intelligenz), or iv. 77, 'Nature itself is an intelligence,
as it were, turned to rigidity (erstarrte) with all its sensations and
perceptions'; and ii. 226 (_Ideen zu einer Philosophie der Natur,_
1797), 'Hence nature is only intelligence turned into the rigidity of
being; its qualities are sensations extinguished to being; bodies are
its perceptions, so to speak, killed.'

A close approach to the phrase quoted is found in the words of another
of the 'Romantic' philosophers: 'Nature is a petrified magic-city'
(versteinerte Zauberstadt). (Novalis, _Schriften,_ ii. 149.)

P. 48, § 24. Cf. Fichte to Jacobi: (Jacobi's _Briefwechsel,_ ii. 208)
'My absolute Ego is obviously not the individual: that explanation
comes from injured snobs and peevish philosophers, seeking to
impute to me the disgraceful doctrine of practical egoism. But the
_individual must be deduced from the absolute ego._ To that task my
philosophy will proceed in the "Natural Law." A finite being--it may
be deductively shown--can only think itself as a sense-being in a
sphere of sense-beings,--on one part of which (that which has no power
of origination) it has causality, while with the other part (to which
it attributes a subjectivity like its own) it stands in reciprocal
relations. In such circumstances it is called an individual, and the
conditions of individuality are called rights. As surely as it affirms
its individuality, so surely does it affirm such a sphere the two
conceptions indeed are convertible. So long as we look upon ourselves
as individuals--and we always so regard ourselves in life, though not
in philosophy and abstract imagination--we stand on what I call the
"practical" point of view in our reflections (while to the standpoint
of the absolute ego I give the name "speculative"). From the former
point of view there exists for us a world independent of us,--a world
we can only modify; whilst the pure ego (which even on this altitude
does not altogether disappear from us,) is put outside us and called
God. How else could we get the properties we ascribe to God and deny to
ourselves, did we not after all find them within us, and only refuse
them to ourselves in a certain respect, i.e., as individuals? When this
"practical" point of view predominates in our reflections, realism
is supreme: when speculation itself deduces and recognises that
standpoint, there results a complete reconciliation between philosophy
and common sense as premised in my system.

'For what good, then, is the speculative standpoint and the whole of
philosophy therewith, if it be not for life? Had humanity not tasted
of this forbidden fruit, it might dispense with all philosophy. But in
humanity there is a wish implanted to behold that region lying beyond
the individual; and to behold it not merely in a reflected light but
face to face. The first who raised a question about God's existence
broke through the barriers, he shook humanity in its main foundation
pillars, and threw it out of joint into an intestine strife which is
not yet settled, and which can only be settled by advancing boldly
to that supreme point from which the speculative and the practical
appear to be at one. We began to philosophise from pride of heart, and
thus lost our innocence: we beheld our nakedness, and ever since we
philosophise from the need of our redemption.'

P. 50. Physics and Philosophy of Nature: cf. _Werke,_ vii. i, p. 18:
'The Philosophy of Nature takes up the material, prepared for it by
physics out of experience, at the point to which physics has brought
it, and again transforms it, without basing it ultimately on the
authority of experience. Physics therefore must work into the hands of
philosophy, so that the latter may translate into a true comprehension
(Begriff) the abstract universal transmitted to it, showing how it
issues from that comprehension as an intrinsically necessary whole. The
philosophic way of putting the facts is no mere whim once in a way,
by way of change, to walk on the head, after walking a long while on
the legs, or once in a way to see our every-day face besmeared with
paint. No; it is because the method of physics does not satisfy the
comprehension, that we have to go on further.'

P. 51, § 24. The distinction of ordinary and speculative Logic
is partly like that made by Fichte (i. 68) between Logic and
Wissenschaftslehre. 'The former,' says Fichte, 'is conditioned and
determined by the latter.' Logic deals only with form; epistomology
with import as well.

P. 54, § 24. The Mosaic legend of the Fall; cf. similar interpretations
in Kant: _Religion innerhalb der Grenzen der blossen Vernunft_,
1ster Stück; and Schelling, _Werke,_ i. (1. Abth.) 34.


