CHAPTER III.

P. 61, § 28. Fichte--to emphasise the experiential truth of his
system--says (_Werke,_ ii. 331): 'There was a philosophy which
professed to be able to expand by mere _inference_ the range thus
indicated for philosophy. According to it, thinking was--not, as we
have described it, the analysis of what was given and the recombining
of it in other forms, but at the same time--a production and creation
of something quite new. In this system the philosopher found himself
in the exclusive possession of certain pieces of knowledge which the
vulgar understanding had to do without. In it the philosopher could
reason out for himself a God and an immortality and talk himself into
the conclusion that he was wise and good.'

Wolfs definition of philosophy is 'the Science of the possible in so
far as it can be'; and the possible = the non-contradictory.

P. 64, § 29. The oriental sage corresponds (cf. Hegel, _Werke,_ xii.
229) to the writer known as Dionysius the Areopagite (_De Mystica
Theologia,_ and _De Divitus Nominibus._)--The same problem as to the
relation of the Infinite (God) to the Finite (world) is discussed in
Jewish speculation (by Saadia, Mamuni, _&c._) as the question of the
divine names,--a dogma founded on the thirteen names (or attributes)
applied to God in Exodus xxxiv. 6. (Cf. D. Kaufmann, _Geschichte der
Attributenlehre._) The same spirit has led to the list of ninety-nine
'excellent names' of Allah in Islam, a list which tradition derives
from Mohammed.

P. 65, § 31. Cf. _Werke,_ ii. 47 _seqq.:_ 'The nature of the judgment
or proposition--involving as it does a distinction of subject and
predicate--is destroyed by the "speculative" proposition. This conflict
of the propositional form with the unity of comprehension which
destroys it is like the antagonism in rhythm between metre and accent.
The rhythm results from the floating "mean" and unification of the two.
Hence even in the "philosophical" proposition the identity of subject
and predicate is not meant to annihilate their difference (expressed by
the propositional form): their unity is meant to issue as a _harmony._
The propositional form lets appear the definite shade or accent
pointing to a distinction in its fulfilment: whereas in the predicate
giving expression to the substance, and the subject itself falling
into the universal, we have the unity in which that accent is heard no
more. Thus in the proposition "God is Being" the predicate is Being; it
represents the substance in which the subject is dissolved away. Being
is here meant not to be predicate but essence: and in that way God
seems to cease to be what he is--by his place in the proposition--viz.
the permanent subject. The mind--far from getting further forward in
the passage from subject to predicate--feels itself rather checked,
through the loss of the subject, and thrown back, from a sense of its
loss, to the thought of the subject. Or,--since the predicate itself
is enunciated as a subject (as Being or as Essence) which exhausts the
nature of the subject, it again comes face to face with the subject
even in the predicate.--Thought thus loses its solid objective ground
which it had on the subject: yet at the same time in the predicate it
is thrown back upon it, and instead of getting to rest in itself it
returns upon the subject of the content.--To this unusual check and
arrest are in the main due the complaints as to the unintelligibility
of philosophical works,--supposing the individual to possess any other
conditions of education needed for understanding them.'

P. 66, § 32. On the relation of dogmatism and scepticism see the
introduction to Kant's _Criticism of Pure Reason,_ and compare Caird's
_Critical Philosophy of I. Kant,_ vol. i. chap. i.

P. 67, § 33. The subdivision of 'theoretical' philosophy or metaphysics
into the four branches, Ontology, Cosmology, Psychology (rational and
empirical), and Natural Theology, is more or less common to the whole
Wolfian School. Wolf's special addition to the preceding scholastic
systems is found in the conception of a general Cosmology. Metaphysics
precedes physics, and the departments of practical philosophy. In
front of all stands logic or rational philosophy. Empirical psychology
belongs properly to physics, but reasons of practical convenience put
it elsewhere.

P. 69, § 34. The question of the 'Seat of the Soul' is well known in
the writings of Lotze (_e.g. Metaphysic,_ § 291).

Absolute actuosity. The _Notio Dei_ according to Thomas Aquinas, as
well as the dogmatics of post-Reformation times, is _actus purus_
(or _actus purissimus_). For God _nihil potentialitatis habet._ Cf.
_Werke, xii._228: 'Aristotle especially has conceived God under the
abstract category of activity. Pure activity is knowledge (Wissen)--in
the scholastic age, _actus purus_--: but in order to be put as
activity, it must be put in its "moments." For knowledge we require
another thing which is known: and which, when knowledge knows it, is
thereby appropriated. It is implied in this that God--the eternal and
self-subsistent--eternally begets himself as his Son,--distinguishes
himself from himself. But what he thus distinguishes from himself,
has not the shape of an otherness: but what is distinguished is
_ipso facto_ identical with what it is parted from. God is spirit:
no darkness, no colouring or mixture enters this pure light. The
relationship of father and son is taken from organic life and used
metaphorically--the natural relation is only pictorial and hence does
not quite correspond to what is to be expressed. We say, God eternally
begets his Son, God distinguishes himself from himself: and thus we
begin from God, saying he does this, and in the other he creates is
utterly with himself (the form of Love): but we must be well aware
that God is this _whole action itself_ God is the beginning; he does
this: but equally is he only the end, the totality: and as such
totality he is spirit. God as merely the Father is not yet the true
(it is the Jewish religion where he is thus without the Son): He is
rather beginning and end: He is his presupposition, makes himself a
presupposition (this is only another form of distinguishing): He is the
eternal process.'

Nicolaus Cusanus speaks of God (_De docta Ignorantia,_ ii. I) as
_infinita actualitas quae est actu omnis essendi possibilitas._ The
term 'actuosity' seems doubtful.

P. 73, § 36. _Sensus eminentior._ Theology distinguishes three modes in
which the human intelligence can attain a knowledge of God. By the _via
causalitatis_ it argues that God is; by the _via negationis,_ what he
is not; by the _via eminentiae,_ it gets a glimpse of the relation in
which he stands to us. It regards God _i.e._ as the cause of the finite
universe; but as God is infinite, all that is predicated of him must be
taken as merely approximative (_sensu eminentiori_) and there is left
a vast remainder which can only be filled up with negations [Durandus
de S. Porciano on the Sentent, i. 3. I]. The _sensus eminentior_ is
the subject of Spinoza's strictures, Ep. 6 (56 in Opp. ii. 202): while
Leibniz adopts it in the preface to _Théodicée,_ 'Les perfections de
Dieu sont celles de nos âmes, mais il les possède sans bornes: il est
un océan, dont nous n'avons reçu que les gouttes; il y a en nous
quelque puissance, quelque connaissance, quelque bonté; mais elles sont
toutes entières en Dieu.'

The _via causalitatis_ infers _e.g.,_ from the existence of morality
and intelligence here, a Being whose will finds expression therein: the
_via eminentiae_ infers that that will is good, and that intelligence
wise in the highest measure, and the _via negationis_ sets aside in the
conception of God all the limitations and conditions to which human
intelligence and will are subject.


