CHAPTER VIII.


SECOND SUB-DIVISION OF LOGIC.


THE DOCTRINE OF ESSENCE.


112.] The terms in Essence are always mere pairs of correlatives, and
not yet absolutely reflected in themselves: hence in essence the actual
unity of the notion is not realised, but only postulated by reflection.
Essence,--which is Being coming into mediation with itself through the
negativity of itself--is self-relatedness, only in so far as it is
relation to an Other,--this Other however coming to view at first not
as something which _is,_ but as postulated and hypothetised.--Being has
not vanished: but, firstly, Essence, as simple self-relation, is Being,
and secondly as regards its one-sided characteristic of immediacy,
Being is deposed to a mere negative, to a seeming or reflected
light--Essence accordingly is Being thus reflecting light into itself.

The Absolute is the Essence. This is the same definition as the
previous one that the Absolute is Being, in so far as Being likewise
is simple self-relation. But it is at the same time higher, because
Essence is Being that has gone into itself: that is to say, the
simple self-relation (in Being) is expressly put as negation of
the negative, as immanent self-mediation.--Unfortunately when the
Absolute is defined to be the Essence, the negativity which this
implies is often taken only to mean the withdrawal of all determinate
predicates. This negative action of withdrawal or abstraction thus
falls outside of the Essence--which is thus left as a mere result apart
from its premisses,--the _caput mortuum_ of abstraction. But as this
negativity, instead of being external to Being, is its own dialectic,
the truth of the latter, viz. Essence, will be Being as retired within
itself,--immanent Being. That reflection, or light thrown into itself,
constitutes the distinction between Essence and immediate Being, and is
the peculiar characteristic of Essence itself.

       *       *       *       *       *

Any mention of Essence implies that we distinguish it from Being:
the latter is immediate, and, compared with the Essence, we look upon
it as mere seeming. But this seeming is not an utter nonentity and
nothing at all, but Being superseded and put by. The point of view
given by the Essence is in general the standpoint of 'Reflection.'
This word 'reflection' is originally applied, when a ray of light in
a straight line impinging upon the surface of a mirror is thrown back
from it. In this phenomenon we have two things,--first an immediate
fact which is, and secondly the deputed, derivated, or transmitted
phase of the same.--Something of this sort takes place when we reflect,
or think upon an object; for here we want to know the object, not in
its immediacy, but as derivative or mediated. The problem or aim of
philosophy is often represented as the ascertainment of the essence of
things: a phrase which only means that things instead of being left
in their immediacy, must be shown to be mediated by, or based upon,
something else. The immediate Being of things is thus conceived under
the image of a rind or curtain behind which the Essence lies hidden.

Everything, it is said, has an Essence; that is, things really are not
what they immediately show themselves. There is therefore something
more to be done than merely rove from one quality to another, and
merely to advance from qualitative to quantitative, and _vice versâ:_
there is a permanent in things, and that permanent is in the first
instance their Essence. With respect to other meanings and uses of the
category of Essence, we may note that in the German auxiliary verb
_'sein'_ the past tense is expressed by the term for Essence (_Wesen_):
we designate past being as _gewesen._ This anomaly of language implies
to some extent a correct perception of the relation between Being and
Essence. Essence we may certainly regard as past Being, remembering
however meanwhile that the past is not utterly denied, but only laid
aside and thus at the same time preserved. Thus, to say, Caesar _was_
in Gaul, only denies the immediacy of the event, but not his sojourn
in Gaul altogether. That sojourn is just what forms the import of
the proposition, in which however it is represented as over and
gone.--'_Wesen_' in ordinary life frequently means only a collection
or aggregate: Zeitungswesen (the Press), Postwesen (the Post-Office),
Steuerwesen (the Revenue). All that these terms mean is that the things
in question are not to be taken single, in their immediacy, but as a
complex, and then, perhaps, in addition, in their various bearings.
This usage of the term is not very different in its implication from
our own.

People also speak of _finite_ Essences, such as man. But the very term
Essence implies that we have made a step beyond finitude: and the title
as applied to man is so far inexact. It is often added that there is
a supreme Essence (Being): by which is meant God. On this two remarks
may be made. In the first place the phrase 'there is' suggests a
finite only: as when we say, there are so many planets, or, there are
plants of such a constitution and plants of such an other. In these
cases we are speaking of something which has other things beyond and
beside it. But God, the absolutely infinite, is not something outside
and beside whom there are other essences. All else outside f God, if
separated from Him, possesses no essentiality: in its I isolation it
becomes a mere show or seeming, without stay or essence of its own.
But, secondly, it is a poor way of talking to call God the _highest_
or supreme Essence. The category of quantity which the phrase employs
has its proper place within the compass of the finite. When we call
one mountain the highest on the earth, we have a vision of other
high mountains beside it. So too when we call any one the richest or
most learned in his country. But God, far from being _a_ Being, even
the highest, is _the_ Being. This definition, however, though such
a representation of God is an important and necessary stage in the
growth of the religious consciousness, does not by any means exhaust
the depth of the ordinary Christian idea of God. If we consider God as
the Essence only, and nothing more, we know Him only as the universal
and irresistible Power; in other words, as the Lord. Now the fear of
the Lord is, doubtless, the beginning,--but _only_ the beginning, of
wisdom. To look at God in this light, as the Lord, and the Lord alone,
is especially characteristic of Judaism and also of Mohammedanism.
The defect of these religions lies in their scant recognition of the
finite, which, be it as natural things or as finite phases of mind,
it is characteristic of the heathen and (as they also for that reason
are) polytheistic religions to maintain intact. Another not uncommon
assertion is that God, as the supreme Being, cannot be known. Such is
the view taken by modern 'enlightenment' and abstract understanding,
which is content to say, _Il y a un être suprême_: and there lets
the matter rest. To speak thus, and treat God merely as the supreme
other-world Being, implies that we look upon the world before us in
its immediacy as something permanent and positive, and forget that
true Being is just the superseding of all that is immediate. If God
be the abstract super-sensible Being, outside whom therefore lies all
difference and all specific character, He is only a bare name, a mere
_caput mortuum_ of abstracting understanding. The true knowledge of God
begins when we know that things, as they immediately are, have no truth.

In reference also to other subjects besides God the category of Essence
is often liable to an abstract use, by which, in the study of anything,
its Essence is held to be something unaffected by, and subsisting in
independence of, its definite phenomenal embodiment. Thus we say, for
example, of people, that the great thing is not what they do or how
they behave, but what they are. This is correct, if it means that a
man's conduct should be looked at, not in its immediacy, but only as
it is explained by his inner self, and as a revelation of that inner
self. Still it should be remembered that the only means by which the
Essence and the inner self can be verified, is their appearance in
outward reality; whereas the appeal which men make to the essential
life, as distinct from the material facts of conduct, is generally
prompted by a desire to assert their own subjectivity and to elude an
absolute and objective judgment.

113.] Self-relation in Essence is the form of Identity or of
reflection-into-self, which has here taken the place of the immediacy
of Being. They are both the same abstraction,--self-relation.

The unintelligence of sense, to take everything limited and finite for
Being, passes into the obstinacy of understanding, which views the
finite as self-identical, not inherently self-contradictory.

114.] This identity, as it has descended from Being, appears in the
first place only charged with the characteristics of Being, and
referred to Being as to something external. This external Being, if
taken in separation from the true Being (of Essence), is called the
Unessential. But that turns out a mistake. Because Essence is
Being-in-self, it is essential only to the extent that it has in itself
its negative, _e._ reference to another, or mediation. Consequently,
it has the unessential as its own proper seeming (reflection) in
itself. But in seeming or mediation there is distinction involved:
and since what is distinguished (as distinguished from the identity
out of which it arises, and in which it is not, or lies as seeming,)
receives itself the form of identity, the semblance is still in the
mode of Being, or of self-related immediacy. The sphere of Essence
thus turns out to be a still imperfect combination of immediacy and
mediation. In it every term is expressly invested with the character
of self-relatedness, while yet at the same time one is forced beyond
it. It has Being,--reflected being, a being in which another shows,
and which shows in another. And so it is also the sphere in which the
contradiction, still implicit in the sphere of Being, is made explicit.

As the one notion is the common principle underlying all logic, there
appear in the development of Essence the same attributes or terms as
in the development of Being, but in a reflex form. Instead of Being
and Nought we have now the forms of Positive and Negative; the former
at first as Identity corresponding to pure and uncontrasted Being, the
latter developed (showing in itself) as Difference. So also, we have
Becoming represented by the Ground of determinate Being: which itself,
when reflected upon the Ground, is Existence.

The theory of Essence is the most difficult branch of Logic. It
includes the categories of metaphysic and of the sciences in general.
These are products of reflective understanding, which, while it assumes
the differences to possess a footing of their own, and at the same
time also expressly affirms their relativity, still combines the two
statements, side by side, or one after the other, by an 'Also,' without
bringing these thoughts into one, or unifying them into the notion.

A.--ESSENCE AS GROUND OF EXISTENCE.

(a) _The pure principles or categories of Reflection._

(α) Identity.

115.] The Essence lights up _in itself_ or is mere reflection: and
therefore is only self-relation, not as immediate but as reflected. And
that reflex relation is self-Identity.

This Identity becomes an Identity in form only, or of the
understanding, if it be held hard and fast, quite aloof from
difference. Or, rather, abstraction is the imposition of this Identity
of form, the transformation of something inherently concrete into this
form of elementary simplicity. And this may be done in two ways. Either
we may neglect a part of the multiple features which are found in the
concrete thing (by what is called analysis) and select only one of
them; or, neglecting their variety, we may concentrate the multiple
characters into one.

If we associate Identity with the Absolute, making the Absolute the
subject of a proposition, we get: The Absolute is what is identical
with itself. However true this proposition may be, it is doubtful
whether it be meant in its truth: and therefore it is at least
imperfect in the expression. For it is left undecided, whether it means
the abstract Identity of understanding,--abstract, that is, because
contrasted with the other characteristics of Essence, or the Identity
which is inherently concrete. In the latter case, as will be seen,
true Identity is first discoverable in the Ground, and, with a higher
truth, in the Notion.--Even the word Absolute is often used to mean no
more than 'abstract.' Absolute space and absolute time, for example, is
another way of saying abstract space and abstract time.

When the principles of Essence are taken as essential principles of
thought they become predicates of a pre-supposed subject, which,
because they are essential, is 'Everything,' The propositions thus
arising have been stated as universal Laws of Thought. Thus the first
of them, the maxim of Identity, reads: Everything is identical with
itself, A=A: and, negatively, A cannot at the same time be A and not
A.--This maxim, instead of being a true law of thought, is nothing
but the law of abstract understanding. The propositional form itself
contradicts it: for a proposition always promises a distinction
between subject and predicate; while the present one does not fulfil
what its form requires. But the Law is particularly set aside by
the following so-called Laws of Thought, which make laws out of its
opposite.--It is asserted that the maxim of Identity, though it
cannot be proved, regulates the procedure of every consciousness,
and that experience shows it to be accepted as soon as its terms
are apprehended. To this alleged experience of the logic-books may
be opposed the universal experience that no mind thinks or forms
conceptions or speaks, in accordance with this law, and that no
existence of any kind whatever conforms to it. Utterances after the
fashion of this pretended law (A planet is--a planet; Magnetism
is--magnetism; Mind is--mind) are, as they deserve to be, reputed
silly. That is certainly matter of general experience. The logic which
seriously propounds such laws and the scholastic world in which alone
they are valid have long been discredited with practical common sense
as well as with the philosophy of reason.

*       *       *       *       *       *

Identity is, in the first place, the repetition of what we had earlier
as Being, but as _become,_ through supersession of its character of
immediateness. It is therefore Being as Ideality.--It is important
to come to a proper understanding on the true meaning of Identity:
and, for that purpose, we must especially guard against taking it
as abstract Identity, to the exclusion of all Difference. That is
the touchstone for distinguishing all bad philosophy from what alone
deserves the name of philosophy. Identity in its truth, as an Ideality
of what immediately is, is a high category for our religious modes
of mind as well as all other forms of thought and mental activity.
The true knowledge of God, it may be said, begins when we know Him as
identity,--as absolute identity. To know so much is to see that all
the power and glory of the world sinks into nothing in God's presence,
and subsists only as the reflection of His power and His glory. In
the same way, Identity, as self-consciousness, is what distinguishes
man from nature, particularly from the brutes which never reach the
point of comprehending themselves as 'I,' that is, pure self-contained
unity. So again, in connexion with thought, the main thing is not to
confuse the true Identity, which contains Being and its characteristics
ideally transfigured in it, with an abstract Identity, identity of bare
form. All the charges of narrowness, hardness, meaninglessness, which
are so often directed against thought from the quarter of feeling and
immediate perception, rest on the perverse assumption that thought
acts only as a faculty of abstract Identification. The Formal Logic
itself confirms this assumption by laying down the supreme law of
thought (so-called) which has been discussed above. If thinking were no
more than an abstract Identity, we could not but own it to be a most
futile and tedious business. No doubt the notion, and the idea too, are
identical with themselves: but identical only in so far as they at the
same time involve distinction.

(β) _Difference._

116.] Essence is mere Identity and reflection in itself only as it is
self-relating negativity, and in that way self-repulsion. It contains
therefore essentially the characteristic of Difference.

Other-being is here no longer qualitative, taking the shape of the
character or limit. It is now in Essence, in self-relating essence, and
therefore the negation is at the same time a relation,--is, in short,
Distinction, Relativity, Mediation.

To ask, 'How Identity comes to Difference,' assumes that Identity as
mere abstract Identity is something of itself, and Difference also
something else equally independent. This supposition renders an answer
to the question impossible. If Identity is viewed as diverse from
Difference, all that we have in this way is but Difference; and hence
we cannot demonstrate the advance to difference, because the person
who asks for the How of the progress thereby implies that for him
the starting-point is non-existent. The question then when put to
the test has obviously no meaning, and its proposer may be met with
the question what he means by Identity; whereupon we should soon see
that he attaches no idea to it at all, and that Identity is for him
an empty name. As we have seen, besides, Identity is undoubtedly a
negative,--not however an abstract empty Nought, but the negation of
Being and its characteristics. Being so, Identity is at the same time
self-relation, and, what is more, negative self-relation; in other
words, it draws a distinction between it and itself.

117.] Difference is, first of all, (1) immediate difference, _e.g._
Diversity or Variety. In Diversity the different things are each
individually what they are, and unaffected by the relation in which
they stand to each other. This relation is therefore external to them.
In consequence of the various things being thus indifferent to the
difference between them, it falls outside them into a third thing, the
agent of Comparison. This external difference, as an identity of the
objects related, is Likeness; as a non-identity of them, is Unlikeness.

The gap which understanding allows to divide these characteristics, is
so great, that although comparison has one and the same substratum for
likeness and unlikeness, which are explained to be different aspects
and points of view in it, still likeness by itself is the first of the
elements alone, viz. identity, and unlikeness by itself is difference.

Diversity has, like Identity, been transformed into a maxim:
'Everything is various or different': or,'There are no two things
completely like each other.' Here Everything is put under a predicate,
which is the reverse of the identity attributed to it in the first
maxim; and therefore under a law contradicting the first. However there
is an explanation. As the diversity is supposed due only to external
comparison, anything taken _per se_ is expected and understood always
to be identical with itself, so that the second law need not interfere
with the first. But, in that case, variety does not belong to the
something or everything in question: it constitutes no intrinsic
characteristic of the subject: and the second maxim on this showing
does not admit of being stated at all. If, on the other hand, the
something _itself_ is as the maxim says diverse, it must be in virtue
of its own proper character: but in this case the specific difference,
and not variety as such, is what is intended. And this is the meaning
of the maxim of Leibnitz.

When understanding sets itself to study Identity, it has already passed
beyond it, and is looking at Difference in the shape of bare Variety.
If we follow the so-called law of Identity, and say,--The sea is the
sea, The air is the air, The moon is the moon, these objects pass for
having no bearing on one another. What we have before us therefore is
not Identity, but Difference. We do not stop at this point however, or
regard things merely as different. We compare them one with another,
and thus discover the features of likeness and unlikeness. The work of
the finite sciences lies to a great extent in the application of these
categories, and the phrase 'scientific treatment' generally means no
more than the method which has for its aim comparison of the objects
under examination. This method has undoubtedly led to some important
results;--we may particularly mention the great advance of modern times
in the provinces of comparative anatomy and comparative linguistic.
But it is going too far to suppose that the comparative method can be
employed with equal success in all branches of knowledge. Nor--and this
must be emphasised--can mere comparison ever ultimately satisfy the
requirements of science. Its results are indeed indispensable, but they
are still labours only preliminary to truly intelligent cognition.

If it be the office of comparison to reduce existing differences to
Identity, the science, which most perfectly fulfils that end, is
mathematics. The reason of that is, that quantitative difference is
only the difference which is quite external. Thus, in geometry, a
triangle and a quadrangle, figures qualitatively different, have this
qualitative difference discounted by abstraction, and are equalised to
one another in magnitude. It follows from what has been formerly said
about the mere Identity of understanding that, as has also been pointed
out (§ 99, note), neither philosophy nor the empirical sciences need
envy this superiority of Mathematics.

The story is told that, when Leibnitz propounded the maxim of Variety,
the cavaliers and ladies of the court, as they walked round the garden,
made efforts to discover two leaves indistinguishable from each other,
in order to confute the law stated by the philosopher. Their device was
unquestionably a convenient method of dealing with metaphysics,--one
which has not ceased to be fashionable. All the same, as regards the
principle of Leibnitz, difference must be understood to mean not an
external and indifferent diversity merely, but difference essential.
Hence the very nature of things implies that they must be different.


118.] Likeness is an Identity only of those things which are not
the same, not identical with each other: and Unlikeness is a
relation of things unlike. The two therefore do not fall on different
aspects or points of view in the thing, without any mutual affinity:
but one throws light into the other. Variety thus comes to be reflexive
difference, or difference (distinction) implicit and essential,
determinate or specific difference.

*       *       *       *       *       *

While things merely various show themselves unaffected by each other,
likeness and unlikeness on the contrary are a pair of characteristics
which are in completely reciprocal relation. The one of them cannot
be thought without the other. This advance from simple variety to
opposition appears in our common acts of thought, when we allow that
comparison has a meaning only upon the hypothesis of an existing
difference, and that on the other hand we can distinguish only on the
hypothesis of existing similarity.

Hence, if the problem be the discovery of a difference, we attribute
no great cleverness to the man who only distinguishes those objects,
of which the difference is palpable, _e.g._ a pen and a camel:
and similarly, it implies no very advanced faculty of comparison,
when the objects compared, _e.g._ a beech and an oak, a temple and
a church, are near akin. In the case of difference, in short, we
like to sec identity, and in the case of identity we like to see
difference. Within the range of the empirical sciences however, the
one of these two categories is often allowed to put the other out of
sight and mind. Thus the scientific problem at one time is to reduce
existing differences to identity; on another occasion, with equal
one-sidedness, to discover new differences. We see this especially in
physical science. There the problem consists, in the first place, in
the continual search for new 'elements,' new forces, new genera, and
species. Or, in another direction, it seeks to show that all bodies
hitherto believed to be simple are compound: and modern physicists and
chemists smile at the ancients, who were satisfied with four elements,
and these not simple. Secondly, and on the other hand, mere identity
is made the chief question. Thus electricity and chemical affinity
are regarded as the same, and even the organic processes of digestion
and assimilation are looked upon as a mere chemical operation. Modern
philosophy has often been nicknamed the Philosophy of Identity. But, as
was already remarked (§ 103, note), it is precisely philosophy, and in
particular speculative logic, which lays bare the nothingness of the
abstract, undifferentiated identity, known to understanding; though it
also undoubtedly urges its disciples not to rest at mere diversity, but
to ascertain the inner unity of all existence.

119.] Difference implicit is essential difference, the Positive
and the Negative: and that is this way. The Positive is the
identical self-relation in such a way as not to be the Negative, and
the Negative is the different by itself so as not to be the Positive.
Thus either has an existence of its own in proportion as it is not the
other. The one is made visible in the other, and is only in so far as
that other is. Essential difference is therefore Opposition; according
to which the different is not confronted by _any_ other but by _its_
other. That is, either of these two (Positive and Negative) is stamped
with a characteristic of its own only in its relation to the other: the
one is only reflected into itself as it is reflected into the other.
And so with the other. Either in this way is the other's _own_ other.

Difference implicit or essential gives the maxim, Everything is
essentially distinct; or, as it has also been expressed, Of two
opposite predicates the one only can be assigned to anything, and
there is no third possible. This maxim of Contrast or Opposition
most expressly controverts the maxim of Identity: the one says a
thing should be only self-relation, the other says that it must be
an opposite, a relation to its other. The native unintelligence of
abstraction betrays itself by setting in juxtaposition two contrary
maxims, like these, as laws, without even so much as comparing
them.--The Maxim of Excluded Middle is the maxim of the definite
understanding, which would fain avoid contradiction, but in so doing
falls into it. A must be either + A or - A, it says. It virtually
declares in these words a third A which is neither + nor--, and which
at the same time is yet invested with + and - characters. If + W mean
6 miles to the West, and - W mean 6 miles to the East, and if the +
and - cancel each other, the 6 miles of way or space remain what they
were with and without the contrast. Even the mere _plus_ and _minus_ of
number or abstract direction have, if we like, zero, for their third:
but it need not be denied that the empty contrast, which understanding
institutes between _plus_ and _minus,_ is not without its value in such
abstractions as number, direction, &c.

In the doctrine of contradictory concepts, the one notion is, say,
blue (for in this doctrine even the sensuous generalised image of a
colour is called a notion) and the other not-blue. This other then
would not be an affirmative, say, yellow, but would merely be kept at
the abstract negative.--That the Negative in its own nature is quite as
much Positive (see next §), is implied in saying that what is opposite
to another is _its_ other. The inanity of the opposition between what
are called contradictory notions is fully exhibited in what we may call
the grandiose formula of a general law, that Everything has the one and
not the other of _all_ predicates which are in such opposition. In this
way, mind is either white or not-white, yellow or not-yellow, &c, _ad
infinitum._

It was forgotten that Identity and Opposition are themselves opposed,
and the maxim of Opposition was taken even for that of Identity,
in the shape of the principle of Contradiction. A notion, which
possesses neither or both of two mutually contradictory marks, _e.g._
a quadrangular circle, is held to be logically false. Now though a
multangular circle and a rectilineal arc no less contradict this
maxim, geometers never hesitate to treat the circle as a polygon with
rectilineal sides. But anything like a circle (that is to say its mere
character or nominal definition) is still no notion. In the notion
of a circle, centre and circumference are equally essential: both
marks belong to it: and yet centre and circumference are opposite and
contradictory to each other.

The conception of Polarity, which is so dominant in physics, contains
by implication the more correct definition of Opposition. But physics
for its theory of the laws of thought adheres to the ordinary logic; it
might therefore well be horrified in case it should ever work out the
conception of Polarity, and get at the thoughts which are implied in it.

(1) With the positive we return to identity, but in its higher truth
as identical self-relation, and at the same time with the note that it
is not the negative. The negative _per se_ is the same as difference
itself. The identical as such is primarily the yet uncharacterised:
the positive on the other hand is what is self-identical, but with the
mark of antithesis to an other. And the negative is difference as such,
characterised as not identity. This is the difference of difference
within its own self.

Positive and negative are supposed to express an absolute difference.
The two however are at bottom the same: the name of either might be
transferred to the other. Thus, for example, debts and assets are not
two particular, self-subsisting species of property. What is negative
to the debtor, is positive to the creditor. A way to the east is also
a way to the west. Positive and negative are therefore intrinsically
conditioned by one another, and are only in relation to each other. The
north pole of the magnet cannot be without the south pole, and _vice
versâ._ If we cut a magnet in two, we have not a north pole in one
piece, and a south pole in the other. Similarly, in electricity, the
positive and the negative are not two diverse and independent fluids.
In opposition, the different is not confronted by any other, but by
_its_ other. Usually we regard different things as unaffected by each
other. Thus we say: I am a human being, and around me are air, water,
animals, and all sorts of things. Everything is thus put outside of
every other. But the aim of philosophy is to banish indifference, and
to ascertain the necessity of things. By that means the other is seen
to stand over against _its_ other. Thus, for example, inorganic nature
is not to be considered merely something else than organic nature, but
the necessary antithesis of it. Both are in essential relation to one
another; and the one of the two is, only in so far as it excludes the
other from it, and thus relates itself thereto. Nature in like manner
is not without mind, nor mind without nature. An important step has
been taken, when we cease in thinking to use phrases like: Of course
something else is also possible. While we so speak, we are still
tainted with contingency: and all true thinking, we have already said,
is a thinking of necessity.

In modern physical science the opposition, first observed to exist
in magnetism as polarity, has come to be regarded as a universal law
pervading the whole of nature. This would be a real scientific advance,
if care were at the same time taken not to let mere variety revert
without explanation, as a valid category, side by side with opposition.
Thus at one time the colours are regarded as in polar opposition to one
another, and called complementary colours: at another time they are
looked at in their indifferent and merely quantitative difference of
red, yellow, green, &c.

(2) Instead of speaking by the maxim of Excluded Middle (which is the
maxim of abstract understanding) we should rather say: Everything is
opposite. Neither in heaven nor in earth, neither in the world of
mind nor of nature, is there anywhere such an abstract 'Either--or'
as the understanding maintains. Whatever exists is concrete, with
difference and opposition in itself. The finitude of things will then
lie in the want of correspondence between their immediate being, and
what they essentially are. Thus, in inorganic nature, the acid is
implicitly at the same time the base: in other words, its only being
consists in its relation to its other. Hence also the acid is not
something that persists quietly in the contrast: it is always in effort
to realise what it potentially is. Contradiction is the very moving
principle of the world: and it is ridiculous to say that contradiction
is unthinkable. The only thing correct in that statement is that
contradiction is not the end of the matter, but cancels itself. But
contradiction, when cancelled, does not leave abstract identity; for
that is itself only one side of the contrariety. The proximate result
of opposition (when realised as contradiction) is the Ground, which
contains identity as well as difference superseded and deposed to
elements in the completer notion.

120.] Contrariety then has two forms. The Positive is the aforesaid
various (different) which is understood to be independent, and yet
at the same not to be unaffected by its relation to its other. The
Negative is to be, no less independently, negative self-relating,
self-subsistent, and yet at the same time as Negative must on every
point have this its self-relation, _i.e._ its Positive, only in the
other. Both Positive and Negative are therefore explicit contradiction;
both are potentially the same. Both are so actually also; since either
is the abrogation of the other and of itself. Thus they fall to the
Ground.--Or as is plain, the essential difference, as a difference, is
only the difference of it from itself, and thus contains the identical:
so that to essential and actual difference there belongs itself as
well as identity. As self-relating difference it is likewise virtually
enunciated as the self-identical. And the opposite is in general that
which includes the one and its other, itself and its opposite. The
immanence of essence thus defined is the Ground.

(γ) _The Ground._

121.] The Ground is the unity of identity and difference, the
truth of what difference and identity have turned out to be,--the
reflection-into-self, which is equally a reflection-into-an-other, and
_vice versâ._ It is essence put explicitly as a totality.

The maxim of the Ground runs thus: Everything has its Sufficient
Ground: that is, the true essentiality of any thing is not the
predication of it as identical with itself, or as different (various),
or merely positive, or merely negative, but as having its Being in
an other, which, being its self-same, is its essence. And to this
extent the essence is not abstract reflection into self, but into an
other. The Ground is the essence in its own inwardness; the essence is
intrinsically a ground; and it is a ground only when it is a ground of
somewhat, of an other.

We must be careful, when we say that the ground is the unity of
identity and difference, not to understand by this unity an abstract
identity. Otherwise we only change the name, while we still think the
identity (of understanding) already seen to be false. To avoid this
misconception we may say that the ground, besides being the unity,
is also the difference of identity and difference. In that case in
the ground, which promised at first to supersede contradiction, a new
contradiction seems to arise. It is however a contradiction which, so
far from persisting quietly in itself, is rather the expulsion of it
from itself. The ground is a ground only to the extent that it affords
ground: but the result which thus issued from the ground is only
itself. In this lies its formalism. The ground and what is grounded are
one and the same content: the difference between the two is the mere
difference of form which separates simple self-relation, on the one
hand, from mediation or derivativeness on the other. Inquiry into the
grounds of things goes with the point of view which, as already noted
(note to § 112), is adopted by Reflection. We wish, as it were, to see
the matter double, first in its immediacy, and secondly in its ground,
where it is no longer immediate. This is the plain meaning of the law
of sufficient ground, as it is called; it asserts that things should
essentially be viewed as mediated. The manner in which Formal Logic
establishes this law of thought, sets a bad example to other sciences.
Formal Logic asks these sciences not to accept their subject-matter as
it is immediately given; and yet herself lays down a law of thought
without deducing it,--in other words, without exhibiting its mediation.
With the same justice as the logician maintains our faculty of thought
to be so constituted that we must ask for the ground of everything,
might the physicist, when asked why a man who falls into water is
drowned, reply that man happens to be so organised that he cannot live
under water; or the jurist, when asked why a criminal is punished,
reply that civil society happens to be so constituted that crimes
cannot be left unpunished.

Yet even if logic be excused the duty of giving a ground for the law
of the sufficient ground, it might at least explain what is to be
understood by a ground. The common explanation, which describes the
ground as what has a consequence, seems at the first glance more lucid
and intelligible than the preceding definition in logical terms. If you
ask however what the consequence is, you are told that it is what has
a ground; and it becomes obvious that the explanation is intelligible
only because it assumes what in our case has been reached as the
termination of an antecedent movement of thought. And this is the
true business of logic: to show that those thoughts, which as usually
employed merely float before consciousness neither understood nor
demonstrated, are really grades in the self-determination of thought.
It is by this means that they are understood and demonstrated.

In common life, and it is the same in the finite sciences, this
reflective form is often employed as a key to the secret of the real
condition of the objects under investigation. So long as we deal with
what may be termed the household needs of knowledge, nothing can be
urged against this method of study. But it can never afford definitive
satisfaction, either in theory or practice. And the reason why it
fails is that the ground is yet without a definite content of its own;
I so that to regard anything as resting upon a ground merely gives
the formal difference of mediation in place of immediacy. We see an
electrical phenomenon, for example, and we ask for its ground (or
reason): we are told that electricity is the ground of this phenomenon.
What is this but the same content as we had immediately before us, only
translated into the form of inwardness?

The ground however is not merely simple self-identity, but also
different: hence various grounds may be alleged for the same sum
of fact. This variety of grounds, again, following the logic of
difference, culminates in opposition of grounds _pro_ and _contra._
In any action, such as a theft, there is a sum of fact in which
several aspects may be distinguished. The theft has violated the
rights of property: it has given the means of satisfying his wants to
the needy thief: possibly too the man, from whom the theft was made,
misused his property. The violation of property is unquestionably
the decisive point of view before which the others must give way:
but the bare law of the ground cannot settle that question. Usually
indeed the law is interpreted to speak of a sufficient ground, not
of any ground whatever: and it might be supposed therefore, in the
action referred to, that, although other points of view besides the
violation of property might be held as grounds, yet they would not be
sufficient grounds. But here comes a dilemma. If we use the phrase
'sufficient ground,' the epithet is either otiose, or of such a kind
as to carry us past the mere category of ground. The predicate is
otiose and tautological, if it only states the capability of giving a
ground or reason: for the ground is a ground, only in so far as it has
this capability. If a soldier runs away from battle to save his life,
his conduct is certainly a violation of duty: but it cannot be held
that the ground which led him so to act was insufficient, otherwise
he would have remained at his post. Besides, there is this also to
be said. On one hand any ground suffices: on the other no ground
suffices as mere ground; because, as already said, it is yet void of
a content objectively and intrinsically determined, and is therefore
not self-acting and productive. A content thus objectively and
intrinsically determined, and hence self-acting, will hereafter come
before us as the notion: and it is the notion which Leibnitz had in his
eye when he spoke of sufficient ground, and urged the study of things
under its point of view. His remarks were originally directed against
that merely mechanical method of conceiving things so much in vogue
even now; a method which he justly pronounces insufficient. We may
see an instance of this mechanical theory of investigation, when the
organic process of the circulation of the blood is traced back merely
to the contraction of the heart; or when certain theories of criminal
law explain the purpose of punishment to lie in deterring people from
crime, in rendering the criminal harmless, or in other extraneous
grounds of the same kind. It is unfair to Leibnitz to suppose that he
was content with anything so poor as this formal law of the ground. The
method of investigation which he inaugurated is the very reverse of a
formalism which acquiesces in mere grounds, where a full and concrete
knowledge is sought. Considerations to this effect led Leibnitz to
contrast _causae efficientes_ and _causae finales,_ and to insist in
the place of final causes as the conception to which the efficient were
to lead up. If we adopt this distinction, light, heat, and moisture
would be the _causae efficientes,_ not the _causa finalis_ of the
growth of plants: the _causa finalis_ is the notion of the plant itself.

To get no further than mere grounds, especially on questions of law and
morality, is the position and principle of the Sophists. Sophistry,
as we ordinarily conceive it, is a method of investigation which aims
at distorting what is just and true, and exhibiting things in a false
light. Such however is not the proper or primary tendency of Sophistry:
the standpoint of which is no other than that of 'Raisonnement.' The
Sophists came on the scene at a time when the Greeks had begun to grow
dissatisfied with mere authority and tradition and felt the need of
intellectual justification for what they were to accept as obligatory.
That desideratum the Sophists supplied by teaching their countrymen
to seek for the various points of view under which things may be
considered: which points of view are the same as grounds. But the
ground, as we have seen, has no essential and objective principles of
its own, and it is as easy to discover grounds for what is wrong and
immoral as for what is moral and right. Upon the observer therefore it
depends to decide what points are to have most weight. The decision in
such circumstances is prompted by his individual views and sentiments.
Thus the objective foundation of what ought to have been of absolute
and essential obligation, accepted by all, was undermined: and
Sophistry by this destructive action deservedly brought upon itself
the bad name previously mentioned. Socrates, as we all know, met the
Sophists at every point, not by a bare re-assertion of authority and
tradition against their argumentations, but by showing dialectically
how untenable the mere grounds were, and by vindicating the obligation
of justice and goodness,--by reinstating the universal or notion of the
will. In the present day such a method of argumentation is not quite
out of fashion. Nor is that the case only in the discussion of secular
matters. It occurs even in sermons, such as those where every possible
ground of gratitude to God is propounded. To such pleading Socrates
and Plato would not have scrupled to apply the name of Sophistry.
For Sophistry has nothing to do with what is taught:--that may very
possibly be true. Sophistry lies in the formal circumstance of teaching
it by grounds which are as available for attack as for defence. In a
time so rich in reflection and so devoted to _raisonnement_ as our
own, he must be a poor creature who cannot advance a good ground for
everything, even for what is worst and most depraved. Everything in the
world that has become corrupt has had good ground for its corruption.
An appeal to grounds at first makes the hearer think of beating a
retreat: but when experience has taught him the real state of these
matters, he closes his ears against them, and refuses to be imposed
upon any more.



122.] As it first comes, the chief feature of Essence is show in itself
and intermediation in itself. But when it has completed the circle
of intermediation, its unity with itself is explicitly put as the
self-annulling of difference, and therefore of intermediation. Once
more then we come back to immediacy or Being,--but Being in so far as
it is intermediated by annulling the intermediation. And that Being is
Existence.

The ground is not yet determined by objective principles of its
own, nor is it an end or final cause: hence it is not active, nor
productive. An Existence only _proceeds from_ the ground. The
determinate ground is therefore a formal matter: that is to say, any
point will do, so long as it is expressly put as self-relation, as
affirmation, in correlation with the immediate existence depending on
it. If it be a ground at all, it is a good ground: for the term 'good'
is employed abstractly as equivalent to affirmative; and any point (or
feature) is good which can in any way be enunciated as confessedly
affirmative. So it happens that a ground can be found and adduced for
everything: and a good ground (for example, a good motive for action)
may effect something or may not, it may have a consequence or it may
not. It becomes a motive (strictly so called) and effects something,
_e.g._ through its reception into a will; there and there only it
becomes active and is made a cause.

(b) _Existence._

123.] Existence is the immediate unity of reflection-into-self and
reflection-into-another. It follows from this that existence is the
indefinite multitude of existents as reflected-into-themselves, which
at the same time equally throw light upon one another,--which, in
short, are co-relative, and form a world of reciprocal dependence and
of infinite interconnexion between grounds and consequents. The grounds
are themselves existences: and the existents in like manner are in many
directions grounds as well as consequents.

The phrase 'Existence' (derived from _existere_) suggests the fact of
having proceeded from something. Existence is Being which has proceeded
from the ground, and been reinstated by annulling its intermediation.
The Essence, as Being set aside and absorbed, originally came
before us as shining or showing in self, and the categories of this
reflection are identity, difference and ground. The last is the unity
of identity and difference; and because it unifies them it has at the
same time to distinguish itself from itself. But that which is in
this way distinguished from the ground is as little mere difference,
as the ground itself is abstract sameness. The ground works its
own suspension: and when suspended, the result of its negation is
existence. Having issued from the ground, existence contains the ground
in it 'the ground does not remain, as it were, behind existence, but by
its very nature supersedes itself and translates itself into existence.
This is exemplified even in our ordinary mode of thinking, when we
look upon the ground of a thing, not as something abstractly inward,
but as itself also an existent. For example, the lightning-flash
which has set a house on fire would be considered the ground of the
conflagration: or the manners of a nation and the condition of its
life would be regarded as the ground of its constitution. Such indeed
is the ordinary aspect in which the existent world originally appears
to reflection,--an indefinite crowd of things existent, which being
simultaneously reflected on themselves and on one another are related
reciprocally as ground and consequence. In this motley play of the
world, if we may so call the sum of existents, there is nowhere a
firm footing to be found: everything bears an aspect of relativity,
conditioned by and conditioning something else. The reflective
understanding makes it its business to elicit and trace these
connexions running out in every direction; but the question touching an
ultimate design is so far left unanswered, and therefore the craving of
the reason after knowledge passes with the further development of the
logical Idea beyond this position of mere relativity.

124.] The reflection-on-another of the existent is however inseparable
from the reflection-on-self: the ground is their unity, from which
existence has issued. The existent therefore includes relativity, and
has on its own part its multiple interconnexions with other existents:
it is reflected on itself as its ground. The existent is, when so
described, a Thing.

The 'thing-by-itself' (or thing in the abstract), so famous in the
philosophy of Kant, shows itself here in its genesis. It is seen to be
the abstract reflection-on-self, which is clung to, to the exclusion of
reflection-on-other-things and of all predication of difference. The
thing-by-itself therefore is the empty substratum for these predicates
of relation.

If to know means to comprehend an object in its concrete character,
then the thing-by-itself, which is nothing but the quite abstract
and indeterminate thing in general, must certainly be as unknowable
as it is alleged to be. With as much reason however as we speak
of the thing-by-itself, we might speak of quality-by-itself or
quantity-by-itself, and of any other category. The expression would
then serve to signify that these categories are taken in their abstract
immediacy, apart from their development and inward character. It is
no better than a whim of the understanding, therefore, if we attach
the qualificatory 'in or by-itself' to the _thing_ only. But this
'in or by-itself' is also applied to the facts of the mental as well
as the natural world: as we speak of electricity or of a plant in
itself, so we speak of man or the state in itself. By this 'in-itself'
in these objects we are meant to understand what they strictly and
properly are. This usage is liable to the same criticism as the
phrase 'thing-in-itself.' For if we stick to the mere 'in-itself' of
an object, we apprehend it not in its truth, but in the inadequate
form of mere abstraction. Thus the man, by or in himself, is the
child. And what the child has to do is to rise out of this abstract
and undeveloped 'in-himself,' and become 'for himself what he is at
first only 'in-himself,' a free and reasonable being. Similarly, the
state-in-itself is the yet immature and patriarchal state, where the
various political functions, latent in the notion of the state, have
not received the full logical constitution which the logic of political
principles demands. In the same sense, the germ may be called the
plant-in-itself. These examples may show the mistake of supposing
that the 'thing-in-itself' or the 'in-itself' of things is something
inaccessible to our cognition. All things are originally in-themselves,
but that is not the end of the matter. As the germ, being the
plant-in-itself, means self-development, so the thing in general passes
beyond its in-itself, (the abstract reflection on self,) to manifest
itself further as a reflection on other things. It is in this sense
that it has properties.

(c) _The Thing._

125.] (α) The Thing is the totality--the development in explicit
unity--of the categories of the ground and of existence. On the side
of one of its factors, viz. reflection-on-other-things, it has in it
the differences, in virtue of which it is a characterised and concrete
thing. These characteristics are different from one another; they have
their reflection-into-self not on their own part, but on the part of
the thing. They are Properties of the thing: and their relation to the
thing is expressed by the word 'have.'

As a term of relation, 'to have' takes the place of 'to be.' True,
somewhat has qualities on its part too: but this transference of
'Having' into the sphere of Being is inexact, because the character as
quality is directly one with the somewhat, and the somewhat ceases to
be when it loses its quality. But the thing is reflection-into-self:
for it is an identity which is also distinct from the difference,
_i.e._ from its attributes.--In many languages 'have' is employed
to denote past time. And with reason: for the past is absorbed or
suspended being, and the mind is its reflection-into-self; in the mind
only it continues to subsist,--the mind however distinguishing from
itself this being in it which has been absorbed or suspended.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the Thing all the characteristics of reflection recur as existent.
Thus the thing, in its initial aspect, as the thing-by-itself, is the
self-same or identical. But identity, it was proved, is not found
without difference: so the properties, which the thing has, are the
existent difference in the form of diversity. In the case of diversity
or variety each diverse member exhibited an indifference to every
other, and they had no other relation to each other, save what was
given by a comparison external to them. But now in the thing we have a
bond which keeps the various properties in union. Property, besides,
should not be confused with quality. No doubt, we also say, a thing
has qualities. But the phraseology is a misplaced one: 'having' hints
at an independence, foreign to the 'Somewhat,' which is still directly
identical with its quality. Somewhat is what it is only by its
quality: whereas, though the thing indeed exists only as it has its
properties, it is not confined to this or that definite property, and
can therefore lose it, without ceasing to be what it is.

126.] (ß) Even in the ground, however, the reflection-on-something-else
is directly convertible with reflection-on-self. And hence the
properties are not merely different from each other; they are also
self-identical, independent, and relieved from their attachment to the
thing. Still, as they are the characters of the thing distinguished
from one another (as reflected-into-self), they are not themselves
things, if things be concrete; but only existences reflected
into themselves as abstract characters. They are what are called
Matters.

Nor is the name 'things' given to Matters, such as magnetic and
electric matters. They are qualities proper, a reflected Being,--one
with their Being,--they are the character that has reached immediacy,
existence: they are 'entities.'

To elevate the properties, which the Thing has, to the independent
position of matters, or materials of which it consists, is a proceeding
based upon the notion of a Thing: and for that reason is also found
in experience. Thought and experience however alike protest against
concluding from the fact that certain properties of a thing, such
as colour, or smell, may be represented as particular colouring or
odorific matters, that we are then at the end of the inquiry, and
that nothing more is needed to penetrate to the true secret of things
than a disintegration of them into their component materials. This
disintegration into independent matters is properly restricted to
inorganic nature only. The chemist is in the right therefore when,
for example, he analyses common salt or gypsum into its elements, and
finds that the former consists of muriatic acid and soda, the latter of
sulphuric acid and calcium. So too the geologist does well to regard
granite as a compound of quartz, felspar, and mica. These matters,
again, of which the thing consists, are themselves partly things,
which in that way may be once more reduced to more abstract matters.
Sulphuric acid, for example, is a compound of sulphur and oxygen. Such
matters or bodies can as a matter of fact be exhibited as subsisting by
themselves: but frequently we find other properties of things, entirely
wanting this self-subsistence, also regarded as particular matters.
Thus we hear caloric, and electrical or magnetic matters spoken of.
Such matters are at the best figments of understanding. And we see
here the usual procedure of the abstract reflection of understanding.
Capriciously adopting single categories, whose value entirely depends
on their place in the gradual evolution of the logical idea, it employs
them in the pretended interests of explanation, but in the face of
plain, unprejudiced perception and experience, so as to trace back to
them every object investigated. Nor is this all. The theory, which
makes things consist of independent matters, is frequently applied in a
region where it has neither meaning nor force. For within the limits of
nature even, wherever there is organic life, this category is obviously
inadequate. An animal may be said to consist of bones, muscles, nerves,
&c.: but evidently we are here using the term 'consist' in a very
different sense from its use when we spoke of the piece of granite as
consisting of the above-mentioned elements. The elements of granite are
utterly indifferent to their combination: they could subsist as well
without it. The different parts and members of an organic body on the
contrary subsist only in their union: they cease to exist as such, when
they are separated from each other.

127.] Thus Matter is the mere abstract or indeterminate
reflection-into-something-else, or reflection-into-self at the same
time as determinate; it is consequently Thinghood which then and there
is,--the subsistence of the thing. By this means the thing has on the
part of the matters its reflection-into-self (the reverse of § 125);
it subsists not on its own part, but consists of the matters, and is
only a superficial association between them, an external combination of
them.

128.] (γ) Matter, being the immediate unity of existence with itself,
is also indifferent towards specific character. Hence the numerous
diverse matters coalesce into the one Matter, or into existence
under the reflective characteristic of identity. In contrast to this
one Matter these distinct properties and their external relation which
they have to one another in the thing, constitute the _Form_,--the
reflective category of difference, but a difference which exists and is
a totality.

This one featureless Matter is also the same as the Thing-by-itself
was: only the latter is intrinsically quite abstract, while the former
essentially implies relation to something else, and in the first place
to the Form.

       *       *       *       *       *

The various matters of which the thing consists are potentially the
same as one another. Thus we get one Matter in general to which the
difference is expressly attached externally and as a bare form. This
theory which holds things all round to have one and the same matter at
bottom, and merely to differ externally in respect of form, is much in
vogue with the reflective understanding. Matter in that case counts for
naturally indeterminate, but susceptible of any determination; while at
the same time it is perfectly permanent, and continues the same amid
all change and alteration. And in finite things at least this disregard
of matter for any determinate form is certainly exhibited. For example,
it matters not to a block of marble, whether it receive the form of
this or that statue or even the form of a pillar. Be it noted however
that a block of marble can disregard form only relatively, that is, in
reference to the sculptor: it is by no means purely formless. And so
the mineralogist considers the relatively formless marble as a special
formation of rock, differing from other equally special formations,
such as sandstone or porphyry. Therefore we say it is an abstraction
of the understanding which isolates matter into a certain natural
formlessness. For properly speaking the thought of matter includes the
principle of form throughout, and no formless matter therefore appears
anywhere even in experience as existing. Still the conception of
matter as original and pre-existent, and as naturally formless, is a
very ancient one; it meets us even among the Greeks, at first in the
mythical shape of Chaos, which is supposed to represent the unformed
substratum of the existing world. Such a conception must of necessity
tend to make God not the Creator of the world, but a mere world-moulder
or demiurge. A deeper insight into nature reveals God as creating the
world out of nothing. And that teaches two things. On the one hand it
enunciates that matter, as such, has no independent subsistence, and on
the other that the form does not supervene upon matter from without,
but as a totality involves the principle of matter in itself. This free
and infinite form will hereafter come before us as the notion.

129.] Thus the Thing suffers a disruption into Matter and Form. Each
of these is the totality of thinghood and subsists for itself. But
Matter, which is meant to be the positive and indeterminate existence,
contains, as an existence, reflection-on-another, every whit as
much as it contains self-enclosed being. Accordingly as uniting
these characteristics, it is itself the totality of Form. But Form,
being a complete whole of characteristics, _ipso facto_ involves
reflection-into-self; in other words, as self-relating Form it has the
very function attributed to Matter. Both are at bottom the same. Invest
them with this unity, and you have the relation of Matter and Form,
which are also no less distinct.

130.] The Thing, being this totality, is a contradiction. On the side
of its negative unity it is Form in which Matter is determined and
deposed to the rank of properties (§ 125). At the same time it consists
of Matters, which in the reflection-of-the-thing-into-itself are as
much independent as they are at the same time negatived. Thus the thing
is the essential existence, in such a way as to be an existence that
suspends or absorbs itself in itself. In other words, the thing is an
Appearance or Phenomenon.

The negation of the several matters, which is insisted on in the
thing no less than their independent existence, occurs in Physics as
_porosity._ Each of the several matters (colouring matter, odorific
matter, and if we believe some people, even sound-matter,--not
excluding caloric, electric matter, &c:) is also negated: and in this
negation of theirs, or as interpenetrating their pores, we find the
numerous other independent matters, which, being similarly porous,
make room in turn for the existence of the rest. Pores are not
empirical facts; they are figments of the understanding, which uses
them to represent the element of negation in independent matters.
The further working-out of the contradictions is concealed by the
nebulous imbroglio in which all matters are independent and all no less
negated in each other.--If the faculties or activities are similarly
hypostatised in the mind, their living unity similarly turns to the
imbroglio of an action of the one on the others.

These pores (meaning thereby not the pores in an organic body, such as
the pores of wood or of the skin, but those in the so-called 'matters,'
such as colouring matter, caloric, or metals, crystals, &c.) cannot be
verified by observation. In the same way matter itself,--furthermore
form which is separated from matter,--whether that be the thing as
consisting of matters, or the view that the thing itself subsists and
only has proper ties,--is all a product of the reflective understanding
which, while it observes and professes to record only what it observes,
is rather creating a metaphysic, bristling with contradictions of which
it is unconscious.


B.--APPEARANCE.

131.] The Essence must appear or shine forth. Its shining or reflection
in it is the suspension and translation of it to immediacy, which,
whilst as reflection-on-self it is matter or subsistence, is also form,
reflection-on-something-else, a subsistence which sets itself aside. To
show or shine is the characteristic by which essence is distinguished
from being,--by which it is essence; and it is this show which, when
it is developed, shows itself, and is Appearance. Essence accordingly
is not something beyond or behind appearance, but just because it
is the essence which exists--the existence is Appearance
(Forth-shining).

       *       *       *       *       *

Existence stated explicitly in its contradiction is Appearance. But
appearance (forth-shining) is not to be confused with a mere show
(shining). Show is the proximate truth of Being or immediacy. The
immediate, instead of being, as we suppose, something independent,
resting on its own self, is a mere show, and as such it is packed or
summed up under the simplicity of the immanent essence. The essence
is, in the first place, the sum total of the showing itself, shining
in itself (inwardly); but, far from abiding in this inwardness, it
comes as a ground forward into existence; and this existence being
grounded not in itself, but on something else, is just appearance.
In our imagination we ordinarily combine with the term appearance
or phenomenon the conception of an indefinite congeries of things
existing, the being of which is purely relative, and which consequently
do not rest on a foundation of their own, but are esteemed only as
passing stages. But in this conception it is no less implied that
essence does not linger behind or beyond appearance. Rather it is, we
may say, the Infinite kindness which lets its own show freely issue
into immediacy, and graciously allows it the joy of existence. The
appearance which is thus created does not stand on its own feet, and
has its being not in itself but in something else. God who is the
essence, when He lends existence to the passing stages of His own show
in Himself, may be described as the goodness that creates a world: but
He is also the power above it, and the righteousness, which manifests
the merely phenomenal character of the content of this existing world,
whenever it tries to exist in independence.

Appearance is in every way a very important grade of the logical idea.
It may be said to be the distinction of philosophy from ordinary
consciousness that it sees the merely phenomenal character of what the
latter supposes to have a self-subsistent being. The significance of
appearance however must be properly grasped, or mistakes will arise.
To say that anything is a _mere_ appearance may be misinterpreted to
mean that, as compared with what is merely phenomenal, there is greater
truth in the immediate, in that which _is._ Now in strict fact, the
case is precisely the reverse. Appearance is higher than mere Being,--a
richer category because it holds in combination the two elements of
reflection-into-self and reflection-into-another: whereas Being (or
immediacy) still mere relationlessness and apparently rests upon itself
alone. Still, to say that anything is _only_ an appearance suggests a
real flaw, which consists in this, that Appearance is still divided
against itself and without intrinsic stability. Beyond and above mere
appearance comes in the first place Actuality, the third grade of
Essence, of which we shall afterwards speak.

In the history of Modern Philosophy, Kant has the merit of first
rehabilitating this distinction between the common and the philosophic
modes of thought. He stopped half-way however, when he attached to
Appearance a subjective meaning only, and put the abstract essence
immovable outside it as the thing-in-itself beyond the reach of our
cognition. For it is the very nature of the world of immediate objects
to be appearance only. Knowing it to be so, we know at the same time
the essence, which, far from staying behind or beyond the appearance,
rather manifests its own essentiality by deposing the world to a mere
appearance. One can hardly quarrel with the plain man who, in his
desire for totality, cannot acquiesce in the doctrine of subjective
idealism, that we are solely concerned with phenomena. The plain man,
however, in his desire to save the objectivity of knowledge, may very
naturally return to abstract immediacy, and maintain that immediacy
to be true and actual. In a little work published under the title,
_A Report, clear as day, to the larger Public touching the proper
nature of the Latest Philosophy: an Attempt to force the reader to
understand,'_ Fichte examined the opposition between subjective
idealism and immediate consciousness in a popular form, under the shape
of a dialogue between the author and the reader, and tried hard to
prove that the subjective idealist's point of view was right. In this
dialogue the reader complains to the author that he has completely
failed to place himself in the idealist's position, and is inconsolable
at the thought that things around him are no real things but mere
appearances. The affliction of the reader can scarcely be blamed when
he is expected to consider himself hemmed in by an impervious circle
of purely subjective conceptions. Apart from this subjective view of
Appearance, however, we have all reason to rejoice that the things
which environ us are appearances and not steadfast and independent
existences; since in that case we should soon perish of hunger, both
bodily and mental.

(a) _The World of Appearance._

132.] The Apparent or Phenomenal exists in such a way, that its
subsistence is _ipso facto_ thrown into abeyance or suspended and
is only one stage in the form itself. The form embraces in it the
matter or subsistence as one of its characteristics. In this way
the phenomenal has its ground in this (form) as its essence, its
reflection-into-self in contrast with its immediacy, but, in so doing,
has it only in another aspect of the form. This ground of its is no
less phenomenal than itself, and the phenomenon accordingly goes on to
an endless mediation of subsistence by means of form, and thus equally
by non-subsistence. This endless inter-mediation is at the same time
a unity of self-relation; and existence is developed into a totality,
into a world of phenomena,--of reflected finitude.

(b) _Content and Form._

133.] Outside one another as the phenomena in this phenomenal
world are, they form a totality, and are wholly contained in their
self-relatedness. In this way the self-relation of the phenomenon is
completely specified, it has the Form in itself: and because it
is in this identity, has it as essential subsistence. So it comes about
that the form is Content: and in its mature phase is the Law
of the Phenomenon. When the form, on the contrary, is not reflected
into self, it is equivalent to the negative of the phenomenon, to
the non-independent and changeable: and that sort of form is the
indifferent or External Form.

The essential point to keep in mind about the opposition of Form and
Content is that the content is not formless, but has the form in its
own self, quite as much as the form is external to it. There is thus
a doubling of form. At one time it is reflected into itself; and then
is identical with the content. At another time it is not reflected
into itself, and then is the external existence, which does not at
all affect the content. We are here in presence, implicitly, of the
absolute correlation of content and form: viz. their reciprocal
revulsion, so that content is nothing but the revulsion of form into
content, and form nothing but the revulsion of content into form. This
mutual revulsion is one of the most important laws of thought. But it
is not explicitly brought out before the Relations of Substance and
Causality.

Form and content are a pair of terms frequently employed by the
reflective understanding, especially with a habit of looking on the
content as the essential and independent, the form on the contrary as
the unessential and dependent. Against this it is to be noted that both
are in fact equally essential; and that, while a formless _content_ can
be as little found as a formless _matter,_ the two (content and matter)
are distinguished by this circumstance, that matter, though implicitly
not without form, still in its existence manifests a disregard of form,
whereas the content, as such, is what it is only because the matured
form is included in it. Still the form comes before us sometimes as
an existence indifferent and external to content, and does so for
the reason that the whole range of Appearance still suffers from
externality. In a book, for instance, it certainly has no bearing upon
the content, whether it be written or printed, bound in paper or in
leather. That however does not in the least imply that apart from such
an indifferent and external form, the content of the book is itself
formless. There are undoubtedly books enough which even in reference
to their content may well be styled formless: but want of form in this
case is the same as bad form, and means the defect of the right form,
not the absence of all form whatever. So far is this right form from
being unaffected by the content that it is rather the content itself. A
work of art that wants the right form is for that very reason no right
or true work of art: and it is a bad way of excusing an artist, to say
that the content of his works is good and even excellent, though they
want the right form. Real works of art are those where content and form
exhibit a thorough identity. The content of the Iliad, it may be said,
is the Trojan war, and especially the wrath of Achilles. In that we
have everything, and yet very little after all; for the Iliad is made
an Iliad by the poetic form, in which that content is moulded. The
content of Romeo and Juliet may similarly be said to be the ruin of two
lovers through the discord between their families: but something more
is needed to make Shakespeare's immortal tragedy.

In reference to the relation of form and content in the field of
science, we should recollect the difference between philosophy and
the rest of the sciences. The latter are finite, because their mode
of thought, as a merely formal act, derives its content from without.
Their content therefore is not known as moulded from within through
the thoughts which lie at the ground of it, and form and content do
not thoroughly interpenetrate each other. This partition disappears in
philosophy, and thus justifies its title of infinite knowledge. Yet
even philosophic thought is often held to be a merely formal act; and
that logic, which confessedly deals only with thoughts _quâ_ thoughts,
is merely formal, is especially a foregone conclusion. And if content
means no more than what is palpable and obvious to the senses, all
philosophy and logic in particular must be at once acknowledged to
be void of content, that is to say, of content perceptible to the
senses. Even ordinary forms of thought however, and the common usage of
language, do not in the least restrict the appellation of content to
what is perceived by the senses, or to what has a being in place and
time. A book without content is, as every one knows, not a book with
empty leaves, but one of which the content is as good as none. We shall
find as the last result on closer analysis, that by what is called
content an educated mind means nothing but the presence and power of
thought. But this is to admit that thoughts are not empty forms without
affinity to their content, and that in other spheres as well as in art
the truth and the sterling value of the content essentially depend on
the content showing itself identical with the form.

134.] But immediate existence is a character of the subsistence itself
as well as of the form: it is consequently external to the character of
the content; but in an equal degree this externality, which the content
has through the factor of its subsistence, is essential to it. When
thus explicitly stated, the phenomenon is relativity or correlation:
where one and the same thing, viz. the content or the developed
form, is seen as the externality and antithesis of independent
existences, and as their reduction to a relation of identity, in which
identification alone the two things distinguished are what they are.

(c) _Relation or Correlation._

135.] (α) The immediate relation is that of the Whole and the
Parts. The content is the whole, and consists of the parts (the
form), its counterpart. The parts are diverse one from another. It is
they that possess independent being. But they are parts, only when they
are identified by being related to one another; or, in so far as they
make up the whole, when taken together. But this 'Together' is the
counterpart and negation of the part.

Essential correlation is the specific and completely universal
phase in which things appear. Everything that exists stands in
correlation, and this correlation is the veritable nature of every
existence. The existent thing in this way has no being of its own, but
only in something else: in this other however it is self-relation; and
correlation is the unity of the self-relation and relation-to-others.

The relation of the whole and the parts is untrue to this extent, that
the notion and the reality of the relation are not in harmony. The
notion of the whole is to contain parts: but if the whole is taken
and made what its notion implies, _i.e._ if it is divided, it at once
ceases to be a whole. Things there are, no doubt, which correspond
to this relation: but for that very reason they are low and untrue
existences. We must remember however what 'untrue' signifies. When
it occurs in a philosophical discussion, the term 'untrue' does not
signify that the thing to which it is applied is non-existent. A bad
state or a sickly body may exist all the same; but these things are
untrue, because their notion and their reality are out of harmony.

The relation of whole and parts, being the immediate relation, comes
easy to reflective understanding; and for that reason it often
satisfies when the question really turns on profounder ties. The limbs
and organs, for instance, of an organic body are not merely parts of
it: it is only in their unity that they are what they are, and they
are unquestionably affected by that unity, as they also in turn affect
it. These limbs and organs become mere parts, only when they pass under
the hands of the anatomist, whose occupation, be it remembered, is not
with the living body but with the corpse. Not that such analysis is
illegitimate: we only mean that the external and mechanical relation of
whole and parts is not sufficient for us, if we want to study organic
life in its truth. And if this be so in organic life, it is the case
to a much greater extent when we apply this relation to the mind and
the formations of the spiritual world. Psychologists may not expressly
speak of parts of the soul or mind, but the mode in which this
subject is treated by the analytic understanding is largely founded
on the analogy of this finite relation. At least that is so, when the
different forms of mental activity are enumerated and described merely
in their isolation one after another, as so-called special powers and
faculties.

136.] (β) The one-and-same of this correlation (the self-relation
found in it) is thus immediately a negative self-relation. The
correlation is in short the mediating process whereby one and the
same is first unaffected towards difference, and secondly is the
negative self-relation, which repels itself as reflection-into-self to
difference, and invests itself (as reflection-into-something-else) with
existence, whilst it conversely leads back this reflection-into-other
to self-relation and indifference. This gives the correlation of
Force and its Expression.

The relationship of whole and part is the immediate and therefore
unintelligent (mechanical) relation,--a revulsion of self-identity
into mere variety. Thus we pass from the whole to the parts, and from
the parts to the whole: in the one we forget its opposition to the
other, while each on its own account, at one time the whole, at another
the parts, is taken to be an independent existence. In other words,
when the parts are declared to subsist in the whole, and the whole
to consist of the parts, we have either member of the relation at
different times taken to be permanently subsistent, while the other is
non-essential. In its superficial form the mechanical nexus consists in
the parts being independent of each other and of the whole.

This relation may be adopted for the progression _ad infinitum,_
in the case of the divisibility of matter: and then it becomes an
unintelligent alternation with the two sides. A thing at one time is
taken as a whole: then we go on to specify the parts: this specifying
is forgotten, and what was a part is regarded as a whole: then the
specifying of the part comes up again, and so on for ever. But if this
infinity be taken as the negative which it is, it is the _negative_
self-relating element in the correlation,--Force, the self-identical
whole, or immanency; which yet supersedes this immanency and gives
itself expression;--and conversely the expression which vanishes and
returns into Force.

Force, notwithstanding this infinity, is also finite: for the content,
or the one and the same of the Force and its out-putting, is this
identity at first only for the observer: the two sides of the relation
are not yet, each on its own account, the concrete identity of that
one and same, not yet the totality. For one another they are therefore
different, and the relationship is a finite one. Force consequently
requires solicitation from without: it works blindly: and on account of
this defectiveness of form, the content is also limited and accidental.
It is not yet genuinely identical with the form: not yet is it _as_ a
notion and an end; that is to say, it is not intrinsically and actually
determinate. This difference is most vital, but not easy to apprehend:
it will assume a clearer formulation when we reach Design. If it be
overlooked, it leads to the confusion of conceiving God as Force, a
confusion from which Herder's God especially suffers.

It is often said that the nature of Force itself is unknown and only
its manifestation apprehended. But, in the first place, it may be
replied, every article in the import of Force is the same as what
is specified in the Exertion: and the explanation of a phenomenon
by a Force is to that extent a mere tautology. What is supposed to
remain unknown, therefore, is really nothing but the empty form of
reflection-into-self, by which alone the Force is distinguished from
the Exertion,--and that form too is something familiar. It is a form
that does not make the slightest addition to the content and to the
law, which have to be discovered from the phenomenon alone. Another
assurance always given is that to speak of forces implies no theory as
to their nature: and that being so, it is impossible to see why the
form of Force has been introduced into the sciences at all. In the
second place the nature of Force is undoubtedly unknown: we are still
without any necessity binding and connecting its content together in
itself, as we are without necessity in the content, in so far as it is
expressly limited and hence has its character by means of another thing
outside it.

(1) Compared with the immediate relation of whole and parts, the
relation between force and its putting-forth may be considered
infinite. In it that identity of the two sides is realised, which in
the former relation only existed for the observer. The whole, though
we can see that it consists of parts, ceases to be a whole when it
is divided: whereas force is only shown to be force when it exerts
itself, and in its exercise only comes back to itself. The exercise is
only force once more. Yet, on further examination even this relation
will appear finite, and finite in virtue of this mediation: just
as, conversely, the relation of whole and parts is obviously finite
in virtue of its immediacy. The first and simplest evidence for the
finitude of the mediated relation of force and its exercise is, that
each and every force is conditioned and requires something else than
itself for its subsistence. For instance, a special vehicle of magnetic
force, as is well known, is iron, the other properties of which, such
as its colour, specific weight, or relation to acids, are independent
of this connexion with magnetism. The same thing is seen in all other
forces, which from one end to the other are found to be conditioned
and mediated by something else than themselves. Another proof of
the finite nature of force is that it requires solicitation before
it can put itself forth. That through which the force is solicited,
is itself another exertion of force, which cannot put itself forth
without similar solicitation. This brings us either to a repetition of
the infinite progression, or to a reciprocity of soliciting and being
solicited. In either case we have no absolute beginning of motion.
Force is not as yet, like the final cause, inherently self-determining:
the content is given to it as determined, and force, when it exerts
itself, is, according to the phrase, blind in its working. That phrase
implies the distinction between abstract force-manifestation and
teleological action.

(2) The oft-repeated statement, that the exercise of the force and
not the force itself admits of being known, must be rejected as
groundless. It is the very essence of force to manifest itself, and
thus in the totality of manifestation, conceived as a law, we at the
same time discover the force itself. And yet this assertion that force
in its own self is unknowable betrays a well-grounded presentiment
that this relation is finite. The several manifestations of a force at
first meet us in indefinite multiplicity, and in their isolation seem
accidental: but, reducing this multiplicity to its inner unity, which
we term force, we see that the apparently contingent is necessary, by
recognising the law that rules it. But the different forces themselves
are a multiplicity again, and in their mere juxtaposition seem to be
contingent. Hence in empirical physics, we speak of the forces of
gravity, magnetism, electricity, &c, and in empirical psychology of
the forces of memory, imagination, will, and all the other faculties.
All this multiplicity again excites a craving to know these different
forces as a single whole, nor would this craving be appeased even if
the several forces were traced back to one common primary force. Such
a primary force would be really no more than an empty abstraction,
with as little content as the abstract thing-in-itself. And besides
this, the correlation of force and manifestation is essentially a
mediated correlation (of reciprocal dependence), and it must therefore
contradict the notion of force to view it as primary or resting on
itself.

Such being the case with the nature of force, though we may consent to
let the world be called a manifestation of divine forces, we should
object to have God Himself viewed as a mere force. For force is after
all a subordinate and finite category. At the so-called renascence of
the sciences, when steps were taken to trace the single phenomena of
nature back to underlying forces, the Church branded the enterprise
as impious. The argument of the Church was as follows. If it be the
forces of gravitation, of vegetation, &c. which occasion the movements
of the heavenly bodies, the growth of plants, &c., there is nothing
left for divine providence, and God sinks to the level of a leisurely
on-looker, surveying this play of forces. The students of nature, it is
true, and Newton more than others, when they employed the reflective
category of force to explain natural phenomena, have expressly pleaded
that the honour of God, as the Creator and Governor of the world, would
not thereby be impaired. Still the logical issue of this explanation
by means of forces is that the inferential understanding proceeds to
fix each of these forces, and to maintain them in their finitude as
ultimate. And contrasted with this deinfinitised world of independent
forces and matters, the only terms in which it is possible still to
describe God will present Him in the abstract infinity of an unknowable
supreme Being in some other world far away. This is precisely the
position of materialism, and of modern 'free-thinking,' whose theology
ignores what God is and restricts itself to the mere fact _that_ He
is. In this dispute therefore the Church and the religious mind have
to a certain extent the right on their side. The finite forms of
understanding certainly fail to fulfil the conditions for a knowledge
either of Nature or of the formations in the world of Mind as they
truly are. Yet on the other side it is impossible to overlook the
formal right which, in the first place, entitles the empirical sciences
to vindicate the right of thought to know the existent world in all
the speciality of its content, and to seek something further than the
bare statement of mere abstract faith that God creates and governs the
world. When our religious consciousness, resting upon the authority of
the Church, teaches us that God created the world by His almighty will,
that He guides the stars in their courses, and vouchsafes to all His
creatures their existence and their well-being, the question Why? is
still left to answer. Now it is the answer to this question which forms
the common task of empirical science and of philosophy. When religion
refuses to recognise this problem, or the right to put it, and appeals
to the unsearchableness of the decrees of God, it is taking up the same
agnostic ground as is taken by the mere Enlightenment of understanding.
Such an appeal is no better than an arbitrary dogmatism, which
contravenes the express command of Christianity, to know God in spirit
and in truth, and is prompted by a humility which is not Christian, but
born of ostentatious bigotry.

137.] Force is a whole, which is in its own self negative
self-relation; and as such a whole it continually pushes
itself off from itself and puts itself forth. But since this
reflection-into-another (corresponding to the distinction between the
Parts of the Whole) is equally a reflection-into-self, this out-putting
is the way and means by which Force that returns back into itself is
as a Force. The very act of out-putting accordingly sets in abeyance
the diversity of the two sides which is found in this correlation,
and expressly states the identity which virtually constitutes their
content. The truth of Force and utterance therefore is that relation,
in which the two sides are distinguished only as Outward and Inward.

138.] (γ) The Inward (Interior) is the ground, when it
stands as the mere form of the one side of the Appearance and
the Correlation,--the empty form of reflection-into-self. As a
counterpart to it stands the Outward (Exterior),--Existence,
also as the form of the other side of the correlation, with the
empty characteristic of reflection-into-something-else. But Inward
and Outward are identified: and their identity is identity brought
to fulness in the content, that unity of reflection-into-self and
reflection-into-other which was forced to appear in the movement of
force. Both are the same one totality, and this unity makes them the
content.

139.] In the first place then, Exterior is the same content as
Interior. What is inwardly is also found outwardly, and _vice versâ._
The appearance shows nothing that is not in the essence, and in the
essence there is nothing but what is manifested.

140.] In the second place, Inward and Outward, as formal terms,
are also reciprocally opposed, and that thoroughly. The one is the
abstraction of identity with self; the other, of mere multiplicity
or reality. But as stages of the one form, they are essentially
identical: so that whatever is at first explicitly put only in the one
abstraction, is also as plainly and at one step only in the other.
Therefore what is only internal is also only external: and what is only
external, is so far only at first internal.

It is the customary mistake of reflection to take the essence to be
merely the interior. If it be so taken, even this way of looking at
it is purely external, and that sort of essence is the empty external
abstraction.

    Ins Innere der Natur
    Dringt sein erschaffner Geist,
    Zu glücklich wenn er nur
    Die äußere Schaale weist.[1]

It ought rather to have been said that, if the essence of nature is
ever described as the inner part, the person who so describes it
only knows its outer shell. In Being as a whole, or even in mere
sense-perception, the notion is at first only an inward, and for that
very reason is something external to Being, a subjective thinking
and being, devoid of truth.--In Nature as well as in Mind, so long
as the notion, design, or law are at first the inner capacity, mere
possibilities, they are first only an external, inorganic nature,
the knowledge of a third person, alien force, and the like. As a man
is outwardly, that is to say in his actions (not of course in his
merely bodily outwardness), so is he inwardly: and if his virtue,
morality, &c. are only inwardly his,--that is if they exist only in his
intentions and sentiments, and his outward acts are not identical with
them, the one half of him is as hollow and empty as the other.

The relation of Outward and Inward unites the two relations that
precede, and at the same time sets in abeyance mere relativity and
phenomenality in general. Yet so long as understanding keeps the Inward
and Outward fixed in their separation, they are empty forms, the one
as null as the other. Not only in the study of nature, but also of the
spiritual world, much depends on a just appreciation of the relation
of inward and outward, and especially on avoiding the misconception
that the former only is the essential point on which everything turns,
while the latter is unessential and trivial. We find this mistake made
when, as is often done, the difference between nature and mind is
traced back to the abstract difference between inner and outer. As for
nature, it certainly is in the gross external, not merely to the mind,
but even on its own part. But to call it external 'in the gross' is
not to imply an abstract externality--for there is no such thing. It
means rather that the Idea which forms the common content of nature and
mind, is found in nature as outward only, and for that very reason only
inward. The abstract understanding, with its 'Either--or,' may struggle
against this conception of nature. It is none the less obviously found
in our other modes of consciousness, particularly in religion. It is
the lesson of religion that nature, no less than the spiritual world,
is a revelation of God: but with this distinction, that while nature
never gets so far as to be conscious of its divine essence, that
consciousness is the express problem of the mind, which in the matter
of that problem is as yet finite. Those who look upon the essence of
nature as mere inwardness, and therefore inaccessible to us, take up
the same line as that ancient creed which regarded God as envious and
jealous; a creed which both Plato and Aristotle pronounced against long
ago. All that God is, He imparts and reveals; and He does so, at first,
in and through nature.

Any object indeed is faulty and imperfect when it is only inward, and
thus at the same time only outward, or, (which is the same thing,) when
it is only an outward and thus only an inward. For instance, a child,
taken in the gross as human being, is no doubt a rational creature;
but the reason of the child as child is at first a mere inward, in the
shape of his natural ability or vocation, &c. This mere inward, at the
same time, has for the child the form of a more outward, in the shape
of the will of his parents, the attainments of his teachers, and the
whole world of reason that environs him. The education and instruction
of a child aim at making him actually and for himself what he is at
first potentially and therefore for others, viz. for his grown-up
friends. The reason, which at first exists in the child only as an
inner possibility, is actualised through education: and conversely, the
child by these means becomes conscious that the goodness, religion, and
science which he had at first looked upon as an outward authority, are
his own and inward nature. As with the child so it is in this matter
with the adult, when, in opposition to his true destiny, his intellect
and will remain in the bondage of the natural man. Thus, the criminal
sees the punishment to which he has to submit as an act of violence
from without: whereas in fact the penalty is only the manifestation of
his own criminal will.

From what has now been said, we may learn what to think of a man who,
when blamed for his shortcomings, it may be, his discreditable acts,
appeals to the (professedly) excellent intentions and sentiments of
the inner self he distinguishes therefrom. There certainly may be
individual cases, where the malice of outward circumstances frustrates
well-meant designs, and disturbs the execution of the best-laid plans.
But in general even here the essential unity between inward and outward
is maintained. We are thus justified in saying that a man is what he
does; and the lying vanity which consoles itself with the feeling of
inward excellence, may be confronted with the words of the gospel: 'By
their fruits ye shall know them.' That grand saying applies primarily
in a moral and religious aspect, but it also holds good in reference
to performances in art and science. The keen eye of a teacher who
perceives in his pupil decided evidences of talent, may lead him to
state his opinion that a Raphael or a Mozart lies hidden in the boy:
and the result will show how far such an opinion was well-founded.
But if a daub of a painter, or a poetaster, soothe themselves by the
conceit that their head is full of high ideals, their consolation is
a poor one; and if they insist on being judged not by their actual
works but by their projects, we may safely reject their pretensions
as unfounded and unmeaning. The converse case however also occurs. In
passing judgment on men who have accomplished something great and good,
we often make use of the false distinction between inward and outward.
All that they have accomplished, we say, is outward merely; inwardly
they were acting from some very different motive, such as a desire to
gratify their vanity or other unworthy passion. This is the spirit of
envy. Incapable of any great action of its own, envy tries hard to
depreciate greatness and to bring it down to its own level. Let us,
rather, recall the fine expression of Goethe, that there is no remedy
but Love against great superiorities of others. We may seek to rob
men's great actions of their grandeur, by the insinuation of hypocrisy;
but, though it is possible that men in an instance now and then may
dissemble and disguise a good deal, they cannot conceal the whole of
their inner self, which infallibly betrays itself in the _decursus
vitae._ Even here it is true that a man is nothing but the series of
his actions.

What is called the 'pragmatic' writing of history has in modern times
frequently sinned in its treatment of great historical characters, and
defaced and tarnished the true conception of them by this fallacious
separation of the outward from the inward. Not content with telling
the unvarnished tale of the great acts which have been wrought by
the heroes of the world's history, and with acknowledging that their
inward being corresponds with the import of their acts, the pragmatic
historian fancies himself justified and even obliged to trace the
supposed secret motives that lie behind the open facts of the record.
The historian, in that case, is supposed to write with more depth in
proportion as he succeeds in tearing away the aureole from all that
has been heretofore held grand and glorious, and in depressing it, so
far as its origin and proper significance are concerned, to the level
of vulgar mediocrity. To make these pragmatical researches in history
easier, it is usual to recommend the study of psychology, which is
supposed to make us acquainted with the real motives of human actions.
The psychology in question however is only that petty knowledge of
men, which looks away from the essential and permanent in human
nature to fasten its glance on the casual and private features shown
in isolated instincts and passions. A pragmatical psychology ought
at least to leave the historian, who investigates the motives at the
ground of great actions, a choice between the 'substantial' interests
of patriotism, justice, religious truth and the like, on the one hand,
and the subjective and 'formal' interests of vanity, ambition, avarice
and the like, on the other. The latter however are the motives which
must be viewed by the pragmatist as really efficient, otherwise the
assumption of a contrast between the inward (the disposition of the
agent) and the outward (the import of the action) would fall to the
ground. But inward and outward have in truth the same content; and the
right doctrine is the very reverse of this pedantic judicially. If the
heroes of history had been actuated by subjective and formal interests
alone, they would never have accomplished what they have. And if we
have due regard to the unity between the inner and the outer, we must
own that great men willed what they did, and did what they willed.

141.] The empty abstractions, by means of which the one identical
content perforce continues in the two correlatives, suspend themselves
in the immediate transition, the one in the other. The content is
itself nothing but their identity (§ 138): and these abstractions are
the seeming of essence, put as seeming. By the manifestation of force
the inward is put into existence: but this putting is the mediation by
empty abstractions. In its own self the intermediating process vanishes
to the immediacy, in which the inward and the outward are absolutely
identical and their difference is distinctly no more than assumed and
imposed. This identity is Actuality.


C.--ACTUALITY.

142.] Actuality is the unity, become immediate, of essence with
existence, or of inward with outward. The utterance of the actual
is the actual itself: so that in this utterance it remains just as
essential, and only is essential, in so far as it is in immediate
external existence.

We have ere this met Being and Existence as forms of the immediate.
Being is, in general, unreflected immediacy and transition into
another. Existence is immediate unity of being and reflection; hence
appearance: it comes from the ground, and falls to the ground. In
actuality this unity is explicitly put, and the two sides of the
relation identified. Hence the actual is exempted from transition, and
its externality is its energising. In that energising it is reflected
into itself: its existence is only the manifestation of itself, not of
an other.

Actuality and thought (or Idea) are often absurdly opposed. How
commonly we hear people saying that, though no objection can be urged
against the truth and correctness of a certain thought, there is
nothing of the kind to be seen in actuality, or it cannot be actually
carried out! People who use such language only prove that they have
not properly apprehended the nature either of thought or of actuality.
Thought in such a case is, on one hand, the synonym for a subjective
conception, plan, intention or the like, just as actuality, on the
other, is made synonymous with external and sensible existence. This
is all very well in common life, where great laxity is allowed in the
categories and the names given to them: and it may of course happen
that _e.g._ the plan, or so-called idea, say of a certain method of
taxation, is good and advisable in the abstract, but that nothing of
the sort is found in so-called actuality, or could possibly be carried
out under the given conditions. But when the abstract understanding
gets hold of these categories and exaggerates the distinction they
imply into a hard and fast line of contrast, when it tells us that in
this actual world we must knock ideas out of our heads, it is necessary
energetically to protest against these doctrines, alike in the name of
science and of sound reason. For on the one hand Ideas are not confined
to our heads merely, nor is the Idea, upon the whole, so feeble as to
leave the question of its actualisation or non-actualisation dependent
in our will. The Idea is rather the absolutely active as well I as
actual. And on the other hand actuality is not so bad and irrational,
as purblind or wrong-headed and muddle-brained would-be reformers
imagine. So far is actuality, as distinguished from mere appearance,
and primarily presenting a unity of inward and outward, from being in
contrariety with reason, that it is rather thoroughly reasonable, and
everything which is not reasonable must on that very ground cease to
be held actual. The same view may be traced in the usages of educated
speech, which declines to give the name of real poet or real statesman
to a poet or a statesman who can do nothing really meritorious or
reasonable.

In that vulgar conception of actuality which mistakes for it what is
palpable and directly obvious to the senses, we must seek the ground
of a wide-spread prejudice about the relation of the philosophy of
Aristotle to that of Plato. Popular opinion makes the difference to be
as follows. While Plato recognises the idea and only the idea as the
truth, Aristotle, rejecting the idea, keeps to what is actual, and is
on that account to be considered the founder and chief of empiricism.
On this it may be remarked: that although actuality certainly is
the principle of the Aristotelian philosophy, it is not the vulgar
actuality of what is immediately at hand, but the idea as actuality.
Where then lies the controversy of Aristotle against Plato? It lies in
this. Aristotle calls the Platonic idea a mere δίναμις, and establishes
in opposition to Plato that the idea, which both equally recognise to
be the only truth, is essentially to be viewed as an ἐνέργεια, in other
words, as the inward which is quite to the fore, or as the unity of
inner and outer, or as actuality, in the emphatic sense here given to
the word.

143.] Such a concrete category as Actuality includes the
characteristics aforesaid and their difference, and is therefore also
the development of them, in such a way that, as it has them, they are
at the same time plainly understood to be a show, to be assumed or
imposed (§ 141).

(α) Viewed as an identity in general, Actuality is first of all
Possibility--the reflection-into-self which, as in contrast with
the concrete unity of the actual, is taken and made an abstract and
unessential essentiality. Possibility is what is essential to reality,
but in such a way that it is at the same time only a possibility.

It was probably the import of Possibility which induced Kant to regard
it along with necessity and actuality as Modalities, 'since these
categories do not in the least increase the notion as object, but only
express its relation to the faculty of knowledge.' For Possibility is
really the bare abstraction of reflection-into-self,--what was formerly
called the Inward, only that it is now taken to mean the external
inward, lifted out of reality and with the being of a mere supposition,
and is thus, sure enough, supposed only as a bare modality, an
abstraction which comes short, and, in more concrete terms, belongs
only to subjective thought. It is otherwise with Actuality and
Necessity. They are anything but a mere sort and mode for something
else: in fact the very reverse of that. If they are supposed, it is as
the concrete, not merely supposititious, but intrinsically complete.

As Possibility is, in the first instance, the mere form of
identity-with-self (as compared with the concrete which is actual),
the rule for it merely is that a thing must not be self-contradictory.
Thus everything is possible; for an act of abstraction can give any
content this form of identity. Everything however is as impossible as
it is possible. In every content,--which is and must be concrete,--the
speciality of its nature may be viewed as a specialised contrariety
and in that way as a contradiction. Nothing therefore can be more
meaningless than to speak of such possibility and impossibility. In
philosophy, in particular, there should never be a word said of showing
that 'It is possible,' or 'There is still another possibility,' or, to
adopt another phraseology, 'It is conceivable.' The same consideration
should warn the writer of history against employing a category which
has now been explained to be on its own merits untrue: but the subtlety
of the empty understanding finds its chief pleasure in the fantastic
ingenuity of suggesting possibilities and lots of possibilities.

Our picture-thought is at first disposed to see in possibility the
richer and more comprehensive, in actuality the poorer and narrower
category. Everything, it is said, is possible, but everything which
is possible is not on that account actual. In real truth, however, if
we deal with them as thoughts, actuality is the more comprehensive,
because it is the concrete thought which includes possibility as an
abstract element. And that superiority is to some extent expressed
in our ordinary mode of thought when we speak of the possible, in
distinction from the actual, as _only_ possible. Possibility is often
said to consist in a thing's being thinkable. 'Think,' however, in this
use of the word, only means to conceive any content under the form of
an abstract identity. Now every content can be brought under this form,
since nothing is required except to separate it from the relations in
which it stands. Hence any content, however absurd and nonsensical, can
be viewed as possible. It is possible that the moon might fall upon
the earth to-night; for the moon is a body separate from the earth,
and may as well fall down upon it as a stone thrown into the air does.
It is possible that the Sultan may become Pope; for, being a man, he
may be converted to the Christian faith, may become a Catholic priest,
and so on. In language like this about possibilities, it is chiefly
the law of the sufficient ground or reason which is manipulated in the
style already explained. Everything, it is said, is possible, for which
you can state some ground. The less education a man has, or, in other
words, the less he knows of the specific connexions of the objects
to which he directs his observations, the greater is his tendency to
launch out into all sorts of empty possibilities. An instance of this
habit in the political sphere is seen in the pot-house politician.
In practical life too it is no uncommon thing to see ill-will and
indolence slink behind the category of possibility, in order to escape
definite obligations. To such conduct the same remarks apply as were
made in connexion with the law of sufficient ground. Reasonable and
practical men refuse to be imposed upon by the possible, for the simple
ground that it is possible only. They stick to the actual (not meaning
by that word merely whatever immediately is now and here). Many of
the proverbs of common life express the same contempt for what is
abstractly possible. 'A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.'

After all there is as good reason for taking everything to be
impossible, as to be possible: for every content (a content is always
concrete) includes not only diverse but even opposite characteristics.
Nothing is so impossible, for instance, as this, that I am: for 'I' is
at the same time simple self-relation and, as undoubtedly, relation
to something else. The same may be seen in every other fact in the
natural or spiritual world. Matter, it may be said, is impossible:
for it is the unity of attraction and repulsion. The same is true of
life, law, freedom, and above all, of God Himself, as the true, _e.g._
the triune God,--a notion of God, which the abstract 'Enlightenment'
of Understanding, in conformity with its canons, rejected on the
allegation that it was contradictory in thought. Generally speaking,
it is the empty understanding which haunts these empty forms: and
the business of philosophy in the matter is to show how null and
meaningless they are. Whether a thing is possible or impossible,
depends altogether on the subject-matter: that is, on the sum total of
the elements in actuality, which, as it opens itself out, discloses
itself to be necessity.

144.] (ß) But the Actual in its distinction from possibility (which
is reflection-into-self) is itself only the outward concrete, the
unessential immediate. In other words, to such extent as the actual
is primarily (§ 142) the simple merely immediate unity of Inward
and Outward, it is obviously made an unessential outward, and thus
at the same time (§ 140) it is merely inward, the abstraction of
reflection-into-self. Hence it is itself characterised as a merely
possible. When thus valued at the rate of a mere possibility, the
actual is a Contingent or Accidental, and, conversely,
possibility is mere Accident itself or Chance.

146.] Possibility and Contingency are the two factors of
Actuality,--Inward and Outward, put as mere forms which constitute the
externality of the actual. They have their reflection-into-self on the
body of actual fact, or content, with its intrinsic definiteness which
gives the essential ground of their characterisation. The finitude of
the contingent and the possible lies, therefore, as we now see, in the
distinction of the form-determination from the content: and, therefore,
it depends on the content alone whether anything is contingent and
possible.

As possibility is the mere _inside_ of actuality, it is for that
reason a mere _outside_ actuality, in other words, Contingency. The
contingent, roughly speaking, is what has the ground of its being
not in itself but in somewhat else. Such is the aspect under which
actuality first comes before consciousness, and which is often mistaken
for actuality itself. But the contingent is only one side of the
actual,--the side, namely, of reflection on somewhat else. It is the
actual, in the signification of something merely possible. Accordingly
we consider the contingent to be what may or may not be, what may be
in one way or in another, whose being or not-being, and whose being
on this wise or otherwise, depends not upon itself but on something
else. To overcome this contingency is, roughly speaking, the problem
of science on the one hand; as in the range of practice, on the other,
the end of action is to rise above the contingency of the will, or
above caprice. It has however often happened, most of all in modern
times, that contingency has been unwarrantably elevated, and had a
value attached to it, both in nature and the world of mind, to which
it has no just claim. Frequently Nature--to take it first,--has been
chiefly admired for the richness and variety of its structures. Apart,
however, from what disclosure it contains of the Idea, this richness
gratifies none of the higher interests of reason, and in its vast
variety of structures, organic and inorganic, affords us only the
spectacle of a contingency losing itself in vagueness. At any rate,
the chequered scene presented by the several varieties of animals and
plants, conditioned as it is by outward circumstances,--the complex
changes in the figuration and grouping of clouds, and the like, ought
not to be ranked higher than the equally casual fancies of the mind
which surrenders itself to its own caprices. The wonderment with which
such phenomena are welcomed is a most abstract frame of mind, from
which one should advance to a closer insight into the inner harmony and
uniformity of nature.

Of contingency in respect of the Will it is especially important to
form a proper estimate. The Freedom of the Will is an expression that
often means mere free-choice, or the will in the form of contingency.
Freedom of choice, or the capacity of determining ourselves towards one
thing or another, is undoubtedly a vital element in the will (which in
its very notion is free); but instead of being freedom itself, it is
only in the first instance a freedom in form. The genuinely free will,
which includes free choice as suspended, is conscious to itself that
its content is intrinsically firm and fast, and knows it at the same
time to be thoroughly its own. A will, on the contrary, which remains
standing on the grade of option, even supposing it does decide in
favour of what is in import right and true, is always haunted by the
conceit that it might, if it had so pleased, have decided in favour of
the reverse course. When more narrowly examined, free choice is seen
to be a contradiction, to this extent that its form and content stand
in antithesis. The matter of choice is given, and known as a content
dependent not on the will itself,'but on outward circumstances. In
reference to such a given content, freedom lies only in the form of
choosing, which, as it is only a freedom in form, may consequently be
regarded as freedom only in supposition. On an ultimate analysis it
will be seen that the same outwardness of circumstances, on which is
founded the content that the will finds to its hand, can alone account
for the will giving its decision for the one and not the other of the
two alternatives.

Although contingency, as it has thus been shown, is only one aspect in
the whole of actuality, and therefore not to be mistaken for actuality
itself, it has no less than the rest of the forms of the idea its due
office in the world of objects. This is, in the first place, seen in
Nature. On the surface of Nature, so to speak, Chance ranges unchecked,
and that contingency must simply be recognised, without the pretension
sometimes erroneously ascribed to philosophy, of seeking to find in it
a could-only-be-so-and-not-otherwise. Nor is contingency less visible
in the world of Mind. The will, as we have already remarked, includes
contingency under the shape of option or free-choice, but only as a
vanishing and abrogated element. In respect of Mind and its works,
just as in the case of Nature, we must guard against being so far
misled by a well-meant endeavour after rational knowledge, as to try
to exhibit the necessity of phenomena which are marked by a decided
contingency, or, as the phrase is, to construe them _a priori._ Thus
in language (although it be, as it were, the body of thought) Chance
still unquestionably plays a decided part; and the same is true of the
creations of law, of art, &c. The problem of science, and especially of
philosophy, undoubtedly consists in eliciting the necessity concealed
under the semblance of contingency. That however is far from meaning
that the contingent belongs to our subjective conception alone, and
must therefore be simply set aside, if we wish to get at the truth.
All scientific researches which pursue this tendency exclusively,
lay themselves fairly open to the charge of mere jugglery and an
over-strained precisianism.

146.] When more closely examined, what the aforesaid outward side
of actuality implies is this. Contingency, which is actuality
in its immediacy, is the self-identical, essentially only as a
supposition which is no sooner made than it is revoked and leaves
an existent externality. In this way, the external contingency is
something pre-supposed, the immediate existence of which is at the
same time a possibility, and has the vocation to be suspended, to
be the possibility of something else. Now this possibility is the
Condition.

The Contingent, as the immediate actuality, is at the same time
the possibility of somewhat else,--no longer however that abstract
possibility which we had at first, but the possibility which _is._ And
a possibility existent is a Condition. By the Condition of a thing
we mean first, an existence, in short an immediate, and secondly
the vocation of this immediate to be suspended and subserve the
actualising of something else.--Immediate actuality is in general
as such never what it ought to be; it is a finite actuality with an
inherent flaw, and its vocation is to be consumed. But the other
aspect of actuality is its essentiality. This is primarily the inside,
which as a mere possibility is no less destined to be suspended.
Possibility thus suspended is the issuing of a new actuality, of which
the first immediate actuality was the pre-supposition. Here we see
the alternation which is involved in the notion of a Condition. The
Conditions of a thing seem at first sight to involve no bias anyway.
Really however an immediate actuality of this kind includes in it
the germ of something else altogether. At first this something else
is only a possibility: but the form of possibility is soon suspended
and translated into actuality. This new actuality thus issuing is the
very inside of the immediate actuality which it uses up. Thus there
comes into being quite an other shape of things, and yet itis not an
other: for the first actuality is only put as what it in essence was.
The conditions which are sacrificed, which fall to the ground and are
spent, only unite with themselves in the other actuality. Such in
general is the nature of the process of actuality. The actual is no
mere case of immediate Being, but, as essential Being, a suspension of
its own immediacy, and thereby mediating itself with itself.

147.] (γ) When this externality (of actuality) is thus developed into
a circle of the two categories of possibility and immediate actuality,
showing the intermediation of the one by the other, it is what is
called Real Possibility. Being such a circle, further, it
is the totality, and thus the content, the actual fact or affair in
its all-round definiteness. Whilst in like manner, if we look at the
distinction between the two characteristics in this unity, it realises
the concrete totality of the form, the immediate self-translation
of inner into outer, and of outer into inner. This self-movement of
the form is Activity, carrying into effect the fact or affair as a
_real_ ground which is self-suspended to actuality, and carrying into
effect the contingent actuality, the conditions; _i.e._ it is their
reflection-in-self, and their self-suspension to an other actuality,
the actuality of the actual fact. If all the conditions are at hand,
the fact (event) _must_ be actual; and the fact itself is one of the
conditions: for being in the first place only inner, it is at first
itself only pre-supposed. Developed actuality, as the coincident
alternation of inner and outer, the alternation of their opposite
motions combined into a single motion, is Necessity.

Necessity has been defined, and rightly so, as the union of possibility
and actuality. This mode of expression, however, gives a superficial
and therefore unintelligible description of the very difficult notion
of necessity. It is difficult because it is the notion itself, only
that its stages or factors are still as actualities, which are yet at
the same time to be viewed as forms only, collapsing and transient. In
the two following paragraphs therefore an exposition of the factors
which constitute necessity must be given at greater length.

       *       *       *       *       *

When anything is said to be necessary, the first question we ask is,
Why? Anything necessary accordingly comes before us as something due to
a supposition, the result of certain antecedents. If we go no further
than mere derivation from antecedents however, we have not gained a
complete notion of what necessity means. What is merely derivative,
is what it is, not through itself, but through something else; and in
this way it too is merely contingent. What is necessary, on the other
hand, we would have be what it is through itself; and thus, although
derivative, it must still contain the antecedent whence it is derived
as a vanishing element in itself. Hence we say of what is necessary,
'It is.' We thus hold it to be simple self-relation, in which all
dependence on something else is removed.

Necessity is often said to be blind. If that means that in the process
of necessity the End or final cause is not explicitly and overtly
present, the statement is correct. The process of necessity begins
with the existence of scattered circumstances which appear to have no
inter-connexion and no concern one with another. These circumstances
are an immediate actuality which collapses, and out of this negation
a new actuality proceeds. Here we have a content which in point of
form is doubled, once as content of the final realised fact, and once
as content of the scattered circumstances which appear as if they
were positive, and make themselves at first felt in that character.
The latter content is in itself nought and is accordingly inverted
into its negative, thus becoming content of the realised fact. The
immediate circumstances fall to the ground as conditions, but are at
the same time retained as content of the ultimate reality. From such
circumstances and conditions there has, as we say, proceeded quite
another thing, and it is for that reason that we call this process of
necessity blind. If on the contrary we consider teleological action, we
have in the end of action a content which is already fore-known. This
activity therefore is not blind but seeing. To say that the world is
ruled by Providence implies that design, as what has been absolutely
pre-determined, is the active principle, so that the issue corresponds
to what has been fore-known and fore-willed.

The theory however which regards the world as determined through
necessity and the belief in a divine providence are by no means
mutually excluding points of view. The intellectual principle
underlying the idea of divine providence will hereafter be shown to be
the notion. But the notion is the truth of necessity, which it contains
in suspension in itself; just as, conversely, necessity is the notion
implicit. Necessity is blind only so long as it is not understood.
There is nothing therefore more mistaken than the charge of blind
fatalism made against the Philosophy of History, when it takes for its
problem to understand the necessity of every event. The philosophy of
history rightly understood takes the rank of a Théodicée; and those,
who fancy they honour Divine Providence by excluding necessity from
it, are really degrading it by this exclusiveness to a blind and
irrational caprice. In the simple language of the religious mind which
speaks of God's eternal and immutable decrees, there is implied an
express recognition that necessity forms part of the essence of God. In
his difference from God, man, with his own private opinion and will,
follows the call of caprice and arbitrary humour, and thus often finds
his acts turn out something quite different from what he had meant and
willed. But God knows what He wills, is determined in His eternal will
neither by accident from within nor from without, and what He wills He
also accomplishes, irresistibly.

Necessity gives a point of view which has important bearings upon our
sentiments and behaviour. When we look upon events as necessary, our
situation seems at first sight to lack freedom completely. In the
creed of the ancients, as we know, necessity figured as Destiny. The
modern point of view, on the contrary, is that of Consolation. And
Consolation means that, if we renounce our aims and interests, we do so
only in prospect of receiving compensation. Destiny, on the contrary,
leaves no room for Consolation. But a close examination of the ancient
feeling about destiny, will not by any means reveal a sense of bondage
to its power. Rather the reverse. This will clearly appear, if we
remember, that the sense of bondage springs from inability to surmount
the antithesis, and from looking at what _is,_ and what happens, as
contradictory to what _ought_ to be and happen. In the ancient mind the
feeling was more of the following kind: Because such a thing is, it
is, and as it is, so ought it to be. Here there is no contrast to be
seen, and therefore no sense of bondage, no pain, and no sorrow. True,
indeed, as already remarked, this attitude towards destiny is void of
consolation. But then, on the other hand, it is a frame of mind which
does not need consolation, so long as personal subjectivity has not
acquired its infinite significance. It is this point on which special
stress should be laid in comparing the ancient sentiment with that of
the modern and Christian world.

By Subjectivity, however, we may understand, in the first place, only
the natural and finite subjectivity, with its contingent and arbitrary
content of private interests and inclinations,--all, in short, that
we call person as distinguished from thing: taking 'thing' in the
emphatic sense of the word (in which we use the (correct) expression
that it is a question of _things_ and not of _persons)._ In this sense
of sub-activity we cannot help admiring the tranquil resignation of
the ancients to destiny, and feeling that it is a much higher and
worthier mood than that of the moderns, who obstinately pursue their
subjective aims, and when they find themselves constrained to resign
the hope of reaching them, console themselves with the prospect of a
reward in some other shape. But the term subjectivity is not to be
confined merely to the bad and finite kind of it which is contrasted
with the thing (fact). In its truth subjectivity is immanent in the
fact, and as a subjectivity thus infinite is the very truth of the
fact. Thus regarded, the doctrine of consolation receives a newer and
a higher significance. It is in this sense that the Christian religion
is to be regarded as the religion of consolation, and even of absolute
consolation. Christianity, we know, teaches that God wishes all men
to be saved. That teaching declares that subjectivity has an infinite
value. And that consoling power of Christianity just lies in the fact
that God Himself is in it known as the absolute subjectivity, so that,
inasmuch as subjectivity involves the element of particularity, _our_
particular personality too is recognised not merely as something to be
solely and simply nullified, but as at the same time something to be
preserved. The gods of the ancient world were also, it is true, looked
upon as personal; but the personality of a Zeus and an Apollo is not
a real personality: it is only a figure in the mind. In other words,
these gods are mere personifications, which, being such, do not know
themselves, and are only known. An evidence of this defect and this
powerlessness of the old gods is found even in the religious beliefs
of antiquity. In the ancient creeds not only men, but even gods,
were represented as subject to destiny (πεπρωμένον or εἱμαρμένη), a
destiny which we must conceive as necessity not unveiled, and thus as
something wholly impersonal, selfless, and blind. On the other hand,
the Christian God is God not known merely, but also self-knowing; He is
a personality not merely figured in our minds, but rather absolutely
actual.

We must refer to the Philosophy of Religion for a further discussion of
the points here touched. But we may note in passing how important it
is for any man to meet everything that befalls him with the spirit of
the old proverb which describes each man as the architect of his own
fortune. That means that it is only himself after all of which a man
has the usufruct. The other way would be to lay the blame of whatever
we experience upon other men, upon unfavourable circumstances, and the
like. And this is a fresh example of the language of unfreedom, and at
the same time the spring of discontent. If man saw, on the contrary,
that whatever happens to him is only the outcome of himself, and that
he only bears his own guilt, he would stand free, and in everything
that came upon him would have the consciousness that he suffered no
wrong. A man who lives in dispeace with himself and his lot, commits
much that is perverse and amiss, for no other reason than because of
the false opinion that he is wronged by others. No doubt too there is a
great deal of chance in what befalls us. But the chance has its root in
the 'natural' man. So long however as a man is otherwise conscious that
he is free, his harmony of soul and peace of mind will not be destroyed
by the disagreeables that befall him. It is their view of necessity,
therefore, which is at the root of the content and discontent of men,
and which in that way determines their destiny itself.

148.] Among the three elements in the process of necessity--the
Condition, the Fact, and the Activity--

a. The Condition is (α) what is pre-supposed or ante-stated, _e.g._
it is not only supposed or stated, and so only a correlative to the
fact, but also prior, and so independent, a contingent and external
circumstance which exists without respect to the fact. While thus
contingent, however, this pre-supposed or ante-stated term, in respect
withal of the fact, which is the totality, is a complete circle of
conditions, (ß) The conditions are passive, are used as materials for
the fact, into the content of which they thus enter. They are likewise
intrinsically conformable to this content, and already contain its
whole characteristic.

b. The Fact is also (α) something pre-supposed or ante-stated, _i.e._
it is at first, and as supposed, only inner and possible, and also,
being prior, an independent content by itself, (ß) By using up the
conditions, it receives its external existence, the realisation of
the articles of its content, which reciprocally correspond to the
conditions, so that whilst it presents itself out of these as the fact,
it also proceeds from them.

c. The Activity similarly has (α) an independent existence of its own
(as a man, a character), and at the same time it is possible only
where the conditions are and the fact, (ß) It is the movement which
translates the conditions into fact, and the latter into the former as
the side of existence, or rather the movement which educes the fact
from the conditions in which it is potentially present, and which gives
existence to the fact by abolishing the existence possessed by the
conditions.

In so far as these three elements stand to each other in the shape
of independent existences, this process has the aspect of an outward
necessity. Outward necessity has a limited content for its fact. For
the fact is this whole, in phase of singleness. But since in its form
this whole is external to itself, it is self-externalised even in its
own self and in its content, and this externality, attaching to the
fact, is a limit of its content.

149.] Necessity, then, is potentially the one essence, self-same but
now full of content, in the reflected light of which its distinctions
take the form of independent realities. This self-sameness is at the
same time, as absolute form, the activity which reduces into dependency
and mediates into immediacy.--Whatever is necessary is through an
other, which is broken up into the mediating ground (the Fact and
the Activity) and an immediate actuality or accidental circumstance,
which is at the same time a Condition. The necessary, being through
an other, is not in and for itself: hypothetical, it is a mere result
of assumption. But this intermediation is just as immediately however
the abrogation of itself. The ground and contingent condition is
translated into immediacy, by which that dependency is now lifted up
into actuality, and the fact has closed with itself. In this return
to itself the necessary simply and positively _is,_ as unconditioned
actuality. The necessary is so, mediated through a circle of
circumstances: it is so, because the circumstances are so, and at the
same time it is so, unmediated: it is so, because it is.

(a) _Relationship of Substantiality._

150.] The necessary is in itself an absolute correlation of elements,
_i.e._ the process developed (in the preceding paragraphs), in which
the correlation also suspends itself to absolute identity.

In its immediate form it is the relationship of Substance and Accident.
The absolute self-identity of this relationship is Substance as such,
which as necessity gives the negative to this form of inwardness, and
thus invests itself with actuality, but which also gives the negative
to this outward thing. In this negativity, the actual, as immediate,
is only an accidental which through this bare possibility passes over
into another actuality. This transition is the identity of substance,
regarded as form-activity (§§ 148, 149).

151.] Substance is accordingly the totality of the Accidents,
revealing itself in them as their absolute negativity, (that is to
say, as absolute power,) and at the same time as the wealth of all
content. This content however is nothing but that very revelation,
since the character (being reflected in itself to make content) is
only a passing stage of the form which passes away in the power of
substance. Substantiality is the absolute form-activity and the power
of necessity: all content is but a vanishing element which merely
belongs to this process, where there is an absolute revulsion of form
and content into one another.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the history of philosophy we meet with Substance as the principle
of Spinoza's system. On the import and value of that much-praised and
no less decried philosophy there has been great misunderstanding and
a deal of talking since the days of Spinoza. The atheism and, as a
further charge, the pantheism of the system has formed the commonest
ground of accusation. These cries arise because of Spinoza's conception
of God as substance, and substance only. What we are to think of this
charge follows, in the first instance, from the place which substance
takes in the system of the logical idea. Though an essential stage in
the evolution of the idea, substance is not the same with absolute
Idea, but the idea under the still limited form of necessity. It is
true that God is necessity, or, as we may also put it, that He is the
absolute Thing: He is however no less the absolute Person. That He is
the absolute Person however is a point which the philosophy of Spinoza
never reached: and on that side it falls short of the true notion of
God which forms the content of religious consciousness in Christianity.
Spinoza was by descent a Jew; and it is upon the whole the Oriental way
of seeing things, according to which the nature of the finite world
seems frail and transient, that has found its intellectual expression
in his system. This Oriental view of the unity of substance certainly
gives the basis for all real further development. Still it is not the
final idea. It is marked by the absence of the principle of the Western
World, the principle of individuality, which first appeared under a
philosophic shape, contemporaneously with Spinoza, in the Monadology of
Leibnitz.

From this point we glance back to the alleged atheism of Spinoza. The
charge will be seen to be unfounded if we remember that his system,
instead of denying God, rather recognises that He alone really is.
Nor can it be maintained that the God of Spinoza, although he is
described as alone true, is not the true God, and therefore as good as
no God. If that were a just charge, it would only prove that all other
systems, where speculation has not gone beyond a subordinate stage
of the idea,--that the Jews and Mohammedans who know God only as the
Lord,--and that even the many Christians for whom God is merely the
most high, unknowable, and transcendent being, are as much atheists as
Spinoza. The so-called atheism of Spinoza is merely an exaggeration of
the fact that he defrauds the principle of difference or finitude of
its due. Hence his system, as it holds that there is properly speaking
no world, at any rate that the world has no positive being, should
rather be styled Acosmism, These considerations will also show what is
to be said of the charge of Pantheism. If Pantheism means, as it often
does, the doctrine which takes finite things in their finitude and in
the complex of them to be God, we must acquit the system of Spinoza of
the crime of Pantheism. For in that system, finite things and the world
as a whole are denied all truth. On the other hand, the philosophy
which is Acosmism is for that reason certainly pantheistic.

The shortcoming thus acknowledged to attach to the content turns out
at the same time to be a shortcoming in respect of form. Spinoza puts
substance at the head of his system, and defines it to be the unity
of thought and extension, without demonstrating how he gets to this
distinction, or how he traces it back to the unity of substance. The
further treatment of the subject proceeds in what is called the
mathematical method. Definitions and axioms are first laid down: after
them comes a series of theorems, which are proved by an analytical
reduction of them to these unproved postulates. Although the system
of Spinoza, and that even by those who altogether reject its contents
and results, is praised for the strict sequence of its method, such
unqualified praise of the form is as little justified as an unqualified
rejection of the content. The defect of the content is that the form
is not known as immanent in it, and therefore only approaches it as an
outer and subjective form. As intuitively accepted by Spinoza without a
previous mediation by dialectic, Substance, as the universal negative
power, is as it were a dark shapeless abyss which engulfs all definite
content as radically null, and produces from itself nothing that has a
positive subsistence of its own.

152.] At the stage, where substance, as absolute power, is the
self-relating power (itself a merely inner possibility) which thus
determines itself to accidentality,--from which power the externality
it thereby creates is distinguished--necessity is a correlation
strictly so called, just as in the first form of necessity, it is
substance. This is the correlation of Causality.

(b) _Relationship of Causality._

153.] Substance is Cause, in so far as substance reflects into
self as against its passage into accidentality and so stands as the
_primary_ fact, but again no less suspends this reflection-into-self
(its bare possibility), lays itself down as the negative of itself, and
thus produces an Effect, an actuality, which, though so far only
assumed as a sequence, is through the process that effectuates it at
the same time necessary.

As primary fact, the cause is qualified as having absolute independence
and a subsistence maintained in face of the effect: but in the
necessity, whose identity constitutes that primariness itself, it
is wholly passed into the effect. So far again as we can speak of a
definite content, there is no content in the effect that is not in
the cause. That identity in fact is the absolute content itself: but
it is no less also the form-characteristic. The primariness of the
cause is suspended in the effect in which the cause makes itself a
dependent being. The cause however does not for that reason vanish and
leave the effect to be alone actual. For this dependency is in like
manner directly suspended, and is rather the reflection of the cause
in itself, its primariness: in short, it is in the effect that the
cause first becomes actual and a cause. The cause consequently is in
its full truth _causa sui._--Jacobi, sticking to the partial conception
of mediation (in his Letters on Spinoza, second edit. p. 416), has
treated the _causa sui_ (and the _effectus sui_ is the same), which is
the absolute truth of the cause, as a mere formalism. He has also made
the remark that God ought to be defined not as the ground of things,
but essentially as cause. A more thorough consideration of the nature
of cause would have shown that Jacobi did not by this means gain what
he intended. Even in the finite cause and its conception we can see
this identity between cause and effect in point of content. The rain
(the cause) and the wet (the effect) are the self-same existing water.
In point of form the cause (rain) is dissipated or lost in the effect
(wet): but in that case the result can no longer be described as
effect; for without the cause it is nothing, and we should have only
the unrelated wet left.

In the common acceptation of the causal relation the cause is finite,
to such extent as its content is so (as is also the case with finite
substance), and so far as cause and effect are conceived as two several
independent existences; which they are, however, only when we leave
the causal relation out of sight. In the finite sphere we never get
over the difference of the form-characteristics in their relation: and
hence we turn the matter round and define the cause also as something
dependent or as an effect. This again has another cause, and thus there
grows up a progress from effects to causes _ad infinitum._ There is a
descending progress too: the effect, looked at in its identity with the
cause, is itself defined as a cause, and at the same time as another
cause, which again has other effects, and so on for ever.

The way understanding bristles up against the idea of substance is
equalled by its readiness to use the relation of cause and effect.
Whenever it is proposed to view any sum of fact as necessary, it
is especially the relation of causality to which the reflective
understanding makes a point of tracing it back. Now, although this
relation does undoubtedly belong to necessity, it forms only one aspect
in the process of that category. That process equally requires the
suspension of the mediation involved in causality and the exhibition
of it as simple self-relation. If we stick to causality as such, we
have it not in its truth. Such a causality is merely finite, and its
finitude lies in retaining the distinction between cause and effect
unassimilated. But these two terms, if they are distinct, are also
identical. Even in ordinary consciousness that identity may be found.
We say that a cause is a cause, only when it has an effect, and _vice
versâ._ Both cause and effect are thus one and the same content: and
the distinction between them is primarily only that the one lays down,
and the other is laid down. This formal difference however again
suspends itself, because the cause is not only a cause of something
else, but also a cause of itself; while the effect is not only an
effect of something else, but also an effect of itself. The finitude
of things consists accordingly in this. While cause and effect are in
their notion identical, the two forms present themselves severed so
that, though the cause is also an effect, and the effect also a cause,
the cause is not an effect in the same connexion as it is a cause, nor
the effect a cause in the same connexion as it is an effect. This
again gives the infinite progress, in the shape of an endless series
of causes, which shows itself at the same time as an endless series of
effects.

154.] The effect is different from the cause. The former as such has
a being dependent on the latter. But such a dependence is likewise
reflection-into-self and immediacy: and the action of the cause, as it
constitutes the effect, is at the same time the pre-constitution of
the effect, so long as effect is kept separate from cause. There is
thus already in existence another substance on which the effect takes
place. As immediate, this substance is not a self-related negativity
and _active,_ but _passive._ Yet it is a substance, and it is therefore
active also: it therefore suspends the immediacy it was originally put
forward with, and the effect which was put into it: it reacts, _e.g._
suspends the activity of the first substance. But this first substance
also in the same way sets aside its own immediacy, or the effect which
is put into it; it thus suspends the activity of the other substance
and reacts. In this manner causality passes into the relation of
Action and Reaction, or Reciprocity.

In Reciprocity, although causality is not yet invested with its true
characteristic, the rectilinear movement out from causes to effects,
and from effects to causes, is bent round and back into itself, and
thus the progress _ad infinitum_ of causes and effects is, as a
progress, really and truly suspended. This bend, which transforms, the
infinite progression into a self-contained relationship, is here as
always the plain reflection that in the above meaningless repetition
there is only one and the same thing, viz. one cause and another, and
their connexion with one another. Reciprocity--which is the development
of this relation-itself however only distinguishes turn and turn
about (--not causes, but) factors of causation, in each of which--just
because they are inseparable (on the principle of the identity that the
cause is cause in the effect, and _vice versâ_)--the other factor is
also equally supposed.

(c) _Reciprocity or Action and Reaction._

155.] The characteristics which in Reciprocal Action are retained as
distinct are (α) potentially the same. The one side is a cause, is
primary, active, passive, &c, just as the other is. Similarly the
pre-supposition of another side and the action upon it, the immediate
primariness and the dependence produced by the alternation, are one and
the same on both sides. The cause assumed to be first is on account
of its immediacy passive, a dependent being, and an effect. The
distinction of the causes spoken of as two is accordingly void: and
properly speaking there is only one cause, which, while it suspends
itself (as substance) in its effect, also rises in this operation only
to independent existence as a cause.

156.] But this unity of the double cause is also (β) actual. All this
alternation is properly the cause in act of constituting itself and in
such constitution lies its being. The nullity of the distinctions is
not only potential, or a reflection of ours (§ 155). Reciprocal action
just means that each characteristic we impose is also to be suspended
and inverted into its opposite, and that in this way the essential
nullity of the 'moments' is explicitly stated. An effect is introduced
into the primariness; in other words, the primariness is abolished: the
action of a cause becomes reaction, and so on.

Reciprocal action realises the causal relation in its complete
development. It is this relation, therefore, in which reflection
usually takes shelter when the conviction grows that things can no
longer be studied satisfactorily from a causal point of view, on
account of the infinite progress already spoken of. Thus in historical
research the question may be raised in a first form, whether the
character and manners of a nation are the cause of its constitution and
its laws, or if they are not rather the effect. Then, as the second
step, the character and manners on one side and the constitution and
laws on the other are conceived on the principle of reciprocity: and
in that case the cause in the same connexion as it is a cause will at
the same time be an effect, and _vice versâ._ The same thing is done
in the study of Nature, and especially of living organisms. There
the several organs and functions are similarly seen to stand to each
other in the relation of reciprocity. Reciprocity is undoubtedly the
proximate truth of the relation of cause and effect, and stands, so
to say, on the threshold of the notion; but on that very ground,
supposing that our aim is a thoroughly comprehensive idea, we should
not rest content with applying this relation. If we get no further than
studying a given content under the point of view of reciprocity, we are
taking up an attitude which leaves matters utterly incomprehensible.
We are left with a mere dry fact; and the call for mediation, which
is the chief motive in applying the relation of causality, is still
unanswered. And it we look more narrowly into the dissatisfaction
felt in applying the relation of reciprocity, we shall see that it
consists in the circumstance, that this relation, instead of being
treated as an equivalent for the notion, ought, first of all, to be
known and understood in its own nature. And to understand the relation
of action and reaction we must not let the two sides rest in their
state of mere given facts, but recognise them, as has been shown in
the two paragraphs preceding, for factors of a third and higher, which
is the notion and nothing else. To make, for example, the manners of
the Spartans the cause of their constitution and their constitution
conversely the cause of their manners, may no doubt be in a way
correct. But, as we have comprehended neither the manners nor the
constitution of the nation, the result of such reflections can never
be final or satisfactory. The satisfactory point will be reached only
when these two, as well as all other, special aspects of Spartan life
and Spartan history are seen to be founded in this notion.

157.] This pure self-reciprocation is therefore Necessity unveiled
or realised. The link of necessity _quâ_ necessity is identity, as
still inward and concealed, because it is the identity of what are
esteemed actual things, although their very self-subsistence is bound
to be necessity. The circulation of substance through causality
and reciprocity therefore only expressly makes out or states that
self-subsistence is the infinite negative self-relation--a relation
_negative,_ in general, for in it the act of distinguishing and
intermediating becomes a primariness of actual things independent
one against the other,--and _infinite self-relation,_ because their
independence only lies in their identity.

158.] This truth of necessity, therefore, is _Freedom:_ and the
truth of substance is the Notion,--an independence which, though
self-repulsive into distinct independent elements, yet in that
repulsion is self-identical, and in the movement of reciprocity still
at home and conversant only with itself.

       *       *       *       *       *

Necessity is often called hard, and rightly so, if we keep only to
necessity as such, _i.e._ to its immediate shape. Here we have,
first of all, some state or, generally speaking, fact, possessing an
independent subsistence: and necessity primarily implies that there
falls upon such a fact something else by which it is brought low.
This is what is hard and sad in necessity immediate or abstract. The
identity of the two things, which necessity presents as bound to each
other and thus bereft of their independence, is at first only inward,
and therefore has no existence for those under the yoke of necessity.
Freedom too from this point of view is only abstract, and is preserved
only by renouncing all that we immediately are and have. But, as we
have seen already, the process of necessity is so directed that it
overcomes the rigid externality which it first had and reveals its
inward nature. It then appears that the members, linked to one another,
are not really foreign to each other, but only elements of one whole,
each of them, in its connexion with the other, being, as it were, at
home, and combining with itself. In this way necessity is transfigured
into freedom,--not the freedom that consists in abstract negation,
but freedom concrete and positive. From which we may learn what a
mistake it is to regard freedom and necessity as mutually exclusive.
Necessity indeed _quâ_ necessity is far from being freedom: yet
freedom pre-supposes necessity, and contains it as an unsubstantial
element in itself. A good man is aware that the tenor of his conduct
is essentially obligatory and necessary. But this consciousness is
so far from making any abatement from his freedom, that without it
real and reasonable freedom could not be distinguished from arbitrary
choice,--a freedom which has no reality and is merely potential. A
criminal, when punished, may look upon his punishment as a restriction
of his freedom. Really the punishment is not foreign constraint to
which he is subjected, but the manifestation of his own act: and if he
recognises this, he comports himself as a free man. In short, man is
most independent when he knows himself to be determined by the absolute
idea throughout. It was this phase of mind and conduct which Spinoza
called _Amor intellectualis Dei._

159.] Thus the Notion is the truth of Being and Essence, inasmuch as
the shining or show of self-reflection is itself at the same time
independent immediacy, and this being of a different actuality is
immediately only a shining or show on itself.

The Notion has exhibited itself as the truth of Being and Essence, as
the ground to which the regress of both leads. Conversely it has been
developed out of being as its ground. The former aspect of the advance
may be regarded as a concentration of being into its depth, thereby
disclosing its inner nature: the latter aspect as an issuing of the
more perfect from the less perfect. When such development is viewed on
the latter side only, it does prejudice to the method of philosophy.
The special meaning which these superficial thoughts of more imperfect
and more perfect have in this place is to indicate the distinction of
being, as an immediate unity with itself, from the notion, as free
mediation with itself. Since being has shown that it is an element in
the notion, the latter has thus exhibited itself as the truth of being.
As this its reflection in itself and as an absorption of the mediation,
the notion is the pre-supposition of the immediate--a pre-supposition
which is identical with the return to self; and in this identity lie
freedom and the notion. If the partial element therefore be called the
imperfect, then the notion, or the perfect, is certainly a development
from the imperfect; since its very nature is thus to suspend its
pre-supposition. At the same time it is the notion alone which, in the
act of supposing itself, makes its pre-supposition; as has been made
apparent in causality in general and especially in reciprocal action.

Thus in reference to Being and Essence the Notion is defined as Essence
reverted to the simple immediacy of Being,--the shining or show of
Essence thereby having actuality, and its actuality being at the same
time a free shining or show in itself. In this manner the notion has
being as its simple self-relation, or as the immediacy of its immanent
unity. Being is so poor a category that it is the least thing which can
be shown to be found in the notion.

The passage from necessity to freedom, or from actuality into the
notion, is the very hardest, because it proposes that independent
actuality shall be thought as having all its substantiality in the
passing over and identity with the other independent actuality. The
notion, too, is extremely hard, because it is itself just this very
identity. But the actual substance as such, the cause, which in its
exclusiveness resists all invasion, is _ipso facto_ subjected to
necessity or the destiny of passing into dependency: and it is this
subjection rather where the chief hardness lies. To think necessity, on
the contrary, rather tends to melt that hardness. For thinking means
that, in the other, one meets with one's self.--It means a liberation,
which is not the flight of abstraction, but consists in that which is
actual having itself not as something else, but as its own being and
creation, in the other actuality with which it is bound up by the force
of necessity. As existing in an individual form, this liberation is
called I: as developed to its totality, it is free Spirit; as feeling,
it is Love; and as enjoyment, it is Blessedness.--The great vision
of substance in Spinoza is only a potential liberation from finite
exclusiveness and egoism: but the notion itself realises for its own
both the power of necessity and actual freedom.

       *       *       *       *       *

When, as now, the notion is called the truth of Being and Essence,
we must expect to be asked, why we do not begin with the notion? The
answer is that, where knowledge by thought is our aim, we cannot begin
with the truth, because the truth, when it forms the beginning, must
rest on mere assertion. The truth when it is thought must as such
verify itself to thought. If the notion were put at the head of Logic,
and defined, quite correctly in point of content, as the unity of
Being and Essence, the following question would come up: What are we
to think under the terms 'Being' and 'Essence,' and how do they come
to be embraced in the unity of the Notion? But if we answered these
questions, then our beginning with the notion would be merely nominal.
The real start would be made with Being, as we have here done: with
this difference, that the characteristics of Being as well as those
of Essence would have to be accepted uncritically from figurate
conception, whereas we have observed Being and Essence in their own
dialectical development and learnt how they lose themselves in the
unity of the notion.


[1] Compare Goethe's indignant outcry--'To Natural Science,' vol. i.
pt. 3:

    Das hör' ich sechzig Jahre wiederholen,
    Und fluche drauf, aber verstohlen,--
    Natur hat weder Kern noch Schaale,
    Alles ist sie mit einem Male.





