CHAPTER V.

P. 121, § 62. F. H. Jacobi (_Werke,_ v. 82) in his _Woldemar_ (a
romance contained in a series of letters, first published _as a whole_
in 1781) writes: 'The philosophical understanding (Verstand) is jealous
of everything unique, everything immediately certain which makes itself
true, without proofs, solely by its existence. It persecutes this
faith of reason even into our inmost consciousness, where it tries to
make us distrust the feeling of our identity and personality.' 'What
is absolutely and intrinsically true,' he adds (v. 122), 'is not got
by way of reasoning and comparison: both our immediate consciousness
(Wissen)--I am--and our conscience (Gewissen) are the work of a secret
something in which heart, understanding, and sense combine.' 'Notions
(Begriffe), far from embalming the living, really turn it into a
corpse' (v. 380).

Cf. Fichte's words (_Werke,_ ii. 255), Aus dem Gewissen allein stammt
die Wahrheit, &c.

P. 122, § 62. The Letters on the doctrine of Spinoza, published in
1785, were re-issued in 1789 with eight supplements.

'A science,' says Jacobi in his latest utterance (_Werke,_ iv. pref.
xxx.) 'is only a systematic register of cognitions mutually referring
to one another--the first and last point in the series is wanting.'

P. 123, § 62. Lalande's dictum is referred to by Fries (_Populäre
Vorlesungen über Sternkunde,_ 1813) quoted by Jacobi in his _Werke,_
ii. 55. What Lalande has actually written in the preface to his work on
astronomy is that the science as he understands it has no relation to
natural theology--in other words, that he is not writing a Bridgewater
treatise.

P. 123, § 63. Jacobi, _Werke,_ ii. 222. 'For my part, I regard the
principle of reason as all one with the principle of life.' And ii.
343: 'Evidently reason is the true and proper life of our nature.'
It is in virtue of our inner tendency and instinct towards the
eternal (Richtung und Trieb auf das Ewige),--of our sense for the
supersensible--that we, human beings, really subsist (iv. 6. 152). And
this Organ der Vernehmung des Uebersinnlichen is Reason (iii. 203, &c).

The language of Jacobi fluctuates, not merely in words, but in the
intensity of his intuitionalism. Thus, _e.g._ iii. 32: 'The reason man
has is no faculty giving the science of the true, but only a presage'
(Ahndung des Wahren). 'The belief in a God,' he says, at one time (iii.
206) 'is as natural to man as his upright position': but that belief
is, he says elsewhere, only 'an inborn devotion (Andacht) before an
unknown God.' Thus, if we have an immediate awareness (Wissen) of
God, this is not knowledge or science (Wissenschaft). Such intuition
of reason is described (ii. 9) as 'the faculty of _presupposing_ the
intrinsically (an sich) true, good, and beautiful, with full confidence
in the objective validity of the presupposition.' But that object we
are let see only in feeling (ii. 61). 'Our philosophy,' he says (iii.
6) 'starts from feeling--of course an objective and pure feeling.'

P. 124, § 63. Jacobi (_Werke,_ iv. a, p. 211): 'Through faith (Glaube)
we know that we have a body.' Such immediate knowledge of our own
activity--'the feeling of I am, I act' (iii. 411)--the sense of
'absolute self-activity' or freedom (of which the 'possibility cannot
be cognised,' because logically a contradiction) is what Jacobi calls
Anschauung (Intuition). He distinguishes a sensuous, and a rational
intuition (iii. 59).

P. 125, § 63. Jacobi expressly disclaims identification of his Glaube
with the faith of Christian doctrine (_Werke,_ iv. a, p. 210). In
defence he quotes from Hume, Inquiry V, and from Reid, passages to
illustrate his usage of the term 'belief--by the distinction between
which and faith certain ambiguities are no doubt avoided.

P. 129, § 66. Kant had said _'Concepts without intuitions are empty'_
It is an exaggeration of this half-truth (the other half is _Intuitions
without concepts are blind_) that is the basis of these statements of
Jacobi (and of Schopenhauer)--a view of which the following passage
from Schelling (_Werke,_ ii. 125) is representative. 'Concepts
(Begriffe) are only silhouettes of reality. They are projected by
a serviceable faculty, the understanding, which only comes into
action when reality is already on the scene,--which only comprehends,
conceives, retains what it required a creative faculty to produce....
The mere concept is a word without meaning.... All reality that can
attach to it is lent to it merely by the intuition (Anschauung) which
preceded it. ... Nothing is real for us except what is _immediately
given_ us, without any mediation by concepts, without our feeling at
liberty. But nothing reaches us immediately except through intuition.'
He adds, however, 'Intuition is due to the activity of mind (Sein):
it demands a disengaged sense (freier Sinn) and an intellectual organ
(geistiges Organ).'

P. 134. Cicero: _De Natura Deorum,_ i. 16; ii. 4, _De quo autem omnium
natura consentit, id verum esse necesse est_; cf. Seneca, Epist. cxvii.
6. The principle is common to Stoics and Epicureans: it is the maxim
of Catholic truth _Quod semper, quod ubique, quod ab omnibus creditum
est_--equivalent to Aristotle's ὄ πᾶσι δοκεῖ, τοῦτ' εἷναι φάμεν--But as
Aristotle remarks (_An. Post._ i. 31) τὸ καθόλον καὶ ἐπὶ πᾶσιν ἀδίνατον
αἰσθάνεσθαι.

Jacobi: _Werke,_ vi. 145. 'The general opinion about what is true and
good must have an authority equal to reason.'

P. 136, § 72. Cf. _Encyclop._ § 400: 'That the heart and the feeling
is not the form by which anything is justified as religious, moral,
true, and just, and that an appeal to heart and feeling either means
nothing or means something bad, should hardly need enforcing. Can any
experience be more trite than that hearts and feelings are also bad,
evil, godless, mean, &c.? Ay, that the heart is the source of such
feelings only, is directly said in the words: Out of the heart proceed
evil thoughts, &c. In times when the heart and the sentiment are, by
scientific theology and philosophy, made the criterion of goodness,
religion, and morality, it is necessary to recall these trivial
experiences.'


