CHAPTER V.

REVIEW OF THE PRINCIPAL METAPHYSICAL HYPOTHESES WHICH WILL REPLACE
DOGMA—_Concluded_.

IDEALISM, MATERIALISM, MONISM.

    I. Idealism—Different forms of idealism: subjective
      idealism, objective idealism: The whole of existence
      resolved into a mode of mental existence—Value of
      idealism considered from point of view of the religious
      sentiment—Most specious of contemporary idealisms:
      Possibility of universal progress on the hypothesis of
      radical spontaneity and of “freedom”—Reconciliation
      between determinism and the conception of freedom—Moral
      idealism as a possible substitute for religious sentiment:
      Dependence of the universe on the principle of goodness.

    II. Materialism—Difficulty in defining absolute materialism:
      Matter—The atom—Nebular hypothesis—Hydrogen—Necessity
      of supplementing materialism by some theory of the origin
      of life—The latest conception of materialism: Conception
      of infinite divisibility and infinite extensibility.

    III. Monism and the fate of worlds—Current of contemporary
      systems toward monism—Scientific interpretation of
      monism—The world conceived monistically as a becoming and
      as a life—Scientific formulæ for life—Progress consists
      in the gradual confusion of these two formulæ—That the
      rise of morality and religion can be accounted for without
      the presupposition of any final cause—Metaphysical
      and moral expectations in regard to the destiny of the
      world and of humanity it may be founded on scientific
      monism—Facts which appear to be inconsistent with these
      expectations—Pessimistic conception of dissolution that
      is complementary to the conception of evolution—Is the
      immanence of dissolution demonstrable?—Natural devices for
      the perpetuation of the “fittest”—Rôle of intelligence,
      of numbers, etc.—Calculation of probabilities—Is
      eternity _a parte post_ a ground of discouragement or
      of hope—Probable existence of thinking beings in other
      worlds: the planets, possibility of the existence of
      beings superior to man—Survival of the conception of
      gods—Hypothesis of intercosmic consciousness and of a
      universal society.

    IV. Destiny of the human race—The hypothesis of
      immortality from the point of view of monism—Two
      possible conceptions of immortality—Eternal or
      untemporal existence and continuation of life in some
      superior forms—I. Hypothesis of eternal life—its
      function in antique religions, in Platonism, and in the
      systems of Spinoza, Kant, and Schopenhauer—Eternal
      life and the subsistence of the individual—Distinction
      made by Schopenhauer and various other philosophers
      between individuality and personality—Eternal life
      problematical and transcendent—Aristocratic tendency of
      the theory of eternal life—Hypothesis of conditional
      immortality—Criticism of the hypothesis of conditional
      immortality; incompatibility of this notion with that
      of divine goodness—II. Hypothesis of a continuation of
      the present life and its evolution into some superior
      form—What sort of immortality the theory of evolution
      permits us to hope for—Immortality of one’s labours
      and conduct—True conception of such immortality—Its
      relation to the laws of heredity, atavism, natural
      selection—Immortality of the individual—Objections
      drawn from science—Protestations of affection against
      the annihilation of the person—Resulting antinomy—III.
      Modern opposition between the conception of _function_
      and the conception of simple substance, in which
      ancient philosophy endeavours to find a proof of
      immortality—Peripatetic theory of Wundt and modern
      philosophers on the nature of the soul—Immortality as a
      continuation of function, proved not by the simplicity,
      but by the complexity of consciousness—Relation between
      complexity and instability—Three stages of social
      evolution—Analogy of conscience with a society, collective
      character of individual consciousness—Conception of
      progressive immortality—Last product of evolution and
      natural selection: (1) No necessary relation between the
      compositeness and complexity of consciousness and its
      dissolubility: indissoluble compounds in the physical
      universe—(2) Relation between consciousnesses, their
      possible fusion in a superior consciousness—Contemporary
      psychology and the religious notion of the interpenetration
      of souls—Possible evolution of memory and identification
      of it with reality—Palingenesis by force of
      love—Problematic character of those conceptions and of
      every conception relative to existence, of consciousness,
      and the relation between existence and consciousness—IV.
      Conception of death appropriate to those who, in the
      present state of evolution, do not believe in the
      immortality of the individual—Antique and modern
      stoicism—Acceptance of death: element of melancholy
      and of greatness in it—Expansion of self by means of
      philosophical thought, and scientific disinterestedness,
      to the point of to some extent approving one’s own
      annihilation.


[Sidenote: The problem of the immanence of being.]

Naturalism consists in believing that nature, together with the beings
which compose it, make up the sum total of existence. But even from
this point of view there still remains the problem, what existence
essentially is, and what special mode of existence is most typical.
Is nature material, or mental, or both? The problem of the essence of
being is one that cannot be escaped.

[Sidenote: The double-aspect theory.]

The theory that seems to-day to be dominant is the “double-aspect”
theory—the theory of two inseparable correlatives subjective and
objective, of consciousness and of motion. We have, as M. Taine[143]
would say, two texts of the eternal book instead of one. The question
is, which of the two texts is original and sacred? Sometimes that which
is furnished by introspection alone, sometimes that which objective
science endeavours to decipher, are respectively held to be primitive.
Thence arise two opposed tendencies, not alone in psychological but
in metaphysical speculation; the one toward idealism, the other
toward materialism; the one toward what lies within, the other toward
what lies without. But these two aspects may and should be conceived
as possessing a certain unity; there is an inevitable tendency in
the human mind to follow out two converging lines to their point
of intersection. There are, therefore, three forms of naturalism:
idealism, materialism, monism. These three constitute the three genuine
systems of thought from which theism, atheism, and pantheism are
respectively derived.

      [143] M. Ribot holds the same doctrine.


_I. Idealism._

[Sidenote: Idealism defined.]

If the words thought and idea be interpreted as Descartes and Spinoza
understand them, as designating the entire life of the mind, the sum
total of the possible content of consciousness, idealism may be defined
as the system which resolves all reality into thought, into psychical
existence, insomuch that to be is to think or to be thought; to feel or
to be felt; to will or to be willed; to be the object or subject of a
conscious effort.

[Sidenote: Idealism and the religious instinct.]

It is evident that idealism is one of the systems which is capable of
affording a certain satisfaction to the religious sentiment, because
the religious sentiment is allied to the instinct for metaphysics, and
the instinct for metaphysics finds itself at home among all things
of the spirit, of thought, of the moral world. The foundation of
theism, as we have said, is _moralism_; the belief, that is to say,
that the true power in nature is mental and moral. God is simply a
representation of this power, conceived as transcendent. Pantheism
itself, after having divinized and materialized the universe and
resolved all things, so to speak, into God, tends to become idealistic,
to resolve God into the thought which has conceived Him, to deny Him
all existence over and above that which He possesses in thought,
and for thought, and by virtue of thought. According to the Hindu
comparison, the human mind is like the spider that can build its
mansion out of materials drawn from its own body, and then reabsorb
them.

[Sidenote: Subjective idealism criticised.]

But how shall the mind itself, the central fund of thought that is
the origin and end of all things, be conceived? Is it individual or
impersonal? English subjective or egoistic idealism, as Mr. Huxley
defines it in his “Life of Hume,” replies, that in spite of all
demonstration to the contrary, the collection of perceptions which
constitute our consciousness may be simply a phantasmagoria which,
engendered and co-ordinated by the ego, unrolls its successive
scenes upon a background of nonentity. Mr. Spencer retorts that,
if the universe is thus simply a projection of our subjective
sensations, evolution is a dream; but evolution may be formulated in
idealistic quite as well as realistic terms: and a coherent dream
is as good as reality. Subjective idealism is therefore difficult
to refute logically; but in spite of that fact it will never have
many followers. For this apparent simplification of the world is in
reality a complication. For subjective idealism involves the ridiculous
hypothesis of a chance agreement between the impressions of any given
individual and of all other individuals: a difficulty much harder to
explain away than the preliminary one of the simple reflection in us
of an external world. Mental phenomena are always more complex than
material phenomena.

The reduction of the external world to subjective terms, the
explanation of the optical illusion of objectivity, demands a much
greater display of vain ingenuity than any theory of simple perception.
More than that, the least effort with the resistance that it encounters
is a refutation of egoistic, or as the English again say, solipsistic
idealism. In the fact of resistance, subjective sensation and the
perception of an objective reality coincide. Even if the manner in
which our sensations of resistance are combined in tridimensional space
may be conceived as subjective, it is difficult to admit that the
materials out of which the structure is made are, as it were, suspended
in mid-air. To explain the fact of resistance requires us absolutely
to pass beyond the limits of consciousness, for even in the cases in
which the sensation of resistance seems to be due to hallucination,
the cause of hallucination is always found to be some instance of
actual resistance, of friction or stress inside the body. The mistake
of a madman, who sees an unfamiliar form take shape and rise before
his eyes, is not that of considering the power as existing outside
of himself, but of locating it at the extremities of his nerves of
touch; whereas it is really in his brain, at the point where the nerves
intersect with the cerebral centres. He is right in his sense of the
presence of an enemy, but wrong in the direction in which he looks for
it.

[Sidenote: Truth in subjective idealism.]

We are obliged, therefore, to admit the hypothesis of a multitude
of microcosms, of mine, of yours, of everybody’s, and of a single
macrocosm the same for everybody. What is true is that between the
great world and every little world there is an incessant communication,
by means of which everything that passes in the one is echoed in the
other. We live in the universe, and the universe lives in us. The
statement is not metaphorical, but literal. If we could look into the
consciousness of a school child, we should see a more or less faithful
image of all the marvels of the world: skies, seas, mountains, cities,
etc.; we should perceive the germ of every elevated sentiment, of
every kind of complex knowledge that the human brain contains. If we
could look into the consciousness of some great man—some thinker, some
poet—the spectacle would be quite different. It would embrace the
whole of the visible and invisible universe, with its facts and its
laws; it would embrace what is best in the whole of humanity. If the
traces left by experience on the nervous system could be read, like the
writing in a book, the earth might disappear, and its image and history
be handed down in certain chosen human brains.

[Sidenote: Realism destined to prevail.]

Active and practical humanity will always believe in realism to the
extent of insisting that the world possesses an existence which is
independent of any individual thought. We shall dwell no further
on subjective idealism, which is more important as a metaphysical
curiosity than for any comfort it gives to the religious sentiment.

[Sidenote: Objective idealism.]

Of objective idealism the same cannot be said. In objective idealism,
too, all material existence is regarded as a mode of mental existence;
being is identified either with the ideal law which presides over the
development of the universe, or with the genuine foundation of our
consciousness, our sensations, our desires. The world, as Emerson has
said, is a precipitate of the soul.

[Sidenote: Criticised.]

This hypothesis is certainly one of those that may best serve as a
substitute for theism, if theism should ever disappear. But idealism,
thus understood, is open to the following objection: Is it of any
special use to objectify the soul, if the existence of evil, which
Plato identified with matter, is thereby left unchanged? It is in
vain to translate evolution into psychic terms; no difficulty can be
avoided by so doing. The mysterious imperfections of the exterior world
are transported bodily into the mind; evil is spiritualized simply.
Identifying things with the intellectual law which presides over their
evolution in nowise excuses us from explaining why that law is in so
many respects bad, and why the intelligence that directs the universe
is so often self-contradictory and feeble.

[Sidenote: Objective idealism relatively capable of satisfying the
moral instincts.]

In spite of this objection, which will, perhaps, never receive a
sufficient reply, it is certain that, so far as our moral and social
instincts are concerned, idealism offers us greater ground for hope
than either of the remaining systems of thought. In spite of evil and
pain, the desire of progress and of salvation, which is the basis of
all religious speculation, may rely upon thought as its last resource.
But thought, if the doctrine of objective idealism is to be made
acceptable, must be understood as including not only intelligence,
but also sentiment, desire, and volition, and, in effect, the purely
intellectual idealism of a former time is at the present day being
succeeded by an idealism that regards the will as the fundamental
element in the universe.[144] Universal sensibility is an incident of
universal power of will, whereas intelligence, properly so called,
at least in so far as the function of intelligence is regarded as
representation, is more superficial than sensibility or volition.[145]
These three inseparable forms of psychic life[146] constitute the great
forces to which moral and religious sentiment must always turn for
support.

      [144] See Schelling, Schopenhauer, Lotze, Wundt, Secrétan, MM.
      Ravaison, A. Fouillée, Lachelier, and, to a certain extent, M.
      Renouvier.

      [145] See Schopenhauer, Horwicz, and M. Fouillée.

      [146] See Wundt’s _Psychologie physiologique_.

[Sidenote: Hypothesis of moral progress immanent in the world.]

Idealism, thus understood, constitutes one of the most tempting of the
solutions of the problem of evil. Optimism being, as we have seen,
indefensible, and pessimism being a caricature, the most plausible
religious and metaphysical hypothesis at the present day is the
conception of a “possible progress owing to the radical spontaneity
of all existing things.”[147] The will, according to this hypothesis,
with its tendency to indefinite self-expansion, is _par excellence_
the primitive power, the central element in man and in the universe.
Freedom of the will in man means the consciousness of this progressive
power, which is immanent in all things, and this consciousness may
be made the foundation of a moral being. This conception of freedom,
which is reconcilable with determinism, becomes an additional motive
among the other motives that govern man’s life, and tends to be
realized by the very fact that it is conceived and desired. Through
the intermediation of this conception, reality possesses a progressive
freedom, that is to say, a power of constant union with the whole, and
of moral enfranchisement. “In the beginning there obtains a universal
antagonism among the forces of the universe, a brutal fatality, an
infinite reign of shock and counter-shock, between blind and blindly
driven beings; then there arises a progressive organization that makes
the evolution of consciousness, and therefore of volition, possible;
there arises a gradual union and fraternity among the particulars that
constitute the universe. Ill-will, whether it originate in mechanical
necessity or in intellectual ignorance, is transitory; good-will is
permanent, radical, normal, and fundamental. To cultivate good-will
in one’s self is to enfranchise one’s self from the individual and
the transitory in favour of the universal and the permanent; it is to
become truly free, and by that very fact to become truly loving.”[148]

      [147] Alfred Fouillée, _La Liberté et le Déterminisme_, 2d
      edition, pp. 353, 354, 356.

      [148] Alfred Fouillée, _La Liberté et le Déterminisme_, 2d
      edition, pp. 353, 354, 356.

[Sidenote: Reconciliation between freedom and determinism.]

Between progressive freedom thus conceived, and the determinism in
the midst of which it progresses, there is no opposition; freedom and
determinism constitute two aspects of one and the same process of
evolution. Determinism essentially consists in a series of actions and
reactions existing between other beings and ourselves; but these very
actions and reactions constitute the manifestation of the development
of our, and their, inner activities. And the source of activity in the
universe is none other than an overflowing power, which is hostile to
limitation, to impediment of every kind; is, in a word, none other than
a self-realizing volition. Freedom, thus understood, may, therefore,
be considered in the last resort as the origin of determinism and as
one with it.[149] Necessity is, so to speak, the outer surface of
freedom—the point of contact between two or more free agents. Freedom
is inconceivable apart from a resulting determinism, for to be free is
to possess power, is to act and to react, is to determine and to be
determined. Determinism, on the other hand, that is to say, reciprocal
action, is inconceivable apart from freedom, from internal action, from
a spontaneous outbreak of power that tends to be free. So that one may
say, without contradiction, that determinism envelops the world, and
that free-will constitutes it.

      [149] A. Fouillée, _op. cit._

[Sidenote: Ideal liberty the aim of the universe.]

If the shock of wills in the world is unusually brutal, the reason
is that they are as yet but half conscious of their powers; as
consciousness develops, contest will give way to concurrence. To
avoid violent concussion with obstacles in the way, the free agent
has less need of acquaintance with them than of acquaintance with
itself. As there is nothing in the universe that is foreign to
volition, there is nothing in the universe that is foreign to the ideal
that every volition aims at. It is probable that life is always and
everywhere accompanied by consciousness in some slight degree; and
wherever consciousness exists, desire may exist. Nature’s device, as
a contemporaneous poet has said, is “I aspire.” The human ideal is,
perhaps, no more than the conscious formulation of this aspiration
which is common to the whole universe. If so, it follows that ideal
freedom is the limit of evolution, and that volition, which aims at
ideal freedom, is the principle of it.[150]

      [150] “The category of Real Existence does not seem
      reconcilable with the notion of liberty; the latter in its
      perfection must be conceived under the category of the Ideal,
      and in its imperfection under that of Becoming.”—A. Fouillée,
      _La Liberté et le Déterminisme_, conclusion.

[Sidenote: Objections answered.]

It has been objected to this idealist theory of evolution that
progress implies an aim and the observance of certain principles
in its attainment, while evolution does not.[151] But the precise
object of the doctrine in question is to supply evolution with a name
and appropriate principles, and to extend the notion of progress to
the universe as a whole. It has also been objected to this somewhat
panthelistic hypothesis (θέλος), that if everything is free, nothing
is free.[152] This objection is not exact, for it would imply, in
economics, for instance, that to increase everybody’s well-being would
increase the well-being of nobody, or that if everybody equally
should be impoverished, everybody would equally be enriched. To
universalize a conception is one thing, to suppress it is another.
The world cannot at the present day be conceived as distinct from the
human race: the two are vitally and intimately related. Endow mankind
with an unbiassed freedom of will, and Epicurus would be right in
holding that indeterminism is the basis of all things.[153] Similarly,
suppose mankind endowed with “a radical goodness of will, which is
very distinct from freedom of the will, but nevertheless constitutes a
sort of moral freedom in process of formation,”[154] and the germ of
such goodness of will should be found in a more or less unconscious
form throughout the entire universe. Before the human mind can really
produce anything whatever, the whole universe must be like it in
labour. Partisans of the theory of goodness of will as the basis of
human morality are therefore logical in regarding it as more or less
present in some degraded form throughout the whole of nature, even
in beings in which intelligence has not yet made its appearance; and
goodness of will in such cases is to be considered as accompanied
by the obscure beginnings of responsibility, of implicit merit or
demerit—one must return in effect to a sort of re-reading of the Hindu
theory, according to which the several degrees that exist in nature
represent so many stages in morality.

      [151] M. Franck, _Essais de critique philosophique_.

      [152] M. Franck, _op. cit._

      [153] The author argued the point at length, in 1873, in his
      book on Epicurus. See also his _Morale anglaise_, 2 partie, pp.
      385-386, 2d edition.

      [154] A. Fouillée, _La Liberté et le Déterminisme_, 2d edition.

[Sidenote: Moral idealism and the religious sentiment.]

_Hypotheses fingo_ is the mother of metaphysics. Moral idealism of
the kind we have just epitomized from the pages of a contemporary
author is decidedly no more than a hypothesis, and a hypothesis open
to discussion; but it is assuredly the form of idealism that is
least incompatible with the theory of evolution, and with the facts
of natural history and of human history.[155] Moreover, it affords
unusual scope for the religious sentiment, freed from its mysticism
and transcendence. If the unknown activity which lies at the basis
of the natural world has produced in the human race a consciousness
of goodness, and a deliberate desire for it, there is reason to hope
and to believe that the last word of ethics and metaphysics is not a
negative.

      [155] This form of idealism is equally compatible with the
      prevailing monistic doctrines, and is in some cases, as notably
      in that of M. Fouillée, confounded with them. See below.

[Sidenote: Religion interpreted in the light of this hypothesis.]

We have a number of times cited Schleiermacher’s definition of
religion: the sense of our absolute dependence in regard to the
universe and its principle. When the religious sentiment becomes
transformed into a moral idealism its correct formula tends to be the
inverse of the preceding: a sense of the dependence of the universe
upon the determination that goodness shall prevail, of which we are
conscious in ourselves and which we conceive to be or to be capable of
becoming the directing principle of universal evolution. The notion
of the moral and social ideal of freedom is, therefore, according to
this doctrine, not a mere superficial accident in the universe, but
a revelation and growing consciousness of the most fundamental laws
of the universe, of the true essence of things, which is the same in
all beings in different degrees and in diverse combinations. Nature
represents an eternal ascent toward a more and more clearly conceived
ideal, which dominates its progress from beginning to end. As one
climbs a height to survey a mountain range, the snow-capped peaks rise
silently and take their places side by side along the horizon; it seems
as if the enormous masses rise in obedience to an immense effort which
uplifts them; it seems as if their immobility is only apparent, and one
feels borne aloft with them toward the zenith. The heroes in the Indian
legend, when they were weary of life and of the earth, rallied their
strength for a final effort, and hand in hand scaled the Himalayas,
and the mountains bore them away into the clouds. Ancient peoples
generally regarded the mountains as a transition between earth and sky;
it was from the mountains that the soul, profiting by the impulse lent
it by the last touch of earth, took its freest flight: the mountains
constituted a pathway toward the open heavens. And that may be an
element of profundity in these naïve ideas which ascribe to nature
aspirations which are more properly human. Do there not exist in nature
great unfinished sketches, hints and lines leading upward? Nature has
done all that unconsciously, has blindly piled block on block of stone
slowly toward the stars. It is man’s privilege to read a meaning into
her work, to make use of her efforts, to employ past centuries as the
materials out of which to build the future; by scaling the heights of
nature man will reach the sky.


_II. Materialism._

Properly to estimate idealism it must be contrasted with its opposite,
materialism.

[Sidenote: Materialism difficult to define.]

We shall say but a few words on the subject of pure materialism,
because of all systems of thought materialism is the farthest removed
from those which give rise to religious and to metaphysical theories.
Absolute materialism is somewhat difficult to define, because matter
is one of the vaguest of words. To aim at representing the ultimate
elements of matter as wholly independent of thought, of consciousness,
of life, is evidently chimerical; such an effort leads straight to
the pure indeterminism of matter as conceived by Plato, Aristotle,
and Hegel; to an indefinite dyad, to a theory of virtuality and of
the identity of non-being. Also materialists are obliged to regard
as determinate and material the primitive force of which the world
constitutes simply a development. If, for example, according to the
most recent theories, all matter should prove to be reducible to
hydrogen, materialism would regard hydrogen as constituting a sort of
material or substantial unity in the world. Variety would exist only
in the forms displayed by the primitive element, hydrogen, or, if you
prefer, pre-hydrogen.

[Sidenote: Materialism criticised.]

It must be confessed that this conception is somewhat naïve and
nominalistic; the word material or chemical can never express more
than the outside, than the exterior properties of the primordial
element. The hydrogen atom itself is probably in a high degree
composite, is itself probably a world of little worlds, held in
place by gravitation. The very conception of an indivisible atom is
philosophically infantine. Thomson and Helmholtz have shown that our
atoms are little vortices of energy, and have succeeded in producing
experimentally analogous vortices formed of vapour; for instance, of
the vapour chlor-hydrate of ammonia. Each vortex is composed always of
the same particles; no one particle can be separated from the others;
each vortex possesses, therefore, a stable individuality. When the
attempt is made to cut the vortices, they fly the blade or bend about
it, and prove to be indivisible. They are capable of contraction, of
dilation, of partial interpenetration and distortion, but never of
dissolution. And certain men of science have thence inferred that we
possess thus a material proof of the existence of atoms. And so indeed
we do, providing an atom be understood to be something as complex, as
little primordial, and as relatively enormous as a nebula. Atoms are
indivisible as a nebula is indivisible by a knife blade, and the atom
of hydrogen is about as simple as the solar system. To explain the
universe by hydrogen is like explaining it by the sun and the planets.
The rise of the actual world out of hydrogen can be conceived only
on condition of ascribing to the alleged atoms of hydrogen something
more than physicists and chemists know them to possess. Materialism,
therefore, must enlarge its principle if it is to prove productive:
enlarge, as Diderot would say, your atheism and your materialism.

[Sidenote: Must be supplemented by some theory to account for life.]

But the instant materialism is “enlarged,” the universal element must
at once be regarded as alive and is not what is called brute matter.
Every generation of physicists, as Mr. Spencer says, discovers in so
called brute matter forces the existence of which the best informed
physicist would some years previous have disbelieved. When we perceive
solid bodies, sensitive in spite of their inertia to the action of
forces, the number of which is infinite; when the spectroscope proves
to us that terrestrial molecules move in harmony with molecules in the
stars; when we find ourselves obliged to infer that the innumerable
vibrations traverse space in all directions, the conception which is
forced upon us is not that of a universe of dead matter but rather
that of a universe everywhere alive; alive in the general sense of the
word, if not in the restricted.[156] The notion of life is perhaps
more human and more subjective, but after all more complete and
concrete than the notion of movement and of force; for we cannot hope
to discover the truth at any great distance from the subjective, since
subjectivity is the necessary form in which truth appears to us.

      [156] Mr. Spencer himself has a little forgotten this fact in a
      number of his own somewhat too mechanical constructions.

[Sidenote: Must be supplemented by some sort of mind-stuff theory.]

The second emendation to which materialism must submit, if it is to
satisfy the metaphysical instincts of mankind, is to include in the
primordial element not only life but some germ of mind. But primitive
matter conceived as a force capable of living and ultimately of
thinking is not what is scientifically and vulgarly regarded as matter,
far less as hydrogen. The pure materialist, thumping the rotundity of
the earth with his fist, and relying grossly on his sense of touch,
cries: “Matter is everything,” but matter is analyzable into force, and
force is simply a primitive form of life. Materialism therefore issues
into a sort of animism; in the presence of the circling world, the
materialist is obliged to say it is alive. Nor can he stop there; the
world is force, is action, is life—and something more; for in and by
me the world thinks. _E pur si pensa!_

[Sidenote: Passes readily into idealism.]

Behold us landed once more in idealism. And, indeed, as Lange and M.
Taine have well shown, materialism easily passes to idealism; pure
materialism results in an abstract mechanism, which is analyzable
into the laws of logic and of thought. And the basis of this
mechanism—atoms and motion—consists in enfeebled subtilized and
rarefied tactual and visual sensations, taken ultimately as the
expression of the final reality. The alleged foundation of objective
reality is simply a residuum of our most essential sensations.
Materialism is advocated in the name of positive science; but it, not
less than idealism, belongs really to the poetry of metaphysics; its
poetry is recorded simply in terms of atoms and motion, instead of in
terms of the elements of consciousness. Materialistic symbols are more
matter of fact, more neighbour to the visible reality, possess a wider
compass and generality, but they are none the less symbols simply.
Materialism is in some sort a tissue of metaphor in which scientific
terms lose their scientific signification, and gain a metaphysical
signification in its stead, transferred, as they are, to a domain that
lies beyond the range of experience. The man of science who speculates
thus upon the nature of things is, unknown to himself, a modern
Lucretius.

[Sidenote: Materialism and the notion of infinity.]

And finally, materialism, properly so called, has been invaded by
a notion which has been at all times peculiarly adapted to satisfy
the metaphysical and religious aspirations of mankind; the notion of
infinity, whether in the direction of greatness or the opposite. Men of
science go to the trouble of estimating the number of molecules in a
drop of water; they tell us that the thousandth part of a millimeter of
water contains 228,000,000 molecules; they say that a pinhead contains
the fourth power of 20,000,000 atoms, and that, if the atoms could be
counted a billion every second, it would take 253,678 years to complete
the task. But all such calculations are simply arithmetical _jeux
d’esprit_. These figures, which are so great in appearance, really
amount to nothing, and a grain of sand, no doubt, contains literally an
infinite number of particles.

[Sidenote: Final breakdown of materialism.]

The argument against the notion of infinity, based on the logical
impossibility of an infinite number, is not decisive;[157] it rests
upon a begging of the question, namely, that everything in the
universe is innumerable—that is to say, is capable of being precisely
included within the limits of an intelligence like our own. Logic, on
the contrary, insists that in homogeneous matter, like space, time,
and quantity, there is no limit to the possibility of division and
multiplication, and that, consequently, they may proceed beyond any
given number. If so called “purely scientific” materialism does not
admit that nature is coextensive with man’s conception of what is
possible—if it denies the parallelism between thought and nature—it
by that very fact denies also the rationality of nature, which is
precisely the principle upon which every philosophy that pretends to
be purely scientific ultimately relies. Whoever rejects the notion
of infinity is obliged, in the last resort, to suppose a species of
contradiction between the activity of the human mind, which is unable
to stop at any given point, and nature, which stops, for no reason in
particular, at a determinate point in time and space. The conception
of infinity may be said to be forced upon materialism, and that very
notion contains one of the antinomies against which intelligence, by
the very fact of its employment, is ultimately brought to a standstill;
it is precisely in the act of counting that intelligence achieves
the conception of the innumerable; it is by exhausting every given
quantity that it achieves the conception of the inexhaustible; it is
by reaching ever beyond the limits of the known that it comes in touch
with the unknowable; and all these conceptions mark the point where
we feel our intelligence becoming feeble and beyond which our sight
grows dim. Back of matter, which thought takes cognizance of, and back
of thought, which takes cognizance of itself, lies infinity, which
envelops both of them, and which seems the most fundamental aspect
of matter itself. It was not without reason that the ancients called
matter, abstractly considered, as independent of its diverse forms,
the infinite ἄπειρον. Materialism thus leaves us, as other systems
do, in the presence of that ultimate mystery which all religions have
symbolized in their myths, and which metaphysics will always be obliged
to recognize, and poetry to express, by the instrumentality of images.

      [157] See Renouvier’s arguments and Lotze’s and Fouillée’s
      replies to them in the _Revue philosophique_.

[Sidenote: Apologue.]

By the seaside stood a great, upright mountain that pierced the sky
like an arrow-head, and the waves beat upon its base. In the morning,
when the first light of the sun touched the ancient rocks, they
shivered, and a voice rose from the gray stones and mingled with the
sound made by the blue sea; and mountain and wave conversed together.
The sea said: “The heavens have been mirrored in my shifting waves
a million years, and in all that time have held as high aloof from
me and stood as motionless.” And the mountain said: “I have climbed
toward the heavens a million years, and they are still as high above
me as ever.” One day a ray of sun fell smiling upon the brow of the
mountain, and the mountain questioned it on the distant heavens from
which it came. The ray was about to reply, but was reflected suddenly
from the mountain to the sea, and from a scintillating wave back to
the heavens from which it came. And the ray is still _en route_ across
the infinite, toward the nebulæ of Maïa, in the Pleiades, which were
so long invisible, or toward some point farther still, and has not yet
replied.


_III. Monism. The Fate of Worlds._

[Sidenote: Monism.]

The word infinite, ἄπειρον, which the ancients applied to matter, the
moderns have applied to mind. The reason, no doubt, is that matter and
mind are two aspects of one and the same thing. The synthesis of these
two aspects is attempted by monism.

[Sidenote: Monism to-day prevalent.]

I. It is not our purpose here to pass judgment upon the theoretical
pretensions of monism as a system of metaphysics. We observe simply
that the trend of modern thought is toward this system. Materialism is
simply a mechanical monism, the fundamental law of which is conceived
as capable of being completely formulated in mathematical terms.
Idealism is simply a monism the essential law of which is conceived as
mental, as pertaining to the intelligence or to the will. This latter
form of monism numbers many adherents in Germany and in England. In
France it has been advocated by M. Taine, and we have just seen that
it is maintained at the present moment under a somewhat different form
by M. Fouillée, who regards it as a reconciliation of naturalism and
idealism, and no doubt also as a possible reconciliation between what
is essential in pantheism and in theism.[158] In our judgment the
balance must be more evenly trimmed than the philosophers above cited
have done, between the material and mental aspects of existence,
between objective science and subjective, conscious knowledge. Monism,
therefore, essentially consists simply in a hypothesis that combines
the least questionable facts dealt with by science, those which are
inseparable from the elementary facts of consciousness. The fundamental
unity imported by the term monism is not to be confounded with
Spinoza’s unity of substance, nor with the absolute unity advocated
by the Alexandrians, nor with Spencer’s unknowable force, nor with
anything in the nature of a final cause, such as is spoken of, for
example, by Aristotle. Neither do we affirm the existence of any
unity of figure and form in the universe. We are content to admit,
by a hypothesis at once scientific and metaphysical, the fundamental
homogeneity of all things, the fundamental identity of nature. Monism,
in our judgment, should be neither transcendent nor mystical, but
immanent and naturalistic. The world is one continuous Becoming; there
are not two kinds of existence nor two lines of development, the
history of which is the history of the universe.

      [158] See the preceding chapter.

[Sidenote: The fundamental conception of philosophy is that of life.]

Instead of endeavouring to resolve matter into mind or mind into
matter, we recognize them both as united in this synthesis, which
science itself (and science is a stranger to anything in the nature of
moral or religious prejudice) is obliged to recognize: the synthesis
known as _life_. Science tends every day still further to extend the
domain of life, and there exists no fixed point of demarcation between
the organic and the inorganic world. We do not know whether the
foundation of life is _will_, or _idea_, or _thought_, or _sensation_,
although in sensation we no doubt approach the central point; it seems
to us probable simply that consciousness, which constitutes for us
everything, should count for something in every mode of being, and
that there is, so to speak, no being in the universe which is entirely
abstracted from self. But, leaving these hypotheses to one side, what
we can affirm with certainty is that life, by the very fact of its
development, tends to engender consciousness; and that progress in life
ultimately comes to be one with progress in consciousness, in which
what is movement in one aspect is sensation in another. Considered
from within everything, even the intellectual forms of time and space,
is resolvable by the psychologist into sensation and desire;[159] and,
considered from without, everything is resolvable by the physicist into
emotion; to feel and to move seem to be the two formulæ that express
the entire inner and outer universe, the concave and convex aspects of
things; but to feel that one’s self moves is the formula that expresses
self-conscious life which is still so infrequent in the great totality
of things, but which is becoming increasingly more common. The very
meaning of progress in life consists in what is expressed by the
gradual fusion of these two. Life means, in fact, development toward
sensation and thought.

      [159] See the author’s study on _L’idée de temps_ (_Revue
      philosophique_, April, 1885).

[Sidenote: Life and activity.]

Side by side with the tendency which life thus displays to take
possession of itself by consciousness, it seeks to widen the sphere
of its operation by a more and more profound activity. Life is
productivity. At the lowest stage of consciousness life leads only
to the inner development of the solitary cell; at the highest stage
of consciousness, life manifests itself in intelligent and moral
productivity. Expansion, far from being opposed to the nature of
life, is in harmony with its nature, is the very condition of life,
properly so called, just as in generation the need to engender another
individual results in that individual’s existence being, as it were,
a condition of our own. The fact is that life does not consist in
nutrition only, it consists in production, and pure egoism involves not
an expansion of self but a diminution and mutilation of self. Also the
individual, by the mere fact of growth, tends to become both social and
moral.[160] It is this fact of the fundamental sociality of mankind
which is the basis of the moral instinct, and of what is most profound
and durable in the religious and metaphysical instinct. Metaphysical
speculation, like moral action, thus springs from the very source
of life. To live is to become a conscious, a moral, and ultimately
a philosophical being. Life is activity in one or other of its more
or less equivalent forms: moral activity, and what may be called
metaphysical activity, that is to say, activity of thought, binds up
the individual with the universe.

      [160] See the author’s _Esquisse d’une morale_, p. 447, _et
      seq._

[Sidenote: No final cause in nature.]

Up to this point we have made no mention of anything in the nature of
a final cause. Morality, in our judgment, is as independent as the
so-called religious instinct of anything in the nature of a primordial
end and aim. Morality in the beginning is simply a more or less blind,
unconscious, or, at best, subconscious power. As this power becomes
endowed with self-consciousness, it directs itself toward more and more
rational objects: _duty_ is self-conscious and organized morality.
Just as humanity moves blindly forward without in the first instance
possessing any notion of its destination, so also moves nature.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Monism and the problem of destiny.]

All this being true, what is the destiny of mankind in the world? Does
monism allow a place for the hopes on which the moral and metaphysical
sentiments have always relied in their effort to save thought and
good-will from the charge of vanity?

[Sidenote: Natural selection and the possible evolution of gods.]

If evolution may be conceived as possessing from the beginning a
certain aim and as being on the whole providential,—a metaphysical
hypothesis which unhappily is guiltless of the smallest trace of
scientific induction,—it may also be conceived as resulting in beings
capable of proposing to themselves a certain aim, and of dragging
nature after them toward it. Natural selection would thus finally be
converted into moral and, in some sort, divine selection. Such an
hypothesis is, no doubt, as yet a rash one, but is at least in the
direction of the trend of scientific thought, and it is not formally
in contradiction with present knowledge. Evolution, in effect, can and
will produce species and types superior to humanity as we know it; it
is not probable that we embody the highest achievement possible in
life, thought, and love. Who knows, indeed, but that evolution may
be able to bring forth, nay, has not already brought forth, what the
ancients called gods?

[Sidenote: Possibility of arresting process of dissolution.]

Such speculation offers a permanent support for what is best in the
religious sentiment for sociality, not only with all living and knowing
beings, but with the creatures of thought and superior power with which
we people the universe. Provided such beings are in no sense anti-real,
provided they might somewhere exist, if not in the present at least in
the future, the religious sentiment may attach itself to them without
check from the scientific sentiment. And in so doing it becomes one
with the metaphysical and poetic impulse. The believer is transmuted
into a philosopher or a poet, but into a poet whose poetry is his
life, and who dreams of a universal society of real or possible beings
who shall be animated to a goodness of will analogous to his own. The
statement that Feuerbach proposed, of what is essential in moral and
religious sentiment (the reaction of human desire on the universe),
may then be interpreted in a higher sense as referring to a desire and
a hope both that, first, the sociality with which we feel ourselves
personally to be animated may, as biology would lead us to believe,
be discovered in all beings that exist at the summit of universal
evolution; and second, that these beings thus placed at the front by
evolution, will one day succeed in securing what they have gained, in
preventing dissolution, and that they may thereby permanently establish
in the universe the love of social or rather universal well-being.

[Sidenote: The highest possible conception in the realms of morals.]

Thus understood, the religious sentiment may still be regarded as
ultra-scientific, but no longer as anti-scientific. It is, no doubt,
taking much for granted to suppose that beings who have arrived at a
high degree of evolution may determine from that point on the direction
that the evolutionary process is to take, but, after all, since we are
unable to affirm with certitude that such is not or may not become the
fact, the moral and social sentiment urges us to act in such manner
as to turn as far as in us lies the process of evolution in that
direction. If, as we have said, morality is a species of productivity,
every moral being must turn his eyes toward the future, must hope that
his work will not die, must watch over the safety of that portion of
himself that he has delivered to someone else—of his love—by which
not only he has devoted himself to others, but has made others in a
sense his own; has acquired rights over them, has conquered them, so to
speak, by subjecting himself to them. By labouring for humanity and for
the universe with which humanity is bound up, I acquire certain rights
over the universe. There arises between us a relation of reciprocal
dependence. The highest conception of morals and metaphysics is that
of a sort of sacred league between the higher beings of the earth, and
even of the universe, for the advancement of what is good.

       *       *       *       *       *

II. What scientific facts may be urged in bar of such hopes as to the
destiny of the universe and of humanity?

[Sidenote: Immanence of dissolution.]

The most discouraging aspect of the theory of evolution is that
of dissolution, which seems to be inevitably incident to it. From
Heracleitus to Mr. Spencer, philosophers have regarded these two ideas
as inseparable. But does evolution necessarily result in dissolution?
Our experience, both of the life of individuals and of worlds,
seems, so far as the past is concerned, to make for a reply in the
affirmative. Our whole acquaintance has been with worlds which have
gone or are going to shipwreck. When the corpse of a sailor is thrown
into the sea, his friends take notice of the exact point of latitude
and longitude at which his body disappeared in the ocean. Two figures
on a bit of paper are all that exists of what was a human life. An
analogous destiny may be supposed to be in reserve for the terrestrial
globe and for humanity as a whole. They may some day sink out of sight
in space and dissolve beneath the moving waves of ether; and at that
period, if some neighbouring and friendly star observe us, it may
take the latitude and longitude in infinite space of the point in the
celestial abyss where we disappeared—the angle made by the last rays
that left the earth; and the measure of this angle, made by two extinct
rays, may be the sole trace to remain of the whole sum of human effort
in the world of thought.

[Sidenote: Has been observed in the past only.]

Nevertheless, the duty of science being equally in its denials and
in its affirmations to keep within the limits of certainty, it is
important not to model our conception of the future too absolutely upon
our knowledge of the past.

[Sidenote: The future may differ from the past.]

Up to the present time there has been no individual, nor group of
individuals, nor world which has attained complete self-consciousness,
complete consciousness of its life and of the laws of its life. We are
unable, therefore, either to affirm or to demonstrate that dissolution
is essentially and eternally incident to evolution by the very law
of being: the law of laws is to us simply _x_. If thought is ever to
understand the law of laws, it will be by realizing the law in its
own person. And such a height of development is conceivable; if it
is impossible to prove its existence, it is still more impossible to
prove its non-existence. It may be that if complete self-consciousness,
if complete consciousness is ever achieved, it will produce a
corresponding power great enough to arrest the process of dissolution.
Beings who are capable, in their infinite complication of movements
in the world, of distinguishing those which make for evolution as
against those which make for dissolution, might be capable of defeating
the latter and of securing the unimpeded operation of the former. If
a bird is to cross the sea it needs a certain breadth of wing; its
destiny depends on some inches, more or less, of feathers. Seabirds
that desert the shore before their wings have attained the proper
strength are one after another engulfed in the waves, but when their
wings are full grown they can cross the ocean. A world also needs, so
to speak, a certain breadth of wing to secure its flight in infinite
space—its fate depends on some small increments, more or less, in the
development of consciousness; beings may one day be produced capable of
traversing eternity without danger of being engulfed, and evolution may
be established once for all in security against a recoil; for the first
time in the onward movement of the universe a definitive result may be
achieved. According to the profound symbolism of the Greek religion,
time is the father of worlds. The power of evolution which the moderns
regard as ruling over all things is the ancient Saturn who devours
his offspring. Which of his children shall deceive him and vanquish
him—what Jupiter shall some day prove strong enough to chain up the
divine and terrible power that engendered him? The problem for him when
he shall arise—for this god of light and intelligence—will be to
check the eternal and blind impulse of destruction without at the same
time arresting the impulse of productivity. Nothing, after all, can
justify one in affirming scientifically that such a problem is forever
insoluble.

[Sidenote: The inexhaustible resources of nature.]

The great resource of nature is number, the possible combinations of
which are infinite and constitute the secret of the eternal mechanism
of the universe. Fortuitous combination and selection, which have
produced so many marvels in the past, may give rise to still greater
marvels in the future. It is on that fact that Heracleitus, Empedocles,
Democritus, and later the men like Laplace, Lamarck, and Darwin based
their conception of the part played by chance in the universe, and of
the point of union between luck and destiny. There is in the history
of the world—as in the history of a people, a belief, or a science—a
certain number of partings of the way, where the least impulse toward
one side or toward the other suffices to destroy or to preserve the
accumulated effort of centuries. We must happily have passed an
infinity of such cross-roads to have attained our present point of
development. And at each new point of the kind we encounter once more
the same danger and run the same risk of losing everything that we have
gained. The number of times that a fortunate soldier has evaded death
will not make the next shot fired at him deviate a millimetre from its
appointed path, but if our successes in the past are no guarantee of
success in the future, our failures in the past do not constitute a
definitive proof of failure in the future.

[Sidenote: Even chances that the future may not resemble the past.]

The gravest objection that can be urged against hopefulness, an
objection which has hitherto not been sufficiently considered,
and which M. Renan has omitted to deal with in his something too
optimistic “Dialogues”—is that of the eternity _a parte post_, is the
semi-abortion, the partial miscarriage of a universe which, throughout
an infinite past, has proved itself incapable of a better world than
this.[161] Still, if that fact constitutes a reason for looking with
less confidence toward the future, it cannot be regarded as a ground
for despair. An infinite past has proved to be more or less sterile,
but an infinite future may prove to be otherwise. Even taking for
granted the total miscarriage hitherto of the labours of humanity and
of the infinity of extra-terrestrial beings who no doubt coöperate with
us, there remains, so far as the future is concerned, mathematically
one chance out of every two of success; and that is enough to debar
pessimism forever of an ultimate triumph. If the mere chances of the
dice, by which, according to Plato, the universe is governed, have as
yet produced nothing but crumbling worlds and caducous civilization, a
calculation of probabilities demonstrates that even after an infinite
number of throws the result of the present cast or of the next cast
cannot be foreseen. The future is not entirely determined by the past
_which is known to us_. Future and past are reciprocally related and
the one cannot be absolutely known without the other, and the one
cannot be absolutely divined from a knowledge of the other. Conceive a
flower in bloom at some point in infinite space—a sacred flower, the
flower of thought: hands have been groping for it in every direction
throughout an infinite past; some have touched it by chance and then
lost it again before they could seize it. Is the divine flower never
to be plucked? Why not? A negative answer would be simply the outcome
of discouragement, not the expression of probability. Or conceive,
once more, a ray of light following a straight line through space,
not reflected by any solid atom or molecule of air, and an infinity
of eyes in an eternal obscurity seeking for this ray, with no means
of discovering how near to them or how far from them it may, at any
moment, be. The ray pursues its way unimpeded, and innumerable open,
ardent eyes long for it and sometimes seem to feel the presence of
the luminous wave moving forward on its victorious course. Must
their search eternally be vain? If there is no definitive reason for
affirming it, there is still less any categorical reason for denying
it. It is a matter of chance, the man of science might say; it is a
matter, also, of perseverance and intelligence, would be added by the
philosopher.

      [161] See on this subject the author’s _Vers d’un philosophe_,
      p. 198.

[Sidenote: Positive evidence of ultimate success.]

The fact that we are to-day capable of stating such problems in regard
to the destiny of the universe seems to indicate something like an
advance in the direction of solving them; thought is unable to advance
upon reality beyond a certain point; the conception of an ideal
presupposes the existence of a more or less imperfect realization of
it. In the tertiary period no animal speculated about the universal
society. A true conception of the ideal, if the truth about the matter
could be known mathematically, would be found to possess, in all
probability, an enormous number of chances of being realized; properly
to state a problem is to have begun to solve it. A purely mathematical
calculation of the external probabilities of the case does not,
therefore, express the real value in the domain of intelligence and
morality, because in matters of intelligence and morality, possibility,
probability, and the powers upon which the realization of the fact
depends, lie in thought which is a concentration of inner and, so to
speak, living chances.

[Sidenote: In especial when the infinity of space is taken into
account.]

Over and above infinity of number and eternity of time, a field of
hopefulness lies in the immensity of space, which makes it irrational
for us to judge too absolutely of the future of the universe solely
from our experience of so small a portion of it as our solar, and even
as our stellar system. Are we the only thinking beings in the universe?
We have already seen that, without passing far beyond what science
holds to be certain, one may even now reply in the negative. There
very probably exists an infinity of cold or cooling stars, which have
arrived at about the same point in their evolution as our earth; each
of these stars is physically and chemically analogous to the earth,
and they must have passed through analogous stages of vapourization,
and condensation, and incandescence, and cooling. It is therefore
probable that they have given rise to forms of organic life more
or less analogous to those that we are acquainted with. In effect,
the homogeneity of the organic matter of which our stellar system
is composed (a fact which spectral analysis enables us to ascertain
in regard to even the most remote stars) allows us to infer, by an
induction which is not too improbable, a certain similitude in the most
fundamental types of organic life. Analogous types of mineralization
and crystallization must have given rise to analogous types of
organization, although the number and richness of the forms that are
possible increase as existence grows more complex. We do not see why
the primordial protoplasm should in such and such a satellite of Sirius
be especially different from that of our globe; nay, there may even
obtain a certain cycle of forms and “living numbers,” as Pythagoras
would say, that periodically recur. It is difficult in the actual state
of science to conceive life as appearing except in some form of matter
analogous to the cellule, and to conceive consciousness as otherwise
than centralized in and manifesting itself by vibrations such as those
to which our nervous systems are subject. Conscious life implies a
society of living beings, a sort of social consciousness which the
individual consciousness seems, in a sort, to presuppose. Organic and
conscious life, the conditions of which are so much more determinate
than those of inorganic life, must everywhere, in spite of differences
in the circumstances, have assumed in the course of evolution forms
that, in a number of respects, must have been analogous to animals and
human beings such as we are familiar with. Perhaps the most general
of the laws formulated by Geoffrey Saint-Hilaire on the correlation
of organs might be found to hold good of the animals existing on the
satellites of distant stars of the twentieth magnitude. In spite of the
infinite variety of the flora and fauna of our globe, and the seemingly
inexhaustible ingenuity that nature has displayed in varying their
forms, it may reasonably be surmised that the difference between the
types of life with which we are acquainted and those with which we are
not acquainted is subject to certain considerable limitations. In spite
of differences of temperature, of light, of attraction, of electricity,
sidereal species, how different soever they may be from terrestrial
species of living beings, must, by the necessities of the case, have
been developed in the direction of sensitiveness and of intelligence,
and have gone in that direction sometimes not as far as we, sometimes
farther. Note also that even on our globe the excessively odd and
monstrous types produced, like those of the tertiary period, as it were
in obedience to a sort of apocalyptic imagination, have proved unable
to maintain themselves. The most enduring species have generally been
the least eccentric, the closest to a uniform and æsthetic type. It is
not excessively improbable, therefore, that the universe contains an
infinite number of human species analogous to humanity as we know it,
in all essential faculties, although, perhaps, very different in the
form of their organs and in the degree of their intelligence. They are
our planetary brothers. Perhaps by comparison with us they are gods;
and in that fact lies, as we have said, the kernel of possible or
actual truth in the ancient beliefs in regard to the divine inhabitants
of the skies.[162]

      [162] To understand the enormous differences which, in spite
      of the analogies, may exist between the organization of the
      planetary or stellar beings and our own, it suffices to
      consider the immense variety which obtains among terrestrial
      species. Ants have already achieved an advanced state of
      society with their shepherd, labouring, and warrior castes.
      Suppose them to continue their intellectual development instead
      of halting at a mechanical life of instinct; they might arrive
      at a point of mental evolution analogous, _mutatis mutandis_,
      to that of such and such a human society; for example, that
      of the Chinese. Who knows, indeed, but that they might rule
      the earth by virtue of substituting number and intelligence
      for individual power? Their civilization would be in some sort
      Liliputian, and destined, no doubt, to exercise a smaller
      influence on the course of things than that of which physically
      stronger beings might prove capable; or, to pass from one
      extreme to the other, in the dreamland in which Fontenelle,
      Diderot, and Voltaire have laboured, conceive a race of human
      beings developed not from anthropoids, but from the next most
      intelligent members of the animal kingdom—from elephants.
      Scientifically, the supposition is not impossible, when it is
      considered that the elephant’s trunk is at once one of the
      strongest and most delicate organs of prehension known to us,
      and that to possess a well-developed brain and good organs of
      prehension are perhaps the prime requisites for success in the
      struggle for existence. A giant civilization, therefore, quite
      different from ours in externals, if not in essentials, might
      well have been achieved on the earth or on some neighbouring
      star. However repugnant to our instinctive anthropomorphism,
      we should familiarize ourselves with the thought that if
      evolution is subject to necessary laws, a simple series of
      accidents and favourable circumstances may give such and such
      a species the advantage over such and such another, and invert
      the comparative dignity of the two without the general onward
      movement of evolution being checked.

      Moreover, the development of intelligence in a planet depends
      much less on the bodily form and number of the inhabitants
      than on the nature of their life; and as their life depends
      upon phenomena of heat, light, electricity, and the chemical
      modifications that they produce, it is these phenomena that
      in some sort decide the intellectual future of the planet.
      Kant threw out the suggestion that in an astronomic system,
      for example—in our solar system—the intellectual and moral
      perfection of the inhabitants increases with their aloofness
      from the central star, and thus follows a lowering of the
      temperature; but such a hypothesis is much too simple to
      account for so complex an effect, and one which is dependent
      upon many other things than temperature. What is probable, from
      the phenomena of life as we know them, is that thought could
      scarcely be developed either in a brazier or a glacier, and
      that a certain mean is a necessary condition of organic and
      intellectual development.

[Sidenote: Objections answered.]

But, it has been said, if other globes than ours are inhabited by
intelligent and affectionate beings who live as we do upon the daily
bread of science, these beings cannot be notably superior to us, or
they would have given us before this time visible signs of their
existence. To argue thus is not sufficiently to take account of the
terrible power of space to imprison beings in infinite isolation.
It may well be doubted whether beings of a relatively infinite
intelligence, as compared with us, would not find their power unequal
to dealing with such spaces as separate the stars. Our testimony on a
question of the existence of such beings has no more value than that of
a flower in the polar regions, or a bit of moss on the Himalayas, or a
bit of weed in the depths of the Pacific Ocean, would have if it should
declare the earth to be void of really intelligent beings on the ground
that they had never been plucked by a human hand. If, therefore, the
universe somewhere contains beings really worthy of the name of gods,
they are probably so distant from us that they are as unaware of our
existence as we are of theirs. They perhaps have realized our ideals,
and the fact of that realization will perhaps remain unknown to us to
the end.

[Sidenote: Possibility of discovering inhabitants in other spheres.]

It is to-day admitted that every thought corresponds to a certain kind
of motion. Suppose that an analysis more delicate even than that of
the spectrum should enable us to record and to distinguish, not only
vibrations of light but the invisible vibrations of thought in distant
worlds. We should, perhaps, be surprised to see that in proportion as
the light and heat of the incandescent stars decrease, there by degrees
arises consciousness, and that the smallest and most obscure stars are
the first to produce it, whereas the most brilliant and enormous, like
Sirius and Aldebaran, are the last to feel these subtler vibrations,
but feel them ultimately with greater power, and develop a humanity
with faculties and powers proportionate to their enormity.

[Sidenote: Slowness of spread of civilization from star to star.]

The total amount of space which is known to us, from our earth to
the farthest nebulæ that the telescope renders visible, and to the
dark depths beyond, is no more than a mere point as compared with the
totality of the universe—supposing always that there is a totality.
Eternity may, therefore, be necessary for progress to traverse the
immensity of space, if one conceives progress (if such a thing exists
at all) as starting from some one point of departure, from a sort
of holy-land and elect people, and spreading from them out in all
directions into the infinite. Modern science, of course, scarcely
permits one to believe in so privileged a land. Illimitable nature
scarcely possesses, after the fashion of God, exclusive election.
If the ideal has been achieved in one place, it must also, in all
probability, have been achieved in a number of others, although the
wave of progress has not yet spread to us. Intellectual light travels
less rapidly than solar and stellar light, and yet how long it takes a
ray to come to us from Capricornus!

[Sidenote: Possibility of mind-acting on mind at a distance.]

In our inferior organisms, consciousness does not seem to pass from
one living molecule to another unless they are contiguous in space;
still, according to the most recent discoveries in regard to the
nervous system, and to the propagation of thought by mental suggestion
from a distance,[163] it is not contrary to the facts to conceive the
possibility of a sort of radiation of consciousness through space by
means of undulations of a degree of subtlety as yet unknown to us. It
is not utterly unpermissible to conceive a society of consciousnesses
not hemmed into some small corner of the universe, each in a narrow
organism which is a prison, but communicating freely with each other
throughout the whole expanse of space; it is not utterly unpermissible
to conceive the ultimate realization of the ideal of universal
sociality which constitutes the basis of the religious instinct. Just
as out of a more intimate communication with individual consciousnesses
there may arise upon our earth a sort of collective consciousness, so
it is not ridiculous to suppose that there may arise, in an infinity of
ages, a sort of intercosmic consciousness.

      [163] See the _Revue philosophique_, 1886.

[Sidenote: Patience.]

God is patient because he is eternal, theologians are fond of saying.
In an all-powerful being patience of evil would be a crime; patience,
which can scarcely be ascribed with any propriety to God, belongs
however most fitly to a being who is aware of his fundamental unity
with the totality of things, and is conscious of his eternity as a
member of the human species, as a member of the brotherhood of living
beings of which the human species is simply an accident, as a part of
the evolution of this globe in which conscious life itself at first
appears as no more than an accident, and of the evolution of the vast
astronomical systems in which our globe is no more than a point. Man
may be patient because, as an inseparable part of nature, he is eternal.


_IV. The destiny of the human race and the hypothesis of immortality
from the point of view of monism._

[Sidenote: Theory of evolution and death.]

Next to the fate of the universe, what interests us most vitally
is the question of our own destiny. Religion consists for the most
part in a meditation on death. If death were not an incident of life
mankind would nevertheless be superstitious, but superstition would
probably never have been systematized into religions. The mass of
society possesses so slight an interest in metaphysics! A problem must
bruise and wound them to attract their attention; and death prevents
such problems. Will the gates of the valley of Jehoshaphat, through
which the dead must pass, open on the heavens like a rainbow made of
light and hope, like a joyous triumphal arch, or will it be low as the
door of the tomb, and open upon infinite darkness? Such is the great
question to which all religions have endeavoured to furnish a response.
“The last enemy that shall be vanquished is death,” says St. Paul;
perhaps that also represents the last secret that shall be penetrated
by human thought. The ideas which tend to become dominant in modern
philosophy seem, however, to exclude the notion of the perpetuity
of the self. The conception of evolution principally is based on a
theory of mobility, and appears to result in the dissolution of the
individual, with even a greater certainty than in that of the species
or the world. The individual form, and the species form, are equally
unstable. On the walls of the catacombs may often be seen, roughly
designed, the dove, bringing back to the ark the green bough, the
symbol of the soul which has passed beyond the ocean and discovered the
eternal harbour; at the present day the harbour recoils _ad infinitum_,
before human thought; limitless open sea stretches away before it:
where in the abyss of bottomless and limitless nature shall be found
the branch of hope. Death is a wider void than life.

[Sidenote: The problem of life after death at the present day.]

When Plato approached the problem of destiny, he did not hesitate
to launch out into philosophical hypotheses, and even into poetical
myths. It is our present purpose to examine what are to-day the
suppositions, or, if you choose, the dreams that may still be
entertained as to the future by a sincere believer in the dominant
philosophy of the present day, the philosophy of evolution. Given the
present conception of nature, would Plato have found himself cut off
from those beautiful expectations to the charm of which he said we
ought to submit ourselves? In Germany, and in especial in England,
it is not uncommon to endeavour to discover how much of the antique
religious beliefs still subsists, and is, in however problematic and
uncertain a form, involved in the scientific and philosophic hypotheses
of the day. It is our purpose to undertake here an analogous inquiry
in regard to immortality, recognizing how conjectural any attempt to
solve the mystery of fate must be. Is it necessary to say that we
make no pretensions to “demonstrating” either the existence or even
the _scientific_ probability of a life after death? Our design is more
modest; it is enough to show that the impossibility of such a life is
not yet proven; even in the presence of modern science immortality is
still a problem; if this problem has not received a positive solution,
no more has it received a negative solution.

It is our intention further to consider what bold, and even adventurous
hypotheses may be necessary to enable one to translate into philosophic
language the sacred symbols of religion, or the destiny of the soul.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Death and idealism.]

I. There are two possible conceptions as to life after death; that
of eternal existence and that of immortality, properly so called, or
continuation and evolution of life under a superior form. The first
conception corresponds more particularly to the idealistic theories of
the world, which we have analyzed above, which, regarding the basis
of things as an eternal thought, a thought of thought, believe that
by identifying itself with it mankind might pass out of time into
eternity. Thought, which seems at first no more than a reverberation
and image of things, idealists believe, turns out in the last analysis
to be the very reality of which all the rest of the world is but a
reflection; but this conception of an eternal existence is not in the
least incompatible with the philosophy of evolution, for evolution
in time does not exclude a transcendent mode of existence out of
time. Such an existence, however, remains essentially problematic; it
corresponds to Kant’s Noumenon and Spencer’s Unknowable; according
to this hypothesis, corporal death is simply a stage in physical
evolution, and the final term to be attained by all beings is their
fixation in the consciousness of eternity. This point of fixation,
accessible to every thinking being, is to be attained only by the
highest, most disinterested, impersonal, and universal thought possible.

[Sidenote: An eternal element in man.]

Such is the hope which lies at the bottom of the great religions,
and the great idealistic systems of metaphysics. According to Plato
there is nothing durable in us but what relates to the eternal, and
to the universal, and is therefore of the same nature as they are.
All the rest is eliminated by Becoming, by perpetual Generation, that
is, by evolution. A flower is, in our eyes, a friend; it owes its
colour and charm, however simple, to a ray of the sun; but this ray,
to which our affection is due, is wholly impersonal; it creates the
beauty of the flower, and passes on its way; and it is the sun that
we should love, both for the ray and the flower. Too exclusive and
limited affection is always based on some mistake, and is on that
account perishable. It insists on our stopping at such and such a
link in the infinite chain of causes and effects. It is the principle
of the universe, it is the universal being that we must love, if our
heart is big enough, and it is that love alone, according to Plato,
which is eternal. Is not eternity the very form of existence in the
intelligible world, in which Goodness is the sun and the Ideas are the
stars? Christian neo-Platonists, over and above Time and its incessant
mobility, have dreamed of an intemporal and immutable somewhat, that
they call the life eternal: _Quæ enim videntur, temporalia sunt; quæ
autem non videntur, æterna_. Spinoza has dealt with the same conception
of an existence under the form of eternity, which does not exclude
the perpetual development of changing modes. Kant also, by his word
_Noumenon_, designated an intelligible, intemporal, transcendent
somewhat, that lay beyond the scope of physical evolution. “The eternal
evolution of the soul,” Schelling has said in his turn, “is not eternal
in the sense that it possesses neither a beginning nor an end, but in
that it bears no relation to Time.” And Schopenhauer, finally, believes
in an intemporal, eternal will, which is distinguished from the will
to live that belongs to time and to the evolution of temporal forms.
“We willingly recognize,” says Schopenhauer, “that what remains after
the complete abolition of the will is absolutely nothing to those who
are still full of the desire of life, but for those in whom desire is
annihilated what does our evil world, with its sun and its Milky Way,
amount to? Nothing.” It is with these words that Schopenhauer closes
his book. He brings us once more into the presence of _Nirvâna_,
conceived not only as a refuge from life, but also as a refuge from
death; as an existence that shall be placeless and timeless, and, so to
speak, _utopian_ (in its primary intention) and _achronistic_.

[Sidenote: Is such immortality personal or not?]

But is this eternal life, the fact of which is, as we have seen,
problematic, altogether impersonal or not? No certain reply can be
given since we are as ignorant of the essence of individual being as
of the essence of universal being, and consequently of the degree to
which it is possible for individuality to subsist in universality.
Schopenhauer, however, in his endeavour to ascribe to the individual
a greater amount of reality than Plato allowed, opposed the principle
of individuation to the natural individualities in which it manifests
itself, and it may, indeed, be asked, whether genuine consciousness,
genuine thought, and genuine volition do not at once pass beyond the
individual, and preserve what is most essential in the individual.
Individuality is always more or less physical, but it is possible that
what makes individuality limited is not of the essence of personality,
of consciousness; perhaps what is best in thought and will may become
universal, without ceasing in the best sense to be personal like the
Νοῦς of Anaxagoras.[164]

      [164] At the very centre of one’s being, universality and
      personality increase side by side; that is to say, the greater
      the share of existence a being possesses, the greater the
      amount of existence that it is capable of sharing with other
      beings. Incommunicability or impenetrability represents the
      lowest degree of existence; natural existence, the existence
      of forces as yet blind and fatal, maintains by their mutual
      antagonism an equilibrium in a state of inertia and torpor
      ... The greater one’s self-appropriation by intelligence, the
      greater one’s power of taking possession of other beings by
      thought; the being that best knows itself best knows other
      beings ... the spirit, in so far as it is intelligent, should
      be open, penetrable, participable, and participant. Two minds,
      in so far as they are perfect, may interpenetrate each other by
      means of thought (A. Fouillée, _Philosophie de Platon_).

      “We must distinguish,” M. Janet also says, “between
      personality and individuality. Individuality consists in all
      the external circumstances which distinguish one man from
      another—circumstances of time, place, organization, etc....
      The root of personality lies in individuality, but it tends
      incessantly to withdraw from it. The individual is centred in
      himself; personality aspires to rise above itself. The ideal
      of individuality is egoism, the focussing of the whole in
      self; the ideal of personality is devotion, the identification
      of self with the whole. Personality, properly so called, is
      consciousness of the impersonal” (_Moral_, 573).

[Sidenote: No positive knowledge to oppose to hypothesis of
immortality.]

Speculate as we may upon individual and universal being, we are all
but brought face to face in the end with the same transcendental _x_.
Such speculations, however, are not without a certain utility, that
of impressing us afresh with the limits of our knowledge. A belief
in a transcendent immortality, as Fiske says, can be defined only
negatively, as a refusal to believe that this world is everything.
The materialist maintains, Fiske says, that when we have described
the entire universe of phenomena, of which we are capable of taking
cognizance under the conditions of this life, the whole of the story
has been told. Fiske himself believes, on the contrary, that the whole
has not then been told.[165] We may at least say that it is _possible_
that the whole story has not then been told. But to pass from the
possible to the probable, no conclusion of the kind can be considered
satisfactory that is not based upon more positive reason, psychological
or moral; unsupported metaphysical speculations leave the mind simply
in the presence of a problem.

      [165] Fiske, _The Destiny of Man_, p. 113.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: The hypothesis of a conditional eternity.]

Theories in regard to an eternal life such as we above mentioned have
always proved in history more or less aristocratic and inclined to
limit the number of the elect. In Buddhism the sage alone is capable
of achieving eternal existence, whereas all the rest of mankind are
condemned to life in time and illusion. Spinoza recognizes eternity
only in what he calls cognition of the third order, intellectual
intuition and love. Such cognition belongs properly to the true
philosopher only. The intelligence of the vulgar is passive and
perishable. “The instant the vulgar cease ... to suffer,” says Spinoza,
“they cease to exist.” And Goethe, too, was inclined to regard the
eternal life as reserved for an aristocracy.

[Sidenote: Criticised.]

This theory of inequality is maintainable only in so far as it is based
upon an actual ascertainment of the difference in progress displayed
by different minds, and of the small number of those who achieve the
heights of wisdom. The case is otherwise when such an observed fact
of natural or moral inequality is converted into a divine right, and
God is conceived as creating and desiring precisely such a state of
things. The latter, however, is the alternative that modern Christian
theologians have adopted in their effort to offer a re-reading of
the sacred texts. In their judgment the good alone are immortal, or,
rather, are immortalized by God; the others are damned, in the sense
that they are totally annihilated—an interpretation of the dogma of
eternal punishment that seems to them wholly to exculpate the Deity.
Any such notion is based upon a metaphysical illusion. The hypothesis
of traditional eternity is inconsistent with that of the existence of a
creator, since it is forever impossible on that hypothesis, to escape
the contradiction involved in the notion of a being’s creating only to
destroy—of a being’s choosing among his creatures a certain number
for condemnation to death. Annihilation is simply damnation palliated;
it is the substitution of a celestial guillotine for the long miseries
that have preceded. This theological hypothesis affords us no way out
of the difficulties involved in the doctrine of divine sanction that
lies at the heart of all religions; it is the sacrifice of Isaac, or of
Jesus, in another form simply. Will it be said that, on the hypothesis
of conditional immortality, the immoral being is alone responsible
for his own death? Yielding to passion, or even to vice, cannot be
assimilated to suicide, for in suicide one knows what one is doing and
is responsible for it; one kills one’s self because one wishes to die;
but one does not wish to die when one abandons one’s self to a passion;
and, if the result therefore of so doing is annihilation, death comes
upon one unforeseen and undesired, takes one by surprise, by a sort of
divine ruse, and the responsibility for such annihilation lies and must
lie with God. Moreover, how can there exist between two individuals
of the same nature a sufficiently great natural or moral difference
to justify the one’s being wholly annihilated, and the other’s being
permitted to live _in æternum_? It may be said, with Plato in the
“Republic,” that, if vice were a disease that is really mortal to the
soul, it would kill it in this life. Its destructive influence would
be felt long before the occurrence of death, which, so far as vice is
concerned, is an accidental circumstance simply.

[Sidenote: Is incompatible with human fellowship.]

As the notion of conditional immortality is incompatible with the
notion of an omnipotent, omniscient, sovereignly loving creator, so
also is it with that of a society of souls, of a spiritual kingdom,
from which a certain number of mankind would be excluded forever. An
absolutely wicked and hateful soul, unpossessed of any element of
humanity, not to say of divinity, and consequently unfit to live, is a
pure figment of hate and amounts to transporting the caste of pariah
into the celestial city. It is a contradiction in terms to enjoin us
to universal charity toward all men without exception, and at the same
time to wish us to consent to the absolute annihilation and damnation
of some of them. We are naturally and morally too intimately related
for certain of us to be condemned definitively to death without the
rest of us being impeded on our upward course; we are bound to each
other by our love of humanity like Alpine climbers by the cord that
passes from waist to waist, and one of us cannot slip but that the
rest of us feel it, nor fall without all of us falling. _Nihil humani
alienum_; one heart beats in the bosom of humanity, and if it stops
forever in a single human breast, it will stop forever in the breasts
of those also who are supposed to be immortal. The best of us, those
who would be fit to receive baptism into immortality, would do as the
barbarous and pagan chief, who, after having washed away his sins in
the holy water of the font, with salvation in his hand and Paradise
before his eyes, demanded suddenly what would be the fate of his former
companions who had died unconverted, and whether he should find them
in heaven. “No,” replied the priest, “they will be among the miserable
and the damned, and thou amongst the blessed.” “I will go, then, among
the damned, for I wish to go where I shall find my companions in arms.
Adieu!” And he turned his back upon the font.

[Sidenote: Summary.]

The hypothesis of conditional immortality can, therefore, be maintained
only by eliminating from it the doctrine of a creator of absolute
merit, of virtue, and of universal and infinite charity; thus
diminished, it becomes a belief in a sort of natural or metaphysical
necessity to which beings are subject according to their degree of
perfection simply. This hypothesis is essentially anti-providential,
and in harmony only with systems more or less analogous to that of
Spinoza.

In general the notion of eternal life is altogether transcendent and a
fit subject for mystical dreams only. Let us, therefore, abandon this
high ground and descend to nature and experience. Instead of talking
of eternity, let us speak of life after death and of an immortality
not conditional, but conditioned by the laws of matter and of mind and
attainable by everyone.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Does personality contain a permanent element?]

II. Let us take our stand in the beginning on positive experience, and
consider what sort of immortality the philosophy of evolution permits
us to hope for. There exists in the sphere of consciousness, so to
speak, a series of concentric circles which lie closer and closer about
an unfathomable centre, personality. Let us pass in review the diverse
manifestations of personality and see if they contain any imperishable
element.

[Sidenote: One’s works immortal.]

The most external, and, in some sort, the most observable aspect of
mankind, consists in their works and actions. Where material works
alone are concerned, such as a house that one has built, a picture that
one has painted, a statue that one has modelled, it may be felt that
the distance between the worker and the work is too great, and that
immortality in one’s work is too much like a sort of optical illusion.
But when intellectual and moral works are concerned, the effect and the
cause are more nearly one; therein lies the element of truth contained
in the highly impersonal and disinterested doctrine that one lives
in one’s works. Intellectual and moral labours are more than their
mere material effect. The good man’s highest wish is to live and live
again in his good actions; the thinker’s highest wish is to live and
live again in the thought that he has contributed to the inheritance
of humanity. This doctrine may be found in almost all great religions
and is capable of subsistence in the domain of pure science. According
to the modern Buddhists of India a man’s actions are his soul, and it
is this soul that survives his death, and transmigration of souls
is simply the constant transformation of good into better, and evil
into worse; the immortality of one’s soul is the immortality of one’s
actions, which continue to operate forever in the world according to
their original force and direction.

[Sidenote: Continuity of human effort.]

Generation after generation labours at the task, and passes the token
of hope from hand to hand. _Heri meum, tuum hodie_, yesterday was mine
and I spent it in doing good, but not enough good; to-day is thine:
employ the whole of it, do not lose an hour of it; if an hour dies
sterile, it is a chance lost of realizing the ideal. Thou art master of
to-day; do what in thee lies to make to-morrow what thou wouldst have
it, let to-morrow be always in advance of to-day, and the horizon that
men see each fresh morning be brighter and higher than the one they saw
before.

[Sidenote: Nothing lost.]

The action must be followed into its effects, or into the effect
of those effects, and so on infinitely. Our conduct stretches away
_ad infinitum_, beyond the reach of our knowledge. Even from the
purely physical and physiological point of view, neither intended
nor attempted goodness is ineffective, since both thought and desire
develop the mind. The very notion of what is to-day chimerical
corresponds to a real movement in our brains; it is a mental force
which contains its element of verity and influence. We inherit not only
what our fathers did, but what they could not do, what they attempted
and did not achieve. We are still alive with the devotion and sacrifice
of our ancestors, with the courage that perhaps they spent in vain, as
we feel in the spring the breath of distant antedeluvian springs and
the loves of the tertiary period.

[Sidenote: Failure in the past the guarantee of success in the future.]

The ability of the present generation has been made possible by the
stumbling and mistakes of generations in the past; and this embryonic
and successless past constitutes the guarantee of our future. In the
moral, as in the physiological world, there are instances of fertility
that are not yet explicable. Sometimes long after the death of the
man who first loved her the woman brings forth a child that resembles
him; and humanity may bring forth a civilization on the model of some
ideal cherished in the past, even when the past seems to be buried
forever, if the ideal contains some obscure element of truth and,
by consequence, of imperishable force. What has once really lived
shall live again, and what seems to be dead is only making ready to
revive. The scientific law of atavism is a guarantee of resurrection.
To conceive and desire the best is to attempt the ideal, is to
predetermine the path that all succeeding generations shall tread. Our
highest aspirations, which seem precisely the most vain, are, as it
were, waves which, having had the power to reach us, have the power to
pass beyond us, and may, by a process of summation with other waves,
ultimately shake the world. I am satisfied that what is best in me
will survive, perhaps not one of my dreams shall be lost; other men
will take them up, will dream them over again in their turn until they
are realized. It is by force of spent waves that the sea fashions the
immense bed in which it lies.

[Sidenote: Death not inevitable.]

In effect, in the philosophy of evolution life and death are recognized
as relative and correlative conceptions; life is in one sense death,
and death is the triumph of life over one of its particular forms.
Proteus in the fable could be prevented from changing his shape only
by being caught in sleep, which is the image of death; thus it is
in nature; fixed form is sleep, is death, is a pause in the eternal
fluctuation of life. Becoming and life are alike formless. Form,
individuality, species, mark a transitory stoppage in the channel of
life; we can neither seize nor hold nature, except when it is laid
asleep, and what we call death—my death or yours—is itself a latent
pulse of universal life, like one of the secret vibrations that pass
through the germ during the months of apparent inertia during which it
is making ready for the later stages of its development. The law of
nature is eternal germination. A man of science was one day holding
a handful of wheat, that had been found in the tomb of an Egyptian
mummy. “Five thousand years without sight of the sun! Unhappy grains
of wheat, as sterile as death, of which they have so long been the
companions, never shall their tall stalks bow beneath the wind on the
banks of the Nile. Never? What do I know of life, of death?” As an
experiment simply, without much hope of success, the man of science
sowed the grains of wheat that he had recovered from the tomb, and the
wheat of the Pharaohs received the caress of the sun, of the air, and
came up green through the soil of Egypt, and bowed beneath the wind on
the banks of the sacred and inexhaustible flood of the Nile. And shall
human thought, and the higher life which stirs in us like the germ in
the seed, and love that seems to sleep forever in the tomb, not have
this reawakening in some unforeseen springtime, and not be brought
face to face with eternity, which seems at present to be buried, once
and for all, in darkness? What is death, after all, in the universe,
but a lesser degree of vital heat, a more or less transitory lowness
of temperature? Death cannot be powerful enough to hold life and its
perpetual youth in check, and to prevent the infinite activity of
thought and of desire.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Is a more personal immortality possible?]

III. Yes, I and my works shall survive; but is immortality in this
sense sufficient to satisfy the religious sentiment? As an individual,
what do science and the philosophy of evolution promise me or permit me
to hope? A somewhat external and impersonal immortality is, as we have
seen, possible; is anything in the nature of an internal or personal
immortality likewise possible?

[Sidenote: Science answers in the negative.]

Assuredly, it is not of science that the individual can demand proofs
of his permanence. The fact of generation is, in the eyes of the man
of science, in and of itself a negative of individual immortality; the
social instinct which opens our hearts to thousands of other beings
emphasizes the negation, and the scientific and metaphysical instincts
themselves, which cause us to take an interest in the sensitive world,
in its laws and destinies, diminish, so to speak, our importance as
limited individuals. Thought breaks the limits of the self in which it
is confined, and our breast is too narrow to contain our heart. Oh,
how rapidly one learns in science and in art to make small account of
one’s self, and this diminution of self-esteem neither lessens one’s
enthusiasm nor one’s ardour, but adds to them only an element of manly
sadness such as a soldier might feel who says: “I count for but one in
the battle, nay, for less than that, for but a hundred millionth, and
if I should disappear the result of the contest would no doubt not be
changed, and yet I shall stay and fight.”

[Sidenote: Counsels resignation.]

Scientifically considered, individuality is a sort of provisional
native land, and one’s native land is a sort of magnified individual
with a consciousness composed of ideas and sentiments, and one’s love
for one’s country may be greater than one’s love for such and such an
individual. Such a love does not prevent us from understanding that
our country will not be immortal as a nation, that it will have its
periods of growth and of decay, that the obstacles which keep peoples
apart are caducous, and that nations incessantly disappear and lose
old elements and take on new. Why, merely from the fact that we love
our own individuality, should we not consent to the same reasoning in
regard to it; why should we wish to imprison it forever within the
limits of the same individuality? If a nation dies, why should not a
man? If it sometimes amounts to divination to cry out as one falls on
the battlefield, “_Finis patriæ!_” does it any the less surely amount
to divination to cry out in the presence of death, “_Finis individuæ_”?
Could Kosciusko feel that he himself had a right to live when Poland
and the ideas and beliefs to which he had devoted his life were no more?

[Sidenote: Dignity of resignation.]

A young girl, a relative of mine, on the point of death and unable
to articulate, signified her wish for a piece of paper. When it was
given to her, she began to write, “I do not want——” Death suddenly
intervened and interrupted her volition before it could find expression
in words; the thinking being and the expression of her thought seemed
to be annihilated by the same blow. The child’s protest, like her life,
was interrupted in the middle. Volition is powerless against death,
and it is useless to stiffen one’s will against the final blow. On
the contrary, man’s sole superiority in death consists in acceptance.
Pascal’s conscious reed might not only be constrained to bend like
any other reed, it might bend consentingly and respect the law that
requires its death. Next to consciousness of his own power, the highest
of man’s privileges is consciousness of the limits of his power, at
least as an individual. Out of the very disproportion between the
infinity that kills us, and the nothing that constitutes us, arises
the sense of a certain greatness in us; we prefer to be stricken
by a mountain rather than by a pebble; we should rather fall in a
struggle against a thousand than in a struggle against one; so that
intelligence, by measuring the greatness of our adversary, deprives us
of regret at our defeat.

[Sidenote: Desire to survive egoistic.]

To desire to make the individual, who is more or less physical even in
his moral nature, eternal, is, in the eyes of the man of science, a
remnant of egoism. In his judgment, the human mind should accept the
death of the individual by a species of intellectual devotion analogous
to that with which we accept the death of our native country. Modern
men of science may be defined as those who have no hope, ὁι μὴ
ἔχοντες ἐλπίδα, as St. Paul said; we are _individually_ of too small
account in the eyes of science to live always _individually_.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: But only when it relates to one’s self.]

Ought we, therefore, to consent cheerfully to the sacrifice of self,
and to die willingly for the benefit of the universal life? So far
as one’s self is concerned, one can make the sacrifice lightly, but
the annihilation of those one loves cannot be accepted by a conscious
and affectionate being. It is in vain for scientific and philosophic
stoicism to urge with Epictetus that it is natural for a vase, which is
fragile, to break, and for a man, who is mortal, to die. The question
still remains, whether what is natural and scientific ought, as the
Stoics alleged, to satisfy my reason and my love. As a matter of fact,
when one really loves another person, what one endeavours to love is
not the element of fragility, the vase of clay, but the intelligence
and the heart, which Epictetus declines to consider separately from
their perishable accompaniments. One attaches one’s self to them as
to something permanent; one corrects and transfigures nature itself,
and passes in thought beyond the brutality of its laws, and therein
lies, perhaps, the very essence of the love of another. If the laws
of nature, after seeming for a moment to be suspended and vanquished
by the force of one’s disinterested love, subsequently break the bond
that holds them in check, is it surprising that one’s love should
still hold out against them? It is not only pain that I experience
at being baffled by the laws of nature; it is indignation, it is the
sense of injustice. The Stoics regarded pain as a passive affection of
the sensibility simply, but moral pain implies a struggle of the will
against nature, and an effort, as they themselves admit, to correct it.
It is on this ground that pain is not an evil; its rôle is incessantly
to impose our moral and social ideal on our physical nature, to force
it to perfect itself; pain is the principle of development in life,
and if there exists a means of vanquishing death, it is perhaps by
virtue of pain that we shall arrive at it. We are right, therefore, in
rebelling against nature’s powers of life and death, in so far as she
exercises them for the purpose of annihilating what is morally best in
us and in others.

[Sidenote: Love under the form of eternity.]

True love should never be expressed in the language of time. We say: “I
loved my father during his lifetime; I was deeply attached to my mother
or my sister.” Why locate it in the past? Why not say always: “I love
my father or my mother?” Does not, and should not, love lay claim to an
eternal present?

[Sidenote: Uniqueness of the individual.]

How could one say to a mother that there is nothing truly and
definitively alive, personal, unique, in the at once smiling and
meditative eyes of the child she holds upon her knees; that the little
being that she dreams of mature, and good, and great, is a simple
incident in the life of the species? No; her child is not like any
other that has ever lived or that ever will live; none other could
possess that look. Nowhere among the generations of men can there
exist a fac-simile of the beloved face before one. All nature does not
possess the equivalent of the individual, which it can destroy, but
not replace. It is not, therefore, without reason that love refuses
to consent to the substitution of one individual for another, which
constitutes the very movement of life; it cannot reconcile itself to
the eternal whirl in the dust of being; it is bent on fixing life, on
arresting the world in mid-progress. But the world does not stop at
its bidding. The future calls to generation after generation, and this
powerful force of attraction is also a force of dissolution. Nature
gives birth by means of death, and the joy of new loves is composed of
the fragments of the old.

[Sidenote: The protest of love against death not limited to humanity.]

This protest of love against death, against the dissolution of the
individual, attaches also to the lower animals. A dog, it seems, has
only a market value, and yet can I ever buy again one that shall be the
equivalent of this one that has died before my eyes? He loved me with
all the power of his unhappy being, and endeavoured to hold fast to me
while he was slipping away, and I endeavoured to hold him fast. Does
not every being that loves acquire a right to immortality? Yes; the
ideal of affection would be to immortalize all conscious beings; nay,
more, the poet who is delicately sensitive to the individuality of a
flower, or a ray of coloured light, of the drop of dew that refracts
it, would wish to immortalize all nature, would wish to view under the
form of eternity the rainbow that quivers in a soap bubble; for can
any two bubbles ever be the same? And yet, while the poet aims thus
at holding everything fast, at preserving everything, at fixing his
dreams, at enchaining the ocean of life, the man of science replies
that the eternal flood must be allowed to pulsate, to engulf our tears
and our blood, and that the world must be left free. For the man of
science, the flux and reflux and progress of life are more sacred than
the love of the individual.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Antagonism between love and science.]

Thus, in the question of individual immortality, two great forces drag
human thought in opposite directions. Science is inclined everywhere
to sacrifice the individual in the name of natural evolution; love
is inclined, in the name of a higher moral and social evolution, to
preserve the individual. The antinomy is one of the most disquieting
that the philosophic mind has to deal with.

[Sidenote: The best in one may survive.]

Should science be admitted to be wholly in the right, or must we
believe that an element of truth exists in the social instinct
which lies at the basis of affection, as there is a presentiment
and anticipation of the truth in all great natural instincts? The
social instinct possesses a greater value at the present day, because
philosophers are beginning to consider even the individual as a
society, and to recognize association as a universal law of nature.
Love, which is the power of cohesion at its highest degree, is
perhaps right in its desire for an element in the association between
individuals. Its sole error is that of exaggerating its pretensions
and of misplacing its hopes. After all, one must not be too exacting
nor ask too much of nature. A true philosopher, even for those that he
loves, should not shrink from proof by fire, and death is the flame
that purifies while it consumes. If anything survives the ordeal that
alone is much, and if what survives is precisely what is best in us,
what more can be asked? One may break the vase, of which Epictetus
speaks, but the perfume remains, and floats out into the air, and
becomes, no doubt, ultimately indistinguishable, but still subsists.

[Sidenote: Sociology and the problem of immortality.]

The science which seems to offer the strongest opposition to the
preservation of the individual is mathematics, which recognizes the
existence of nothing in the world but variable and equivalent figures
and abstractions. On the contrary, perhaps the most concrete of the
sciences, sociology, recognizes everywhere groups of realities;
sociology therefore cannot hold relations that arise out of
association, nor the terms between which they exist, so cheap. Let us
consider whether, from the point of view of a more complete and more
concrete science, consciousness, which is the principle of personality,
properly so called, necessarily and forever excludes the possibility of
indefinite duration that all great sciences attribute to the spirit.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: The basis of existence not substance but activity.]

III. Antique metaphysics gave too much attention to questions of
substance, to considering whether the soul is simple or complex.
The question amounts to whether the soul is made of indivisible
or divisible material; it assumes as the basis of the phenomena of
mind, an imaginary and in some sort extended substance. It was upon
this doctrine of the simple substance that the demonstration of the
immortality of the soul was founded. Evolutionist philosophy tends
to fix our attention nowadays, not on the substance, but on the
way the substance behaves, that is to say, in physical terms, on
movements.[166] Consciousness is a certain action accompanied by a
certain collective unity of movements. If it exists in a substance
it is not the duration of this substance that interests us, but that
of its activity, since it is that activity which constitutes our
consciousness.

      [166] “Whoever says that he cannot conceive an action without
      a substratum confesses by his very words that the alleged
      substratum which he conceives is a product of his imagination;
      it is his own thought that he is obliged to place as a support
      behind the reality of things. By a pure illusion of the
      imagination, after one has stripped off from an object the only
      qualities that it possesses, one affirms that something of it,
      one knows not what, still subsists.” (Schelling, _System of
      Transcendental Idealism_.)

      “To be,” said Berkeley, “is to be this or that. Simply to be,
      without explanatory addition, is to be nothing; it is a simple
      conception, if not a word void of sense.”

      “Berkeley’s object was to overthrow the hypothesis of a
      substance lying beyond the range of spirit, as an imperceptible
      support of the qualities of which our senses take cognizance.”
      (Félix Revaisson, _La Philosophie en France_, 9.)

      See also M. Lachelier, _De l’Induction_.

[Sidenote: Continuity of existence means continuity of function.]

Wundt is one of the contemporary philosophers, who, after Aristotle,
Hume, Berkeley, and Kant, has best shown the illusiveness of
endeavouring to discover a simple substance underlying consciousness.
It is only internal experience, he says, only consciousness itself,
that comes to us guaranteed by immediate certainty. And this implies,
he adds, “that all these substances which spiritualism regards as the
basis of subjective or objective experience are of the highest degree
of uncertainty, for in no experience whatsoever are they given. They
are deliberate fictions, by the aid of which it has been attempted
to explain the unity of experience.” The true explanation of this
unity should be sought for elsewhere in continuity of function, and
not in simplicity of substance. “The consecutive effects of anterior
states combine with those which arise later; in this way there is
caused a subjective continuity of states which corresponds to the
objective continuity of movement, which is the condition of unity of
consciousness.” The binding together of successive mental states is
lacking in bodies, although they must possess the germ of action and
of sensation. For this reason Leibnitz was right in saying that bodies
are “momentary spirits,” which forget everything immediately, and know
only a present, uncomplicated by a past or a future. Conscious life,
on the contrary, by the very means of changing elements, realizes
a continuity of mental functions, a memory of the past, a certain
durability. This continuity is not a result of simplicity, but, on the
contrary, of the higher complexity that belongs to mental functions.
“On the physical side, as on the psychical side,” says Wundt, “the
living body is a unity; this unity is not founded in simplicity but
in compositeness of a high degree of complexity. Consciousness, with
its multitude of combined states, is a unity analogous to that of the
bodily organism. The absolute correlation between the physical and the
psychical suggests the following hypothesis:[167] that what we call the
soul is the internal aspect of what, in its external aspect, we call
the body that contains the soul. This way of conceiving the problem
of correlation inevitably leads us to the belief that the essence of
reality is intellectual, and that the fundamental attribute of being is
development or evolution. Human consciousness is the highest point of
such evolution; it constitutes the nodal point in the course of nature
where the world recollects itself. It is not as a simple being but as a
product evolved out of innumerable elements that the human soul is, as
Leibnitz says, ‘a mirror of the world.’”[168]

      [167] This hypothesis is identical with that of monism.

      [168] Wundt, _Psychologie_, vol. ii.

[Sidenote: The problem of immortality at the present day.]

From this modern point of view, which is a development of that of
Aristotle,[169] the question of immortality amounts to asking how
far the continuity of mental functions may be supposed to extend the
continuity of one’s intellectual being, which is the subjective unity
of a complex multiplicity aware of itself as such?

      [169] See M. Ravaisson, _La Métaphysique d’Aristote_, vol. ii.,
      and _Rapport sur la Philosophie en France_.

[Sidenote: Indissoluble material compounds.]

Note, first, that even in the external world we are not without
examples of indissoluble compounds; certain simple atoms are compounds
of this sort. The atom of hydrogen is a vortex of little worlds. Well,
is there nothing indissoluble in the universe except so-called atoms,
so-called physical “individuals,” and is it unpermissible to conceive,
on the subjective side, individuals more worthy of the name, whose
duration is guaranteed by the very fact of their complexity?

[Sidenote: Restatement of the problem.]

According to the reigning doctrines in physiology and experimental
psychology, individual consciousness is, as we have said, a compound of
the consciousnesses of all the cells that are united in the physical
organism.[170] The individual, consisting thus of a society, the
problem of death amounts to the question, whether there can exist an
association, at once solid enough to endure forever, and flexible
enough to adapt itself to the ever-shifting conditions of universal
evolution.

      [170] Association or grouping is the general law of organic
      and inorganic existence. Society, properly so called, is only
      a particular case, is only the most complex instance, of this
      universal law.... A consciousness is rather a _We_ than an
      _I_. It is capable of union with other consciousnesses and
      of forming, in conjunction with them, a more comprehensive
      and more durable consciousness, from which it receives and
      to which it communicates thought, as a star both borrows
      and communicates motion in the system to which it belongs.
      (Espinas, _Des Sociétés animales_, 128. See also M. Fouillée,
      _La Science sociale contemporaine_, l. iii.)

[Sidenote: The ideal type of association.]

This problem, be it observed in the first place, is precisely that
which human societies are endeavouring to solve. At the lowest stage
of social evolution solidity and flexibility are rarely united. Egypt,
for example, was solid but not very progressive. A stage higher in the
scale of evolution, in proportion as science advances and personal
liberty comes to be recognized, civilization becomes both more solid
and indefinitely flexible, and at some period in the future, when
scientific civilization shall have once mastered the globe, it will
possess a power that the most compact, and, in appearance, the solidest
masses cannot equal; it will be firmer than the very pyramids, and
will at the same time prove increasingly flexible, progressive,
capable of adaptation to every variation in the environment. The
synthesis of complexity and stability will then have been achieved.
The very character of thought is increasing adaptivity, and the
more intellectual a being is, the greater its power of displaying
the qualities which are most advantageous under any given set of
circumstances. The eye, which is more intellectual than the sense of
touch, furnishes a power of adaptation to a wider and more diversified
environment. Thought, which is more intellectual than sight, enables
one to adapt one’s self to the universe itself, to the immensity of
the stars, as well as to the infinite pettiness of the atoms in a drop
of water. If memory is a masterpiece of intellectual record-taking,
reasoning is a masterpiece of flexibility, of mobility, and of
progress. So that, whether individuals or nations are in question, the
most intellectual are those which possess at once the greatest amount
of stability and of adaptability. The problem of society is to unite
these two things, the problem of immortality is at bottom the same;
the individual consciousness being, as we have seen, itself a society.
From this point of view, it seems probable that the more perfect
one’s personal consciousness is, the more absolutely it possesses
both durability and a power of indefinite metamorphosis. So that,
even admitting what the Pythagoreans insist upon, that consciousness
is a number, a harmony, a musical chord, we may still ask whether
certain harmonies may not become sufficiently perfect to endure forever
without, on that account, ceasing to enter as elements into richer and
more complex harmonies. A lyre might vibrate _ad infinitum_ without
its several strings losing their respective tonalities amid the
multitude of their variations. There ought to exist an evolution in the
organization of consciousness as in the organization of molecules and
living cells, and the most vital and durable and flexible combinations
should possess the advantage in the struggle for existence.

[Sidenote: The last stage in the struggle for existence.]

Consciousness is a collection of associations of ideas, and,
consequently, of habits, grouped about a centre; and we know that
habits possess an indefinite duration; contemporary philosophy
regards the properties of elementary material substances as habits,
as instances of indissoluble association. A vegetable or animal
species is a habit, a type of grouping and organic form which subsists
century after century. It is not proved that mental habits may not in
the course of evolution achieve a fixity and a durability of which
we possess to-day no example. It is not proved that instability is
the definitive and eternal characteristic of the highest functions
of consciousness. A philosophic hopefulness in regard to immortality
is founded on the belief that, in the last stages of evolution,
the struggle for existence will become a struggle for immortality.
Nature will then come to realize, not by virtue of simplicity, but of
judicious complexity, a sort of progressive immortality, the final
product of natural selection; and, if so, religious symbols will have
been simply an anticipation of this final period. We shall have wings
to support us in our flight through life, Rückert says, wings to
support us in our flight past death; but the bird does not learn to
fly immediately nor at once; the hereditary habit of flight must have
been acquired and developed by the species because of the advantage it
brings with it in the struggle for existence. Survival, therefore, must
not be conceived as completed at a bound, but as slowly perfected by a
gradual and continuous lengthening of the average span of life. It must
be shown, however, that such a survival would constitute a superiority,
not only for the individual, but for the species.

[Sidenote: Psychology and the communion of souls.]

And now let us consider consciousnesses in their relations to each
other. Contemporary psychology tends to the doctrine that different
consciousnesses, or if you prefer, different aggregates of states
of consciousness, may combine, and even interpenetrate, somewhat
analogously to what theologians mean by communion of souls. And
if so, it is permissible to ask whether, if consciousnesses can
interpenetrate, they may not some day come to possess a continuity of
existence; may not be able to hand on their existence to each other,
and to communicate to each other a new sort of durability instead of
remaining, as Leibnitz says, more or less momentary; supposing always
that such durability would be advantageous to the species.

[Sidenote: Possible frequency of the phenomenon.]

Mystical intuitions sometimes contain a certain presentiment of the
truth. St. Paul tells us that the heavens and the earth shall pass
away, that prophecies and languages shall pass away, but that one thing
shall not pass, and that is charity, or love. If this doctrine is to be
interpreted philosophically, the bond of continual love, which is of
all bonds the least primitive and the most complex, must be conceived
as capable of ultimately becoming the most durable of bonds, and as
tending progressively to embrace a larger and larger proportion of the
whole number of the inhabitants of the celestial city. It is by what is
best, what is most disinterested, most impersonal, and most loving in
one, that one achieves communion with the consciousness of another, and
such disinterestedness must coincide ultimately with disinterestedness
in others, with others’ love for one’s self; and there will arise thus
a possible fusion of souls, a communion so intense that as one suffers
in the bosom of another, so, too, one may come to live in the heart of
another. To be sure, we have passed here into the limits of dreamland,
but it is to be remarked that such dreams are extra-scientific, and not
anti-scientific.

[Sidenote: Vision of the ideal society.]

Let us conceive ourselves as existing in this problematical, though
not impossible, epoch when individual consciousnesses shall have
achieved a higher degree of complexity and of subjective unity, and
along with them a power of more intimate communion than they possess
to-day, without the fact of that communion altogether breaking down
the bounds of personality. They will communicate thus with each other,
as the living cells in the same body sympathize with each other, and
contribute each to form the collective consciousness; they will be all
in all, and all in every part. And indeed one may readily conceive
means of communication and of sympathy, much more subtle and direct
than those which exist to-day among different individuals. The science
of the nervous system is in its earliest stages; we are acquainted as
yet with exaltation as a state of disease only, and with suggestion at
a distance as an incident merely of hypnotism; but we already begin
to be dimly aware of a whole world of phenomena that go to show the
possibility of a direct communication between different, and even
under certain circumstances of a sort of reciprocal absorption of two
personalities. Some such complete fusion of two consciousnesses, that
however still preserve their individuality, is to-day the dream of love
which, as one of the greatest of social forces, ought not to labour
in vain. Supposing the power of communion with other consciousnesses
gradually to develop, the death of the individual will manifestly
encounter a greater and greater resistance on the part of the several
minds with which such an individual is in communication. And, in any
event, the minds with which an individual is in communication will
tend to retain an increasingly vivid, and, so to speak, living memory
of him. Memory at the present day is simply an absolutely distinct
representation of a certain being—an image, as it were, vibrating
in the ether after the original has disappeared. The reason is that
there does not as yet exist an intimate solidarity and continuous
communication between one individual and another. But it is possible
to conceive an image which would be scarcely distinguishable from the
object represented; would be the sum of what such and such an object
means to me; would be, as it were, the prolongation of the effect
of another consciousness on my consciousness. Such an image might
be regarded as a point of contact between the two consciousnesses
involved. Just as in generation the two factors combine in a certain
third, which represents them both, so such an animated and beloved
image, instead of being passive, would constitute a component part of
the collective energy and purpose of one’s being; would count for one
in the complex whole that one calls a mind or a consciousness.

[Sidenote: Personal immortality.]

According to this hypothesis, the problem would be, to be at once
loving enough and beloved enough to live and survive in the minds
of others. The individual, in so far as his external accidents are
concerned, would disappear; but what is best in him would survive in
the souls of those he loves who love him. A ray of sunlight may for
a time record upon a bit of dead paper the lines of a face that no
longer exists among the living; nay, human art may go farther, and
impart to canvas or to stone the minutest resemblances to human life;
but art has not yet succeeded in imparting a soul to Galatea. Love must
be added to art to achieve that miracle—men must love each other so
completely that they become identified in the universal consciousness.
When that consummation has been reached, each of us will live
completely, and without loss, in the love of our fellows. The power of
love is not limited, like that of light, to giving permanence to the
outward appearances of life; it is capable of lending stability to life
itself.

[Sidenote: Elimination of death.]

Separation on such an hypothesis would be as impossible as in the case
of those atomic vortices of which we spoke above, which consisted each
in a single individual, in the sense that no force could break them
up into their elements; their unity lay not in their simplicity, but
in their inseparability. Just so in the sphere of consciousness, a
manifold of conscious states may conceivably form a luminous ring that
can neither be broken nor extinguished. The atom, it has been said, is
inviolable, and consciousness may come to be inviolable _de facto_.

[Sidenote: Triumph of love.]

Nay, one’s secondary and reflected life in the minds of other people
might even come to be more important than the original of which it is
a copy, insomuch that a gradual process of substitution might take
place, a substitution of which death would simply mark the definitive
and tranquil accomplishment. We might feel ourselves, even in this
life, entering into possession of an immortality in the hearts of
those who love us. Such an immortality would be a species of new
creation. Morality, and religion even, are in our judgment simply the
outcome of moral productivity; such an immortality would be simply an
ultimate manifestation of the same thing. And if it were once achieved,
the opposition that the man of science to-day perceives between the
continuation of the species and the immortality of the individual would
have disappeared in a final synthesis. Death closes one’s eyes, but
love stands by to open them again.

[Sidenote: Complete survival of the individual.]

The point of contact might thus be found between life and immortality.
At the beginning of evolution, death was the end of the individual and
the light of consciousness ended in obscurity. By virtue of moral and
social progress, one’s friends tend to remember one after death with
increasing intensity and for longer and longer periods; the image that
survives the original fades only by degrees, and more and more slowly,
as the course of evolution advances. And it may be that, at some time
in the future, the memory of beloved beings will so mingle with the
life and the blood of each new generation, and will be so passed on
from one to the other, that it will become a permanent element in
the current of conscious existence. Such a persistent memory of the
individual would be a gain in power for the species, for they who
remember love more dearly than they who forget, and to love dearly
is advantageous to the species. It is not, therefore, unpermissible
to conceive a gradual increase in the faculty of memory by natural
selection. The day may come when the individual will survive in as
detailed and complete a fac-simile of what he was in his lifetime as
can well be imagined, and death may become less significant than a
period of absence; love will endow the beloved object with the mystery
of eternal presence.

[Sidenote: Exemplified to-day in isolated cases.]

Even at the present day individuals here and there are sometimes so
deeply loved that it is doubtful whether or no what is best in them
does not survive their death, and their minds, unhappily subject to
the weaknesses of humanity and unable as yet to break through the
limitations of the physical organism, do not really succeed, by virtue
of the love that surrounds them, in achieving an almost complete
immortality even before their death. It is in the hearts of those
who love them that they really live, and in all the world the corner
that it really concerns them to be able to call their own lies in the
affections of two or three people.

[Sidenote: Destined to become common.]

This phenomenon of mental palingenesis, which is at present isolated,
may gradually come to be extended to the whole of the human species.
Immortality may be an ultimate possession acquired by the species,
as a whole, for the benefit of all of its members. Every individual
consciousness may come to survive as a constituent part in a more
comprehensive consciousness. Fraternity may, at some time in the
future, be universal, render soul transparent to soul, and the ideal of
morals and of religion be realized. Every soul will be reflected and
mirrored in every other; although it will not suffice for that purpose
simply to look into each other’s eyes unless one’s heart positively
shines through them. One must project one’s own image into the mirror
of the sea, if one is to find it there.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Possibility of a still more literal immortality.]

It must, of course, be admitted that, if such speculations do not
positively stretch away beyond the limits of possibility, they
certainly do stretch away beyond the limits of actual science and
experience, but precisely what renders all such hypotheses uncertain
renders them also forever possible: namely, our irremediable ignorance
of the basis of consciousness. Whatever discovery science may make in
regard to consciousness and its conditions, it will never ascertain its
essence, nor, consequently, the limits of its possible subsistence.
Psychologically and metaphysically considered, what are conscious
action and volition? Nay, what is unconscious activity, what is force,
what is efficient causality? We do not know, we are obliged to define
subjective activity and power in terms of objective motion, that is
to say, in terms of their effect, and it will always be permissible
for a philosopher to deny that motion, as a simple change of relations
in space, constitutes the whole of an action, and that there are no
uncaused movements, no relations between non-existent terms. And, if
so, how are we to know precisely to what extent activity is essentially
enduring as the emanation of a subjective power of which motion is, as
it were, the visible sign, and of which consciousness is the immediate
and intimate “apprehension.” Neither word nor act expresses all of us,
something always remains unsaid, and will, perhaps, remain unsaid to
the end of our lives—and beyond. It is possible that the foundation of
personal consciousness is a power as incapable of being exhausted by
any amount of activity as of being confined to any variety of forms.

[Sidenote: Can never be disproved.]

In any event the matter is, and always will be, a mystery, which arises
from the fact that consciousness is _sui generis_, is absolutely
inexplicable, and at bottom forever inaccessible to scientific formulæ
and a fit subject, therefore, of metaphysical hypotheses. Just as being
is the supreme genus, _genus generalissimum_, in the objective world,
so consciousness is the supreme genus in the subjective world; so that
no reply can ever be given to these two questions: What is being, and
what is consciousness? Nor, therefore, to this third question, which
depends upon the two preceding: Will consciousness continue to exist?

On an old dial, in a town in the south of France, may be read the
legend: _Sol non occidat!_ May the light not fail! Such is, indeed, the
proper epilogue to _fiat lux_. Of all things in this world light is the
one upon which we are most dependent; it, of all things, should have
been created once for all, εἰς ἀεί; should pour down from the heavens
through all eternity. And the light of the mind, which is more powerful
than the light of the sun, may ultimately succeed in eluding the law of
destruction which everywhere in the book of nature immediately follows
the law of creation, and then only will the command, _fiat lux_, have
been accomplished. _Lux non occidat in æternum!_

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Stoicism the last resort.]

IV. But, it will be asked, what consolation and encouragement is
there in all this for those who do not feel the charm of these remote
hypotheses concerning the outer limits of existence, for those who see
death in all its brutality, and lean, as you yourself probably do, in
the present state of the theory of evolution, somewhat toward purely
negative conclusions? What can be said to them when they stand, as they
believe they do, on the brink of annihilation? Nothing better could
be said than the simple and somewhat unfeeling words of the ancient
Stoics, who, be it remarked also, were themselves disbelievers in
the immortality of the individual: “Be not a coward!” Deeply in the
wrong as Stoicism was in the presence of death, in its insensibility
to the pain of love which was the condition of its power and of its
progress among mankind, when it interdicted attachment and commanded
impassibility, it was right when it recommended insensibility to one’s
own death. A man needs no other consolation than to feel that he has
lived a complete life, that he has done his work, and that mankind
is not the worse, nay, is perhaps the better for his having existed;
and that whatever he has loved will survive, that the best of his
dreams will somewhere be realized, that the impersonal element in his
consciousness, the portion of the immortal patrimony of the human race,
which has been intrusted to him and constitutes what is best in him,
will endure and increase, and be passed on, without loss, to succeeding
generations; that his own death is of no more importance, no more
breaks the eternal continuity of things, than the shivering of a bit of
a hand-glass does. To gain a complete consciousness of the continuity
of life is to estimate death at its proper value, which is perhaps
that of the disappearance of a kind of living illusion. Once more, in
the name of reason, which is capable of understanding death, and of
accepting it as it accepts whatsoever else is intelligible—be not a
coward!

[Sidenote: Dignity of resignation.]

More than that, despair is grotesque because it is useless; cries and
groans, at least such as are not purely reflex, originally served their
purpose in the life of the species of arousing attention or pity, or
of summoning aid; it is to the fact that it was once useful that the
existence and propagation of the language of pain are due; but as there
is no help against the inexorable, and no pity to be asked for in a
matter that is in harmony with the interests of the totality of things
and conformable to the dictates of our own thought, resignation alone
is the proper attitude of mind, or rather a certain inner assent, or
still better, a smile of detachment and intelligence and comprehension,
and interest even in our own extinction. What is beautiful in the
natural order of things cannot definitively excite despair.

[Sidenote: Of considering one’s own case impersonally.]

If anyone who has experienced the pangs of death should make light of
the sort of consolation here referred to, we reply that we are not
ourselves speaking in absolute ignorance of the visage of the supreme
moment. We have ourselves had occasion more than once to look death in
the face, less often no doubt than a soldier in active service; but we
have had more time to consider it at our ease, and we have never found
reason to desire that it should be veiled by an irrational belief.
It is better to see and to know the truth; it is better not to tread
the brink of the precipice with bandaged eyes. To disguise death is
to pay it too great a compliment. We have had more than one example
of it under our eyes. We have seen our grandfather, who, by the way,
was himself not a believer, stricken down by successive attacks of
apoplexy, and he said to us, smiling in the intervals of his pain,
that he felt but one regret, and that was that so many superstitions
should be in existence, and that Catholicism in particular (it was at
that time when France was aiding the Papacy) should still be in power.
Note also that the progress of science—in especial, of physiological
and medical sciences—tends to increase the number of instances in
which death is foreseen and is waited for almost with serenity.
The least stoical of mankind sometimes feel the inclination toward
an act of heroism, which, though in a measure forced upon them, is
nevertheless not without its dignity. In the course of certain cases
of protracted disease, such as consumption or cancer, the patient, if
he possesses the necessary scientific qualifications, can calculate
the probabilities of his life and determine within a few days at what
time he will die. Bergot, whom I knew, was such a patient; Trousseau
was another, and there have been many more. Knowing one’s self to be
condemned, feeling one’s self to count for but one in the infinity of
the universe, one can consider one’s self and one’s progress toward the
unknown in a sense impersonally.

[Sidenote: Sudden death a blessing.]

If such a death is not without its bitterness, it is nevertheless the
one which, of all others perhaps, is likely to prove attractive to a
philosopher, to a mind with a passion for clearness, for foresight, for
comprehension. For the rest, in the majority of cases, death takes its
victims in the height of their vigour, in the midst of the struggle
for existence; it is a matter of a few hours, like birth; its very
suddenness renders it less redoubtable to the majority of mankind, who
find it comparatively easy to be brave in the presence of a danger that
is brief, and they hold out against the supreme enemy with the same
obstinate courage that they would display against any other. On the
contrary, when death approaches slowly, and deprives us of our strength
by degrees, and each day leaves us in possession of something less than
the day before, another source of consolation is open to us.

[Sidenote: Decline in interest in life with decline in vitality.]

It is a law of nature that diminution of vitality brings with it a
proportionate diminution of desire; a man cares less keenly for what
he feels himself less capable of attaining. Illness and old age always
make us set less value upon the joys of which they deprive us which
they first render bitter and then impossible; and the last joy of all,
that of bare existence, is as subject to the law as its predecessors.
Consciousness of one’s inability to live brings with it inability to
desire to live; it becomes a burden to draw one’s breath. One feels
one’s self dispersing, falling into dust, and no longer possessing
the strength to check the process of decay. Moreover, egoism declines
with declining strength; as we approach the grave we gain a power of
estimating ourselves more nearly at our just value, of understanding
that a faded flower has no right to live; that, as Marcus Aurelius
said, “a ripe olive _ought_ to fall from the tree.” One sentiment alone
survives, a sense of weariness, of extreme weariness. We long for rest,
long to relax the tension of life, to lie at ease, to have done with
it once for all. Oh! to be no longer on one’s feet. The dying well
know the supreme joy of looking forward to their last resting place!
They no longer envy the interminable file of the living whom they
perceive, as it were in a dream, vainly marching and countermarching
upon the surface of the earth where they sleep. They are resigned
to the solitude and abandonment of death. They are like travellers
in the desert—worn with fever, and fatigue, and unwilling to make
another step in advance; they are no longer borne up by the hope of
revisiting familiar skies; they are unable to surmount the remaining
difficulties of the way and request their companions to leave them, to
march on without them, and, stretched upon the sand, watch without a
tear, without a desire, the departing caravan creeping away toward the
horizon.

[Sidenote: Persistence of curiosity.]

Naturally, some of us will always shrink before death, and wring our
hands, and lose our self-possession. Some temperaments are subject to
vertigo, to a horror of abysses, and in especial to a horror of the
great abyss toward which all paths converge. Montaigne counsels such
people to throw themselves blindly over the verge; others counsel them
to fix their eyes till the end on some small mountain flower in the
crevice of the rock. The manliest of mankind will give their attention
to the depths of space and to the heavens, will fill their hearts with
the immensity of the universe, will magnify their souls to the limits
of the abyss, will subdue the rebellious individuality in themselves
before it is forcibly subdued for them, and will scarcely be aware of
the precipice till they have fairly passed beyond its brink. And for
the philosopher, who is essentially a worshipper of the unknown, death
possesses the attraction of novelty; birth only excepted, it is the
most mysterious incident in life. Death has its secret, its enigma, and
we are haunted by a vague hope that, as the final touch of irony, it
may be revealed to us at the last moment; that the dying, according to
the ancient belief, divine it and close their eyes only to shield them
from an intolerable brightness. Man’s last agony and his last pulse of
curiosity are one.




INDEX.


  A

  Absoluteness of primitive faith, 139
  Adler, Felix, 367
  All-embracing unity, modernity of concept of, 39
  Alviella, M. Goblet d’, 254, 277, 352
  Amiel, 378, 466
  Analysis, effect of, on emotions, 461;
    destroys irrational joys only, 466
  Ancestor worship, 47
  Animal’s prayer, 74;
    religion in lower, 76
  Animate and inanimate, obviousness of distinction between, 49
  Animism, priority of, 52;
    dualistic, 82
  Anomy, religious, 374
  Antagonism between wealth and population, 315
  Arnold, Matthew, 23, 92, 143, 156, 174, 189, 247, 259
  Art, and religion, 414;
    necessary reforms in, 418
  Asceticism, 211, 473
  Asia, danger from, 321
  Association, ideal type of, 392
  Augustine, Saint, 147
  Aurelius, Marcus, 360

  B

  Baudelaire’s criminal, 406
  Baudrillart, 324, 332
  Beneficent error, 14
  Bentham, 403
  Bertillon, M., 324, 337
  Bost, Pastor, 184
  Buddhism, 362
  Byron, 407

  C

  Caro, M., 387
  Catholicism, 203, 244, 247
  Cause, conception of God as first, 88
  Celibacy, 306;
    tax on, 336
  Charity, intolerance a perverted, 147, 400
  Christianity, 359, 362;
    main strength of, 180;
    the error of, 196;
    and communism, 240
  Civilization, menace to modern, 318
  Clergy, impropriety of suppressing the, 274
  Colenso, Bishop, 357
  Commune, The, 244
  Communism and Christianity, 240
  Compensation, notion of, 75
  Comte, A., 109
  Confessional, the, 248
  Conservatism, feminine, 7
  Constant, Benjamin, 146
  Conway, Moncure, 167
  Cosmism, 365
  Creation hypothesis, 102, 433
  Credulity, feminine, 29
  Crimes of French Revolution and Commune not due to non-religion, 244
  Criminal, Baudelaire’s, 406
  Criminology and religion, 241

  D

  Darwin, 295
  Dead, cult for the, 410
  Defect of French mind, 20
  Definition, by Schleiermacher and Feuerbach, of religion, 3
  Delirium, 82
  Dependence of religion upon morality, 192
  Determinism, concept of, 72;
    reconciliation between indeterminism and, 484
  Diderot, 222
  Dissolution, possibility of arresting, 497
  Divine and human love, conflict between, 201
  Divine Providence, notion of a, 85;
    futility of doctrine of, 440
  Divinization, 69
  Doctrine of Divine Providence, futility of, 440
  Dogma, unfitness as material for education of religions, 272
  Dogmatism and intelligence, 150
  Doubt, Morality of, 382
  Dreams, 67, 82
  Dualistic animism, 82
  Duty of civilized races to multiply, 319

  E

  Ecstasy, religious, 222
  Education, unfitness of religious dogma as material for, 272;
    by the priesthood, 273, 282;
    moral, 280;
    husband responsible for wife’s, 310
  Egoism and mysticism, conflict between, 204
  Eighteenth century view of miracles, 91
  Espinas, 526
  Essence of religion, 1, 10
  Ethical Culture Society, 367
  Evil of belief in a Divine Providence, 97
  Evil, problem of, 433
  Experiment in miracles, 158

  F

  Fainting, 82
  Faith, absoluteness of primitive, 139;
    complete intellectual rest, incident to, 142;
    willfully blind, 143;
    transformation of inevitable, 234
  Fall of man, doctrine of the, 439
  Family, religion of the, 322
  Fanaticism, possible scientific, 395
  Father’s duty in regard to religious instruction, 286
  Feminine credulity, 297;
    conservatism, 297;
    timidity, 298
  Féré, M. Ch., 462
  Fetichism, 44, 48, 65
  Fetichistic monism, primitive metaphysics a, 81
  Feuerbach’s definition of religion, 3
  First cause, concept of God as, 88
  Fiske, Mr. John, 452, 455, 512
  Force, use of justifiable, 146
  Fouillée, M. Alfred, 7, 37, 435, 484, 485, 493, 526
  France, proposal to Protestantize, 249;
    gradual improvement of, 322
  French, mind, its defect, 20;
    Revolution, 250;
    gaiety, 268

  G

  Gaiety, French, 268
  Ghosts, 83
  Gift, notion of, 75
  God, conceived as first cause, 88, 431;
    as ordered, 104;
    as creator, 432;
    responsible for evil, 433;
    His omnipotence, 442;
    hypothesis of, a non-omnipotent, 443;
    disanthropomorphization of concept of, 452;
    possible evolution of by natural selection, 496
  God, love of, 131;
    belief in, falls with belief in devil, 165;
    love of, on the wane, 205
  Goethe, 377, 400
  Grace, doctrine of, 200

  H

  Hartmann, Von, 39, 108, 109, 464
  Hasheesh, use of, defended, 223
  Havet, M., 355
  Hellenism, 261
  Henneguy, Felix, 290
  Henotheism, 27, 39, 108
  Hindu tolerance, 32
  History and religion, 158
  Human and divine love, conflict between, 261
  Humanity, religion of, 365
  Humanization, 68
  Husband responsible for wife’s education, 310
  Huxley, 480
  Hysteria, 83

  I

  Ideal type of association, 392
  Idealism, 479
  Incuriosity of primitive man, 51
  Indeterminism, reconciliation between determinism and, 484
  Individualism, religious, 12
  Infinite, concept of the, 34
  Inheritance, injustice of present law of, 338
  Initiative, sentiment of personal, 98
  Instinct, religious, 40, 229;
    of self-preservation and sociality, 44
  Instruction, father’s duty in regard to, 286
  Insurance and religion, 161
  Intolerance, incident to faith, 144;
    a perverted charity, 147
  Invisible, suffering from the, a modern malady, 35
  Immanence of conscious life in nature, 66
  Immortality, importance of concept of, 119

  J

  Javal, M., 337, 341
  Jerome, Saint, 355
  Jesus, 134, 187, 356
  Junqua, Dr., 183

  K

  Kant, 195, 380, 433, 447

  L

  Lange, 415, 490
  Laveleye, M. de, 249, 252, 284
  Lenormant, M., 285
  Leopardi, 468
  Lethargy, 82
  Liberal Protestantism, 182
  Littré, 277, 288
  Livingstone, 302
  Love, conflict between divine and human, 201;
    a cerebral stimulant, 307;
    makes for sanity, 308;
    of mankind, future of, 399
  Love of God, 131;
    on the wane, 205
  Lower animals, religion in, 76
  Luther, 193

  M

  Mainlaender, Phillipp, 458
  Malthusianism, 317;
    fallacy of, 317;
    in France, 325
  Marvellous, primitive man’s faith in the, 137
  Materialism, 488
  Maternity, girls should be trained for, 333
  Medical knowledge, progress of, and religion, 162
  Ménard, M. Louis, 249, 289
  Metaphysics, primitive, a fetichistic monism, 81;
    scope of, 383;
    instability of, 389;
    present direction of, 424
  Michelet, 249, 320
  Mill, John Stuart, 173, 442, 461
  Mind stuff, 490
  Misoneism, 125
  Miracles, conception of, 87;
    not frauds, 90;
    eighteenth century view of, 91;
    but illusions, 92;
    experiment in, 128;
    in modern times, 353
  Modesty, nature or, 301
  Mohammedanism, 257, 361
  Molinari, M. de, 409
  Monism, 493
  Montesquieu, 329
  Moral sentiment defined, 7
  Moralism, 426
  Morality and religion, 114, 241, 362;
    dependence of religion upon, 192;
    essence of, 197;
    apart from religion not hard to teach, 402
  Mormonism, 358
  Müller, Max, 24, 49, 233
  Mystery, fear of thunder due to sense of, 62
  Mysticism a perversion, 132;
    conflicts with egoism, 204;
    and asceticism, 211;
    and women, 299

  N

  Natural phenomena non-existent for primitive man, 64
  Natural selection, evolution of gods by, 496
  Nature a society, 55;
    seeming menace of conscious life in, 66;
    love of, 421;
    inexhaustible resources of, 500
  Neo-Christianity, 184
  Neutrality, propriety in religious affairs of state, 277
  Newman, Cardinal, 247
  Newman, Mr. Francis, 351
  Nirvâna, 473
  Nonotte, Abbé, 327
  Non-religion defined, 8;
    the goal of religion, 167;
    not responsible for the crimes of the French Revolution and the
      Commune, 244
  Novelty, persistent in the world, 470

  O

  Omnipotence, God’s, 442

  P

  Pantheism, 452
  Panthelism, 55
  Paraphysics, religion primarily a, 79
  Parents, not protected against ingratitude, 334;
    should be taxed inversely to number of children, 337
  Parvé, M. Steyn, 283
  Pascal, 202, 440
  Pattison, Mark, 365
  Paul, Saint, 356
  Paul, Vincent de, 399
  Personal initiative, sentiment of, 98
  Pessimism, 457;
    an optical illusion, 468
  Pillon, M., 249
  Polydemonism, 85
  Population, antagonism between wealth and, 315;
    importance of, 316;
    inability of priest to cope with question of, 327;
    decrease of, encouraged by the church, 328
  Positivism, 24, 109, 365
  Possession, 83
  Prayer, the animal’s, 74;
    kinds of, distinguished, 217;
    durable element in, 217;
    highest form of, 225
  Priest and prophet, antagonism between, 128
  Priesthood, origin of, 126;
    education by the, 273, 282
  Primary instruction and religion, 159
  Primitive man, incurious, 51;
    unaware of natural phenomena as such, 64;
    and novelty, 125;
    and the marvelous, 137
  Primitive metaphysics, a fetichistic monism, 81
  Problem of evil, 433
  Prophet and priest, antagonism between, 128
  Protestantism, 152, 167, 252;
    liberal, 182
  Providence, notion of a Divine, 85;
    evil of belief in, 97;
    futility of doctrine of, 440

  R

  Realism, 482
  Reconciliation between determinism and indeterminism, 484
  Relics, belief in, 86
  Religion, essence of, 1, 10;
    and science, difference between, 3;
    Feuerbach’s definition of, 3;
    Schleiermacher’s definition of, 3, 487;
    of natural origin, 22;
    and superstition, 78;
    primarily a paraphysics, 79;
    morally retrograde, 114;
    and physiology, psychology, and history, 158;
    and primary instruction, 159;
    and development of commerce, 160;
    and insurance, 161;
    and progress of medical knowledge, 162;
    tends toward non-religion, 167;
    dependent upon morality, 192;
    and crime, 241;
    not essential to morality, 241;
    deserted by genius, 355;
    of humanity, 365;
    and art, 414
  Religious individualism, 12;
    instinct, 40, 229;
    ecstasy, 222;
    instruction, father’s duty in regard to, 286
  Renan, 17, 23, 40, 119, 126, 158, 172, 227, 232, 236, 306, 321, 373
  Renouvier, 249
  Revelation, essence of faith in, 140
  Réville, M., 49, 114, 128, 417
  Revolution, French, 244, 250
  Richet, M., 337
  Romanes, George, 62

  S

  Sanction, superfluity of religious, 405
  Scepticism, feebleness of, 376
  Schelling, 524
  Schleiermacher’s definition of religion, 3, 487
  Schoolmaster, importance of the, 277
  Schultz, Professor Hermann, 184
  Science and religion, difference between, 3
  Secrétan, M., 437
  Secularism, 365
  Self-preservation, and sociality, instincts of, 44
  Sentiment, definition of moral, 7
  Sermon, transformation of the, 416
  Shadows, 82
  Sin, morbid preoccupation with, 213
  Socialism, 369
  Sociality, and self-preservation, instincts of, 44
  Society for Ethical Culture, 367
  Sociomorphism, religion a, 2
  Somnambulism, 83
  Special Providence, 440;
    mankind to be its own, 450
  Spencer, Herbert, 44, 384, 427, 451, 490
  Spinozism, 454
  Spirit, genesis of concept of, 82
  Stoicism, 520
  Strauss, 23, 417, 431
  Suffering from the invisible, a modern malady, 35
  Suicide, as a resource, 472
  Superstition and religion, 78
  Symbolism, 9

  T

  Taine, 227, 479, 490, 493
  Tax on celibacy, 306
  Theism, 429
  Theresa, Saint, 134
  Thunder, sense of mystery responsible for fear of, 63
  Timidity, feminine, 298
  Tolerance, 149;
    Hindu, 32
  Totality, concept of, 39
  Transformation of the sermon, 416
  Trent, Council of, 141

  U

  Unity, modernity of concept of an all-embracing, 39
  Universal Providence, 441

  V

  Vernes, M. Maurice, 281, 283
  Verrier, Dr., 344

  W

  Wealth, antagonism between population and, 315
  Wife, husband responsible for education of, 310
  Women and mysticism, 299;
    importance of early education of, 309
  Worship of ancestors, 47;
    public, 126;
    subjective, 130

  Z

  Zoölatry, 47


THE END.
