CHAPTER I.

RELIGIOUS INDIVIDUALISM.

    I. Is a renovation of religion possible? 1. Is a unification
      of the great religions to-day existing possible? 2. Is
      the appearance of a new religion to be expected?—Future
      miracles impossible—Religious poetry not to be
      expected—Men of genius capable of sincerely and naïvely
      labouring in the creating of a new religion not to
      be expected—Impossibility of adding to the original
      stock of religious ideas—No new cult possible—Last
      attempts at a new cult in America and in France—The
      Positivist cult—Ethical culture—Can socialism renew
      religion?—Advantages and defects of socialistic
      experiments.

    II. Religious anomy and the substitution of doubt for
      faith—1. Will the absence of religion result in
      scepticism? Will the number of sceptics increase with the
      disappearance of religion? 2. Substitution of doubt for
      faith—Genuinely religious character of doubt.

    III. Substitution of metaphysical hypothesis for
      dogma—Difference between religious sentiment and
      instinct for metaphysics—Imperishable character of
      the latter—Sentiment at once of the limits of science
      and of the infinity of our ideal—Spencer’s attempted
      reconciliation of science and religion—Confusion of
      religion with metaphysics.


_I. Is a renovation of religion possible?_

[Sidenote: Is contemporary scepticism final?]

We have seen that the influence of dogma and of religious morality is
on the wane in actually existing societies; but will not this period of
decline be followed by a reaction in the opposite direction?

[Sidenote: Consolidation of existing religions not possible.]

Such a reaction could take place in two ways only: 1. By the
unification of religions; 2. By the appearance of a new religion.
The unification of existing religions is not to-day to be thought
of; each of them has shown itself to be incapable of assimilating
the others. The different Christian confessions hold each other in
mutual respect, but they do the same with the great religions of the
East. Islamism alone has made notable progress among tribes still
imbued with primitive animism, and for them it represents a manifest
progress. As for Christian missionaries they have never been able
to make many proselytes among the Mussulmans, the Buddhists, or
the Hindus. The Hindu who has been instructed in European science
necessarily comes to doubt the revealed foundation of his national
religion, but he is not on that account any the more inclined to
believe in the Christian revelation. He ceases simply to be religious
and becomes a free-thinker. All peoples alike are in that position;
the principal great religions possess an approximate value as symbols
of the unknowable, and worshippers perceive no advance in passing from
one of them to the other: mankind in general does not welcome change
for change’s sake. Missionaries themselves to-day lack faith in their
religion; they possess either enthusiasm minus talent or talent minus
enthusiasm, and the time is at hand when the spirit of propagandism,
which has hitherto constituted the power of religion, will abandon
it. Few people can cry to-day in the words of the unbelieving Jesuit
missionary: “Ah, you have no conception of the pleasure of convincing
men of what you do not believe yourself!” Where absolute faith is
lacking, and absolute faith in the very details of the dogmas is
lacking, sincerity, which constitutes the essential power of all
propagandism, is lacking too. Bishop Colenso was one day asked, by his
neophytes in Natal, some questions on the Old Testament. After having
followed him up from question to question they asked him, on his word
of honour, if all that was true. Seized by a scruple, the Bishop fell
into a profound train of reflection, studied the question, read Strauss
and the German commentators, and finally published a book in which
he treats Biblical history as a series of myths. To this celebrated
example of Colenso among the Kaffirs, must be joined that of Mr.
Francis Newman in Syria, and of the Rev. Adams in India, and of others
less well known. Efficiently to combat religions as well organized
as those of India, for example, our missionaries would be obliged to
become seriously proficient in the history of religion. But the day
they sincerely study comparative religion in the hopes of converting
somebody else, they will themselves undergo conversion, or at least
will rapidly learn to reject a belief in a special revelation.[114]
The great religions, and principally the “universal” religions, which
to-day have attained their full development, hold each other in
check. These vast bodies show almost no signs of life except within,
by the formation of new centres of activity which detach themselves
from the primitive nucleus, as we see daily happening in the bosom of
Protestantism, which is constantly being subdivided into new sects; as
also within the bosom of Hinduism, insomuch that the only sign of life
that these religions give is that they are beginning to disintegrate.

      [114] See M. Goblet d’Alviella, _L’évolution religieuse_.
      Anglo-Saxon religious proselytism has achieved the distinction
      of contradicting and paralyzing itself. The Theosophist
      Society of the United States, in 1879, sent to India certain
      missionaries, or rather counter-missionaries, who were
      commissioned “to preach the majesty and glory of all ancient
      religions and to fortify the Hindu, the Cingalese, the Parsee,
      against all efforts to induce him to accept a new faith instead
      of the Vedas, of the Tri-Pitâka and of the Zend Avestâ.” In
      India and in the island of Ceylon these counter-missionaries
      have succeeded in bringing back to the primitive faith some
      thousands of converts to Christianity.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Analogy between nineteenth century and times of the
Antonines superficial.]

The increasing multiplicity of sects, for example of the Protestant
sects; the courageous efforts of certain disciples of Comte and of
Spencer, the birth of Mormonism in America and of Brahmaism in India,
have been regarded as symptoms of a religious fermentation analogous
to that which disturbed the world at the time of the Antonines and
very possibly destined, like that, to result in a renovation. “All
things in nature spring from humble beginnings, and no one can to-day
say whether the unconscious mission of the fisherman and publicans,
gathered eighteen centuries ago on the borders of Lake Tiberias about
a gentle and mystical idealist, will not to-morrow be handed on to
such and such an association of spiritualists prophesying in a gorge
of the Rocky Mountains; to such and such an illuminated gathering
of socialists in some back shop in London; to such and such a band
of ascetics, meditating, like the Essenes of old on the miseries of
the world, in some jungle of Hindustan. Perhaps all they need is to
discover on the road to Damascus another Paul, to give them a passport
to future ages.”[115] These analogies between our century and that of
the Antonines are very superficial; between the century which, as a
whole, is of an unexampled incredulity and the century which was of an
unexampled credulity—which accepted all religion from that of Isis
and Mithra to that of Christ; from that of the talking serpent to that
of Christ incarnate in the body of a virgin. During the past eighteen
hundred years a new thing has been born into the world—science; and
science is not compatible with supernatural revelations, which are the
foundation of religions.

      [115] _L’évolution religieuse contemporaine_, by M. Goblet
      d’Alviella, p. 411.

[Sidenote: Attempt to found a religion to-day on miracles desperate.]

Will it be objected that miracles still happen? Possibly one or two
notable ones in a century! The surprising thing is not that miracles
still happen, but that, with millions of believers, including in their
ranks thousands of excited women and children, they do not happen
frequently. Every day ought to bring forth its duly authenticated
miracle, but unhappily daily miracles no longer happen—except in
mad-houses and hospitals for the hysterical, where they are observed
and reported nowadays by incredulous men of science. When they happen
elsewhere, true believers themselves are almost afraid of them and
do not care to talk about them. Of old a king forbade God to perform
miracles; the Pope has done almost as much to-day; they are regarded
as objects of doubt and suspicion, rather than of edification. Among
orthodox Protestant nations, miracles do not happen; enlightened
theologians among them no longer insist on the marvellous elements
in the early Christian tradition; they regard them as more likely to
enfeeble than to confirm the authority of the Scriptures. Add that as
a means of founding a new religion, or of reviving old religions, a
miracle or two would do no good; they would rather result in the total
destruction of the faith they were intended to establish. A whole
series of miracles would be necessary, a sort of marvellous atmosphere
in which the whole face of nature should be transformed, a mystic halo
not only visibly resting on the head of the prophet, but reflected
on the believers who surround him. In other words, the Messiah must
be in his lifetime quite as wonderful as he is always reported to
be afterward, and that without deception or finesse, either on his
part or on the part of those who surround him and are supported by
his divinity. Unhappily, in our days great men are immediately taken
account of by history, which verifies everything, describes everything,
sets down in plain print the contemporary fact, otherwise so likely
to settle, with time, into some fantastic shape. Even the legend of
Napoleon, which he himself laboured with all the resources of despotic
power and brutal force to establish, did not last thirty years in
Europe; in the East it exists still, transfigured. Personalities
shrink beneath the touch of history. If Jesus had lived to-day his
letters would have been published, and it is impossible to believe in
the divinity of anybody after one has read his correspondence. The
slightest facts of an interesting man’s life are ascertainable: state
records enable us to ascertain important dates, what he did from year
to year and even sometimes from day to day; sometimes a mere appearance
in court, such as happened in the life of Shakspeare’s father, may
serve to fix a date; and in the life of a prophet there would be
no lack of appearances in court since unlicensed assemblies are
interdicted. Life to-day is so hemmed in by reality, so disciplined,
that it is difficult for the marvellous to find entrance, or to make
good its lodgment even if it should get in. We live in little numbered
and windowed boxes, in which the least disturbance attracts attention;
we are watched like soldiers living in barracks; we have every evening
to be present at the roll-call, with no possibility of dropping out of
the society of men, of returning into ourselves, of avoiding the big
eye of society. We are like bees living under a glass; the observer can
watch them at work, watch them constructing their hive, watch them
making their honey; and the sweetest of honey, even the honey with
which the ancients nourished the baby Jupiter, ceases to be marvellous
when one has been present at its tardy and painstaking elaboration.

We are far from the time when Pascal could say “Miracles are as a flash
of lightning that reveals.” The lightning no longer flashes. Science
stands ready to explain the first miracle that arises in support of a
new religion.

[Sidenote: Genius has deserted the service of religion.]

Metaphysical and poetic genius also, upon which religions were so
dependent in their earliest stages in the past, have also withdrawn
from their service. Read the descriptions of the latest miracles, those
at Lourdes, for example: the little girl taking off her stockings to
step into the rivulet, the words of the Virgin, the vision repeated
as a spectacle before witnesses who saw nothing—all of it is trivial
and insignificant; how far we have travelled from the Lives of the
Saints, the Gospel, the great Hindu legends! The poor in spirit may see
God or the Virgin, but they cannot make others see them; the poor in
spirit cannot found or revive religion; it requires genius, and genius,
which bloweth where it listeth, bloweth to-day elsewhere. If the Bible
and the Gospels had not been sublime poems they would not have made
the conquest of the world. Æsthetically considered, they are epics
greater than the Iliad. What Odyssey equals that of Jesus? Refined
Greeks and Romans did not at first appreciate the simple, impassioned
poetry of the Gospels; it was long before they admired the style of
the Scriptures. St. Jerome, transported in a dream to the feet of the
Sovereign Judge, heard a menacing voice cry: “Thou art naught but a
Ciceronian!” After this dream St. Jerome applied himself to the study
of the beauties of the Bible and the New Testament, and came ultimately
to prefer them to the balanced periods of the great Latin orator: the
Sermon on the Mount, in spite of some inconsistencies (in part the work
of the disciples), is more eloquent than the most eloquent of Cicero’s
orations, and the invectives against the Pharisees, authentic or not,
are better literature than the denunciations against Catiline. M.
Havet, in our judgment, entirely misses the point, when he asks how
“so great a revolution could have taken its rise from such commonplace
literature as the New Testament.” The literary excellence of the New
Testament is of a new kind, unparalleled among the Greeks or the
writers of the Old Testament; it possesses the grace of tenderness
and of unction, which is well worth the lyrical fire of the prophets;
it is a profound and naïve manual of popular morality, and every word
makes one’s heart vibrate. The literary success of the New Testament
was fully merited. The Hebrew people, who had not produced one man
of science, had evidently produced a succession of sombre, tender,
puissant poets unparalleled among any other people; a fact which in a
great part explains the victorious progress of Hebrew religion. Poetry,
like hope, is the sister of faith, and is more necessary than hope to
faith, for one may forego the distant grace of hope when one is under
the present charm of an illusion.

[Sidenote: And the conditions in which alone genius could succeed are
wanting.]

To found a great religion has demanded and will always demand the
services of men of genius such as Jesus was, or, to be quite historic,
as St. Paul was. But if genius is to found religion it can do so
only under two essential conditions. It must in the first place be
absolutely sincere; we no longer live in a period when religion can be
benefited by imposture; it must, in the second place, distinctly impose
upon itself; it must be the dupe of its own inspiration, of its own
interior illuminations, disposed to see in them something superhuman,
to feel itself in direct communication with God, or at least especially
designated by God. This second condition was easy to realize in ancient
times when, in their ignorance of psychological and physiological
phenomena, not only men like Jesus but philosophers like Socrates and
Plotinus believed that they felt within them something supernatural,
took their visions and their ecstasies seriously; and, unable to
explain their own very genuine genius, regarded it as a proof of some
mysterious or miraculous communication with God. Purely and simply to
rank these great men among lunatics would be absurd; they were simply
seeking to explain phenomena which overtaxed their knowledge and gave
what, after all, was the most plausible explanation for the times
in which they lived. With the scientific knowledge that we possess
nowadays, and which every man who attains a certain intellectual
level inevitably will possess, men like Moses and Jesus, men who
are inspired, will be obliged, so to speak, to choose between two
alternatives; to see in their inspiration simply the natural impulse of
genius, to speak in their own name, to make no pretences to revelation
or prophecy, to be, in effect, philosophers, or actively to allow
themselves to be deceived by their own exaltation, to objectify it, to
personify it, to become madmen in downright earnest. At the present
day those who are not capable of naming the force that is acting in
them and declaring it to be natural and human, and of preserving their
self-mastery, are definitively regarded as of unsound mind; prophets
who believe in their own prophecies are sent to Charenton. We are
familiar with distinctions that were unknown in ancient times, even to
the promoters of religious ideas; the great men who founded religions
were carried away by the movement they had themselves called into
being; were divinized by the God that they themselves had brought
to men. Genius is as capable of going to school as stupidity; and,
like stupidity, it has been to school in the nineteenth century and
is familiar with nineteenth-century science. A time will come—nay,
probably has come for Europe—when prophets, apostles, and Messiahs
will be extinct among men. It is a species which is dying out. “Who
of us, who of us will become a god?” None of us will become a god,
and more than that none of us wants to. Science has killed the
supernatural in us even in the very centre of our being, in our deepest
ecstasies; visions no longer put on the shape of apparition but of
simple hallucination, and the day they become so strong that we believe
in them we lose all power to make anybody else believe in them, and
become, not uncommonly, amenable to the law. The middle term between
the man of genius and the fool, the man of inspiration, of revelation,
the Messiah, the God, has disappeared.

[Sidenote: Dissemination of knowledge has weakened the religious
sentiment.]

Add that inspiration nowadays, and forever more, lacks and will lack
its appropriate environment. Intensity of religious emotion in a
people, an intensity which sometimes rises to the height of fanaticism,
depends, in a great measure, upon ignorance and upon the level of
intelligence achieved by average human life. When problems of the
origin and destiny, and reason of things, are suddenly presented to an
ignorant people, it experiences profound terrors, ecstasies, a general
heightening of the sensibility which is due to the fact that a state of
metaphysical and philosophical curiosity is utterly unfamiliar to it,
constitutes a positive revolution in its ordinary habits of mind. When
the average level of intellectual activity is once raised, metaphysical
emotion loses its revolutionary character precisely because the whole
extent of human existence has become imbued with it. A calm, high,
continuous enjoyment takes the place of a brief, stormy ecstasy; people
who pass their lives on the shore of the ocean cease to fear it, or
at least do not experience so violent an emotion in its presence as
they did at the sight of their first tempest. If we had never looked
upon the starry heavens, the first time we lifted our eyes to them we
should be filled with fear; the spectacle of them to-day calms us,
gently inspires us. To appease the violence of religious sentiment, it
must, when it has been purified, be permitted to permeate the whole of
human existence, be always present with us, and domesticate us in the
infinite.

[Sidenote: A new religion must be both novel and significant.]

A final condition precedent to the success of a new religion would be
that it should be really new, that it should contribute a new idea to
the treasury of the human mind. Among the wretched attempts at starting
a new faith which have been made from one end of the world to the other
in our days, nothing original has made its appearance. In America a
religion new in appearance, Mormonism, has had some success; it is,
of all modern attempts, the only one which has relied upon miraculous
prophecy and revelation, such as are indispensable to a genuine
dogmatic religion: it has also its book, its Bible, and even includes
in its legend some prosaic tale of marvellous pair of spectacles
destined for the deciphering of the book. The God of Mormonism, who
is rather better educated than the God of the Bible, possesses some
notion of optics. But at bottom Mormonism is simply a modern edition of
Jewish ideas and customs: the whole religion is a bit of plagiarism,
a resuscitation of superanuated legends and beliefs, to which it has
added nothing but what is trivial; it is a religious anachronism. It
seems also to have reached the limit of its development, the number
of its adherents is not increasing. Hindu Brahmaism is an eclectic
and mystic spiritualism without one really new idea. Comtism, which
consists of the rites of religion and nothing else, is an attempt
to maintain life in the body after the departure of the soul. The
spiritualists are charlatans, or empirics, who have been impressed with
certain, as yet obscure, phenomena of the nervous system which they
themselves are unable to explain scientifically. But charlatanism has
never founded anything durable in the domain of religion. To compare
American Mormonism or spiritualism to nascent Christianity is to make
one’s self ridiculous. Humble as the beginnings of Christianity were
one must not be the dupe of historical illusion, nor believe that
Christianity owed its triumph to a simple concurrence of happy events;
that the world, for example, according to M. Renan’s hypothesis, might
quite easily have become Mithraic. The disciples of a certain Chrestus,
mentioned for the first time by Suetonius, could present, as the basis
of their as yet vague beliefs, two incomparable epic poems, the Old
Testament and Gospels; they introduced into the world a new system
of morality, which was admirable even in its errors, and original at
least for the mass of mankind; and they contributed, finally, to the
common stock of ideas a great metaphysical conception, that of the
resurrection, which, combined with current philosophical conceptions,
necessarily gave birth to the doctrine of personal immortality.
Christianity conquered by its own weight, it was inevitable that it
should find its St. Paul; the Old Testament and the Gospels were too
eminent to be forgotten, or to remain without influence on human life.
There is not a single example in the history of the world of a great
masterpiece, at once literary or philosophical, which has gone its
way unperceived, without exerting an influence upon the progress of
humanity. Every work which is sufficiently endowed with beauty or
virtue is sure of the future.

[Sidenote: No great religion could nowadays take its rise among the
masses.]

It is among the masses that religious movements have hitherto begun.
But a new religion could not come to us to-day from the ignorant
masses of an Oriental people nor from the lower classes of any country
of Europe. In heathen antiquity, all social classes were united in a
belief in naïve superstitions. Marcus Aurelius himself was obliged
to preside in great pomp over a ceremony in honour of the serpent of
Alexander of Abonoteichos which numbered believers among his friends.
To-day a bishop in Australia can refuse to order a prayer for rain, and
declare that atmospheric phenomena are regulated by inflexible natural
laws, and persuade the believers in his diocese, if they want a remedy
against drought, to ameliorate their system of irrigation. These two
facts indicate the thorough-going difference between the ancient and
modern world. The contemptuous title of Barbarians, which the Greeks
and Romans applied to all other peoples, was less than exact, for the
Hebrews and the Hindus at least possessed a more profound religion
than the Greeks and Romans and even in certain respects a superior
literature. Greek and Roman civilization is a rare historical example,
which proves that religion is not necessarily the measure of the
intellectual development of a people. Greece excels principally by her
art and science; but the superiority which she conceived herself to
possess in other respects was a pure illusion founded on ignorance.
The superiority that we attribute to ourselves is demonstrated by
our knowledge; we are better acquainted to-day with the religion of
most Oriental peoples than they are themselves; and we have earned
a right to sit in judgment on them, and admire them, and criticise
them, that the ancients did not possess. The distinction between those
who know and those who do not is to-day the sole really serious line
of demarcation between classes and nations. And the line is one that
religion cannot pass, for every complete religion involves a general
conception of the world, and no such naïve conception of the world
as a man of the people is capable of can ever find acceptance by a
cultivated mind. No great religion can germinate and achieve complete
development in modern society.

[Sidenote: Impossibility of improving on existing religions in their
kind.]

The impossibility of finding anything new in the domain of mythical
religion might almost be demonstrated _a priori_; nothing more
attractive will ever be discovered in the way of a metaphysical myth
than the sovereign happiness obtained in this life in the Buddhists
Nirvâna, or obtained in the life after death in Christian immortality.
In these two conceptions, the metaphysical imagination of humanity
has once for all achieved its masterpiece, as the plastic imagination
once for all achieved its masterpiece in Greek statuary. Something
may be demanded in another order of ideas, one may exact less naïve
hypotheses, hypotheses more neighbour to the truth; but these
hypotheses will never seduce humanity nor pass over the world like a
wave of light, nor become transfigured in the form of a revelation.
The multitude never listens to a revelation that does not announce
some glad tidings, some salvation in this world, or the next; to be
a prophet, and to be listened to, imperatively requires one to be a
prophet of good augury. Religious metaphysics, after its two immense
efforts in Buddhism and Christianity (Mohammedanism is simply a
vulgarization of these two), is condemned in the future to sterility
or repetition, so long as severe and truly philosophical hypotheses,
based on scientific generalization, engage the attention of mankind.
Infantine hypotheses, which resolve the problems of the destiny of
mankind and of the world in a manner altogether consoling to human
vanity, are condemned to uniformity and banality. To discover anything
new in the realm of metaphysics, the religious spirit will have to
abandon the conditions which have hitherto existed; will have to deal
with ideas that lie beyond the primitive intellectual range of a
Hottentot, and even abandon all notion of universality, of Catholicity,
in the sphere of speculation.

[Sidenote: Impossibility of improving existing religious morality as
such.]

The same is true in the sphere of morals. So far as an exalted and
attractive system of morality is concerned, can one go farther than
Christianity and Buddhism, both of which preach exclusive altruism,
absolute self-abnegation? All that one can do is really to take a few
steps backward to moderate certain exaggerated outbursts of devotion in
the void, to fit Christian and Buddhistic morality to the real world,
to supply this beautiful mysticism with a material body; but for such
a task a new Messiah would be powerless, simple good sense does not
charm humanity; the cold, humble, commonplace duties of everyday life
cannot be made the basis of a great popular movement. Common-sense
is not contagious after the fashion of religious exaltation, which
passes from man to man like wildfire. Moral sentiment may well, in the
course of time, filter into us, pass slowly from man to man, rise like
a rising tide, but so gradually as scarcely to be perceptible. The
most lasting approaches to perfection are often the most unconscious.
It is a difficult matter by a simple impulse of faith to climb sheer
up on the ladder of civilization. True moral perfection is often the
precise opposite of heroic paroxysm. As the passion for goodness
becomes triumphant, it ceases to be a passion: it becomes, and must
become, a portion of our normal life, of the flesh that the mystics
curse; the man must become good from the roots of his hair to the
soles of his feet. Thus Buddhism and Christianity, in many respects,
have miscarried. If the first apostles, who preached these religions,
should return among men, how unchanged and untransmuted they would
find humanity, after so many thousands of years! There has been, no
doubt, an intellectual progress which has confirmed a certain number
of moral ideas, but this very complex intellectual progress has not
entirely been effected by religions. There was as yet no sign of it in
the small number of simple-hearted people gathered about the “new word”
in which the apostles saw their moral and religious ideal realized. As
the primitive virtues of this small knot of wholly religious and not
at all scientific people overspread humanity, they necessarily became
corrupt: and a morality of exalted self-abnegation could not succeed
beyond a small group, a family, a convent, artificially sequestered
from the rest of the world it necessarily failed when it undertook to
appeal to all mankind. The great world is too inhospitable and shifting
a soil; one does not sow seed in the sea. A revival or a repetition of
the religious epics of Christianity or of Buddhism would to-day meet
with an immediate check; for it is the very essence of their influence
to develop the heart disproportionately to the brain, and, such an
effect being a sort of disturbance of equilibrium, a sort of natural
monstrosity, can be produced in individuals indeed, but not in races.
The investigator to-day, who adds the least item of truth to the mass
of scientific and philosophic knowledge already acquired, performs a
much less brilliant but probably more definitive work than the purely
religious work of a Messiah. He is of those who construct not in three
days, but during successive ages, the sacred edifice which will not
fall.

[Sidenote: Growing antagonism to externals of worship.]

The most essential incident of every dogmatic religion, the cult, is
not less foreign to the spirit of modern society than dogma itself
is. The foundation of outer forms of worship, as we have seen, is a
crystallization of custom and tradition into the form of rites. Well,
as has been said, one of the characteristic marks of the innovating
spirit, and of intellectual superiority, is the power of breaking up
associations of ideas, of liberating one’s self in a measure from
established collocations of ideas, of being slow to contract invincible
habits of thought, of precisely not possessing a ritualistic mind. If
such be one of the great signs of superiority in an individual, it is
none the less so in a people. Progress in humanity may be estimated by
the degree of perfection that the faculty of psychic disassociation
has achieved. The instinct for novelty is then no longer held in
check by the instinct for ritualism; curiosity may be pushed to its
extreme without any sense of innovating impiety such as primitive
peoples regard it with. The importance of ritualism in the material
and religious life of a people indicates the predominance among them
of obscure and unconscious associations of ideas, their brain is
caught and enveloped in a closely woven network of tradition, in a
tissue impenetrable to the light of conscience. On the contrary, the
progress of reflection and of conscience which is manifested among
modern people is accompanied by an enfeeblement of established custom,
of unconscious habit, of the discipline and power of the past. There
is often a certain danger, on the practical side, in this change,
because reflection becomes strong enough to dissolve habits before it
is capable of making head against the passions of the moment. The power
of disassociation is intellectual, and is not in itself adequate to
the moral domination and direction of the individual, and whatever may
be the objections, from the point of view of morals, to the progress
of reflection, it is certain that it sooner or later strips rites,
religious ceremonies, and the whole machinery of worship, of their
sacred character. Etiquette in the presence of kings and gods alike
is destined to disappear. Whatever is an observance ceases to be a
duty, and the rôle of the priest by that fact is seriously changed.
The distant ideal toward which we are marching includes among other
things the disappearance of the priesthood, which is rite personified;
the god of the priesthood, who in certain respects is no more than an
apotheosis of custom, has to-day grown old and maintains his power only
by the prestige of the accomplished fact. It is in vain for men like
German, English, or American clergymen, or Hindu deists, who still
possess a religion, to endeavour to throw over revelation and dogma,
and reduce their faith to a system of personal and progressive beliefs,
to be accompanied by a ritual. The ritual is an excrescence simply,
an almost superstitious habit, mechanically practised and destined to
disappear.

[Sidenote: The liberal movement in religion a movement of
disintegration.]

The movement which, in certain countries, inclines religion to be shy
of dogmas and rites, is in reality a movement of disintegration, not
of reconstruction. Human beliefs, when they shall have taken their
final form in the future, will bear no mark of dogmatic and ritualistic
religion, they will be simply philosophical. Among certain people,
it is true, every philosophical system tends to assume the practical
and sentimental form of a system of beliefs and aspirations. The
ideas of Kant and Schelling, when they passed into America, gave
birth to Emerson’s and Parker’s transcendentalism; Spencer’s theory
of evolution became, in America, a religion of Cosmism, represented
by Messrs. Fiske, Potter, and Savage. But all such alleged religions
are simply the moving shadow, in the domain of sentiment and action,
of the substance of intellectual speculation. It is not enough to be
of the same opinion on some sociological or metaphysical theory and
then to congregate to the number of ten or a hundred in some theatre
or temple, to found a new religion and a new cult. The majority of
these pretended religions, which are simply philosophies and sometimes
very bad philosophies, are open to Mark Pattison’s observation on the
congregation of Comtists in their chapel in London: “Three persons and
no God.”

[Sidenote: Secularism.]

The defects of these modern cults appear in their most exaggerated form
in secularism, which had its hour of success in England. Secularism is
a purely atheistic and utilitarian religion, which has borrowed all it
could from the ritual of the English Church. This contradiction between
the outer form and the inner void resulted in a positive parody.[116]

      [116] See the secularist version of the _Ite missa est_.

[Sidenote: Comtists.]

In France the Comtists have made the same attempt to preserve the
rites, without the background, of belief. The Comtist doctrine of
fetichism contains a certain amount of truth as characterizing
primitive religion, but it is insufficient in its application to
actual, existing religions. The religions of the present day have
developed, gradually, from a primitive system of physics to a complete
system of metaphysics: the fetiches have been transmuted into symbols
of the First Cause, or of the Final Cause. Positivism can offer us
no symbol of this kind; its “Great Fetich” is genuinely a fetich,
and appropriate for primitive peoples only. “Humanity” does not
afford complete satisfaction to one’s conception of causality, nor
to one’s conception of finality. In regard to the first, humanity is
a simple link in the infinite chain of phenomena; in regard to the
second, humanity constitutes an end which is practically inexact and
theoretically insufficient: practically inexact because almost the
whole of one’s activity relates to such and such a restricted group
of human beings and not to humanity as a whole; and theoretically
insufficient, because humanity looks small in the presence of the great
universe. Its life is a point in space, a point in time; it constitutes
a contracted ideal, and to say the truth, it is as vain for a race to
regard itself as its own end as for an individual. One cannot eternally
contemplate one’s own image and cannot, in especial, eternally adore
it. Love of humanity is the greatest of virtues and the most ridiculous
of fetichisms. The marriage of positive science and blind sentiment
cannot produce religion; the attempt to return to fetichism is an
attempt to foist the religion of a savage upon the most civilized of
mankind. Moreover, what we believe destined to subsist in the future in
a multitude of forms, and to replace religions, is not pure and simple
sentiment, but sentiment roused by metaphysical symbols, by speculation
and thought. Religious metaphysics may consist in involuntary illusion,
in error, in dream; but unmetaphysical fetichism consists in voluntary
illusion, in cherished error, in day-dream. Auguste Comte seemed to
believe that we should always need as the centre of our system of
worship, an imaginary personification of humanity, a great Being, a
great Fetich; such a fetichism would be a species of new category, in
the Kantian sense. Fetichism has never imposed itself upon humanity
after that fashion; intellectually considered, it was based on reasons
which can be shown to be false; emotionally considered, it was based on
feelings which can be shown to be perverted, and can be rectified. If
love sometimes stretches out toward personification, toward fetiches,
it is only in default of real persons and living individuals; such in
our opinion is, in its simplest form, the law which will gradually
result in the disappearance of every fetichistic cult. We must find
gods of flesh and bone, living and breathing among us—not poetical
creations like those of Homer, but visible realities. We must discover
the kingdom of heaven in the human soul, a future providence in
science, absolute goodness in the foundation of life. We must not
project our ideas and subjective images of things into the outer world,
and beyond the limits of the outer world, and love them with a sterile
love; but must love the beings of this world with an active affection
in so far as they are capable of conceiving and realizing the same
ideas as we. Just as patriotism, in so far as it is an abstract love,
tends to disappear, and to resolve itself into a general sympathy for
all our fellow-citizens, just so far the love of God tends to overflow
the surface of the earth and to include all living beings. To know
living beings is to love them; and thus science, in so far as it is
science of the observation of life, is one with the sentiment which
constitutes what is best in religion, is one with love.

[Sidenote: Ethical Culture Society.]

Another religion of humanity, or rather a religion of ethics, has
recently been founded in New York by Mr. Felix Adler, the son of an
American rabbi; but Mr. Adler, who is more consistent than Comte, has
determined to do away with religious ceremonial, not less than with
religious dogma. He has abandoned almost everything in the way of
ceremony; he has abandoned the catechism, and professes allegiance to
no sacred book. As a metaphysician he is a follower of Kant, rather
than of Comte, but makes no positive affirmation on the subject of
God and immortality; he admits only the existence of an unknowable
noumenon, of an ultimate reality which lies behind all appearances,
and is responsible for the harmony of the world. So long as divergence
in matters of belief continues to become increasingly great, Mr.
Adler regards it as necessary to concentrate attention on the moral
law itself, apart from any theory of its origin or justification. Men
have so long disputed, he thinks, about the basis of the law, that the
law itself has not received its due share of notice. His movement is
essentially a practical movement and appeals to the conscience, a cry
for more justice, an exhortation for the performance of duty.

[Sidenote: Its object.]

The primary aim of the society should be, according to Mr. Adler,
to reform the lives of its own members. He has founded: 1. A
Sunday-school, where instruction is given in practical morality, in
the history of the most important religions, and in the elements of
the philosophy of religion; 2. A public kindergarten organized on the
Froebel method; 3. A school, for working people’s children between the
ages of three and nine.[117]

      [117] Indigent pupils are clothed and fed; the instruction is
      gratuitous; the school contains at present one hundred pupils,
      having begun with eight. An industrial museum is attached to
      it. The society also sends out district nurses to attend the
      sick in the poorer quarters of New York.

[Sidenote: Is of a type destined to survive.]

Mr. Adler’s following at first consisted of Jews; subsequently a number
of people, without distinction of race, gathered about him. They are
left entirely free in the matter of their personal beliefs, and are
united only in an ardent desire for the regeneration of mankind.
Every Sunday the faithful congregate, to listen to a discourse and
then disperse; none but members of the society are permitted to join
in the management of the institutions founded and maintained by the
society. This religion, which is, _à l’américaine_, wholly practical,
is acceptable to the philosopher; at bottom it is simply a great mutual
aid temperance society. The only objection that can be urged against it
is that it is somewhat prosaic, but it is certainly one of the forms of
social activity which are destined to succeed ritualistic religions.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Antiquity of faith in socialism as a panacea.]

Certain partisans of religious revival regard socialism as their last
hope. Socialistic ideas ought, in their judgment, to give religion
a fresh start and supply it with an impetus hitherto unknown. This
conception wears an air of originality, but, as a matter of fact, it is
quite the reverse of original. The great catholic religions, Buddhism
and Christianity, were in the beginning socialistic, they preached
universal partition of goods, and poverty; it was by means of so doing
that they were in part enabled to spread with such rapidity. In reality
the instant that the period of propagandism succeeded the period of
struggle for permission to exist, these religions did everything
within their power to become individualistic even at the expense of
inconsistency; they ceased to promise equality on earth and relegated
it to heaven or to Nirvâna.

[Sidenote: Socialism unrealizable except by a select few.]

Do we therefore believe that socialistic ideas will play no part in
the future, and is it not conceivable that a certain mysticism might
form an alliance with socialism, and both lend and borrow force by so
doing? A mystical socialism is by no means unrealizable under certain
conditions, and, far from constituting an obstacle to religious
free-thought, it might become one of its most important manifestations.
But what has hitherto rendered socialism impracticable and utopian is
that it has aimed at subjugating the whole of mankind, rather than
some small social group. What has been aimed at is state socialism;
the case has been the same in the matter of religion. But systems of
socialism and of religious doctrine must, in the future at least, be
addressed to small groups and not to confused masses; must be made the
basis of manifold and various associations in the bosom of society. As
its most earnest partisans recognize, socialism presupposes for its
success a certain average of virtue, that may well obtain among some
hundreds of men but not among some millions. It endeavours to establish
a sort of special providence, which would be quite incompetent to
manage the affairs of the world but may well watch over the interests
of a neighbourhood. Socialism aims more or less at playing the part of
fate, at predetermining the destiny of the individual, at supplying
each individual with a certain average amount of happiness which he can
neither increase nor diminish. Socialism is the apotheosis of state
interference, and the world in general is not disposed to worship it;
its ideal is a life which is completely foreseen, insured, with the
element of fortune and of hope left out, with the heights and the
depths of human life levelled away—an existence somewhat utilitarian
and uniform, regularly plotted off like the squares on a checker board,
incapable of satisfying the ambitious desires of the mass of mankind.
Socialism is to-day advocated by the rebels in society. Its success,
however, would depend on the most peaceable, the most conservative, the
most bourgeois people in the world; it supplies no sufficient outlet
for the love of risk, of staking one’s everything, of playing for the
height of fortune against the depth of misery, which is one of the
essential factors of human progress.

[Sidenote: Experiments in socialism.]

Practical experiments in socialism are being made every day; there
is in France the phalansterian association of M. Godin; in America
there are the associations by the followers of Cabet, not to speak
of others of a more purely religious character, such as those of the
Quakers, Shakers, etc.; and finally, there are co-operative societies
of various kinds. These avowedly or unavowedly socialistic experiments
have never succeeded except when their promoters were willing very
rigorously to limit their numbers; certain intellectual and moral
defects in the members must inevitably in every case have proved fatal
to them. Socialism is possible only in a small society of the elect.
Even the theorists who once regarded profit-sharing as the universal
panacea recognize to-day that profit-sharing constitutes a remedy in
some cases only; that the labouring classes are not, as a whole, either
patient, or painstaking enough to fulfil the very simple conditions
that profit-sharing demands. They are unfit for corporate life, they
are hard repellent individuals, they are elements of disintegration;
when a small socialistic society finds them on its list of members,
it excludes them; if mankind as a whole formed one great socialistic
society, it also would be obliged to exclude them. To universalize
socialism is to destroy it.

[Sidenote: Future of socialism.]

Every scientific discovery passes through three distinct stages:
the stage of pure theory, of application on a small scale in the
laboratory, of application on a grand scale in the world of business.
It frequently happens that the development of an idea is arrested
in the sphere of theory, that it does not enter into the sphere of
practice at all, or that, completely successful in the laboratory,
it miscarries when the attempt is made to apply it to business. If
this holds true of scientific ideas, of devices that depend for their
success upon the plasticity of inert matter only, which we may bend
to our will, _a fortiori_ it must be true of sociological ideas, of
experiments, of devices that depend for their success on the plasticity
of so variable, so heterogeneous a substance as human nature. Socialism
is still, for the most part, at the theoretical stage; and even as
a theory socialism is very vague and not very consistent and, when
the effort is made to put it into practice, the difference between
experiments in the laboratory, among conditions that the experimenter
can in a measure determine and control, and in the great world in which
everything is determined and controlled for him, must be remembered.
The state which yields to the seduction of some charming socialistic
theory, and endeavours, as it will endeavour, to realize it, will
inevitably be ruined. Social experiments cannot be attempted by the
state—not even if they are experiments in religion, or rather in
especial not if they are experiments in religion. Some experiments may
at most be observed by the state and followed with interest by it; nay,
the state may even in certain cases encourage the most interesting of
them and subsidize them as it does certain industrial enterprises.
We are persuaded that socialism in the future, like religion in the
past, will appear in many different forms. There will arise a number
of conceptions of an ideal society, each of which is realizable in
special circumstances, and by people of some special disposition. Human
society which to-day, beyond the limits of convents and monasteries
(which consist in artificial groupings of individuals of the same sex),
presents a certain uniformity of type, may well at some later date,
owing to complete liberty of association, and to the spread of personal
initiative, present a great variety of types. Socialism will not result
in the founding of a religion, but it may well result in the founding
of a number of associations dominated respectively by some metaphysical
or moral idea. Socialism will thus contribute to that multiplicity and
diversity of beliefs which does not exclude but rather encourages their
practical application.

[Sidenote: Necessity of allowing for a multiplicity of conflicting
ideals.]

The future, therefore, will leave the human mind, as time goes on, more
and more at liberty; will permit the individual to do increasingly as
he likes so long as he does not violate the rights of anybody else.
What is the highest social ideal? Does it lie purely and simply in the
practice of the necessary virtues or of a half conscious morality, an
unreflecting benignity, compounded of ignorance and custom? This social
ideal is realized in certain countries in the Orient, where Buddhism
is dominant, and the people are so gentle that years pass without a
homicide; and yet life in these countries in nowise appeals to us
as ideal. To this sort of morality must be added some satisfaction
of the principal desire of mankind, of the desire for economic ease
and for practical happiness, and even that would not be enough; for
that much is realized in corners of Switzerland, of Portugal, in
primitive countries like Costa Rica, where poverty is unknown. Artists
dream of a life devoted entirely to art, to the beautiful, of a life
which is hostile to prosaic and practical virtue, and this ideal was
realized in the Renaissance: the Renaissance was distinguished by an
extraordinary efflorescence of æsthetic instinct and moral depravity,
and we in nowise desire to return to it. And if science, which is
the modern ideal, should become absolute, we should see a society of
_blasés_ Fausts which would not be more enviable perhaps than other
societies. No; a complete social ideal must neither consist in bare
morality nor in simple economic well-being, nor in art alone, nor in
science alone—it must consist in all of these together; its ideal must
be the greatest and most universal conceivable. This ideal is that
of progress, and progress cannot take place in one direction only at
a time; whoever advances in one direction only will soon retreat. A
point of light shines in all directions simultaneously. The excellence
of religion cannot be demonstrated by showing that it favours some
one species of human activity; morality, for example, or art. It is
not enough to make man moral as Christianity and Buddhism did, nor to
excite his æsthetic imagination as Paganism did. Not one but all of his
faculties must be stimulated, and there is but one religion that can
do it; and that religion each must create for himself. Whoever feels
attracted by a life similar to that of a priest will do well to become
a Christian and even a Quaker, and the artist will do well to become a
pagan. What is certain is that no one of the deities which mankind has
created and worshipped is all-sufficing; mankind needs all of them and
something more, for human thought has outgrown its gods.

[Sidenote: Liberty the condition of knowledge.]

Under the sounding domes of old cathedrals, the echoes are so numerous
that an immense screen has sometimes to be stretched across the nave to
break the reverberations and enable the priest’s voice alone to reach
the faithful. This screen which is invisible from below, which isolates
the sacred word and deadens all other sound, is stretched not only
across the cathedral nave but across the heart of every true believer.
It must be torn away; every voice and word must be free to attain
the ear of man; the sacred word rises from no one throat, but is the
symphony of all the voices that sound beneath the dome of heaven.

[Sidenote: Decline of the power of religion.]

I was talking one day with M. Renan upon the gradual decrease in the
power of religion, on the silence that has fallen on the divine word,
which formerly drowned all other sounds. To-day, it is the word of
nature and humanity, of free-thought and free sentiment, which is
taking the place of oracles and of supernatural revelation, of dogmatic
religion. M. Renan, with the openness of mind which is habitual with
him, and which partakes indeed largely of scepticism, took up at
once my point of view. “Yes,” he said, “we are all marching toward
non-religion. After all, why should not humanity do without religious
dogmas? Speculation will take the place of religion. Even at the
present day, among advanced peoples, dogmas are disintegrating, the
incrustations of human thought are breaking up. Most people in France
are already non-religious; men of the people hardly believe more than
professed men of science; they possess their little fund of ideas, more
or less profound, on which they live, without help from the priest.
In Germany the work of decomposition is far advanced. In England it
is only in its beginnings, but it is moving rapidly. Christianity is
everywhere giving place to free-thought. Buddhism and Hinduism are
doing the same; in India the mass of intelligent men are free-thinkers,
in China there is no state religion. It will take a long while, but
religion will in the end disappear, and one may already imagine for
Europe a time when it will be a thing of the past.... Islam is the one
black spot on the horizon. The Turks are narrow, rebellious against
reasoning, hostile to everything that lies beyond literal faith ...
but if they will not follow us we shall simply leave them behind, and
I think we shall be obliged to do so.” We should add that, if some
Christians and Buddhists show themselves as backward as the Turks, we
shall leave them behind also. Those members of mankind who think, see,
and move forward, are always obliged to drag a long train of those who
neither see, nor think, nor wish to move forward. They do move forward,
however, in the long run. Professed advocates of the different positive
and dogmatic religions count every day for less and less among the
truly active members of the human species; and we ask nothing better.
Whoever does not count for progress practically does not exist, and
ultimately will not exist. Activity of thought is becoming more and
more a condition of existence; the preponderant rôle that religions
played in the past is to be explained by the fact that religion offered
almost the sole field of intellectual and moral activity—the sole
issue for the most elevated tendencies of our being. At that time there
lay beyond the limits of religion nothing but the grossest and most
material occupations; there was no known middle ground between heaven
and earth. To-day this middle ground has been discovered—the ground
of thought. Science and art are born; and open before us an infinite
perspective, where each of us may find an opportunity to employ the
best of our gifts. Science offers a field for disinterestedness and
research, but does not tolerate vagaries of the imagination. It
encourages enthusiasm, but not delirium, and possesses a beauty of its
own, the beauty of truth.


_II. Religious anomy and the substitution of doubt for faith._

[Sidenote: Religious anomy.]

I. We have proposed as the moral ideal what we have called moral
anomy—the absence of any fixed moral rule.[118] We believe still
more firmly that the ideal toward which every religion ought to tend
is religious anomy, the complete enfranchisement of the individual in
all religious matters, the redemption of his thought, which is more
precious than his life, the suppression of dogmatic faith in every
form. Instead of accepting ready-made dogmas, we should each of us be
the makers of our own creed. Whatever Montaigne may say, faith is a
softer pillow for idleness than doubt. Faith is a species of nest in
which idleness lies in shelter, and hides its head under the warmth
and darkness of a protecting wing; nay, it is a nest prepared in
advance, like those that are sold in the markets and made by men, for
birds that are kept in cages. We believe that in the future man will
be increasingly unwilling to live in cages and that, if he needs a
nest, he will construct it himself twig by twig in the open air, and
abandon it when he is weary of it, and remake it, if necessary, every
springtime, at each new stage of his thought.

      [118] See our _Esquisse d’une morale sans obligation ni
      sanction_.

[Sidenote: Religious anomy and scepticism.]

Is religious anomy, or the absence of religion, synonymous with
scepticism? Since the disappearance of Pyrrhonism and Ænesideinism,
scepticism is simply a word which serves as a label for the most
dissimilar doctrines. Greek sceptics were fond of calling themselves
seekers, Ζητητικοί; a name which is appropriate to every philosopher
as distinguished from believer. But how the term scepticism in its
modern negative acceptation is abused! If you do not belong to some
definite system of thought, you are at once set down as a sceptic.
But nothing is further removed from a superficial scepticism than
the sympathetic mind which, precisely because it embraces so large a
horizon, refuses to confine itself to some one narrow point of view, as
in a glade a hundred feet square or in a diminutive valley between two
mountains. “You are not dogmatic enough,” the philosopher is sometimes
told. “To what system do you belong?” “In what class of thinking
insects do you belong?” “To what card in our collection must you be
pinned?” A reader always wants to ask an author a certain number of
conventional questions. What do you think of such and such a problem?
Of such and such another? You are not a spiritualist; are you then a
materialist? You are not an optimist; are you then a pessimist? One
must reply, yes or no, without explanatory amplification. But what I
think is of small importance, even for myself; my point of view is
not the centre of the universe. What I am seeking to learn, what
you are seeking to learn, is the contents of human thought in all
its variety and complexity. If I study myself it is not because I am
myself, but because I am a man like other men. If I watch my own little
soap bubble, it is because it contains a ray of the sun; my object is
precisely to pass beyond the limits of my own horizon and not to remain
within them. More than that, people whose ideas are fixed, clear-cut,
absolute, are exactly those who have no ideas of their own. Revelation,
intuition, religion, categorical and exclusive affirmation, are notions
hostile to modern thought, which is in its very essence progressive.
There are two sorts of men: those who remain on the surface of things
and those who sound the depths of things. There are superficial minds
and serious minds. In France almost all those whom we designate as
sceptics or as blasés are superficial minds, with an affectation of
profundity. They are also often practical Epicureans. There will always
be people ready to say, with a certain hero of Balzac’s: “A good fire,
a good table; behold the ideal of human life!” Waiting for dinner is
the sole occupation of the day. But there will always be other people
for whom life consists in an indefatigable activity.

[Sidenote: Feebleness of scepticism.]

The number of sceptics will not necessarily be increased by the final
decay and disappearance of religious scepticism, which is a compound of
lightness and ignorance, resting on the same foundation as religious
prejudice, on the absence of a solid philosophical education. Really
serious minds are either positive or speculative; a too positive,
common-sense spirit might, if it became general in society, menace
it with a certain intellectual debasement; but religion would not
hinder its development: witness America. The true means of checking
the positive spirit is to cultivate the sense of beauty and the love
of art. To speculative minds, on the other hand, belongs the future
of humanity; but far from being dependent upon dogma, speculation
can flourish only in its absence. It is the life of speculation
to ask questions about the deepest concerns of human life; dogma
provides ready-made answers, and speculation cannot accept them.
The disappearance of positive religions will give scientific and
metaphysical speculation a fresh impulse. The speculative spirit is
the extreme opposite both of the spirit of faith and of the spirit
of absolute negation. An inquirer may suspect his own resources, may
recognize his own powerlessness, but he will never give up the search.
Strong minds will never be discouraged or disgusted, will never be
followers of Mérimée or Beyle. In active mental labour there is
something which is worth more than faith and doubt together, as there
is in genius something which is worth more at once than the somewhat
silly admiration of the multitude and the disdainful criticism of
pretended connoisseurs; excess of criticism and excess of credulity
are alike powerless. It is good to be aware of one’s own weakness, but
from time to time only; one must turn one’s eyes toward the limits of
human intelligence, but not rest them there, on pain of paralysis.
“Man,” says Goethe, “should believe firmly that the incomprehensible
will become comprehensible; but for that he would cease to scrutinize
and to try.” In spite of the number of ideas which make their entrance
into and exit from the human mind, which rise and set on the human
horizon, which flame up and burn out, there is, in every human mind,
an element of eternity. On certain autumn nights one may observe a
veritable shower of aerolites; hundreds of stars detach themselves
from the zenith like luminous flakes of snow; the dome of heaven
itself seems to have given way, the worlds hung above the earth seem
to have broken loose, and all the stars at once to be descending and
about to leave the great firmament of night unvariegated, opaque; but
the falling stars go out one by one, and the serene brilliancy of the
fixed stars still remains; the storm has passed beneath them and has
not troubled the tranquil splendour of their rays, nor the incessant
appeal of their fixity and glory. The appeal is one that man will
always respond to; under the open sky and the pressure of the problem
brought home to him by the great stars, man does not feel himself
feeble unless he pusillanimously shuts his eyes. Humanity will lose
none of its intellectual power by the disappearance of religious faith;
its horizon will grow wider simply, and the luminous points in the
immensity of space will grow more numerous. True genius is speculative,
and in whatever environment true genius is placed it will speculate; it
has speculated hitherto despite of all that orthodox faith could do, it
will speculate still more actively in spite of all that scepticism can
do.

[Sidenote: Speculation and practice.]

And the practical side of human life has nothing to fear from the
growth of the speculative spirit. Given minds sufficiently large, and
the fact that they look down upon the earth from a height, does not
prevent them from seeing human life as it is and as it should be.
Decidedly one must be a man, a patriot, a “tellurian,” as Amiel said,
with some contempt; to be so may appear to be a small function in the
totality of things, but an upright spirit will not fulfil it with
less exactitude because he perceives its limits and its restricted
importance. Nothing is in vain, and _a fortiori_ no being is in vain;
small functions are as necessary as great. If a man of intelligence
happens to be a porter or a scavenger, he should apply himself to that
profession with as much devotion as to any other. To do well what one
has to do, however humble it may be, is the first of duties. An ant of
genius ought not to bring to the ant-hill a grain the less, even though
he were capable of taking cognizance of the eternities of time and
space.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Doubt as distinguished from scepticism.]

II. Although the suppression of religious dogma does not lead to
scepticism, it decidedly does lead to doubt, and we believe that the
modern sense of doubt represents a higher stage of civilization than
the faith in dogma that distinguished former times. Religious faith is
distinguished from philosophic belief by a subjective difference. If
the man of faith is not altogether blind, at least he perceives but one
point in the intellectual horizon; he has focussed his intelligence
upon some one plot of ground, and the rest of the world does not
exist for him; he returns day after day to his chosen corner, to the
little nest he has made for his thoughts to dwell in, as we said
above—returns as a dove returns to the dovecote and sees but it in
the immensity of space. Fanaticism marks a still further degree of
contraction in one’s intellectual vision. On the contrary, the greater
the progress of reflection in the history of the human race, the more
completely religious faith becomes merged in, and subordinated to,
philosophic conviction; the two cease to be distinguishable except by
a difference in the degree of doubt that they involve, a doubt which
itself rests upon a clearness in one’s vision of things. As reflection
becomes more profound, it manifests here as everywhere its destructive
influence upon instinct; everything that is instinctive, primitive,
and naïve in faith disappears, and, along with it, disappears
everything that constituted its strength, that made it so powerful in
the human heart. True strength lies in the human reason, in complete
self-consciousness, in a consciousness of the problems of life, of
their complexity, of their difficulties.

[Sidenote: Ideal gradation of faith.]

Faith, as we have seen, consists in affirming things not capable of
objective verification, with the same subjective satisfaction as if
they could be verified: in attributing to the uncertain as great a
value as to the certain—nay, perhaps a greater value. The ideal of the
philosopher, on the contrary, would be a perfect correspondence between
conclusiveness of evidence and degree of belief. The intellectual
satisfaction that we take in our beliefs, the degree of tenacity with
which we hold them, should vary precisely with the completeness and
certainty of our knowledge. A primitive intelligence cannot be content
to remain in suspense, it must decide one way or the other; it is the
mark of a more perfect intelligence to remain in doubt in reference to
what is doubtful. Credulity is intellectual original sin.

[Sidenote: Uncertainty of metaphysics.]

Employing the word certitude strictly for what is certain, and meaning
by belief what is plausible or probable only, when one is investigating
some mere matter of fact, one may in the end be able to say positively
such and such is certain, is what the future will affirm on this point;
but, when the degree of certitude involved amounts to no more than to
probability or even possibility, and to metaphysical possibility at
that, it is ridiculous to say: “I believe such and such a thing; such
and such is therefore the dogma that everybody ought to adopt.” Such
positive basis for metaphysical inductions as exists is too uneven
not to result in a divergence in the lines of the hypotheses which
rise from it into the obscure heights of the unknown; no two of our
glances toward the infinite are parallel; our attempts at solving
metaphysical problems are little more than rockets shot capriciously
into the sky. The philosopher can do little more than take cognizance
of the divergence of rival hypotheses, and of their equality and equal
insufficiency in the eye of reason.

[Sidenote: Postulates for purposes of practice.]

But the problem of action presents itself to the philosopher no less
than to the rest of mankind. For purposes of conduct some one among
the diverging lines of human speculation must be chosen; philosophic
thought must be left to describe its curves and circles above our
heads while we walk, if not sure-footedly at least in some definite
direction, upon the earth. One is sometimes for practical purposes
obliged to rely on doubtful premises as if they were certain. Such
a choice, however, is simply an inferior and exceptional means of
choosing among hypotheses which one has neither the time nor the power
exactly to test. One cuts loose from one’s doubts, but the expedient
is a purely practical one; cutting the Gordian knots of life cannot be
adopted as one’s habitual intellectual procedure. Faith which leans
with an equal sense of security upon the certain and the uncertain,
the evident and the doubtful, should be but a provisional state of
mind forced upon one by some practical necessity. One ought never,
so to speak, to believe once for all, to subscribe one’s allegiance
forever. Faith should never be regarded as more than a second best,
and a provisional second best. The instant that action is no longer
necessary, one must revert to one’s doubt, to one’s scruples, to all
the precautions of science. Kant did violence to the natural order
of things when he ascribed to faith and morals a predominance over
reasoning; when he gave to the practical reason, whose commandments may
be the expression simply of acquired habits, control over the critical
and scientific reason. His moral philosophy consists in erecting a
foregone conclusion into a rule, whereas, as a matter of fact, one
ought not to make up one’s mind definitely until all the evidence is
in, until every alternative choice has been considered and rejected, if
at all, on good grounds; our beliefs should be relied upon in practice
exactly in proportion to their probability in the actual state of
our knowledge. Alternatives do not exist in the outer world, they do
not exist in a state of complete knowledge. The moral ideal is not
to multiply them, nor to make a leap in the dark the habitual method
of intellectual procedure. There is no such thing as a categorical
imperative or a religious _credo_ for the traveller under unknown
skies; he is not to be saved by faith but by active and constant
self-control, by the spirit of doubt and criticism.

[Sidenote: Doubt and the religious sentiment.]

Doubt is not, at bottom, as profoundly opposed as might be believed to
what is best in the religious sentiment, it is even a product of the
religious sentiment. For doubt is simply a consciousness that one’s
thought is not absolute—cannot seize the absolute either directly or
indirectly; and so, consequently, doubt is the most religious attitude
of the human mind. Even atheism is often less irreligious than a
positive belief in the imperfect and inconsistent God of religion. To
be in doubt about God is a form of the sense of the divine. Moreover,
the constant inquiry that doubt provokes does not necessarily exclude
the erection of an altar to the unknown God, but it excludes everything
in the nature of a determinate religion, the erection of an altar that
bears a name, the establishment of a cult that consists in rites. In
the cemeteries in Tyrol, a little marble basin rests on each tomb;
it gathers water from the rain and the swallows from the eaves of
the neighbouring church come and drink from it; this clear water,
that comes from on high, is a thousand times more sacred, more deeply
blessed than that which sleeps in the holy-water vessel in the church,
and over which the priest has stretched his hands. Why should religion,
so to speak, sequestrate, retire from public circulation, everything
it touches? That alone is truly sacred which is consecrated to the
use of mankind as a whole, which passes from hand to hand, which is
worn out in process of time in the service of humanity. There has been
enough and to spare of closed houses, closed temples, closed souls—of
cloistered and walled-in lives, of smothered or extinguished hearts;
what is wanted is an open heart and life under the open sky, under the
incessant benediction of the sun and clouds.

[Sidenote: Modesty of doubt.]

Philosophy is often accused of pride because it rejects faith, but it
was the father of philosophy, Socrates, who first said: “I know but one
thing, that I know nothing.” It is precisely because the philosopher
knows how much he does not know that he is not certain in regard to
all things, but is reduced to remain in doubt, to wait anxiously and
reverentially for the germination of the seed of truth in the distant
future. To regard as certain what one does not positively know is to
violate one’s intellectual conscience. From the point of view of the
individual, as from the point of view of society, doubt is in certain
cases a duty—doubt, or if you prefer, methodical ignorance, humility,
self-abnegation in matters intellectual. Where philosophy is ignorant
it is morally obliged to say to others and to itself: “I do not know; I
doubt, I hope, nothing more.”

[Sidenote: Morality of doubt.]

The most original, and one of the most profoundly moral products of
the present century, of the century of science, is precisely this
sincere sense of doubt, of the seriousness of every act of faith,
of its not being a matter to be undertaken lightly, of its being a
graver engagement than many others that one hesitates to assume; to
give in one’s faith to an opinion has come to be like attesting one’s
allegiance to it by the mediæval signature, which was written in one’s
blood and bound one for all eternity. At the point of death especially,
which is the very period when religion says to a man, “Abandon thyself
for an instant, yield to the force of example, of custom, to the
natural disposition to affirm as certain what thou dost not know, to
fear of damnation, and thou shalt be saved”—at the point of death when
a blind act of faith is a last weakness and a last cowardice, doubt is
assuredly the highest and most courageous position the human thought
can assume: it is a fight to the finish without surrender; it is death
with all one’s wounds before, in the presence of the problem still
unsolved, but faced to the end.


_III. Substitution of metaphysical hypotheses for dogma._

[Sidenote: Scope of metaphysics.]

Beyond the limits of science there lies still a field for hypothesis,
and for that other science called metaphysics, the aim of which is to
estimate the comparative value of hypotheses; to know, to suppose, to
reason, to inquire, are of the essence of the modern mind; we no longer
need dogma. Religion, which in the beginning was a naïve science, has
ultimately become the enemy of science; in the future it must give
way before science or must become merged in some really scientific
hypothesis; an hypothesis, that is to say, which acknowledges itself
to be such, which declares itself to be provisional, which measures
its utility by the amount it explains; and aspires to nothing better
than to give place to an hypothesis that shall be more inclusive.
Science and research outweigh stationary adoration. The eternal
element in religion is the tendency which produced there the need of
an explanation, of a theory that shall bind mankind and the world
together; the indefatigable activity of mind which declines to stop
at the brute fact which produced in former times the tangle of
contradictory myths and legends now transmuted into the co-ordinate
and harmonious body of science. What is respectable in religion
is precisely the germ of the spirit of metaphysics and scientific
investigation, which is to-day proving fatal to religions.

[Sidenote: Distinction between metaphysical and religious sentiment.]

Religious sentiment properly so called must not be confounded with
the instinct for metaphysics, the two are utterly distinct. The first
is destined to decline with the extension of knowledge; the other,
under some form or other, will always continue. The instinct for free
speculation corresponds in the first place to an indestructible sense
of the limits of positive knowledge: it is an echo in us of the undying
mystery of things. It corresponds to an invincible tendency in the
human mind to the need for an ideal; to the need, not only of the
intelligence but of the heart, to pass beyond the limits of the visible
and tangible world. The wings of the soul are too long to fly close to
the earth, the soul is formed to move in long swoops and circles in
the open sky. All it needs is to be lifted above the earth; often it
is unable to do this of itself, and its long wings beat and trail in
the dust. And to what power is it to look for its preliminary start?
To its very desire for unknown spaces, to its desire for an infinite
and insecure ideal. Nature, as positive science reveals it to us, is,
no doubt, the sole incontestable divinity, the _deus certus_, as the
Emperor Aurelius called the Sun; but its very certitude constitutes an
element of inferiority. Sun-light is not the most brilliant light; the
reality can have no lasting pretensions to be regarded as divine. The
ideal God is necessarily the _deus incertus_, a problematical, perhaps
even fictitious God.

[Sidenote: Persistence of metaphysical problems.]

This sense at once of the limits of science and of the infinity of
human aspirations makes it forever inadmissible for man to abandon
all effort to solve the great problem of the origin and destiny
of the universe. The child, Spencer says, may hide his head under
the bed-clothes, and for an instant escape consciousness of the
darkness outside; but in the long run the consciousness subsists, the
imagination continues to dwell upon what lies beyond the limits of
human conception. The progress of human thought has consisted less
in discovering answers to ultimate problems than in discovering more
precise methods of formulating the problems themselves; the enigmas
are no longer stated in primitive terms. This change in statement is a
proof of the progress and growth in the human mind; but the problems
unhappily are as difficult as ever to solve. Up to the present moment
no sufficient answer has been suggested, the mystery has simply been
transposed from one place to another; so much so that Spencer says
the scientific interpretation of the universe is as full of mysteries
as theology; and he compares human knowledge to a luminous globe in
the midst of infinite darkness. The larger the globe becomes the
greater the depth and extent of darkness that it reveals, insomuch that
increase of science but enlarges the abyss of our ignorance.

[Sidenote: Possible finiteness of the unknown.]

One must, however, be on one’s guard against exaggeration. The universe
is infinite, no doubt, and consequently the material of human science
is infinite, but the universe is dominated by a certain number of
simple laws with which we may become continuously better and better
acquainted. Many generations of men would be necessary to master in
all their complexity the vedic epics, but we are able even to-day to
formulate the principles which dominate them, and it is not impossible
that we may some day be able to do the same for the epic of the
universe. We may be able even to go the length of achieving precision
in our ignorance, of marking in the infinite chain of phenomena the
links which must forever be hidden from us. It is not accurate,
therefore, to say that our ignorance increases with our knowledge,
although it may be considered as probable that our knowledge will
always be aware of something that escapes it, and may come in time to
be able more and more distinctly to define, however negatively, the
nature of this residuum. The infinity of the unknowable, even, is no
more than hypothetical. We perhaps flatter ourselves in the belief
that we possess anything that is infinite—even ignorance. Perhaps
the sphere of our knowledge is like the terrestrial globe, enveloped
by but a thin atmosphere of the unknowable and unknown; perhaps there
is no basis and foundation of the universe, just as there is no basis
and foundation of the earth; perhaps the ultimate secret of things is
the gravitation of phenomena. The unknown is the air we breathe, but
it is perhaps no more infinite than the earth’s atmosphere, and one’s
consciousness of an unknowable infinity can no more be regarded as the
basis of knowledge than the atmosphere of the earth can be regarded as
the foundation upon which the earth rests.[119]

      [119] The notion of the unknowable has been the subject of a
      lively discussion in England and in France. See on this point
      the work of M. Paulhan in the _Revue philosophique_, t. vi. p.
      279.

[Sidenote: Distinction between religion and metaphysics.]

Unknowable or not, infinite or finite, the unknown will always be the
object of metaphysical hypotheses. But is to admit the perpetuity of
metaphysical hypotheses to admit the eternity of religion? The question
involves an ambiguity of words. Spencer defines religious thought as
that which deals with all that lies beyond the sphere of the senses,
but that is precisely the field of philosophic thought; philosophy
in its entirety, therefore, and not religion only, is included in
Spencer’s definition. Nay more, science itself is in part included in
Spencer’s definition, for science, which takes cognizance of everything
within the reach of perception and reasoning, by that very fact
undertakes to fix the limit of their power, and thus indirectly touches
upon the field of the unknowable—if not to enter it, at least to
outline it, and that itself constitutes a sort of negative acquaintance
with it. Knowledge is essentially critical and self-critical. The
eternity of philosophy and of science must, no doubt, be admitted; but
the eternity of religion, as that word is usually understood, in nowise
follows from that admission.

[Sidenote: Spencer’s unknowable.]

According to Spencer, the unknowable itself is not absolutely
unknowable. Among the mysteries, which become more mysterious as they
are more deeply reflected upon, there will remain, Spencer thinks,
for man one absolute certitude—that he is in the presence of an
infinite and eternal energy which is the source of all things. The
formula of human certitude is open to discussion. The man of science
is more inclined to believe in an infinite number of energies than in
an infinite energy, in a sort of mechanical atomism, a subdivision of
force _ad infinitum_ rather than in monism. Moreover, no religion can
stop with the bare affirmation of the existence of an eternal energy or
infinity of energies. It must maintain the existence of some relation
between these energies and human morality, between the direction of
these energies and that of the moral impulse in mankind. But a relation
of this sort is the last thing in the world that can be deduced from
the doctrine of evolution. Hypotheses in regard to the matter may of
course be devised, but, far from possessing a character of certitude,
such hypotheses would rather, from the point of view of pure science,
display a positive improbability. Human morality, if it be considered
scientifically, is a question that concerns the struggle for existence
and not a question that concerns the universe. What distinguishes the
natural forces, with which science deals, from gods, is precisely
that the former are indifferent to the morality or immorality of our
lives. In spite of our increasing admiration for the complexity of the
phenomena of the world, for the solidarity that obtains among them,
for the latent or active life which animates all things, we have not
yet demonstrably discovered in the world a single element of divinity.
Science does not reveal to us a universe spontaneously labouring for
the realization of what we call goodness: goodness is to be realized,
if at all, only by our bending the world to our purposes, by enslaving
the gods that we once adored, by replacing the reign of God by the
reign of man.

[Sidenote: Spencer’s followers in France.]

The alleged reconciliation of science and religion in Spencer’s pages
is not made out except by virtue of an ambiguity in terms. Partisans of
religion have, however, hastened to welcome these apparent concessions
in their favour and have based on them an argument for the perpetuity
of dogmas. Jouffroy has told us how dogmas become extinct; recently
one of his successors at the Sorbonne endeavoured to show “how dogmas
come into being again,” and he took his stand with Spencer on an
ambiguity in terms. By dogmas M. Caro meant the principal points of the
original doctrine of the soul—as if one could apply the name dogma
to philosophical hypotheses, even though they be eternal hypotheses!
The important thing, however, is to understand each other; if problems
which constantly recur, and constantly receive hypothetical solutions,
are to be called dogmas, then dogmas do come to life again, and may
be expected always to do so; _multa renascentur quæ jam cecidere,
cadentque_.... But if terms be employed as a philosopher should employ
them, with precision, how can metaphysical conclusions be regarded as
dogmas? Examine the writings of Heraclitus, the evolutionist; Plato,
the contemplator of ideas; Aristotle, the formulater of the laws of
thought; Descartes, the inquirer who sought in an abyss of doubt for
the absolute criterion of truth; Leibnitz, who regarded himself as
the mirror of the universe; Spinoza, lost in the heart of infinite
substance; Kant, resolving the universe into thought and thought
into the moral law; where are the dogmas in these great metaphysical
poems? They are not systems of dogma, they are systems marked by the
individuality of genius, although containing something of the eternal
philosophy, the _perennis philosophia_ of Leibnitz. Every system, as
such, is precisely the means of demonstrating the insufficiency of
the central idea which dominates it, and the necessity for the human
mind of passing beyond it. To systematize is to develop a group of
ideas to their logical conclusion, and, by that very fact, to show how
much they do not include, how far they fall short of exhausting human
thought as a whole; to construct is to demonstrate the weight of the
material one is building with, and the impossibility of piling it up
to heaven. Every system requires a certain number of years to bring it
to completion, and then, when the edifice is achieved, one may one’s
self mark the points where it will begin to crack, what columns will
yield first, where its ultimate decay will begin. To recognize that
the subsidence and decay of a thing is rational, is to be resigned
to it and in some measure consoled for it; but whatever is useful is
necessarily transitory, for it is useful for an end; and it is thus
that the utility of a system implies that it will some day make way for
something else. “Ἀνάγκη στῆναι,” says dogma; “ἀνάγκη μὴ στῆναι,”
the philosopher says. Systems die and dogmas die; sentiments and ideas
survive. Whatever has been set in order falls into disorder, boundaries
become obliterated, structures fall into dust; what is eternal is the
dust itself, the dust of doctrine, which is always ready to take on a
new form, to fill a new mould, and which, far from receiving its life
from the fugitive forms it fills, lends them theirs. Human thoughts
live, not by their contours but from within. To understand them they
must be taken, not as they appear in any one system, but as they appear
in a succession of different and often diverse systems.

[Sidenote: Instability of metaphysics.]

As speculation and hypothesis are eternal, so also is the instinct for
philosophy and metaphysics which corresponds to them eternal, though
it is perpetually changing. It appears at the present day as something
widely different from the intimate certitude of dogma, of confident and
placid faith. If independence of mind and freedom of speculation are
not without their sweetness, their attractiveness, their intoxication,
they are not without their bitterness and disquietude. We must make up
our minds to-day to accept a certain modicum of intellectual suffering
as inseparable from our treasure of intellectual joy; for the life of
the spirit, like that of the body, follows a just mean between pleasure
and pain. Intense metaphysical emotion, like intense æsthetic emotion,
possesses always an element of sadness.[120] The day will come when
the graver moods of the human heart will sometimes demand satisfaction
as they demanded and found satisfaction in Heraclitus and Jeremiah.
It is inevitable that there should be an element of melancholy in the
emotional setting of metaphysical speculation—as there inevitably
is in the perception of the sublimity we feel ourselves incapable of
attaining, in the experience of doubt, of intellectual evil, of moral
evil, of sensible evil which are mingled with all our joys, and of
which doubt itself is but a reverberation in consciousness. There is
an element of suffering in all profound philosophy as in all profound
religion.

      [120] See our _Problèmes de l’esthétique contemporaine_, 1st
      part.

[Sidenote: Communion with the universe.]

One day when I was seated at my desk my wife came up to me and
exclaimed: “How melancholy you look! What is the matter with you?
Tears, _mon Dieu_! Is it anything that I have done?” “Of course it is
not; it is never anything that you have done. I was weeping over a bit
of abstract thought, of speculation on the world and the destiny of
things. Is there not enough misery in the world to justify an aimless
tear? and of joy to justify an aimless smile?” The great totality of
things in which man lives may well demand a smile or a tear from him,
and it is his conscious solidarity with the universe, the impersonal
joy and pain that he is capable of experiencing, the faculty, so to
speak, of impersonalizing himself, that is the most durable element
in religion and philosophy. To sympathize with the whole universe, to
inquire the secret of it, to wish to contribute to its amelioration, to
overpass the limits of our egoism and live the life of the universe, is
the distinguishing pursuit of humanity.

[Sidenote: Summary.]

Religion, therefore, may pass away without in the least affecting the
metaphysical instinct, or the emotion which accompanies its exercise.
When the Hebrews were marching toward the promised land they felt that
God was with them, God had spoken and had told them what lay beyond,
and at night a pillar of fire lighted them on their way. The pillar
of fire has burned out, and we are no longer sure that God is with
us; we possess no other fire to light us on our way through infinite
night but that of our intelligence. If we could but be sure that there
is a promised land—that others may attain it as well as we—that the
desert really has an end! But we are not certain even of that; we are
seeking for a new world and are not positive that it exists; nobody
has journeyed thither, nobody has returned thence, and our sole hope
of repose lies in discovering it. And we shall go forward forever, the
puppets of an indefatigable hope.




