CHAPTER III.

RELIGIOUS MORALS.

    I. The laws which regulate the social relations between
      gods and men—Morality and immorality in primitive
      religions—Extension of friendly and hostile relations to
      the sphere of the gods—Primitive inability in matters of
      conscience, as in matters of art, to distinguish the great
      from the monstrous.

    II. The moral sanction in the society which includes gods and
      men—Patronage—That divine intervention tends always to
      be conceived after the model of human intervention and to
      sanction it.

    III. Worship and religious rites—Principles of
      reciprocity and proportionality in the exchange
      of services—Sacrifice—Principle of coercion and
      incantation—Principle of habit and its relation to
      rites—Sorcery—Sacerdotalism—Prophecy—The externals of
      worship—Dramatization and religious æsthetics.

    IV. Subjective worship—Adoration and love; their
      psychological origin.


_I. The laws which regulate the social relations between gods and men._

[Sidenote: Religion and morals not originally related.]

We are to-day inclined to see everywhere a very intimate relation
between religion and morals, since Kant recognized in ethics the aim
and sole foundation of the conception of God. In the beginning nothing
of the sort existed. It is plain from the preceding chapters that
religion was at first a physical explanation of events, and above all
of events in their relation to the interests of mankind, by a theory
of causes acting for ends of their own after the manner of the human
will; an explanation, that is to say, by causes at once efficient and
final; and theology is the development of a primitive teleology. Man
imagined himself to be living in society with beneficent or maleficent
beings, at first visible and tangible, then progressively invisible and
separate from the objects they inhabited. Therein, as we have said,
lay the first step of religion. Religion was in the beginning nothing
more than an imaginative extension of human society; the explanation of
things by a theory of volitions analogous to the volitions by means of
which man himself acts on the world, but of another order, of a higher
degree of power. Well, these volitions are sometimes good, sometimes
evil, sometimes friendly, sometimes hostile: friendship and hatred are
the two categories under which man inevitably classified the superior
powers with whom he believed himself to be in relations. Morality was
in no sense one of the distinguishing characteristics of these powers;
man was quite as naturally inclined to attribute to them wickedness as
goodness, or rather he felt vaguely that the rules of conduct by which
he was himself bound were not necessarily those by which these beings,
at once analogous to men and so different from them, were themselves
bound. Also in his relations with the gods, with the powers of nature,
man in nowise believed that the rules of mere human society, of the
family, of the tribe, of the nation, were always and in every respect
applicable. Thence it came that to render the gods propitious, man had
recourse to practices which he would have blamed in mere human morals:
human sacrifices, anthropophagy, sacrifices of virginity, etc.[43]

      [43] It has been remarked that peoples who for centuries
      have renounced anthropophagy have long persisted in human
      sacrifices: that thousands of women in certain sanctuaries
      have offered the painful sacrifices of their chastity to gods
      of a furious sensuality. The gods of paganism are dissolute,
      arbitrary, vindictive, pitiless, and still their adorers
      rise little by little to a conception of moral purity, of
      clemency, and of justice. Javeh is vindictive and ferocious,
      and yet it is in the midst of his people that the religion
      _par excellence_ of benignity and forgiveness took its rise.
      Also the real morality of men was never proportionate to the
      frequently fanatic intensity of their religious sentiments. See
      M. Réville (_Prolégomènes_, p. 281).

[Sidenote: Religion much less moral than society.]

If one stops to recollect that moral laws are in a great measure
the expression of the very necessities of human life, and that the
generality of certain rules is due to the uniformity of the conditions
of life on the surface of the globe, one will understand why it was
that one’s relations to the gods, that is to say to creatures of
the imagination, were not dominated so directly as one’s relations
to one’s fellow-men by the exigencies of practical life, but were
regulated by much more variable and fantastic laws containing often
a visible germ of immorality. The divine society was an imaginary
extension of human society, not an imaginative perfection of it. It was
physical fear, _timor_, and not moral reverence, which gave being to
the first gods. The human imagination, labouring thus under the empire
of fear, naturally gave birth to a prodigy more often than to an ideal.
For the primitive conscience, as for primitive art, the distinction
between the great and the monstrous was by no means sufficiently
marked. The germ of immorality, therefore, not less than of morality
lies at the root of every religion. Once more, it would be an error to
believe that religions are immoral in that they are anthropomorphic, or
sociomorphic; rather the contrary is true, they are not moral except
in so far as they are sociomorphic. Mutilation, for example, cruelty,
obscenity are foreign to the conceptions which dominate human conduct.
One may verify in every religion what is observed in Christianity,
that the truly moral God is precisely the man-God, Jesus, whereas God
the Father, who pitilessly sacrifices his own son, is anti-human and
immoral, precisely in that he is superhuman.

[Sidenote: Summary.]

In effect we find our fundamental proposition confirmed afresh:
religion is a sociology conceived as a physical, metaphysical, and
moral explanation of all things; it is the reduction of all natural,
and even supernatural forces to a human type, and the reduction of
their relations to social relations. Also the progress of religion
has been exactly parallel to the progress in social evolution, which
has itself been dominated by the progress of subjective morals and
conscience. The gods were at first divided into two classes: the
beneficent and the maleficent, who ultimately came to be recognized
as respectively virtuous and wicked. Then these two classes were
absorbed into their respective chiefs, into Ormuzd and Ahriman, into
God and Satan, into a principle of good and a principle of evil. Thus
by a fresh dualism spirits themselves were separated and ranged into
classes, as the spirit itself had previously been separated from the
body. Finally the principle of goodness subsisted victoriously under
the name of God. He became the personification of the moral law and
the moral sanction, the sovereign legislator and judge, in a word, the
living law of universal society, as a king is the living law in a human
society. To-day God tends to be identified with the human conscience
purified _ad infinitum_, and adequate with the universe. For these
last and most subtle representations of the religious sentiment, God
is no more than a symbol of the moral and the ideal. One may see in
this evolution of religious ideas the gradual triumph of sociomorphism,
since it is characterized by an extension to the universe at large of
social relations which are incessantly progressing toward perfection
among men.


_II. The moral sanction in the society which includes gods and men._

[Sidenote: The gods inevitably become protectors of social justice.]

To the personification of the law, religious morals inevitably
joined that of the sanction which plays so capital a rôle in every
human society. The celestial government has always been a projection
of the human government, with a penalty at first terrible and
subsequently softened. To say the truth, the theory of a sanction
is the systematization of that of a providence. The distinguishing
characteristic of a providence is that it awards or recompenses,
insomuch that one may bring down upon one’s self or avoid its anger,
by such and such conduct. Well, the instant a man admits that a divine
power is governing him, this power will inevitably appear to him to be
exercising a control over his conduct, and, as it were, sanctioning
it. This control will at first be exercised only in regard to the
personal relations of the individual, with his god and his gods. But
the individual will soon recognize that if the gods take an interest
in him they may well take an interest also in the other members of the
tribe, provided that these last know how to render them propitious;
and to injure the other worshippers of a god would be indirectly to
injure the god himself, and provoke his anger. All the members of a
tribe therefore find themselves protected against each other by their
association with the gods, religion lends support to social justice,
and whoever violates social justice expects the gods to punish him.
This expectation also must have been confirmed by the facts, for if
antisocial and unjust conduct had habitually prevailed among men,
social life would have been impossible. Injustice must then always on
an average have carried its sanction with it, and this sanction must
have appeared to be the direct work of the gods, passing judgment from
on high on the social conduct of their clients, as Roman patrons did,
seated beneath the columns of the atrium.

[Sidenote: And of human justice.]

As religions intermingled and grew in extent, the clientage of a god,
at first extended to the members of a single tribe, passed beyond its
bounds. Men, of no matter what origin, might become citizens of the
celestial city, of the superhuman association which took charge of each
of its members, so that the divine sanction tended increasingly to
become confounded with the moral sanction, and one understood that God
protected justice not only within the bosom of a tribe, but everywhere
within the limits of humanity.

[Sidenote: Natural desire to have the scales loaded on the side of
rectitude.]

While in the matter of the sanction the sociomorphic conception of the
world tended thus to become a moral conception, morality itself must
have tended, in order to eke out its own insufficiency, to ally itself
with religion. Human society, powerless to make itself always respected
by every one of its members, inevitably invoked the aid of the
society of superior beings which enveloped it on all sides. Man being
essentially a social animal, ζῶον πολιτικόν, could not be resigned
in the presence of the success of antisocial conduct, and whenever
it seemed that such conduct had succeeded humanly, the very nature
of mankind tended to make it turn toward the superhuman to demand a
reparation and a compensation. If the bees should suddenly see their
hives destroyed before their eyes without there being any hope of ever
reconstructing them, their whole being would be shaken, and they would
instinctively await for an intervention of some kind, which should
re-establish an order as immutable and sacred for them as that of the
stars is for us. Man, by virtue of the moral nature with which heredity
has furnished him, is thus inclined to believe that wickedness ought
not to have the last word in the universe; the triumph of evil and of
injustice always stirs his indignation. This species of indignation
is observable in infants almost before they can talk, and numerous
traces of it may be found even among animals. The logical result of
this instinctive protest against evil is a refusal to believe in its
definitive triumph.[44]

      [44] See the author’s _Esquisse d’une morale_ (I., iii.);
      _Besoin psychologique d’une sanction_.

[Sidenote: Results in victory being given in heaven to principle of
light.]

Man, in whose eyes the society in which the gods live corresponds so
closely to human society, must almost inevitably imagine the existence
among them of antisocial beings, of Ahrimans and Satans, protectors of
evil in heaven and on earth, but it is natural that he should give the
victory in the end to the “principle of good” over the “principle of
evil.” Of all things it is the most repugnant to him to believe that
the universe is fundamentally indifferent to the distinction between
good and evil; a divinity may be irascible, capricious, and even
intermittently wicked, but man cannot understand an impassible and cold
nature.

[Sidenote: Gods legitimated by alliance with the moral forces of
society.]

The most powerful of the gods had thus served to reconcile force and
justice, a barbarous justice appropriate to the spirit of primitive man.

Through the idea of sanction grafted thus upon that of providence,
religion assumes a really systematic character, and becomes attached
to the very fibres of the human heart. As instruments of goodness
in the universe, the gods, or at least the sovereign gods, serve to
confirm human morality; they become in some sort the life of morality.
Their existence is no longer simply a physical fact; it is a physical
fact, morally justified by a social instinct which relies upon it as
its main safeguard. Henceforth the power of the gods is legitimate. A
divine king, like a human king, requires a certain mystic consecration;
it is religion which consecrates human kings, it is morality which
consecrates the king of the gods.

[Sidenote: Importance of conception of immortality in the moral
evolution of religion.]

The notion of a divine intervention to trim the balance of the social
order, to punish and to recompense, was at first altogether foreign to
the belief in a continuation of life after death; it became allied to
this belief much later. Even among a people so advanced as the Hebrews
in matters of religious evolution, reward and punishment beyond this
life played no rôle, and yet there has scarcely ever been a people
who believed more heartily in the will of God as directing the life
of mankind; but in their eyes God achieved his victory in this life;
they possessed no need for an immortality as a means of redressing the
moral balance of the world.[45] It was only later, when the critical
sense had attained a higher development, that it was recognized that
the sanction did not always come in this life; the chastisement of
the culpable, the hoped-for recompense of the virtuous, gradually
retreated from the present world into a distant future. Hell and heaven
were thrown open to correct the manifest imperfections of this life.
The notion of immortality thus assumed an extraordinary importance,
insomuch that it seemed as if modern life would be destroyed if it were
deprived of this belief, which former times had, however, succeeded in
doing without. At bottom a clear and reflective conception of a life
after death, in which one is rewarded or punished for one’s life here,
is a very complex and remote deduction from the notion of sanction.

      [45] The question whether the Hebrews believed in the
      immortality of the soul has long been discussed, and M. Renan
      has been reproached with his negative attitude in the matter;
      but M. Renan never denied the existence, among the Hebrews, of
      a belief in a sojourn for the shadows or manes of the dead; the
      whole question was whether the Hebrews believed in a system
      of reward and punishment after death, and M. Renan was right
      in maintaining that any such notion is foreign to primitive
      Judaism. It is equally foreign to primitive Hellenism. Though
      the living endeavoured to conciliate the dead, they did not
      envy their fate which, even in the case of the just, was worse
      than the fate of the living. “Seek not to console me for death,
      noble Ulysses,” Achilles says, when he arrives in Tartarus. “I
      would rather be a hired labourer and till a poor man’s field
      than reign over all the regions of the dead.” (See _Morale
      d’Épicure_, 3d ed.; _Des idées antiques sur la mort_.)

[Sidenote: Religious sanction at first conceived as a vengeance.]

The religious sanction, being fundamentally an extension of human
social relations to the life of the gods, successively assumed the
three forms of human penalty. At first it was only vengeance, as in
the case of the lower animals and of savage man. It is evil rendered
in return for evil. The sentiment of vengeance has subsisted, and
still subsists, in the bosom of every religion which admits a divine
sanction; vengeance is confided to God, and becomes only the more
terrible. “Do not avenge yourselves,” St. Paul says, “but rather give
place unto wrath: for it is written, Vengeance is mine; I will repay,
saith the Lord. Therefore, if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he
thirst, give him to drink: for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of
fire on his head.” “Our patience,” St. Cyprian wrote, “comes from our
certainty that we shall be avenged; it heaps coals of fire upon the
heads of our enemies. The day on which the Most High shall number the
faithful shall see the culpable in Gehenna, and our persecutors shall
be consumed in eternal fire! What a spectacle for my transports, my
admiration, and my laughter!” And by way of a refinement, one of the
martyrs at Carthage told the pagans to look him well in the face so
that they might recognize him on the day of judgment at the right
hand of the Father, while they were being precipitated into eternal
flame.[46]

      [46] The most orthodox theologians, of course, mean by fire a
      veritable flame.

[Sidenote: Then as an expiation.]

The notion of vengeance, as it becomes more subtle and passes, so
to speak, from the domain of passion into that of intelligence is
transformed into the notion of expiation, which is exclusively
religious, although spiritualistic philosophers believe that it
contains moral and rational elements. Expiation is a sort of naïve
compensation by which one fancies one may counterbalance moral evil by
accepting physical evil along with it. Expiation is a penalty which
possesses no utility in the way of benefiting the culprit or those who
might follow his example; it is neither corrective nor preventive;
it is an alleged satisfaction of the law, the re-establishment of
an apparent symmetry for the delight of pure intelligence, a public
prosecution pure and simple. In a singular passage in the _Pensées
chrétiennes_, Father Bouhours has clearly and innocently set in relief
the inutility of religious expiation: “Penitence of the damned, thou
art rigorous, and how useless; could the anger of God go further than
to punish pleasure so brief by torments which shall never end? When
a damned soul shall have shed tears enough to fill all the rivers of
the world, even if he should only have shed one a century, he will be
no farther ahead after so many millions of years; he will only have
begun to suffer, and even when he shall have recommenced as often as
there are grains of sand upon the shores of the sea, he shall even
then have done nothing.” The highest degree of the notion of expiation
is in effect this of eternal damnation. In this theory of the penalty
of damnation, and the pains of fire without end, one recognizes the
barbarism of former time and the torments inflicted on the vanquished
by the vanquisher, on the rebel by the chief of the tribe. A sort
of atavism attaches even to the religion of love in this perpetual
inheritance of hatred, of the customs of a savage period erected into
an eternal and divine institution.


_III. Worship and religious rites._

[Sidenote: The cult an expression of supposed reciprocity between gods
and men.]

The cult, which, so to speak, is no more than the religion become
visible and tangible, is, like the religion itself, simply the
apotheosis of a certain social relation: the exchange of services
between men living in society. Man, who believes himself to receive
benefits from the gods, feels himself obliged to give something in
exchange. He conceives a sort of reciprocity of action as appropriate
between God and man, a possible return in good or evil conduct; man
possesses a certain hold on his God, he is capable of procuring Him a
certain satisfaction or causing Him a certain pain, and God will reply
a hundred fold in kind—pain for pain, pleasure for pleasure.

[Sidenote: Is so, even to-day.]

One knows how gross the external forms of worship in the beginning
were. They simply consisted in a practical application of the social
economy: the gods were given to eat and drink; an altar was a
butcher’s stall or the stall of a wine merchant, and the cult was a
veritable commerce between heaven and earth—a sort of a market, in
which man offered lambs or sheep and received in exchange riches and
health. In our days, the cult is refined; the exchange has become
more and more symbolic, the gift is simply an expression of moral
homage, for which the worshipper expects no immediate return; still the
principle of the cult is always the same, one believes that an act on
man’s part possesses a direct influence on the will of God, and this
act consists in offerings or prayers fixed on beforehand.

[Sidenote: Governed by the law of the market.]

Another principle of primitive cult is proportionality. One can expect
no more from another than a proportionate return; bow three times
before him, and he will be better disposed toward you than if you bow
but once; offer him a beef, and he will be more grateful than if you
offer an egg. Accordingly, to an uncultivated and superstitious mind,
it follows that quantity and number should regulate our relations with
the gods as they regulate our relations with our fellow-men; multiply
your prayers, and you will multiply your chances of favours; three
Paternosters go farther than one, a dozen candles will produce a much
greater effect than a single candle. A prayer that you go to a temple
to say in public, a cantique chanted in a sonorous voice, will attract
more attention than a silent demand formulated at the bottom of one’s
heart. Similarly, if one wishes to obtain rain or sun for the crops,
it is into the fields that one must go to offer up one’s prayer, in a
motley file of chanting worshippers; it is always serviceable to point
one’s finger at what one wants, and to make the demand in person.
The better to stimulate the memory of one’s idol primitive man was
accustomed to drive a nail into him, and the custom still survives in
Brittany in the form of thrusting pins into the bodies of the saints.
Out of sight, out of mind, holds good both of gods and saints. To
simple minds it would be contrary to the law of proportionate exchange
for a simple thought, a silent prayer, to receive such favour in the
eyes of the gods as an overt act.

[Sidenote: Embodied in fixed forms.]

Every religion insists upon some quite determinate exterior form of
worship, a precise manifestation, a creed; it endeavours to incorporate
itself into a certain number of rites and customs, which are numerous
and inviolable in proportion as the religion is primitive. The
universality of an external form of worship in the different religions
of the world is the consequence and the most striking proof of their
sociomorphic origin. Man has always believed that he might be useful
and agreeable to his gods so long as he has conceived them as analogous
to himself and to his neighbours.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Which soon came to be conceived as coercive.]

Add that to the notion of seducing the gods that of constraining is
soon joined. To the conception of an exchange of services is soon
joined that of a species of coercion exercised in some vague manner by
the intermediation of some friendly god or even by some simple magic
formula which has once succeeded, once procured the object demanded!
Formulæ consecrated by custom appear to be equally binding on gods
and men. Accordingly the cult, at first more or less loose, more or
less arbitrary, ultimately becomes minutely regulated; ultimately
becomes what one knows as a rite. A rite, at its lowest, is simply
the result of a tendency to repeat indefinitely an act which, at some
time or other, has seemed to render a god or a fetich propitious.
After propitiation comes mechanical custom. Religion, as Pascal well
said, is to a large extent habit. Rites are born of the need to
perform again and again the same act, under the same circumstances;
a need which is the foundation of custom, and without which all life
would be impossible. Moreover, there is something sacred in every
habit whatsoever, and every act, whatever it may be, tends to become
a habit and by that fact to become respectable, to be in some sort
self-consecrated. Rites, therefore, strike root in the very foundations
of our being; the need for rites manifests itself very early in
the life of the child. Children not only imitate other people and
themselves, repeat other people and themselves, but exact a scrupulous
precision in these repetitions; in general they do not distinguish the
end from the means by which, and the circumstances under which, it is
pursued; they do not yet possess a sufficiently exercised intelligence
to understand that the same line of action may lead to the same result
in different ways and under different circumstances. I once observed
a child of from eighteen months to two years old: if I got up from my
armchair and paraded about the room for its amusement, and stopped, it
was necessary before beginning once more that I should return to my
seat; the child’s pleasure was much diminished if the repetition was
not exact. The child was accustomed to be fed by a number of people
indifferently; still if I had given it some one thing—milk to drink,
for example—a number of times, it was no longer satisfied to receive
milk from anybody else, and insisted that the same person should always
give it the same thing. If, on leaving the house, I took another cane
than my own, the child would take it away from me to put it back where
it belonged. It was unwilling that one should wear one’s hat in the
house or go bare-headed out of doors. And finally, I saw it achieve a
veritable bit of ceremonial on its own account. It had been accustomed
to be told to call a domestic at the top of the servants’ stairway;
one day the domestic was in the room when the child was told to call
her; the child looked at her, turned about, went to the top of the
stairway where it usually called her, and there only shouted out her
name. All the conduct of life, in effect the most important as the most
insignificant, is classified in a child’s head, rigorously defined,
and modelled on the type of the first act of that kind that has caught
its attention, without the child’s ever being able to distinguish the
object of an act from its form. This confusion between purpose and
form exists in a no less striking degree among savages and primitive
peoples, and it is upon this very confusion that the sacred character
of religious rites is founded.

[Sidenote: Primitive man possesses a repugnance not to novelty but to a
breach of custom.]

The trouble that is apparent in a child or an uncultivated man in the
presence of whatever deranges his established association of ideas,
has been explained by a pure and simple horror of novelty. Lombroso
has even coined a word to designate this psychological state; he has
called it _misoneism_. But let us not confound two quite distinct
things, a horror of a breach of custom and a horror of novelty; there
are new perceptions, and habits that may be added to the whole body
of already existing perceptions and habits without deranging them
much or at all; and against these neither the savage nor the child
rebels. Though the child never wearies of listening to the same
tale and becomes irritated the moment one alters its least detail,
it will listen no less passionately to a new tale; and new toys and
new walks delight it. The same taste for novelty is observable among
savages, just in so far as it can be gratified without disturbing
their preconceived ideas. Primitive man is like the miser who will
not part with any of his acquired treasure, but asks nothing better
than to increase it. He is naturally curious, but he has no desire to
push his curiosity to the point of contradicting what he knows already
or believes he knows. And in a measure he is right, he is simply
obeying the powerful instinct of intellectual self-preservation; his
intelligence is not sufficiently supple constantly to knit and unknit
the associations of ideas which experience has established in him. A
black, out of an attachment for Livingstone, wished to accompany him to
Europe; a few days on the steamer drove him insane. It is, therefore,
in obedience to a certain branch of the instinct of self-preservation
that primitive peoples are so conservative in their customs and rites;
but they show themselves no less willing to appropriate the customs and
rites of other people whenever they can do so without abandoning their
own. The Romans ultimately came to accept the cult of all the peoples
in the world without, however, any abandonment of their national cult;
and fêtes, which are properly survivals of paganism, subsist even at
the present day; one acquires superstition, and customs, much more
easily than one loses them.

[Sidenote: Worship in public confirms cult.]

The power of example contributes also to lend an additional stability
to the public cult; an individual becomes hardened in a practice which
he finds universal in the society in which he lives. Thence comes the
importance of public worship; the practice of public worship makes
those who abstain from it conspicuous. Public worship is a _viva voce_
poll. Everyone sits in judgment upon you, all of your acquaintances
become your accusers, and all men who worship God are your enemies.
Not to think as everybody else does is comprehensible—but not to act
as everybody else does! To wish to break away from the servitude of
action which, once established, tends to perpetuate itself! In the
end the machine bends; one becomes brutalized. Even among people of
superior minds the force of habit is incredible. In the hours of doubt,
in his youth, M. Renan wrote to his adviser: “I recite the Psalms; I
could pass hours and hours, if I but followed my own inclination, in
the churches.... I experience lively returns of devotion.... At times
I am simultaneously both Catholic and rationalist! When one cuts loose
from such beliefs, beliefs which have become a second nature to one,
it seems as if one has severed one’s self from one’s whole past. One
has in some sense lived them, and one is attached to them as to one’s
own life; to abandon them is to resolve to die to one’s self. It seems
as if one’s entire strength had come from them and that one will be as
feeble as a child when one has lost them; they are to one what Samson’s
hair was to him. Happily they will grow again.”

[Sidenote: Priesthood a consequence of established rites.]

Priesthood is a consequence of the establishment of rites. The priest
is the man supposed to be most capable of influencing the divinity
by a minute and learned observation of the sacred rites. Rites, in
effect, the moment they become complicated by an accumulation of
diverse customs lie beyond the knowledge and power of the ordinary man;
it requires a special education to talk to the gods in the complex
language which alone they understand, in the formulæ which coerce their
wills. Whoever possesses this imagination is a species of magician or
sorcerer; and the priesthood arose out of sorcery, of which it was
simply the regular organization.[47]

      [47] “Sorcery, in the beginning purely individual and
      fantastic,” says M. Réville, “gradually develops into
      sacerdotalism and by that change, having become a permanent
      public institution, sacerdotal sorcery becomes systematic,
      develops a ritual which becomes traditional, imposes upon
      those who aspire to the honour of conducting the conditions
      of initiation, proof of efficiency, a novitiate, receives
      privileges, defends them if they are attacked, endeavours
      to augment them. This is the history of all sacerdotal
      institutions, which are certainly descended from a capricious,
      fantastic, disorderly, practice of sorcery in previous ages.”

[Sidenote: Tendency of priest to become a sacred person.]

The externals of worship remain to-day, in special in the Catholic and
Greek religions, a collection of traditional, inflexible formulæ, which
could not be trusted to produce their effect if a word or a gesture in
them were changed; certain ceremonies are really veritable traditional
forms of incantation. Rites resemble the invisible bonds in which Faust
held the Devil; but it is God himself in this case that is enchanted,
charmed, and overpowered. At bottom the belief which makes the Chinese
priest turn his praying machine, the belief which makes the devotee
tell her beads, the belief which makes the priest thumb his breviary
or say salaried masses for unknown peoples, which in the Midi makes
rich people pay beggars to mumble prayers before their doors, all rest
upon one and the same principle: they all rest on a faith in a power of
the rite, of the traditional formula in and of itself, no matter who
pronounces it. The efficacity of the interested prayers does not seem
to depend solely on the legitimacy of what one demands but on the form
employed in demanding them; and this form has been determined at bottom
by experience; the majority of devotees perform minute experiments
on the comparative virtue of individual prayers, masses, offerings,
pilgrimages, miraculous waters, etc.; they amass the result of their
observations and transmit them to their children. The invocation of
certain privileged Madonnas, such as the Madonna at Lourdes, is even
to-day a vestige of primitive sorcery. The priest inherits all these
naïve experiments as to the conditions appropriate to induce a miracle,
and he systematizes them. Priests being men picked for their capability
in the function which was regarded as the most useful of all others for
the preservation of society, necessarily came to constitute a really
superior caste and to be personally in some sense the object of the
cult which they administered. The perfect type of sacerdotal privilege
is hereditary priesthood as it existed in ancient Judaism, as it still
exists in India; every Brahman is born a priest and needs no special
education. The thirty-seven great priests of Vishnu in Gujerat are
honoured even to-day as the visible incarnation of Vishnu.[48]

      [48] It is an honour for which one pays dear to be permitted
      to consecrate to them one’s soul, one’s body, or the soul and
      body of one’s wife. One pays five rupees for the privilege of
      contemplating them, twenty for the privilege of touching them,
      thirteen for the privilege of being whipped by them, seventeen
      for the privilege of eating betel that they have chewed,
      nineteen for the privilege of drinking the water in which they
      have bathed, thirty-five for the privilege of washing their
      great toes, forty-two for the privilege of rubbing them with
      perfumed oil, and from one hundred to two hundred for tasting
      in their company the essence of delight.

[Sidenote: Antagonism between priest and prophet.]

Historically the priest has always found a rival, sometimes an
adversary, in the prophet, from Buddha to Isaiah and Jesus. The prophet
is not a priest bound to a sanctuary and slave to a tradition, but
an individual. “Prophecy,” says M. Albert Réville, “is to religion
what lyrism is to poetry.” The prophet and the lyric poet, in effect,
both speak in the name of their own inspiration. The prophet is often
a revolutionist, the priest is essentially a conservative; the one
represents innovation, the other custom.

[Sidenote: Dramatic element in cult.]

Exterior forms of worship and rites allying themselves with refined
and elevated sentiments have in all religions taken on a symbolic
and expressive character that they did not possess in the practice
of primitive sorcery; they have become æsthetic and by that fact
rendered durable. For whoever looks upon the most ancient religious
ceremonies with the eye of an artist, they consist in the reproduction,
nowadays too mechanically and unconsciously, of a work of art which
once was not without its significance and its beauty. They are
nowadays like a hand-organ playing admirable compositions by some
old master. Pfleiderer, in his “Philosophy of Religion,” has shown
that the dominant element in the externals of worship is dramatic,
the dramatization of some mythological or legendary scenes. It is
especially among the Aryans that this element predominates; the Aryans
are especially susceptible to the charm of great epics and dramas.
The Semites are lyric rather, and thence arises the importance of
prophecy among them; although the lyric element was also represented
among the Greek poets and Pythonesses. The dramatic element, on the
contrary, is visible in certain symbolic ceremonies of Christianity
and Judaism. The Mass was formerly a veritable drama of the Passion in
which the spectators also took part; the half pagan, half Christian
processions that still subsist to-day possess for the crowd something
of the attractiveness of the opera. The Communion is a dramatization
of the Lord’s Supper. Catholicism especially is distinguished by
the possession of dramatic and æsthetic (too often gross) elements,
which explain, not less than historical reasons, its victory over
Protestantism among the nations of southern Europe, which are more
artistic than those of the north, and more sensually artistic. The
æsthetic superiority of a religion is not to be disdained by the
thinker. It is the æsthetic element in every rite which, as we shall
see, is its most respectable characteristic. Moreover, religious
sentiment and æsthetic sentiment have always gone hand in hand;
and this union has been one of the most important factors in the
development of the æsthetic sentiment; it is thus that dramas and
epics dealt in the beginning with gods and demi-gods rather than with
men; the earliest romances were religious legends; the first odes were
sacred chants and songs. Music and religion have always been allied.
But in the end, the æsthetic element becomes feeble and is replaced,
as religion loses its vitality, by a species of mechanical routine. In
the East, even more than among us, this phenomenon is manifest, the
whole tendency there is toward monotonous and interminable ceremonials.
The Parsees, the representatives of the oldest existing religion,
pass six hours a day in prayer. And according to the _Indian Mirror_
the following is a description of the festival of the Lord, a part
of the cult of Brahmaism, the altogether modern and wholly deistical
religion founded by Ram Mohun Roy and Keshub: “At precisely six o’clock
a hymn was intoned in chorus in the upper gallery of the _mandir_ to
announce the day’s solemnity. Others followed to the accompaniment of
the harmonium, and thus, after a succession of hymns, the sacred office
was reached, which, counting in the sermon, lasted from seven to ten
o’clock. A part of the congregation then retired to take some rest,
but those who remained intoned the _vedi_ to demand of the minister
explanations in regard to several points of his sermon. At noon, the
assembly having convened, four _pundits_ came out successively and
recited Sanskrit texts. At one o’clock the minister gave a conference.”
Then came the exposition of a number of philosophical and religious
theses, delivered by their respective authors. Hymns, meditations, and
prayers in common lasted till nearly seven o’clock, when the initiation
of seven new Brahmaists was celebrated. This ceremony, including a
sermon, lasted not less than two hours, and the assembly, which, if one
may believe the reporter, did not show any sign of fatigue after these
fifteen hours of continuous devotion, separated with a hymn to the
effect that it had not yet had enough: “The heart wishes not to return
home.”


_IV. Subjective worship—Adoration and love._

[Sidenote: Subjective worship a refinement on public and external
worship.]

Subjective worship has grown out of, and been a refinement upon, the
external cult, which in the beginning was in the eyes of mankind much
the more important of the two. To the incantation, to the material
offering, to the sacrifices of the victims succeeded subjective prayer
and the subjective offering of love, and the subjective sacrifice
of egoistic passion. To external homage, to evidences of fear and
respect by which one was supposed to recognize the superior power of
the gods, as one bows down in recognition of the superior power of
kings, succeeded a mental adoration, in which a god is recognized as
all-powerful but also as all-beneficent. The mental bowing down of the
entire soul before God is the last refinement of ritual; and ritual
itself in the higher religions comes to be the simple sign and symbol
of this adoration.[49] Thus the primitive sociomorphic character of
the cult becomes progressively more subtle: the semi-material society,
consisting of gods and men, becomes a wholly moral society, composed
of men and the principle of goodness, which still continues to be
represented as a person, as a master, as a father, as a king.

      [49] Among the Hindus, _Tapas_, that is to say fire, the ardour
      of devotion, and of voluntary renouncement, signified in the
      beginning simply the incantation intended to constrain the
      Devas to obedience, and to deprive them of a part of their
      power. Out of a crude conception has grown an extremely refined
      one. See _Manuel de l’Histoire des religions_, par C. P. Tiele,
      p. 19 (translated by Maurice Vernes).

[Sidenote: The love of God an outlet for the surplus of human love.]

The highest form of subjective worship is love of God, in which all the
duties of religious morality may be regarded as summed up. Adoration
contains in it a vitiating element of respect for power; love is a more
intimate union. The love of God is a partial manifestation of the need
to love which exists in every human being. This need is so great that
it cannot always find satisfaction in real life; it tends therefore to
stretch beyond, and not finding upon earth an object which completely
suffices for it, it seeks one in heaven. The love of God appears thus
to be an expression of the superabundance of the love of man. Our heart
sometimes feels too big for the world and seeks to overpass its limits.
Let us not forget, for the rest, that the world has been strangely
contracted by religious ignorance, intolerance, and prejudice; the
sphere left open to the need of loving was formerly a very narrow one:
it is not astonishing that the latter should have stretched out its
arms toward a celestial and supernatural being.

[Sidenote: Nourished by isolation, feebleness, and misfortune.]

The same thing happens when human affections are shipwrecked in us,
lose their object, no longer find anything to which they can attach
themselves. In France, as in England and America, the habitual devotion
of spinsters has long since been observed, though it often coincides
with a certain pining away of the heart. In our times a virtuous
unmarried woman is, so to speak, predestined to devotion; divine love
is for her (on an average, of course) a necessary compensation. Remark
also that old men are generally more inclined to devotion than young.
There are, no doubt, a number of reasons for it: the approach of death,
the enfeeblement of the body and of the intelligence, the increasing
need for a support, etc.; but there exists also a more profound reason.
The old man, always more isolated than the young, and deprived of the
excitations of the sexual instinct, possesses a smaller outlet for his
instinct for affection and for love. Thus there accumulates in him an
amount of treasure which he is free to apply as to him seems best;
well, the service of God is that which demands least effort, which
is most appropriate to the natural indolence of the old, to their
preoccupation with themselves; they become therefore devotees, partly
out of egoism, partly out of a need for some disinterested occupation.
A grain of incense burns in every heart, and when the perfume of it
can no longer be given to the earth we let it mount to heaven. Note
also that the loss of beloved beings, misfortunes of every sort, and
irreparable infirmities all provoke an expansion of the heart toward
God. In the Middle Ages unhappiness was frequently one of the most
important factors of piety; when a great and unmerited misfortune
happened to a man, the chances were that he would enter the Church or
else become an atheist; it depended often on his strength of mind, his
habits, and his education. When one strikes an animal it is equally
possible that it may bite one or crouch at one’s feet. Every time the
heart is violently bruised there comes an inevitable reaction; we
must reply from within to the blows from without, and this reply is
sometimes revolt and sometimes adoration. The feeble, the disinherited,
the suffering, all those to whom misfortune has not left strength
enough for rebellion, have but one resource: the sweet and consoling
humility of divine love. Whoever does not love, or is not loved
completely and sufficiently, on earth will always turn toward heaven:
the proposition is as regular as the parallelogram of forces.

[Sidenote: Power of mysticism a perversion of love.]

Just as we have seen in an error of the senses one of the objective
principles of religious physics, so perhaps may we find in a perversion
of love one of the most essential subjective principles of mysticism.
It is by love that this unction, this penetrating sweetness which makes
the mystic tremble to the marrow of his bones, is to be explained.
Profound love, even the most terrestrial, tends to envelop the object
with respect and veneration; an effect which is due to a number of
causes, and among others to the psychological law according to which
desire magnifies the desired object. To love is always a little to
adore. If it is a human being that is the object of the love, the
divinization incidental to it will be confined within certain limits,
but if the love stretch up from the earth into heaven, it may command
the full powers of the imagination; the soul, seeking at a distance
for some vague object to which to attach itself, will go out in mystic
outbursts of emotion and ecstasy. The soul will personify its ideal,
will supply it with figure and speech: its ideal will be Jesus with
Mary Magdalene at his feet, or the Virgin weeping at the foot of the
cross, or Moses in the midst of the clouds, or the child Buddha before
whom the statues of the gods rose and made obeisance. Thus mystical
religions are formed of great images and passionate sentiments and the
heart of man, the very life blood of which they turn to their profit.
What appears often to be the most intellectual of tastes is only love
in disguise. The most earthly love is often a religion in its earliest
stages. Henri Beyle, visiting the salt-mines at Salzburg, found in a
shaft a branch covered with incomparable diamonds scintillating in
the light. It was a dead timber on which the salt had crystallized;
in the timber thus transformed Beyle saw the symbol of what happens
in every loving heart; every object one finds there has taken on an
extraordinary brilliancy, a marvellous beauty. He calls this phenomenon
crystallization; we should prefer to call it divinization. Love always
divinizes its object; partially and provisionally when this object
is placed upon earth and close to one’s eyes, but definitively when
this object is lost in the distance of heaven. Our gods are like those
mysterious beings who spring, in legend, from a drop of generous blood
or a loving tear let fall upon the earth; it is with our own substance
that we nourish them; their beauty, their goodness come out of our
love, and if we love them as we do, the reason is that we must love
something; must lift up to the four corners of the horizon, even if
they be deaf, a supreme appeal. This outcome of love and religious
sentiment is most visible in exalted minds, both in the Middle Ages
and in our own days. The true element of originality in Christian
literature is that one there finds, for the first time, a sincere
and warm accent of love, scarcely divined, here and there, by the
great spirits of antiquity, by Sappho and Lucretius. In a page of St.
Augustine one finds the expression of a franker and more profound
ardour than in all the elegant affectations of Horace or the languors
of Tibullus. Nothing in pagan antiquity is comparable to the chapter
in the “Imitation” on love. The passion, confined and held in check,
mounts to heights till then unknown, like a dammed river; but it is
no less genuinely itself. What shall we say of the visionary mystics
of the people like St. Theresa, and Chantal, and Guyon? Among them
piety, in its most exaggerated form, verges upon the madness of love.
St. Theresa might have been a courtesan of genius equally as well as
a saint. Physiologists and physicians have often observed, in our
days, analogous pathological cases, in which the religious effusion is
simply, so to speak, a case of mistake in identity.[50]

      [50] Ribot, _de l’Hérédité_, 364; Moreau de Tours, _Psych.
      morbide_, 259.

[Sidenote: Worship of Christ to a considerable extent a perversion of
love.]

In Christianity the conception of Jesus, the beautiful, gentle young
man, the Holy Spirit incarnate in the purest and most ideal form,
favours more directly than any corresponding conception in any rival
religion this particular perversion of love. Christianity is the most
anthropomorphic belief in existence, for it is the one of all others
which, after having conceived the most elevated idea of God, abases
it, without degrading it, to the most human of human conditions. By
a much more refined, much more profound paganism than the paganism
of antiquity, the Christian religion has succeeded in making God the
object of an ardent love, without ceasing to make Him an object of
respect. By a myth much more seductive and poetic even than that of
Psyche, we see God, the true God, descended upon earth in the form of
a blond and smiling young man; we hear him speak low in the ear of
Mary Magdalene at the fall of evening; and then this vision suddenly
disappears and we see in the gathering shadow two mutilated arms
extended toward us, and a heart which bleeds for humanity. In this
legend all the powers of the imagination are called in play, all the
fibres of the heart are moved; it is an accomplished work of art. What
is there astonishing in the fact that Christ has been and is still the
great seducer of souls? In the ears of a young girl his name appeals
at once to all her instincts, even to the maternal instinct, for Jesus
is often represented as a child with the dimpled, rosy cheeks which
the Greeks ascribed to Eros. The heart of the woman is thus besieged
on all sides at once: her wavering and timid imagination wanders from
the cherub to the youth, and from the youth to the pale figure, with
the bowed head, upon the cross. It is possible that from the birth of
Christianity down to the present day there has not been one single
woman of an exalted piety whose heart has not first beat for her God,
for Jesus, for the most lovable and loving type that the human mind has
ever conceived.

[Sidenote: Moral element in the law of God.]

Side by side with its somewhat sentimental element the love of God
contains a moral element, which is progressively detaching itself
with the march of ideas. God being the very principle of goodness,
the personification of the moral ideal, the love of God ultimately
becomes a moral love properly so called, the love of virtue, of
sanctity at its height. The subjective act of charity thus becomes
the religious act _par excellence_, in which morality and subjective
worship are identified; good works and the externals of worship are
simply a translation into the outer world of the moral consciousness.
At the same time, in the highest speculations of philosophic theology,
charity has been conceived as embracing simultaneously all beings in
the divine love, and by consequence as beginning to realize the sort of
perfect society in which “all exist in all and all in every part.” The
social and moral character of religion thus attains its highest degree
of perfection and God appears as a sort of mystic realization of the
universal society, _sub specie æterni_.




Part Second.

THE DISSOLUTION OF RELIGIONS IN EXISTING SOCIETIES.




