CHAPTER VII.

THE EFFECT OF RELIGION AND NON-RELIGION ON POPULATION AND THE FUTURE OF
THE RACE.

    I. Importance of the problem of population—Antagonism
      between numerical strength and wealth—Necessity of numbers
      for the maintenance and progress of the race—Necessity
      of giving the advantage of numbers to the superior
      races—Problem of population in France—Its relation to
      the religious problem—Are the reasons for the restriction
      of the number of births physiological, moral, or
      economic?—Malthusianism in France—The true national peril.

    II. Remedies—Is a return to religion possible?—Religious
      powerlessness and growing tolerance in the matter—The
      influence that the law might exercise upon the causes of
      small families—Enumeration of these causes—Reform of the
      law in regard to filial duty—(Support of parents)—Reform
      of the law of inheritance—Reform of the military law for
      the purpose of favouring large families and of permitting
      emigration to the French colonies.

    III. Influence of public education: its necessity as a
      substitute for religious sentiment.


One of the most important of the problems to which the gradual
enfeeblement of the religious sentiment has given rise is that of
race fertility and the question of population. Almost all religions
have attached a considerable importance to the rapid increase of
population. With the diminution of the influence of religions among the
superior races of mankind, shall we not lose an important aid in their
maintenance and multiplication?

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Antagonism between wealth and population.]

I. In the beginning, for the earliest aggregations of mankind, number
was a condition of power and consequently of security. The power of
wealth, which can be concentrated in the possession of a single man,
did not, so to speak, exist. In our days wealth has become a power
which is sufficient unto itself, and which division and distribution
often inevitably dissipate. Therein lies the source of the reasoning
which appeals nowadays to the heads of families: “To render a family
powerful one must transmit one’s capital in as undivided a state as
possible; that is to say, one must restrict the numbers of one’s
descendants to the utmost feasible limits.” Capital and capitalistic
egoism is therefore the enemy of population, because multiplication of
men always implies a more or less minute subdivision of wealth.

[Sidenote: Importance of rapid increase of population.]

Religion has always held the power of capital, in this respect, in
check. The Christian, the Hindu, the Mohammedan religion all correspond
to a state of things very different from that of the modern world; to
a state of society in which number constitutes a great power, in which
large families possess an immediate and visible utility. The greater
number of the great religions are at one in the precept: “Increase
and multiply.” According to the laws of Manou, one of the conditions
of salvation is the large number of male descendants. The religious
and national tradition of the Jews on the point is well known. Every
religion of Jewish origin being thus favourable to increase in the
size of the family, and expressly prohibiting means of prevention,
it follows that, other things equal, a sincerely Christian or Jewish
people will multiply more rapidly than a free-thinking people. The
infertility of the higher races, over and above the influence of the
opposition between religion and the modern spirit, is induced also by
a sort of antinomy between civilization and race propagation: rapid
civilization is always accompanied by a certain race corruption. This
antinomy must be remedied under penalty of extinction. Life is intense
in proportion to the number of young, ambitious people who engage
in it; the struggle for existence is fertile just so far as it is
carried on by young men rather than by men who are fatigued and who no
longer possess an enthusiasm for work; a young and rapidly increasing
nation constitutes a richer and more powerful organism, a steam-engine
working at a high pressure. One-half, perhaps three-fourths of the
distinguished men have come of numerous families; some have been the
tenth, some the twelfth child; to restrict the number of children is
to restrict the production of talent and genius, and that, too, out
of all proportion to the restriction of the family. An only son, far
from having, on the average, a greater number of chances of being a
remarkable man, really possesses fewer; in especial if he belongs to
the upper classes. “Both the mother and father, it has been said, watch
over this first child and enfeeble it by superfluous care, and spare
it, by yielding to its wishes, all moral gymnastic.” Every child who
expects to be the sole inheritor of a small fortune will put forth
less energy, in the struggle for existence, than he otherwise would.
And finally, it is a physiological fact that the first children are
often less vigorous and less intelligent; maternity is a function which
becomes perfect, as other functions do, by repetition; a mother’s first
effort is as rarely a masterpiece as a poet’s. To limit the number of
children is, therefore, in a certain measure to dwarf their physical
and intellectual powers.

[Sidenote: Fallacy of Malthusianism.]

As an increase of population heightens the intensity of the physical
and mental life of a nation, so also it heightens the intensity of the
economic life of a nation, stimulates the circulation of wealth, and
ultimately increases the public treasure instead of diminishing it. It
is happening under our very eyes in Germany and England, where public
wealth has increased side by side with the population. In Germany, in
a period of nine years (1872-1881), the average annual revenue of each
individual increased six per cent., while the population rolled up by
millions. The economical doctrine which regards overpopulation as the
principal cause of poverty is a very superficial one. As long as there
is an available plot of ground unoccupied, and perhaps even after the
entire earth shall be cultivated (for science may be able to create
new sources of wealth and even of food) a man will always constitute a
bit of living capital, of a higher value than a horse or a cow, and to
increase the numbers of citizens of a nation will be to increase the
sum of its wealth.[96]

      [96] What economists have really established, and what MM.
      Maurice Block, Courcelles-Seneuil, Paul Leroy-Beaulieu, Othenin
      d’Haussonville are right in maintaining, is that it is harmful
      to society to add to the non-working classes, to the number
      of feeble beings who are incapable of labour, to the number
      of beggars, and of non-combatants generally, whoever they may
      be. Well, poverty favours the birth of those who are dependent
      upon society, and the birth of those who are dependent upon
      society tends still further to increase poverty; that is the
      circle from which so many economists have believed that the
      precepts of Malthus offered them an issue. Unhappily, if there
      is one universal attribute of poverty, it is its fertility;
      for in all nations the poorest classes are those that have the
      greatest number of children. Malthus has never been listened to
      by the poorer classes, but precisely by those only who, from
      the point of view of a sagacious political economy, ought to be
      encouraged to leave as many children behind them as possible,
      because they alone would educate them well: that is to say, the
      economical peasantry and the prosperous middle class. Insomuch
      that a fertility of the poor is absolutely without remedy
      (except by way of charity or emigration); but it constitutes in
      the end a much less considerable evil than the infertility of a
      nation as a whole, and is an ultimate evil only because, in the
      last analysis, it results in a genuine unproductivity. Poverty,
      especially in the cities, rapidly kills out the most prolific
      races.

[Sidenote: Menace to modern civilization.]

Formerly the struggle for existence between two races or nations ended
in a single violent crisis: the vanquished were massacred or reduced
to slavery, and slavery usually resulted in the gradual extinction
of the inferior race; it was a slow massacre. Famine, produced by
methodical devastation, achieved what war had begun—whole races
disappeared abruptly from the face of the globe and left not a trace
behind: the most recent and most striking example is that of the
great American empires of Mexico and Peru. Thus the strongest and
most intelligent races alone survived, and had only to confirm their
victory with all its consequences by clearing the earth before them.
Existence was a monopoly in the hands of the strong. It is no longer
so. To-day the vanquished are no longer massacred; on the contrary,
when an uncivilized country is conquered, it is supplied with good
laws, with police and hygiene. Inferior races increase and multiply
under the rule of superior races. The Cape negroes, the Chinese, the
negroes in the United States, and even the last surviving red-skins,
who seem disposed to-day to take heart, are examples of what I mean.
Well, the Orient contains, in the Chinese Empire, a veritable reservoir
of men, which some day or other will overflow the entire earth. In the
face of this compact multitude, which is increasing rapidly, and with
advancing civilization will increase more rapidly, the four or five
great nations of Europe, and the United States and Australia, seem
a small matter. The future of humanity depends mathematically upon
the proportions in which the more intelligent races are represented
in the complex composition of the man of the future. And every son of
one of the more highly endowed races of the globe, such as the French,
German, or English, commits a positive fault in not labouring for the
multiplication of his race; he contributes to lower the future level
of human intelligence. Men of science have already established it as
a law that the power of reproduction decreases with the increase of
cerebral activity, and that intelligent races reproduce themselves
with increasing difficulty; to augment this natural difficulty by a
voluntary restriction is daily to labour for the brutalization of the
human race.

[Sidenote: Duty of civilized races to multiply.]

The followers of Malthus, supposing that there at present exists an
equilibrium between population and the means of subsistence, look
with anxiety upon every new arrival in the world; but even admitting
that the struggle for existence has already reached that acute stage,
it might still be hoped that only the more intelligent would leave
children behind them. Malthus’ law should possess no force for the
educated men of Europe, who alone are acquainted with it, but only for
the negroes or the Chinese, who are absolutely ignorant of it. Malthus’
law is not meant for us; in reality it is not meant for anyone. By the
very fact that one is acquainted with it, and possesses foresight and
self-control enough to put it into practice, one proves that one stands
beyond the circle of its applicability. Malthusians, who endeavour to
apply to the reproduction of mankind the principles of animal-breeders,
forget that the dominant principle in all breeding is to favour the
multiplication of the superior species. One Durham bull is worth
ten common bulls. What is true of bulls and sheep is true of men: a
Frenchman, with the scientific and æsthetic aptitude of his race,
represents on the average a social capital a hundred times greater
than that represented by a negro, an Arab, a Turk, a Cossack, or a
Chinaman. To leave few French descendants, in order that Cossacks and
Turks may increase and multiply, is to commit an absurdity, even on
the principles of a Malthusian. Be it remembered that it was among the
Aryans, and in especial among the Greeks, that science and art worthy
of the name took their rise; from them they passed to the other Aryans,
and then to the other human races.

[Sidenote: Bad outlook for the future.]

Michelet compares the treasure of science and truth, amassed by the
human mind, to the egg that a slave carried into the Roman circus,
at the end of the entertainment, into the midst of the great lions,
who were gorged and asleep. If one of the wild beasts opened his eyes
and was seized once more by desire at sight of the man with the egg,
which is the symbol of human genius, the slave was lost. In our times
genius is infinitely less persecuted than heretofore, and is no longer
in danger of the arena or of the headsman, and it seems as if the
sacred egg out of which the future is to arise has nothing further to
fear; but this is a mistake. Precisely because the human mind is year
by year growing richer, its treasure is becoming so considerable, so
delicate, and difficult to preserve in its entirety, that it may well
be asked whether a succession of people sufficiently well endowed
will arise to retain and to augment the acquisitions of science. Up
to the present day those truths alone have survived the wear and tear
of time which were simple; at the present epoch the rapidity of the
progress of science may well make us anxious as to its permanence. The
extreme complexity of science may well make us fear that the peoples
of the future may not possess mental elevation enough to embrace it
in its entirety, and to add to it by a constant increase. Suppose,
for example, that the world should be reduced abruptly to Africa,
Asia, and South America, where the Spanish race has not yet produced
a single scientific genius; must not the scientific labours of our
century inevitably miscarry? Happily their safety is bound up with that
of certain great nations. The Anglo-Saxon and Germanic peoples to-day
cover the earth with their children and their colonies. But it is sad
to think that one of the three or four great European peoples, which
alone count for much in the progress of humanity, should be dancing
gaily toward annihilation.

[Sidenote: Danger from Asia.]

A fusion of races will sooner or later take place in humanity; it is
already taking place in the United States, and the perfection of means
of communication is hastening its consummation throughout the entire
world. Europe is pouring out its surplus upon America, Africa, and
Australia; Asia will some day overflow Europe and America; what is
taking place to-day, fifty years after the invention of railways, can
scarcely give us an idea of the mixture and amalgamation of races which
will some day be realized on the earth. Such a mixture, even though
it raise the level, in some small degree, of races intellectually
ill-endowed, may well abase the level of races intellectually
well-endowed, if the latter are greatly outnumbered by the former.

[Sidenote: Money the modern patent of nobility.]

It may be objected, it is true, that the superior races of mankind
may remain isolated in the midst of the multiplication of the other
branches of humanity in a sort of jealous aristocracy, served and
respected by those whom they dominate by their intelligence. This is
one of the dreams of M. Renan, who sees in the Chinese the future slave
of the Europeans—gentle, docile slaves, with just enough intelligence
to be marvellous industrial machines. Unhappily we have learned, to our
expense, that the Chinese are also excellent instruments of war. In the
industrial society in which we live, money constitutes, in the long
run, the basis of aristocracy. To-day money is the true force and title
of nobility. To lay up treasures demands a very average intelligence,
of which a great number of inferior people are no doubt capable: once
rich and they will be our equals; richer, they will be our superiors
and our masters. If they have money enough they can purchase every
privilege, even that of mixing their blood with ours, even that of
marrying our daughters and of confounding our race and theirs. The
only means by which intelligence can preserve its power is by means of
numbers. Genius itself must leave a posterity behind it, and in spite
of prejudice to the contrary, if we are to be eternal it must be by
means of our children rather than by our works.

[Sidenote: Religion of the family.]

Positivists propose to substitute a religion of humanity for existing
and rapidly disappearing religions; there is a still more accessible
religion, and more practical, and more useful, which was one of the
first religions of humanity: the religion of the family, the worship of
the little group of beings bound together by ties of blood and memory
and name and honour, which form an epitome of a nation; to permit one’s
family to die out or to diminish in number is to labour, to the extent
that in one lies, to diminish the power of one’s native country and
of humanity itself. Patriotism has been made a subject of ridicule,
but patriotism is a beautiful thing, and befitting in the head of a
household. Paternity in its completest sense, that is to say, the
responsibility for the education of a new generation from birth to the
age of manhood, is, after all, the surest element of patriotism, and is
within the reach of everyone.

[Sidenote: Gradual impoverishment of France.]

In France especially, as we have seen, the population question is an
important one, and should be insisted on. It has been said with reason
that France to-day is not threatened by a multitude of dangers, but
by one only, which actually constitutes a national peril: that of
extinction from lack of children.[97] A nation may increase its capital
in two ways; 1. By productive expenditure and productive labour; 2. By
the utmost possible diminution of both, of labour and of expenditure.
France has been employing the second means since the beginning of the
present century; she has been economizing in children and diminishing
the rapidity of the circulation of national life. She has, by this
process, amassed a great treasure, but the results of her economy
have been in part consecrated to the payment of an indemnity of five
billions, and in part to loans, as in Mexico, Turkey, and Egypt, and to
speculation of every kind, and the result of these blind economies has
been a gradual impoverishment.

      [97] M. Richet.

[Sidenote: Classes in France that maintain the population.]

Over and above those who are unreflective, or who simply trust to
luck, there exists no considerable class of people in France, except
Catholics, Protestants, and Jews, who can be counted on to maintain
the race. There exists no doubt a certain number of _bons vivants_
who are determined to take their pleasure at all hazards, and who find
in the restriction of the family a limitation of their pleasure; but
they are rare. The disciples of Malthus are nowadays much more numerous
than those of Rabelais. People who have children, not out of pleasure
nor by chance, but out of patriotism and philosophy, are so rare that
they need not at present be taken into account. The more the property
in France is subdivided, the greater the number of small proprietors,
the fewer children there are. Since 1866 the agricultural inquiry
has demonstrated the invasion of Malthusianism and the progress of
voluntary infertility in almost every department _side by side with
the subdivision of the soil_. From that time on the movement has gone
forward unchecked. “In certain communes the words brother and sister
have almost fallen out of use. Primogeniture, which was abolished
in 1789, has been replaced by unigeniture.”[98] Labourers only are
anti-malthusians, and that out of carelessness for the future. A
Malthusian was one day remonstrating with a poor labourer, who was
the father of twelve children and ambitious to become the father of
a thirteenth. “What will you have?” said the latter, “it is the only
pleasure in the world that I get for nothing; I would not diminish it
on any account.”

      [98] Toubeau, _La Répartition des impôts_, t. ii.

[Sidenote: Power of religion to stimulate population.]

It has been maintained that a greater or less restriction of the number
of births is essentially due, not to a diminution in the religious
devotion of the people, but simply to an increase of prudence. Whoever
does not live simply in the present moment, but takes account of the
future, will restrict the number of his children according to the
figure of his income. And yet where faith is sincere and rigid, it does
not permit one to hesitate on mere grounds of economics. In Brittany
prudence neither checks religion nor fertility. Engaged couples,
knowing that they will have children after marriage, postpone their
union till they shall have laid by a certain amount of money, purchased
a house and a plot of ground. In the department of Ille-et-Vilaine,
men do not generally become engaged before their twenty-fourth year,
nor women before their nineteenth year. Marriage does not last as
long therefore in Brittany as in Normandy; it lasts on the average
twenty-seven years and a half in Normandy and twenty-one in Brittany,
and yet the fertility of the women of Brittany, as compared with that
of the women of Normandy, is almost as that of a hundred to sixty.
In Brittany the result of religion and prudence, before marriage,
combined, is a constant increase of population; in Normandy the effect
of incredulity and prudence, after marriage, combined, is a constant
diminution of the population; although, of the two peoples, the Normans
are more vigorous, and owing to the greater frequency of twins,
naturally more fertile.[99]

      [99] See M. Baudrillart, _Les Populations rurales de la
      Bretagne_.

[Sidenote: Condition of population in France not due to aversion to
marriage.]

The weakness of the French as a nation does not lie in the smallness of
the number of marriages. Practically the average number of marriages
in France is the same as in Germany, something like eight a year for
every thousand inhabitants, so that marriages are about as frequent in
France as elsewhere. There is no question of immorality involved, but
simply one of the prudence of married people. Illegitimate births are
less numerous in France than in Italy or in Germany and in especial in
Catholic Germany. In Paris scarcely more than twenty-five per cent. of
the children are illegitimate, at Osmultz in Moravia fully seventy per
cent. are illegitimate. M. Bertillon has established the fact that,
since the beginning of the century, the percentage of marriage has
been maintained, and even has increased rather than diminished up to
1865; but that the percentage of births has diminished continuously,
and regularly. According to statistics every marriage averages five
children in Germany, five in England, or almost five, and three only in
France.

[Sidenote: Nor to degree of civilization in France.]

Certain thinkers have been inclined to believe that the comparative
slowness in the increase of the French people was due to a relatively
high development of the brain. We have already remarked the antagonism
which exists between reproduction and the development of the nervous or
cerebral system, but it is somewhat precipitate to apply to a special
group of men what is true of the species as a whole; and there is a
touch of fatuity in the notion that the French people have achieved so
high a point of development that there exists in certain provinces not
only a decrease in the rate of reproduction, but an absolute decrease
of population. A statistical investigation has shown, it is true, that
members of the Institute do not average more than one or two children
apiece, but this statistical inquiry proves simply that members of
the Institute have not desired to have large families, and that their
conduct, which is generally not influenced by religion, has been
comformable to their desire. An ordinarily healthy man could become the
father of a hundred children every year; and to imagine that his sexual
needs diminish under the influence of intellectual labour to the extent
of his having but one child in forty years would be more apropos in a
comic opera than in a serious book. Remark, however, that the fertility
is less great among peasants, whose cerebral activity is at a minimum,
than in our cities, in which it is relatively great; but in cities
fertility is balanced unhappily by mortality. The antagonism between
fertility and development of the brain should be at its greatest in
women; but Frenchwomen, whose education has long been neglected, do not
appear to possess on the average any intellectual superiority over the
women of other countries. And in our provinces population advances most
slowly in Normandy, where the women are so vigorous that the percentage
of twins is higher than elsewhere.

[Sidenote: Malthusianism the cause.]

Malthusianism therefore is the cause of the evil, and malthusianism
is a worse scourge than pauperism; it is in a sense the pauperism of
the middle classes. Just as an excessive impoverishment may kill out a
whole social class, malthusianism is the death of the middle classes.
It is rare to find a middle-class family with more than two or three
children; two children, at least, are necessary to replace the father
and the mother, and to maintain the population; a certain number of
celibates and of married people who are sterile must be allowed for.
The middle classes therefore are approaching extinction: the result of
restricting their number is suicide.

To sum up, the population question in France is purely and simply a
moral question; but more than any other question of the like nature
it is closely bound up with religion because, up to the present time,
religion has been the sole power which has dared to check popular
inclination in this regard. It is in respect to population that lay
morality has been most negligent.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Futility of effort to bring about a return of religion.]

II. If the question is really one of a return to some traditional
religion or a gradual extinction of the race, free-thinkers may well
hesitate between a number of lines of conduct. They may, in the first
place, take refuge in resignation: “After me the Deluge.” Many of the
middle classes and a great number even of economists, who regard the
future of their race and of their country as much too distant to be
taken into account and consider present comfort as the sole rational
aim of man, accept this position. A more radical alternative is to
join the Church: both the Catholic and the Protestant churches, in
spite of the eccentricity of their legends, are useful as an aid in
making a nation numerous and strong and prolific; and the French
of all nations needs religion, so that, instead of endeavouring to
destroy the Christian faith, it is our duty to endeavour to propagate
it. There is an element of hypocrisy and even of cowardice in this
effort to revive a bygone error in the name of present utility. And
it involves the affirmation that error is at the bottom more useful
than truth, and that truth is fundamentally irreconcilable with the
continued existence of the human race—an affirmation which is somewhat
precipitate. Above all, the effort to arrest scepticism is simply
futile—futile for humanity, for a people, for a family. When it is
time to regret that certain things have been learned it is too late to
set about ignoring them. The French people, in especial, possess a fund
of incredulity which is based upon the practical and logical character
of their temperament: they rose in 1789 against the clergy, in the name
of liberty; nowadays they will struggle with the same stubbornness in
the name of comfort against the prescriptions of religion, against the
very instincts of human nature, and will make themselves sterile in
order to become rich without immoderate labour. The re-establishment
of religion is simply out of the question; sincerely religious men
themselves, if they happen also to be intelligent, recognize it. This
rational sterility, produced by a triumph of the intellect over natural
instinct and religious dogma, is a charming theme for declamation;
but declamation is also sterile, and does not date from yesterday; it
was tried before the Revolution and succeeded neither in augmenting
religious sensibility nor in diminishing French infertility. In a
pamphlet on the Erreurs de Voltaire, the Abbé Nonotte wrote in 1766:
“Present notions and practices on the subject of population are as
melancholy for morality as for statesmanship. People are content
nowadays with a single heir. Pleasure and libertinism carry the day.
The fortunes of a great number of the first families in Paris rest
on the shoulders of a single child. It was better in former times;
for families were not afraid of a number of children, and were not
so extravagant but that they could provide them with a means of
subsistence.”

[Sidenote: Inability of priest to cope with question of population.]

Neither the priest nor the confessor can be counted on. Has the priest
ever power enough, even in countries like Brittany where devotion is at
its height, to suppress the grossest vice; drunkenness, for example,
and that, too, among women? How can a priest be expected to maintain
an influence over men who confess hardly more than once a year—at
Easter? How can the priest, under such circumstances, be expected to be
really a governor of the conscience, and in especial a physician of the
soul? He receives a general confession from each of his parishioners,
he is in a hurry, he is obliged to restrict his attention to the
most enormous of the sins confessed to him, and the whole ends in
absolution, followed by communion. Some days afterward the men get
drunk again, and do just as they did before, till the year comes round.
Prejudices and habits are stronger than anything else.

[Sidenote: Pliancy of religion.]

They who, with the Abbé Nonotte, regard religion as the cure of all
evils, forget that religion itself is very compliant, that it can be
made to stand for a multitude of things. If the mass of the French
people should allow themselves to be persuaded by the Abbé Nonotte
and his disciples to return to the traditional faith, the traditional
faith itself would soon cease to be so austere. Confessors would
become more discreet. Are they not to-day obliged to tolerate polkas
and waltzes, and young people whirling about the room in each other’s
arms, which was formerly so severely prohibited? The letter of religion
remains in vain the same, the spirit of the worshippers changes. At the
present day Jesuits willingly close their eyes to the sterility of the
family; they have even been accused of whispering to advice for the
preservation of certain inheritances. Do you imagine that confessors
in the Faubourg Saint-Germain ask especially embarrassing questions?
Heaven can be compromised with.

[Sidenote: Even of Protestantism.]

This sort of tolerance, like all tolerance, will grow with time. Even
in Protestant families in which a more extreme rigidity reigns, the
spirit of the times is dominant. Orthodoxy is everywhere becoming less
ferocious, sterility is everywhere on the increase. Even clergymen do
not have as large families as formerly. Statistics on this head would
be very instructive; one might find in the very bosom of Protestantism
sterility increasing directly with liberalism of belief. If Darwin and
Spencer have partisans in the English clergy, and among the American
Protestants, why should not Malthus also? In especial, since Malthus
was a grave and religious man.

[Sidenote: Decrease of population encouraged by the Catholic Church.]

The Catholic religion has itself been guilty by its advocacy of
religious celibacy. In France one hundred and thirty thousand persons
of both sexes are devoted to celibacy.[100] It is to be regretted that
Catholicism, which during a number of centuries (in the time when
St. Sidonius Apollinaris, the son-in-law of the Emperor Avitus, was
Bishop of Clermont-Ferrand) did not impose celibacy upon ecclesiastics,
should have felt obliged later to exact it, and should have come to
consider absolute continence superior to marriage, contrary to all
physiological and psychological laws. “Continence as a profession,”
says M. Montesquieu, “has destroyed more men than pestilence and war
together. Every religious house constitutes a family which never gives
birth to a child, and which continues in existence only by adopting
children from without. Such houses are open like so many abysses, to
swallow up the future of the race.” Religious celibacy results in
another evil consequence: although priests do not to-day constitute
the élite of society, they are still among the most intelligent, the
best educated, the least ill-disposed members of society. And they
gaily consent to be annihilated, to disappear, and to leave, like the
heretics they used to burn, no trace behind. They form as constant a
drain on the body-politic as the victims of the Inquisition formed
during so many years in Spain. If we should count the sons only of
clergymen who have become distinguished or even great men, from Linnæus
to Wurtz and Emerson, we might see how much we lose by the celibacy of
our priesthood.

      [100] Dr. Lagneau, _Remarques démographiques sur le célibat en
      France_.

But religion apart, sterility may be combated by law, by morals, and by
education.

[Sidenote: Legal remedy.]

Religion is the law of primitive peoples; when it becomes feeble, its
precepts split into two parts: one of which, regarded as useless,
is neglected and loses its entire value, while the other, which is
regarded as the guarantee of social life, becomes formulated into moral
or civilized laws obligatory in character. This is the history of a
number of hygienic measures prescribed by Oriental religion which have
become simple police regulations in the laws of modern Europe. In the
present question it is evident that the law should take the place that
religion once held; the legislator should assume the function of the
priest. Such a substitution is not unexampled; it took place among the
Greeks; the citizen was obliged, by law, to have children. Socrates in
Athens was obliged by law to take a second wife. In Sparta the young
husband lived at the public table until he had supplied the state with
three sons. He was subject to military service until he had supplied
the state with four.[101] Nowadays of course such radical laws are
not to be thought of, and indeed no simple and direct law could reach
the evil; an entire system of mutually completing laws is necessary.
The whole series of reasons which prevent the head of a household from
having a large family must first be known; then they must be met in
detail by a series of laws devised to suppress them or counterbalance
them; so that whenever one interest makes for sterility, another and
equivalent interest shall make for fertility. It is accordingly in the
very bosom of the family that the law, and that progressive reform of
morals to which the law is so capable of contributing, must operate.

      [101] Aristotle, _Politica_, ii. 6, 13.

[Sidenote: Worship of comfort a reason for small families.]

The head of a family to-day abandons the notion of having many children
for a number of reasons, sometimes mutually contradictory, which it
is necessary we should make ourselves fully acquainted with before
endeavouring to devise means of counteracting them. There exist in
the first place, though not very frequently, physical reasons: the
ill-health of the mother, the fear of her dying through frequent
pregnancies. When this fear is justified in the judgment of a physician
it is respectable; it is defensible even from the point of view of
society, for children born under such conditions would be delicate
and useless as members of society. But in almost the whole number of
cases, the grounds of sterility are economical and egoistic. French
sterility is an economical, much more than a physiological phenomenon.
The head of a family calculates the cost of rearing a numerous family,
calculates that instead of being able to lay by money while he is in
the vigour of his life, he will have to spend it on his children, and
to pass his old age in poverty; having a large family he regards simply
as a bit of prodigality. Our budget of 4,200,000,000 represents an
average of 113 francs a head; with such taxes, decidedly, if one is to
bring up a numerous family, one must have a considerable fortune or
must deftly manipulate one’s poverty.

[Sidenote: Worship of land another.]

Also the small proprietor regards the earth somewhat as a savage does
his fetich: his field, his house, are sacred entities which he wishes
to confide to sure hands. If he has a number of children, it will be
necessary to share these treasures and perhaps to sell them in case
they cannot otherwise be divided equally. The peasant no more regards
such a division of property as possible than a gentleman under the old
régime would have admitted the possibility of selling his ancestral
chateau. Both of them would regard a mutilation of their family as a
less evil than the mutilation of their domain. But to rear a child is
to create a bit of capital, and fertility is a form of social economy.
Both economists and French peasants admit willingly that to rear a calf
or a sheep is to add to one’s wealth, and _a fortiori_ they should
admit that to rear a child is. But there is a difference: the calf,
once reared, labours solely for the person who reared it, whereas the
child ultimately comes to labour for itself. From the selfish point of
view of the father, it is better to raise cattle and sheep. From the
point of view of society, it is incontestably better to rear men. In
all new countries the French race is prolific, because a large number
of children under such circumstances is not a charge but a profitable
investment. In Canada sixty thousand Frenchmen have grown into a people
of two millions and a half. In Algeria the birth-rate is from 30 to 35
per 1000; in Normandy it is not 20 per thousand. Finally, a striking
example of the influence of emigration has been discovered in France
itself, in the Department of the Basses-Pyrénées, where the birth-rate
varies with the rate of emigration, to fill the places of those who
have gone to America.

[Sidenote: Women of fashion imitate the demi-monde.]

Let us consider, on the other hand, the causes which influence women.
It is natural that, in a certain stage of society, women should be
unwilling to be mothers. Motherhood represents the sole task which it
is left to them to perform, and this task they find the harder because
fortune has relieved them of every other. They are not even obliged
to nourish their children: the maternal breast can find a substitute;
they are not obliged either to rear their children or to teach them:
governesses can be hired; but nobody can give birth to their children,
and in their life of frivolity childbirth is the one serious function
that remains. They protest against it and they are right. The ambition
of women of the _grandmonde_ being too often, as has been said, to
mimic women of the _demi-monde_, it is well that they should imitate
them in this respect as in all others, and that they should endeavour
to establish between marriage and prostitution this final bond of
similarity—sterility.

[Sidenote: Women of the lower classes fear labour.]

Even among the women of the people gestation and childbirth, being, as
they are, painful, are also objects of the liveliest repugnance and of
protestations of every kind. I have never seen a woman of the people
who did not complain at being pregnant and who would not have preferred
any other malady. _Ah! Nous ne faisons pas, nous recevons_—“We women
have no voice in the matter,” said one of them to me—“if but we
had!” She epitomized in a word the physiological and psychological
position of the poor woman. Those who have not had children, far from
complaining of it, congratulate themselves, and in any event they
rarely desire more than one.

[Sidenote: Large families among the poor traceable to ignorance.]

In Picardy and in Normandy, as M. Baudrillart remarks, a woman who has
many children is made the butt of raillery. And if other provinces
are less sterile, it is owing to religion or to ignorance. The women
have not yet become acquainted with Malthus. They know of but one
remedy against an evil that they fear—to keep out of the way of
their husbands. The wife of such and such a labouring man prefers a
beating to the risk of having another child: but as she is the weaker
she often succeeds in bringing upon herself both the beating and the
child. Fear of pregnancy is more often than is commonly believed the
cause of dissension in poor households, and for that matter in rich
households also. The instant a woman reasons, instead of submitting to
the law, she inevitably feels the disproportion that exists, for her,
between the pleasures of love and the pains of maternity. She must be
supplied with a new conception of duty, and that not simply in the way
of a religious obligation which the husband can ridicule but of a moral
obligation.

[Sidenote: Girls should be educated for maternity.]

Catholic education, as we have already remarked, does great harm in
rearing young girls in a false modesty, in never speaking to them of
the duties of marriage for fear of awakening their imagination in the
direction of their future husband. The actual result is precisely the
opposite of the calculated result. Young girls see nothing in marriage
but the future husband and unknown pleasures. They never think of any
matter of painful duty which they must accept in advance; they do
not consider children as a question of duty but of necessity simply,
they are actuated by but one ambition, that of diverting themselves.
Girls should be educated and prepared for motherhood; our present
education is adapted to the formation of nuns or old maids, sometimes
of courtesans, for we neglect early to inspire woman with a feeling of
duty for her proper function, which constitutes also a large portion of
all that is moral in her life—the duty of maternity. Happily, married
women cannot remain sterile simply by wishing it, their husbands must
become their accomplices; it is their husbands, who, in the last
resort, are responsible. If the husband, out of complaisance to his
wife or to his wife’s relatives, undertakes to be a Malthusian _malgré
lui_, he plays almost as ridiculous a rôle as that of Georges Dandin:
the man who permits himself to be dictated to in the matter of not
having children is almost as complaisant as the man who acknowledges
the children of other people.

[Sidenote: Paternal love tends to restrict the number of children.]

Another cause which explains the low birth-rate in France is that
paternal and maternal love is more tender and more exclusive there
than in other countries. The French family, whatever may be said
to the contrary, is much more closely united than the English or
German family: in it a sort of fraternity obtains between parents and
children. Members of a family separate with regret, and the ideal of
the father is to have so few children that he may always keep them by
him. We are too refined, too far advanced from a state of nature, to
submit without suffering to the rupture which puberty naturally brings
about in the animal family, to the flight of the young bird whose wings
are grown; we have not the courage to accept the dismemberment of the
household, far less to wish it as a necessity and, on the whole, a good
thing. This affection has of course its egoistic side, and it is on
that side that it results in sterility. Parents rear children less for
the children’s sake than for their own.

[Sidenote: Two legal remedies.]

Having thus passed in review the principal causes which restrict the
number of children in French families let us consider what influence
law and morals might exert in counteracting them. Legal reforms should
be directed especially toward the two following points: 1. Reform of
the law relating to filial duties (maintenance of parents); 2. Reform
of the law of inheritance; 3. Reform of the military law, so as to
favour numerous families and permit emigration to the French colonies.

[Sidenote: Present state of the law does not sufficiently protect
parents against ingratitude.]

Rearing children being a considerable trouble and expense it is
necessary that it should be made profitable, that it should be
converted into a species of loan for a long term of years. The law can
bring this about in various ways. French legislation has protected
children by a provision that their fathers cannot completely disinherit
them; it should also have protected fathers against children’s
ingratitude. It often happens, in the country especially, that after
an aged couple have reared a numerous generation they find themselves
dependent upon their sons or upon their sons-in-law and are ill-fed
and greeted with abuse. The law provides that children must maintain
their parents, no doubt, but maintenance may be supplied in a manner
which renders it little better than assassination. The law which has
endeavoured to establish the moral independence of the son as against
the father might well endeavour to establish on a firm basis the moral
independence of the parents themselves. If a father to-day cannot
disinherit his son, is it not shocking that a son should be able, in a
sense, to disinherit his father—to accept life, nourishment, education
from him and to give derision, abusive language, and sometimes blows
in return? Observers who have lived among the people, in especial in
country districts, uniformly bear witness to the deplorable situation
of certain old men who are obliged to beg on the highroad, or of
their neighbours, for means of support which are refused them in
their own houses. The present French law is helpless in the presence
of filial ingratitude which takes the form, not of overt act, but of
abusive language and disrespectful conduct. It annuls a donation made
to an ungrateful child, but it cannot annul the donation of life, and
ungrateful children benefit by the inability. A father should be able
to count at least on a certain minimum of revenue from his children,
whoever they may be.[102]

      [102] We are not obliged here to enter into details of
      administration. Perhaps it would be no more than just to give
      parents their choice between living with their children,
      which is often so painful, and an annual sum, proportional
      to the salary and resources of the children. This sum might
      be taxed by the state or the commune, and paid by it to the
      father. Every head of a family would at once reflect that if
      he some day becomes poor and has but one child he will have
      but one source of income, whereas, if he has ten children,
      he will have ten sources of income, and ten chances that one
      of them may be considerable; as it would be if any of one’s
      children should have become wealthy. A numerous family would
      thus constitute a guarantee of independence for the father; on
      the other hand, the more he expended in educating them, the
      greater chance he would have of later obtaining an equivalent
      return for it. In labouring for the augmentation of the social
      capital he would thus be securing an insurance for his old
      age. Even supposing that the execution of a law of this kind
      should be difficult, the right of parents to some really active
      gratitude on the part of their children should be recognized
      and consecrated formally by the letter of the law, which should
      prescribe a line of conduct for children and even fix a certain
      appropriate ratio between their income and the amount of their
      remittances to their parents. The law should even do what in
      it lies to efface from the language, in especial in their
      applicability to those who have generously fulfilled their
      duties of paternity, the shameful words: _être à la charge de
      ses enfants_—dependent on his children for support; the public
      should be made accustomed to consider this sort of dependence
      not as an accident to the children, and as a misfortune, and
      almost a disgrace, to the parents, but as a natural consequence
      of the relation of parent and child.

[Sidenote: The state owes parents a debt.]

If, as is probable, the principle of social insurance is ultimately
to prevail, and if a certain amount of the regular income of every
labourer is to be retained and laid by to form a provision for his
old age, which his employer or the state will increase in certain
proportions, we believe that it would be equitable to increase the
provision laid by for the father of a family in a larger ratio than
the provision laid by for a celibate. The father of a family having
done more for the state than the celibate—having contributed to the
state his time and trouble and expense in rearing certain members of
the new generation—it would be legitimate for the state to make a
restitution to him of some small portion of the money he has laid out
in a disinterested manner; in a manner which did not benefit him and
has benefited the state.

[Sidenote: Tax on celibacy.]

Meanwhile this consummation is somewhat distant, and there is a reform
immediately practicable: a tax on celibacy. Whenever this tax has been
mentioned it has been made the subject of universal ridicule; it has
been represented, as M. Ch. Richet remarked, as a sort of penalty,
a fine for not being willing or not being able to marry. This is a
very unfair statement of the case; the measure would be simply strict
justice. With anything like an equality in the matter of fortune
a celibate pays smaller taxes (indirect taxes, taxes on doors and
windows, etc.); and the tax of rearing a family, by which the married
man serves the state in a number of ways at once, the celibate avoids
altogether. The celibate therefore is an altogether privileged person,
he avoids almost everything in the way of social duties. In regard to
all taxes, direct and indirect, he enjoys dispensations which are not
without analogy to those formerly admitted to priests and nobles. The
same thing holds good of married people who do not have children; they
are, so to speak, encouraged by the law: it is a state of things which
should not and cannot last.

[Sidenote: In principle identical with certain provisions at time of
Revolution.]

By a tax on celibacy one would simply be reverting to the ideas of
the French Revolution. The Revolution took care, by a number of laws,
to favour the married man at the expense of the unmarried. Thus every
celibate was ranked, for purposes of taxation, in a higher class than
that to which, according to his income, he would have been placed had
he been married. If he demanded assistance for some of the causes for
which assistance was granted, he would be given but half the amount
that a married man in his situation would have received; if he was more
than thirty years old the laws obliged him to pay twenty-five per
cent. additional to all ground tax; the taxable value of his property
was estimated at fifty per cent. higher than it would otherwise have
been. A manufacturer was obliged to declare whether he was celibate or
married. The law considered every man a celibate who was thirty years
old and was not married, or a widower.[103]

      [103] See the _Études sur le célibat en France_, by Dr. G.
      Lagneau (Académie des sciences morales et politiques, p. 835,
      1885.)

[Sidenote: Parents should be taxed inversely to number of children.]

Over and above the special tax on celibacy, a more equitable
distribution of the tax on families might be realized. As M. Richet
remarks, if the father of a family cannot be assisted by indirect
taxes, the direct tax on him should at least be inversely proportional
to the number of his children.[104] Not only so, but compulsory road
labour—this unpopular tax, which constitutes the last vestige of the
_corvée_—might well be suppressed entirely for the fathers of more
than four or even of more than three children.[105]

      [104] “Direct taxes,” says M. Javal, “are in a great measure a
      tax on children: compulsory road labour is forced on young men
      before they are adult. The tax on doors and windows is a tax on
      air and light, the inconvenience of which increases directly
      with the increase in the size of the family and the consequent
      necessity of occupying a larger apartment. The license itself,
      which applies to the amount of the rent of one’s habitation,
      is in a great measure proportional to the necessary expenses
      and not to the resources of the person taxed.” (_Revue
      scientifique_, No. 18, November 1, 1884, p. 567.) “It is well
      known,” says M. Bertillon, “that the city of Paris pays to
      the state the tax on apartments that rent for less than four
      hundred francs. In principle nothing could be better, but in
      practice: suppose two neighbours, one of them an unmarried
      man, possesses a comfortable lodging of two rooms with the
      accessories; one of these two rooms can scarcely be called a
      necessity for him and is distinctly a simple addition to his
      comfort, and the city pays his tax. His neighbour has a family
      and four children, and lives in three rooms which constitute
      a very narrow, and hardly a sufficient lodging, but the rent
      of it is five hundred francs and the unhappy man must pay: (1)
      Six times greater taxes on what he consumes than his neighbour;
      (2) A furniture tax; (3) Some portion of the tax that the city
      pays on the apartment of the celibate neighbour. Evidently
      the result is precisely the opposite of what it should be.”
      (Bertillon, _La statistique humaine de la France_.)

      [105] If a purse should be given by the state to one of every
      seven children in the same family (according to a law at the
      time of the Revolution which has recently been revived and
      corrected) it would be no more than justice, nay, it would be
      almost an act of simple reparation; although it must not be
      supposed that the practical results would be considerable.
      The benefit that it would do to the father of the family is
      too uncertain, and the prospect of such an advantage could
      influence only a man who had six children and was hesitating
      about the seventh; but he who has had six children is not a
      follower of Malthus and is not likely to be.

[Sidenote: Injustice of present law of inheritance.]

Everybody is agreed nowadays as to the defects in the law regulating
the taxation of inheritances. We believe that it is more than anything
else by a modification of this law that the practice of malthusianism
can be checked. The tax on every inheritance which is to be divided
up among a great number of children ought as far as possible to be
reduced, whereas the tax on inheritances which are to go undivided to a
single inheritor ought to be increased. The small proprietor who limits
himself to one child, in order to avoid dividing his field, would
soon learn that he is making a bad calculation if by that very act he
subjects his estate to a heavy tax. On the contrary, whoever lays out
his fortune in rearing a number of children would at least have the
satisfaction of thinking that almost the whole of his fortune could be
handed down to them, that the public treasury would take little of it,
and that if his property had to be divided after his death it would at
least not be seriously diminished; almost nothing would “go out of the
family.”[106]

      [106] Suppose, to take almost the first figures that occur to
      one, that the law taxed an only son’s inheritance twenty per
      cent.; it might tax an inheritance to be handed down to two
      children only fifteen per cent., an inheritance to be handed
      down to three children ten per cent., to four children eight
      per cent., to five children six per cent., to six children
      four per cent., to seven children two per cent., and to any
      greater number of children nothing. Remark that this gradation
      actually exists to-day but inversely, because just in so far
      as an inheritance has to be divided up among a large number
      of children, the expenses of the sale and partition tend to
      increase and the value of the property, which is thus split up
      into bits, tends to decrease. A number of cases may be cited in
      which inheritances that had to be divided among seven or eight
      children have lost, by partition, not only twenty but even
      twenty-five or fifty per cent. of their value. On the contrary,
      an inheritance transmitted to a single inheritor is burdened
      with the direct tax only, and that amounts at most to ten per
      cent. Here, as elsewhere, the law protects small families and
      encourages sterility.

[Sidenote: Tax on inheritances falling to celibates.]

Every reform of the law of inheritance must make up its account with
the two motives which alone inspire a man to amass a fortune: a
personal interest, and an interest in his wife and children. So that,
whenever a man is a widower without children, his property might be
made subject at his death to a considerable tax, without his industry,
which society is interested in stimulating, being thereby especially
discouraged. A considerable tax therefore on the property left by
celibates, and married couples without children, would be evidently
equitable, and, no more than in the case of a tax on celibacy, to be
regarded as a penalty. The simple fact is that a man who has not
reared children has expended much less of his income for the benefit
of society, and that society has the right during his lifetime or at
his death to trim the scales against him. Indeed proportionate taxation
ought positively to be a matter of conscience with society.

[Sidenote: French law of inheritance tends toward minute subdivision of
estates.]

Given the importance of large fortunes in modern society, religion and
the patriarchal spirit together devised in former times a compromise
between the necessity of having a large family and of keeping the
family possessions undivided; I refer to primogeniture. To attempt to
re-establish the law of primogeniture in nations which have rejected
it would be impracticable and unjust, even though one should recognize
that the traditional superstition and prejudices on this point were
not without some justification. But, to reassure those who dislike the
thought of the inevitable partition of their territorial possessions,
the present laws in regard to inheritances might be made less
stringent. Every land-owner, every owner of a factory or a commercial
house, might be left free to designate which of his children he
considered most competent to succeed him in the possession of such real
property, and the law of partition might be considered as applicable
to the rest of his property only. It would be a sort of liberty of
bequest, within the limits of the family. The authors of our civil
code broke the line of succession as it had existed in the families
of the nobility; and they did well, in that they dispersed masses of
unproductive capital, and by that very fact rendered them productive;
but they did less well, in that they rendered it difficult to bequeath
large farming or manufacturing establishments from father to son. They
have necessitated the subdivision of capitals which were much more
productive in their entirety; and as a result families of farmers and
manufacturers who remain, from father to son, for generations in the
same pursuit and are thereby enabled to carry it to its highest degree
of perfection, have almost disappeared in France. Such commercial
or land-owning dynasties constitute the greatness of England and of
Germany. A great commercial house or a great farming enterprise is
not to be created in a day, and if after one’s death one’s labour is
to be destroyed by partition, so much the worse for the country. Le
Play has depicted in lively colours the despair of the farmer who
has laboured all his life to perfect a system of cultivation, of the
manufacturer who has created a prosperous house, who see their work
menaced with destruction if they have a number of children. Such men
have but one resource; to withdraw enough money from their business
to satisfy the requirements of the law in regard to the children
who are not to succeed them, and thus to prevent the sale of their
establishment. The result of this manœuvre often is that the child who
inherits this establishment is left too poor to carry on the business
and finds ruin where his father found wealth. The law, in its endeavour
to divide the produce of the father’s labour among his children, too
often annihilates the most valuable part of the father’s labour; in the
effort to obtain an apparent equity in the partition of the revenues,
it destroys the source of them. The law cuts down the tree to gather
the fruit.

[Sidenote: Large families should be partly exempted from military
service.]

Military service, which is perhaps the heaviest burden that the state
lays on the individual, also constitutes the state’s principal means of
influencing him. The most Malthusian native of Normandy would become
amenable at once if a question of five years’ military service, more
or less, were involved. To-day the father of four living children is
exempt from the twenty-eight days’ military service (the law does not
seem to be well known, but ought to be); he ought to be exempt from all
reserve service, even in time of war. Similarly, as has already been
demanded, a family which has furnished two soldiers to the army ought
to be exempt from further military duty. The younger sons should be
definitively excused from military service by the fact of their two
elder brothers having marched under the flag. As a matter of fact,
families in which there are more than two sons are so rare that such
a measure would hardly diminish the annual recruits.[107] More than
that the Budget is unequal to the needs of the whole number of possible
recruits even as the case stands; it is therefore irrational to make
one’s selection from among them by an appeal to chance. Such a device
is an appeal to inequality and that under the disguise of equality
and law; the future of every society depends upon the decreasing part
played in it by the injustices of chance. The military service required
of each family should therefore be regulated with some rational
reference to the number of children in it.[108]

      [107] M. Javal in 1885 proposed, in the Chamber, to substitute
      for Article 19 of the commission another article, according
      to the terms of which when two or three sons of the same
      family were enrolled they should be held to only three years
      of service all told, and that when there were more than three
      brothers enrolled they should each be required to give but
      one year’s service. The amendment was due to the fact that
      population in France is not increasing.

      [108] Young soldiers also, as M. Richet says, might be
      permitted to marry under certain conditions. They are precisely
      at the age when fertility is at its greatest.

[Sidenote: Emigration to be encouraged.]

Emigration tends to augment fertility; emigration must therefore
be favoured by law. It is soberly estimated at present that from
thirty to forty thousand Frenchmen emigrate each year; the figure is
relatively small, but that number of emigrants a year is enough to
settle important colonies.[109] It is unscientific to maintain at this
late day that the French are incapable of colonizing when they have
so powerfully aided in forming the great English colonies in Canada,
India, and Egypt and are actually colonizing Algeria and Tunis. What
we lack is not the ability to establish colonies, but the habit of
emigration. Emigration, in spite of its importance for us, obtains
mainly in certain poor districts in France; it is not general enough
to have any considerable influence, as yet, in raising the birth-rate;
the law should here be looked to, to correct the habits of the people.
In England out of every family of four sons it is almost to be expected
that one of them will go to India, another to Australia, a third to
America; there is nothing surprising in it, it is the custom. A sense
of distance is almost unknown on the opposite side of the Channel. In
France, if a single child leaves the country, even as the secretary
of an embassy, he is as solemnly bid good-bye as if he were going
never to return, as if he were dying even. There is a great deal of
prejudice and ignorance in paternal anguish of this kind. Such and such
a sedentary profession, for example that of a physician, is subject
to perils that are perfectly well known to statisticians and which
we nevertheless do not hesitate to choose for our children precisely
because it permits them to live next door to us, rather than at the
other end of the world. Such national prejudices will give way before
education, the increasing habit of travelling, and the progressively
rapid circulation of society; laws might favour it. The spirit of
enterprise and colonization, which seems at first sight so foreign to
love of family, is capable of being allied with it; nay, becomes, under
certain circumstances, the very condition of it. To rear a numerous
family is always in a certain sense to colonize, even though all the
children live within the limits of their native country. To rear a
large family is to launch one’s children upon unknown ways, and demands
the activity of mind and fertility of resource which are of the essence
of colonization. The creation of a numerous family is positively a
social enterprise, as the creation of a great commercial house or a
great farming industry is an economical enterprise; success in both
cases demands constant effort and brings a various profit in return.
Suppose a couple have reared ten children to labour and honesty; the
children form a protecting phalanx about the parents and give them,
in return for the rearing, if not gross and direct benefits, at least
happiness and honour. We do not wish to disguise the fact, however,
that to rear a family involves a certain amount of risk; but every
enterprise involves a risk. And indeed the prime need in this whole
matter is to develop the spirit of enterprise and audacity which was
formerly so powerful in the French nation. A great many people to-day
remain celibate for the same reason that they are content to live
within a small income without endeavouring to increase their fortune
by investing it in commerce or manufacture; they are afraid of the
risks of the family, just as they are afraid of commercial risks. They
consume instead of producing, because producing is inseparable from a
certain preliminary investment of money and activity. Similarly a great
many people, once they are married, endeavour, so to speak, to reduce
marriage to a minimum; they do not dare to have children; they are
afraid of the preliminary outlay, they are afraid of emerging from the
shell of their short-sighted egoism.

      [109] Rightly to appreciate the ability of France to maintain
      colonies, this figure must not be compared with the rate of
      emigration from other countries, but with the average excess of
      births over deaths in France. Thus considered, the number of
      forty thousand emigrants (adopted by M. Paul Leroy-Beaulieu)
      becomes relatively large, since the annual excess of our births
      is not one hundred thousand.

[Sidenote: To French colonies.]

It is, of course, emigration to French colonies that the law ought
especially to favour, and for that purpose there is one respect in
which the military law should be reformed. As a matter of fact, in
spite of the law of July 27, 1872, the government is obliged to grant
pardon to the numerous Basques and Savoyards who emigrate to escape
military service. More than that, the sole important current that
exists in France flows toward foreign colonies, and often creates on
their shores industries which rival our own, while they rarely open
advantageous markets for our commerce. Is it not a matter of urgent
necessity to make our colonies as attractive to the French emigrants
as the colonies of any foreign nationality? If the young man of
twenty who has made up his mind to pass some years of his life in
Brazil finds himself _de facto_ exempt from military service, ought
he not to be _de jure_ exempt if he wishes to emigrate to Algiers,
to Tunis, to Tonquin, to Madagascar? Emigration is itself a sort of
military service. Colonists defend and enlarge the frontiers of the
countries; a really rational law should recognize them as a portion
of the military power of the country. Fifty-four chambers of commerce
in our principal cities, “considering that it is of the greatest
importance to encourage, by every means possible, intelligent and
well-educated young people, intending to emigrate, to establish
themselves in our colonies,” demanded justly “that, in times of peace,
young men residing in the colonies should be granted a delay of five
years in the call to military service, a delay which should become a
definitive exemption after a further residence of five consecutive
years.” We believe that this period of ten years might be shortened,
and that a residence of seven years in the colonies, or even of five
in certain distant colonies, like Tonquin, might be infinitely more
profitable to the mother country than a three-years’ military service
at home.[110] We are much less in need of soldiers to guard our
colonies than of colonists; indeed our colonies are too often “colonies
without colonists.” More than that, we travel too little, we are not
as well acquainted as we should be with our own possessions; whoever
had spent five of the most active years of his life in the colonies
would be tempted to return there or to send his friends and relatives
there. An amendment, looking to this exemption from military service,
was discussed in the Chamber of Deputies in May and June, 1884. If it
should ever be passed, it might have a considerable influence upon the
destinies of the French people.[111]

      [110] The legal minimum of required residence should not be
      taken as representing the real duration of actual residence:
      people do not come back from distant countries merely for the
      wishing; but the legislature should take advantage of the
      psychological effect of a definite figure; an emigrant rarely
      leaves France without a determination to be gone only so long.
      The majority of the Basques who emigrate in such large numbers
      to America expect to return soon; three-fourths of them become
      good citizens of the Argentine Republic.

      [111] Among the secondary causes which tend to lower the
      French birth-rate, and which the law might counteract, let
      us notice that of abortion, which is practised in France not
      less commonly than in Germany, but bears much worse results
      here than there, because of the small number of children that
      are born in France. Paris positively enjoys a reputation for
      the art of miscarriage, and ladies come there from various
      parts of the world to be relieved of their children. “One of
      the professors of our schools said this year, in one of his
      courses, that a midwife had confessed to him that she produced
      on an average one hundred miscarriages a year.” (Dr. Verrier,
      _Revue scientifique_, June 21, 1884.) Pajot affirms that there
      are more miscarriages than births. Might not this state of
      things be remedied: 1. By the re-establishment of the revolving
      boxes (_tours_); 2. By a more constant inspection of the books
      and offices of midwives and accoucheurs, such as furnished
      lodgings in Paris are subject to.

      Among the principal reasons which prevent marriage let us
      mention the preliminary formalities, which are too numerous
      even when both parties are French, and are simply numberless
      when one party is a foreigner. The law of marriages when
      both parties are French ought to be simplified to the utmost
      possible extent, so that an impatience of the preliminaries
      could in nowise influence engaged couples. More than that
      every effort should be made to facilitate marriages between
      French subjects and foreigners, unions the results of which are
      generally good for the race and which are hindered by all sorts
      of legal obstacles in certain countries; this last question is
      a subject to be dealt with by diplomacy. Still other causes
      that the law might modify operate in France, if not to diminish
      the birth-rate, at least—what amounts to the same thing—to
      increase the mortality among children. In the first place is to
      be reckoned the employment of wet-nurses, who should be subject
      to a much more rigorous surveillance than they are at present,
      under the Roussel law. In the second place, there is the
      deplorable condition of illegitimate children, the mortality
      among whom is greater in France than in any other country:
      some of them are reported as stillborn, who medical statistics
      would go to show are the victims of murder; others die of
      hunger in the second week of their birth owing to negligence or
      cruelty on the part of the mother. The re-establishment of the
      revolving boxes (_tours_) would here also be of prime service.
      In the third place, let us mention the exceptional mortality in
      France of adults from twenty to twenty-five years of age, which
      must result from bad administration in the army. Legislators
      and administrators should direct their attention simultaneously
      to all these points, if they are to check the current of
      depopulation in France.

[Sidenote: Dangers of depopulation should be taught.]

III. Apart from the laws, the great means of influencing races is
public education: it is by that means that the ideas and feelings may
be moulded. The French people must be enlightened, therefore, on the
disastrous consequences of depopulation; sentiments of patriotism,
of honour, of duty, must in every possible way be appealed to. The
schoolmaster, the physician, and the mayor may all be of help. There
are a whole multitude of such means of instruction that are being
neglected.

[Sidenote: In the army by conferences.]

In the first place there are military conferences. Conferences of a
half hour each, with striking facts and examples and a few significant
figures, might exercise a considerable influence on the army, which
is to-day the nation. Military conferences will some day certainly be
one of the great means for the dissemination of knowledge; they have
recently been employed with success in Belgium during the strikes, to
inculcate notions of political economy in the army and to fortify the
military against certain communistic arguments.

[Sidenote: In the country by proclamations.]

Then, in the second place, posters might be used. Certain speeches
delivered in the Chamber or the Senate have a much feebler title
to be placarded on the walls of remote villages than such and such
economical, statistical, and geographical information. In the country
placarding might be supplemented by _viva voce_ reading by some
important functionary of the village, or even by the public crier. The
_Bulletin des Communes_, if it were composed more carefully than it is
and filled with examples, might be read every Sunday in front of the
town hall. If the schoolmaster were intrusted with this function the
reading would be the germ of a weekly conference, which considering
the emptiness and monotony of country life might well succeed in
attracting a certain number of the public. Statistical and economical
information on the depopulation of certain provinces; on the dangers
of such depopulation; on the enormous growth of the English, German,
and Italian peoples; on the social consequences of the enfeeblement
of a race—might thus be placarded, read aloud, and commented on in
order to call to the attention of everyone the economical and political
ruin which is menacing us. The influence of religious instruction
is diminishing; it is essential to supply its place by a moral and
patriotic education which shall combat prejudice, egoism, imprudence,
and false prudence.

[Sidenote: Tastes of parents and of children not the same.]

One of the commonest psychological illusions that a better education
might dispel is the belief that one’s children are going to depend for
their happiness on precisely the same circumstances that constitute
one’s own happiness. A miser, whose happiness consists in adding to
his wealth, does not perceive that his posterity will not lay the same
emphasis that he does on the possession of an immense and undivided
capital. The peasant, who has passed his life in rounding out his plot
of ground, by obtaining here a bit and there a bit of real estate at
the expense of infinite stratagem, conceives his son as finding his
highest happiness in a continuation of the same process. His vision
does not stretch beyond the hedge that bounds his own meadow, or rather
the hedge that bounds the neighbouring meadow which he is ambitious
to acquire. A village butcher will have but one child, so that he may
make him a butcher like himself, and his successor; if he had two, the
second might be forced to become a baker or a carpenter or a locksmith.
What a misfortune!—how could one consent to live if one were not a
butcher! The idle man of leisure, who passes the first forty years of
his life between women and horses, dreams of nothing better for his
heir than idleness. Those, on the contrary, who feel such and such a
thorn in their present mode of life imagine that they are securing
perfect happiness for their son if they secure him an immunity from
that particular source of suffering. The hard-working day labourer,
the small shopkeeper, the functionary who has laboured all his life
ten or twelve hours out of every twenty-four, and has never had but
one desire in his life—that of taking his fill of rest—imagines
that his son will naturally be much happier than himself if he does
not have to work so much. Ninety-five per cent. of the human race are
bound to hard labour and imagine that the pinnacle of happiness would
be to do nothing. The majority are absolutely ignorant of the fact
that, other things equal, happiness is never exactly proportionate to
wealth, and that, according to one of Laplace’s theorems, if fortune
should increase by geometrical progression, happiness would increase by
arithmetical progression; the millionaire controls but a fraction more
happiness than a workman who makes enough to live on. And too, wealth
is never known at its best except by the man who has made it, who knows
what it is worth, who looks upon it with the satisfaction of an artist
contemplating his work, of a house-owner examining his house, of a
peasant measuring his field. A fortune is always more precious to the
man who has got it together than to his son, who will perhaps dissipate
it. If there is one axiom that fathers ought to take the trouble to
master, it is this: A robust, intelligent young man with the advantage
of a good education, which to-day is indispensable, runs a greater
chance of being happy in life if he is busy, and he will not be busy
if a fortune is handed to him when he comes of age. If a young man is
to be made happy, the surest means is not to give him a fortune but
to supply him with an opportunity of acquiring one, if fortune be his
aim.[112]

      [112] We conceive, for example, that a father who proposes
      to enrich his son might often do well to take as the measure
      of his generosity the sum that his son can lay by, and does
      really lay by, during a year of labour. The father might double
      or even sextuple that sum, but he ought at least to make it
      the basis of his calculations instead of taking counsel with
      some vague and often deceptive notion of equality, or with his
      affection for his child, which is often an extreme instance
      of inequality. We know a young man who at his twenty-eighth
      year had already amassed by ten years of labour forty thousand
      francs; his parents tripled the amount.

[Sidenote: Relation between ample means of subsistence and population.]

The peasantry and the middle classes of France, when they become more
enlightened, will begin to understand that the universe stretches
beyond their village or their street; that their children, when once
they have been sufficiently educated, will have a multitude of careers
open to them, and notably that of emigration to the colonies. Whenever
a limitless field of action is thrown open to a race, its birth-rate
increases. People who live near unoccupied land, or who see numerous
careers open to their children, are like people who live on the coast
in the presence of the wealth of the ocean. What is the explanation of
the well-known fertility of the fishing population, even in France?
It has been attributed to differences of food; it is more probably
due, as has been remarked, to the fact that the produce of fishing is
proportionate to the number of fishermen and that the sea is large
enough and deep enough for all.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Summary.]

To sum up, the relation of religious beliefs to the maintenance of
the race is the foundation of one of the gravest problems that the
decline of Christianity gives rise to. If we have insisted at length
upon this problem, the reason is that it is almost the only one in
regard to which neither morals nor politics have as yet seriously
attempted to supply the place of religion. In regard to such questions
morals have hitherto been afraid to insist, and politics have been
unpardonably negligent. Religion alone is afraid of nothing and has
neglected nothing. This state of things must be changed; some solution
must be found for so vital a problem—a problem which becomes every
year more and more vital as instinct declines in power and reflective
intelligence becomes stronger.[113] Shall we be obliged some day to
adopt the most radical imaginable solution; shall those who have
no children be obliged to pay for the rearing and education of the
children of those who have many? No; before reaching so extreme a
point as that a number of palliatives will have been tried, and we
have endeavoured to suggest some of them. What is essential is that
politics, morals, education, and hygiene should all do their duty in
this matter, in especial since religion is nowadays beginning to be
powerless in it. Science must do in the future what religion has done
in the past; must secure the fertility of the race and its physical,
moral, and economical education.

      [113] See _Esquisse d’une morale sans obligation ni sanction_,
      p. 53, and _Morale anglaise contemporaine_, 2e partie.




Part Third.

NON-RELIGION OF THE FUTURE.




