CHAPTER IV.

PANTHEISM.

REVIEW OF THE PRINCIPAL METAPHYSICAL HYPOTHESES WHICH WILL REPLACE
DOGMA.—_Continued._

    I. Optimistic pantheism—Transformation of transcendent Deism
      into immanent theism and pantheism—Disanthropomorphized
      God, according to Messrs. Fiske and Spencer—Diverse
      forms of pantheism—Optimistic and intellectualistic
      pantheism of Spinoza—Objections, Spinoza’s fatalism—The
      moral significance that might be lent to pantheism by the
      introduction of some notion of a final cause—Qualities
      and defects of pantheism—Conception of unity upon which
      it is founded—This conception criticised—Its possible
      subjectivity.

    II. Pessimistic pantheism—Pessimistic interpretation
      of religions in Germany—1. Causes of the progress of
      pessimism in the present epoch—Progress of pantheistic
      metaphysics and of positive science—Penalties incident
      to thought and reflection—Mental depression and sense of
      powerlessness, etc.—2. Is pessimism curable?—Possible
      remedies—The labour problem and the future of
      society—Illusions involved in pessimism—Inexactitude
      of its estimate of pleasures and pains—Quotation
      from Leopardi—Criticism of the practical results of
      pessimism—Nirvâna—An experiment in Nirvâna—Will
      pessimistic pantheism be the religion of the future?


[Sidenote: Conception of God being disanthropomorphized.]

As theism becomes immanent, the personality of God comes to be more and
more vaguely conceived. It is the very existence of God’s personality
that pantheism either denies or confounds with that of the universe.
According to Mr. Spencer and Mr. Fiske, the movement which led
humanity to conceive its God anthropomorphically will be succeeded by
a movement in the opposite direction; God will be deprived of all of
His human attributes, will be disanthropomorphized. He will first be
shorn of His lower impulses, and then of everything which is analogous
to human sensibility; the highest human sentiments will be regarded
as too gross to be attributed to Him. Similarly with the attributes
of intelligence and will; every human faculty will in its turn be
abstracted and divinity, as it becomes relieved of its limitations,
will lose, one after the other, every item of its significance to the
intelligence; it will be conceived ultimately as a vague unity simply,
which eludes the forms of distinct thought. Pantheism lends itself to
this notion of an indeterminate and indeterminable disanthropomorphized
divinity. Nevertheless, the crudest and most naïve speculations,
anthropomorphism and fetichism, in Mr. Spencer’s judgment, contained
a part of the truth, namely, that the power that manifests itself in
consciousness is simply a different form of the mysterious power that
manifests itself beyond consciousness. The last result attained by
human science, Mr. Spencer thinks, is that the unknown force which
exists outside of consciousness is, if not similar to the known force
that exists in consciousness, at least a simple mode of the same force,
since the two are convertible into each other. So that the final result
of the line of speculation begun by primitive man is that the power
which manifests itself in the material universe is the same as that
which manifests itself in us under the form of consciousness.

[Sidenote: Pantheism.]

If pantheism goes the length of denying the personality and
individuality of God, it is by way of compensation inclined to
attribute a sort of individuality to the world. In effect, if God is
present in every atom of the universe, the universe is a veritable
living being possessing an organic unity, and developing, like an
embryo, according to a determinate law. What distinguishes pantheism
from this point of view is, therefore, the substantial unity that it
ascribes to the world.

[Sidenote: Different forms of pantheism.]

But, of course, pantheism is a very indefinite doctrine, susceptible
of many interpretations according to the manner in which the universal
energy, the omnipresent unity, and in especial, the fundamental ground
of its activity, which some regard as determinism simply and others as
the orderly achievement of a final cause, are conceived. Nay, more;
both necessity and the orderly achievement of a final cause may be
conceived optimistically or pessimistically.


_I. Optimistic pantheism._

[Sidenote: Spinozism.]

The first kind of pantheism, then, that which conceives a single
substance as developing in an infinity of modes with no final cause
in view, may be typified by the purely intellectualistic pantheism of
Spinoza. This doctrine shows us, as existing in the totality of things,
the immanent logic which presides over its development. The essence of
human nature is reason, since reason is the essence of man. The proper
function of reason is understanding, and to understand is to perceive
the necessity of things, and the necessity of things is nature, or,
if you will, God. Reason serves no other purpose than to enable us
to understand; and the soul, in so far as it employs reason, regards
that alone as useful which leads to understanding. To conceive the
absolute necessity of eternal nature is to conceive that which, being
subject only to the law of its own being, is free; it is, therefore, to
conceive eternal freedom. And by that very fact it is to participate
in eternal freedom, to identify itself with it. A consciousness of
necessity is thus one with the fact of freedom. Human thought thus
identifies itself with divine thought and becomes a consciousness
of eternity. This consciousness, which is supreme joy, is love of
God. The mystic Hebrew and Christian idea thus proves one with the
moral theories of antiquity in Spinoza’s vast synthesis. Intellectual
intuition is self-conscious nature; the intellectual liberty, as the
Stoics taught it, is consciousness of necessity, and nature possessing
itself; and mystic ecstasy, by which the individual is absorbed in
universal being, is nature returning to itself and rediscovering its
eternal existence beneath its passing modes.[137]

      [137] See the chapter on Spinoza in the author’s _Morale
      d’Épicure_, p. 230.

[Sidenote: An optimistic fatalism.]

The objection that moral and religious philosophy urged, and always
will urge, against Spinoza’s pantheism, considered as a possible
substitute for religion, is that it is an optimistic fatalism, that
regards everything as achieved by the mechanical and brutal operation
of efficient causes, and excludes the possibility of any conception of
final cause or of progress, properly so called. The evolution of the
modes of substance, even when it results in pain, death, and vice, is
divine; and the question arises, why this universe, which is alleged to
be perfect and incapable of progress, should not be wholly motionless,
and why this eternal, aimless agitation in the bosom of absolute
substance should exist?

[Sidenote: Fiske’s theory of a dramatic movement in the universe.]

In Mr. Fiske’s judgment, Spinozism is the only pantheism, properly so
called. The remark seems to us unduly to restrict the application of
the term. Every system of theism that involves the notion of a final
cause tends to become pantheistic when it denies the transcendence and
admits the organic unity of the universe, which is the _Deus vivens_,
the _natura naturans_, with a law of progress which is superior to
the necessary laws of pure logic and mathematics and mechanics. The
exclusion of any notion of the immanence of a final cause in things is
not essential to pantheism. One might even conceive a sort of moral
pantheism which should recognize a certain moral significance in the
world, or at least what Mr. Fiske himself calls a dramatic tendency
toward a moral dénouement. The instant men feel it to be a god that is
labouring in the universe, they feel, rightly or wrongly, reassured as
to the destiny of the moral ideal; they feel that they have an aim to
march toward, and seem to hear, in the shadow of things, a multitude
marching with them. They no longer have a sense of the vanity of life;
all life, on the contrary, becomes divine, if not as it is, at least as
it tends to be and ultimately will be.

[Sidenote: Criticised.]

This system, according to its partisans, may be regarded as an
induction which is justified by the modern doctrine of evolution.
Mr. Fiske even goes the length of saying that Darwinism has done as
much to confirm theology as to weaken it. Unhappily, nothing is more
problematic than such an interpretation of modern science. Science
reveals no element of divinity in the universe, and the process of
evolution, which results in the incessant construction and destruction
of similar worlds in an endless round, moves toward no conscious or
unconscious natural end, so far as we can discover. Scientifically,
therefore, the notion of a final cause of the universe may be no more
than a human conception, than a bit of abstract anthropomorphism. No
scientific induction can justify one in ascribing to the universe
as such a conscious purpose. And it is equally rash to conceive the
universe as a whole possessing a psychical and moral unity, since the
universe, as science reveals it to us, is an infinity in no sense
grouped about a centre. Materially speaking, the universe may perhaps
be regarded as the expression of a single power, but not as possessing
any moral or psychic unity. Whatever is organized, living, feeling,
thinking, is, so far as we know, finite, and the equivalence of forces
in the universe possesses nothing in common with the centralization
of these forces. It is, perhaps, precisely because the forces of the
universe are not moving in the same direction that the struggle and
contest which are the life of the world exist. Who knows but that for
the universe to become a unity and a total would involve its becoming
finite, involve the acquisition of a centre, and by that very fact,
perhaps, of a circumference which would arrest the eternal expansion of
matter and life in infinite space.

[Sidenote: No unity in the so-called universe.]

What constitutes the charm of pantheism, for a number of its followers,
is precisely this conception of unity in the world; but when one
endeavours to make the conception precise, it proves so evanescent
that it ultimately resolves itself into the absolute indetermination
of Hegelian Non-Being. The more one examines it, the more one asks
one’s self whether the unity that pantheism ascribes to the universe
is not as purely a bit of anthropomorphism as is the design that
pantheism attributes to the universe. The character of definiteness
and of totality that the universe seems to possess may be simply a
form that the human mind imposes upon the world of experience. Project
on a wall—the wall of Plato’s cavern—shadows of numberless confused
objects, of revolving atoms and formless clouds, and they will all
fall into some certain figure; will look like the fantastic shadow of
certain human constructions: will present the outline of towers and
cities, animals and what not. The unity and figure of the world are
perhaps simply of the same nature. Apart from our conception of it, the
world is perhaps infinite, and infinity can never mean anything else
to the human mind than formlessness, for we are, by the very nature of
the case, unable to describe its contours. The unity of the world is
perhaps realized only in our minds; it is, perhaps, only from our minds
that the mass of things obtain such unity as they seem to possess.
Neither the world nor humanity are totals except in so far as we think
of them as such, and act upon them, and group them about our thought
and action as a centre.

[Sidenote: Summary.]

To sum up, if the need of unity seems to justify pantheism, this
need receives, at least, but an illusory satisfaction in the two
principal forms of pantheism, and, in especial, in the deterministic
form. Either the primordial and finite unity of the world is abstract
and indeterminate and therefore purely subjective; or it becomes
determinate in attributes which are as human as those of the god of
atheism. The will which Schopenhauer makes the basis of his system
is either the human will or simply force (which itself is human or
animal), or the sense of effort, or, finally, pure abstraction.
The same is true of the eternal force which Mr. Spencer regards as
immanent in the universe. Such conceptions are more meagre in content
but not necessarily more objective than those of the God of love, the
World-Spirit, the World-Thought.


_II. Pessimistic pantheism._

[Sidenote: Pessimism.]

Pantheism has travelled from Spinoza’s optimism to Schopenhauer’s
pessimism; its most recent form, and in some respects one of its most
ancient forms. The pessimistic interpretation of religions with death
or Nirvâna regarded as the redemption, is making incessant progress
in Germany. Pascal long ago said: “Of all creatures that inhabit the
earth, the Christian alone avoids pleasure and willingly embraces
pain.” Germany, after having resuscitated Buddhism with Schopenhauer,
Von Hartmann, Bahnsen, is in a fair way to supply us with a sort of
pessimistic edition of Christianity which will far outdo Pascal. But
for evil and sin, religion would not have existed, Von Hartmann thinks,
and as evil is of the essence of existence annihilation is the sole
salvation possible. Bahnsen, in his philosophy of despair reaches an
analogous conclusion. The most interesting representative of the new
doctrine is Philipp Mainlaender, the author of the “Philosophy of the
Redemption” (Die Philosophie der Erclösing). He was the son of parents
of an exalted piety, and grandson of a mystic who died of nervous
fever in his thirty-third year, and brother of another mystic who, on
his arrival in India, was converted to Buddhism and died soon after,
exhausted by the intensity of his mental life. Mainlaender found his
Damascus in Italy; the heavens opened upon him in a bookshop in Naples
where he discovered the writings of Schopenhauer. After having composed
his system of pessimistic philosophy, he supervised the printing of the
first volume, and the day he received his first copy (March 31, 1876)
he hanged himself.[138] The sincerity of this pessimist’s conviction
cannot be denied, nor the power of abstract ideas implanted on a brain
prepared for them by heredity, and by the intellectual tendencies of
the times. Mainlaender regarded philosophy as some day destined to
replace religion, but the philosophy is to be pessimistic; Mainlaender
declared himself a Christian even while he was founding a scientific
system of atheism. Freedom to commit suicide is the modern substitute
for the beautiful illusion of immortality. Salvation by death will,
Mainlaender thought, take the place of salvation by eternal life. The
tree of science will thus become the legendary fig-tree of Timon the
misanthrope, the branches of which were weighted every morning afresh
by the bodies of the dead, who had come in search of oblivion from the
evil of life, and had found it in self-destruction.

      [138] See in the _Revue philosophique_, June, 1885, an article
      by M. Arréat on Mainlaender.

[Sidenote: Must find the causes of pessimism.]

I. To estimate the value and probable duration of the pessimistic
sentiment, which has in some cases at the present day been identified
with the religious sentiment, one must first consider its causes.

[Sidenote: The growth of pantheistic metaphysics.]

Different reasons have brought about this transformation of pantheism,
which after having divinized the world, now inspires the individual to
dream fondly on his annihilation and reabsorption into the unity of
things. The first cause is the progress of pantheistic metaphysics.
After having adored nature as the product of immanent reason,
pantheists have come to regard it as a work of immanent unreason,
as the degeneration of an indeterminate and unconscious unity in
the misery and conflict of phenomenal selves, of conscious beings
condemned to suffering. At the very least, nature is indifferent to
man. Eternal force, which is so much spoken of to-day, is no more
comforting and reassuring to us than eternal substance. Right or wrong,
the metaphysical instinct, which is identical at bottom with the moral
instinct, demands not only the presence of life in all things, but of
life in pursuit of an ideal of goodness and universal sociality.

[Sidenote: Persistence of anthropomorphism.]

I was lying one day in the mountains, stretched on the grass; a lizard
came out of a hole and mistook my motionless body for a rock, and
climbed up on my leg and stretched himself out to bask in the sun. The
confiding little creature lay on me enjoying the light, untroubled
by any suspicion of the relatively powerful stream of life which was
flowing noiselessly and amicably beneath him. And I, for my part, began
to look at the moss and the grass on which I was reposing, and the
brown earth and the great rocks; was I not myself, after all, a lizard
simply as compared with the great world, and was I not perhaps a victim
of the same mistake? Was there not a secret life throbbing everywhere
about me, palpitating beneath my feet, sweeping forward confusedly in
the great totality of things? Yes, but what difference did it make if
it was simply the blind egoistic life of a multitude of atoms, each
striving for ends of its own. Little lizard, why have I not, like thee,
a friendly eye in the universe to watch over me?

[Sidenote: The progress of science.]

The second cause of contemporary pessimism is the rapid progress of
positive science, and the revelations it is making in regard to the
natural world. The movement has been so precipitate, new ideas have
been produced with such rapidity, that the intelligence has found it
difficult to adapt itself to them; we are going too fast, we find it
as difficult to get our breath as the rider of a runaway horse, or an
aeronaut swept away at a dizzy speed by the wind. Knowledge causes
thus, at the present epoch, a sense of discomfort which is due to a
disturbance of the inner equilibrium; consciousness of the world,
so joyous in its beginnings at the time of the Renaissance, making
its first appearance in the midst of Rabelais’ uproarious fun, has
come to be almost melancholy. We have not yet become domesticated in
the infinities of the new world which has been revealed to us, and
we feel a little lost; therein lies the secret of the melancholy of
the present epoch, which was melodramatic and rapid in the pages of
Chateaubriand and the youngest children of the century; and has come to
be serious and reflective in the pages of Leopardi and of Schopenhauer
and of the pessimists of the present day. In India the Brahmans are
distinguished by a black point between their eyes; our men of science,
our philosophers and artists, carry this black point on their foreheads.

[Sidenote: Exaggerated development of thought.]

The third cause of pessimism, which results from the two preceding,
is the suffering caused by the exaggerated development of thought at
the present day, and the disproportionate place that it occupies at
present in human life. We are suffering from a sort of hypertrophy of
the intelligence. Those who work with their brains, who meditate upon
life and death, who philosophize, ultimately experience this suffering;
and the same is true of artists, who pass their life in endeavouring
to realize a more or less inaccessible ideal. One is drawn all ways
at once by the sciences and arts; one wishes to devote one’s self
simultaneously to all of them, and one is obliged to choose. One’s
whole vitality sets in toward one’s brain; one has to check it, to beat
it back, to resign one’s self to vegetating instead of to living! One
does not resign one’s self—one prefers to abandon one’s self to the
inner fire that consumes one. One’s thoughts gradually become feebler,
the nervous system becomes irritable, becomes feminine; but the will
remains virile, is always on the stretch, unsatisfied, and the result
is an eternal struggle, an endless dissatisfaction with one’s self;
one must choose, must have muscles or nerves; be a man or a woman;
and the thinker and artist are neither the one nor the other. If by a
simple immense effort we could but express the world of sentiment and
thought we carry within us, with what joy, what pleasure we should
do it; even if the brain should be torn asunder in the process! But
we must give it out by small fragments, squeeze it out drop by drop,
submit to all the interruptions of life, and little by little the
organism becomes exhausted in the struggle between mind and body, and
the intelligence flickers like a light in a rising wind, until the
spirit is vanquished and the light goes out.

[Sidenote: Dissolving effect of subjective analysis on the emotions.]

Modern thought is not only more clear-sighted in matters of the
external world, but also in matters of the internal world. John
Stuart Mill maintained that introspection and the progress of
psychological analysis possess a certain dissolving force that, along
with disillusionment, induces sadness. We come to be too well aware
of the source of our feelings and the details of our character; what
an antagonism between being gifted enough in matters of philosophy or
poetry to create a world to one’s own mind, to embellish and illuminate
the real world, and, nevertheless, being too analytic and introspective
to profit by the pleasing illusion! We build airy palaces of cards
and are the first to blow them down. We are without pity for our own
hearts, and sometimes wonder whether we should not have been better off
without them; we are too transparent to our own eyes, we see the hidden
springs of our own activity, we have no sincere faith in objective
reality, nor faith enough in the rationality of our own joys to enable
them to attain their maximum.

[Sidenote: Heightened sensibility.]

At the same time that the intelligence is becoming more penetrating and
reflective with the progress of knowledge, sensibility of every kind
is becoming more delicate; even sympathy, according to the pessimist,
is coming to be an instrument of torture by annexing the suffering of
others in addition to our own. The echo and reverberation in us of the
sufferings of other people, growing with the growing sociality, seem
to be greater than the echo and reverberation in us of human joys.
Social needs themselves, which have been so magnified at the present
day, are so far from being satisfied that pessimists are asking whether
they ever can be satisfied and whether humanity is not destined to
become simply more numerous in the struggle for existence, and more
wretched and more conscious of its wretchedness.

[Sidenote: Depression of vitality.]

And, finally, a last cause of pessimism is the enfeeblement of the
will, which accompanies an exaltation of the intelligence and the
sensibility. Pessimism is in some sort a metaphysical suggestion
engendered by physical and moral powerlessness. Consciousness of
lack of power produces a disesteem, not only for one’s self, but for
everything; a disesteem which, in certain speculative minds, must
inevitably crystallize into _a priori_ formulæ. It has been said that
suffering embitters one; and the same is true in an even greater degree
of a sense of powerlessness. Recent psychological observations confirm
this conclusion.[139] Among the insane, and among hypnotic subjects,
periods of satisfaction and optimism, which are periods of benevolence
and amenity, coincide with a heightened muscular power, whereas periods
of discontent and malevolence coincide with a state of depression of
the will which is accompanied by a lowering of the muscular powers,
sometimes by one-half. One may say, with M. Féré, that people in good
health, at the maximum of their muscular vitality, are incessantly
disposed to estimate the world in terms of their own vigour, whereas
the degenerate, the physically or mentally enfeebled, are incessantly
disposed to estimate the world and its possibilities in terms of their
own slackness and incompetency. Add that, being themselves unequal
to the struggle with the universe, it seems to them, by a natural
illusion, that the universe is unequal to their ideals and demands upon
it; they fancy that it is they that tip the scale, whereas the fact is
precisely the opposite.

      [139] M. Ch. Féré, _Revue philosophique_, July, 1886.

[Sidenote: Relation between powerlessness and pessimism.]

In all the experiments in hypnotism a sense of powerlessness engenders
dissatisfaction; the patient who finds himself unable to obtain
possession of a desired object endeavours to explain his inability by
seeking in the object itself some quality which renders it repulsive.
We are inevitably inclined to objectify the limitations of our own
power instead of recognizing them for what they are. Once started in
this path, hypnotic patients would certainly, if they were competent,
go the length of constructing a metaphysical system to justify their
state of mind.[140]

      [140] A woman somnambulist was induced to believe that she
      could not lift her worsted neckerchief off the back of a chair;
      her shoulders were cold and she wanted it; she put out her
      hand, and finding herself unable to overcome the subjective
      obstacle, she translated it into the outer world and declared
      that the neckerchief was unclean, or of an offensive colour,
      etc., and ultimately became violently terrified. Another
      subject, also a woman, was persuaded that she could not pull
      open a drawer; she touched the button and then let go of it
      shivering, and exclaiming that it was cold. “No wonder,” she
      added, as a rational justification of her repulsion, “it is of
      iron!” She was given an iron compass; she endeavoured to handle
      it, but soon dropped it. “You see,” she said, “it is as cold as
      the handle, I cannot hold it.” Thus the objective explanation
      of a subjective fact, once entertained, tends by force of
      logic to become general, to include a whole class of similar
      phenomena, to become a system, and, if need be, a cosmological
      and metaphysical system.

[Sidenote: Sense of powerlessness destined to increase.]

Pessimism thus probably originates, for the individual, in a sense of
lack of power. Sometimes this sense possesses indisputably a certain
element of universality; a consciousness of the limits of human power,
as of human intelligence, must as inevitably increase by the very
progress of our knowledge and capacity. Pessimism is not, therefore,
pure madness, nor pure vanity; or, if it is madness, the madness is
natural, and is induced sometimes by nature itself. At certain periods
nature seems to go insane, to revel in folly, although the power of
logic, which is identical in the last resort with the overruling
principle of things, always has the last word in the universe, as it
ought to have also in the human mind.

[Sidenote: Summary.]

To sum up: in this century of transition, of religious and moral and
social transformation, of reflection and dissolving analysis, causes
of suffering are abundant and ultimately assume the guise of motives
of despair. Every new step in intelligence and sensibility brings new
modes of suffering within our reach. The desire of knowledge, in
especial, which is the most dangerous of all human desires, because the
object of it is really infinite, becomes every day more insatiable and
enslaves not only isolated individuals, but entire nations; it is the
desire of knowledge that is the disease of the century, a disease which
is growing, and becoming for the philosopher the disease of humanity.
The seat of the disease is in the head; it is the brain of mankind that
is attacked. We are far from the naïveté of primitive people, who, when
they are asked for the seat of thought, point to the stomach or the
bosom! We are well aware that we think with our heads, for it is in our
heads that we suffer from a preoccupation with the unknown, with the
ideal, with an incessant endeavour to overtake the progress of a winged
and devouring thought. On the mountains of Tartary one sometimes sees
a strange animal pass through the morning mist at a breathless speed;
its eyes are those of a frightened antelope, and while it gallops with
a foot that trembles as it strikes the soil, two great wings stretch
out from the sides of its head and seem on the point of lifting it from
the ground each time that they pulsate. It sweeps down the valleys, and
its path is marked by traces of blood, and suddenly it falls, and the
two great wings rise from the body, and an eagle, which was feeding
leisurely upon its brain, takes its way off into the sky.

[Sidenote: Is pessimism the last word of philosophy?]

II. Is pessimism curable? A sense of evil constitutes a legitimate
element in the metaphysical or religious sentiment; but is that a
sufficient reason for recognizing it not simply as a part, but as the
whole of metaphysics and of religion? Such is the problem.

[Sidenote: Pessimism only part of the truth.]

Von Hartmann has endeavoured to discover in all religion a basis of
pessimism. To do so is to judge all humanity too narrowly, according to
one’s observation of it at the present day. To maintain that religion
is founded on a radical pessimism is like affirming that medicine is
based not on a theory of the curability, but of the incurability of
disease. Schopenhauer’s pessimism, like Spinoza’s optimism, contains,
no doubt, a certain indestructible element of truth, but immensely
overstated and magnified. If science cannot regard the world as
divine, neither can it regard the world as diabolical. There is no
more ground for cursing the objective universe than for adoring it.
And the subjective causes of unhappiness, which we have analyzed,
are provisional simply. Human knowledge, which at present is so
considerable in its dimensions that it actually embarrasses the brain,
may well come to be so organized (as, indeed, in some cases, it is even
now) that it will produce a sense of well-being and of largeness of
life only. There is need, however, for a wholly new science, that of
intellectual hygiene, of intellectual therapeutics, a science which,
once created, might prevent or cure the mental depression which seems
to result from exaggerated nervous excitation, such as pessimism seems
to be incidental to, and such as Greece was unacquainted with.

[Sidenote: Resignation.]

For the rest, the desire of knowledge, which is, as we have seen,
among the most profound of the desires of the century, may become the
source of, perhaps, the most trustworthy and most infallible cure for
a great number of human ills. Some of us, certainly, who are of the
physically and mentally disinherited, may cry: “I have suffered in all
my joys.” _Nescio quid amari_ was present for us in the first draught
of pleasure, in the first smile, in the first kiss, and yet the present
life is not without its sweetness when we do not rebel against it,
when it is rationally accepted. What makes up for the bitterness of
knowledge is the definiteness and clearness that it lends to the world.
As science becomes more perfect it may some day inspire the soul with
something of the serenity that is everywhere incidental to unfaltering
clear light. Therein lies the secret of Spinoza’s intellectual calm.
If his objective optimism is indefensible, his subjective optimism is
not without an aspect of truth in the consciousness of inner peace that
belongs to breadth of intelligence and harmony of thought.

[Sidenote: Analysis destroys irrational joys only.]

So far as introspection is concerned, and the dissolving force it
exercises upon our joys, introspection is destructive, really, of none
but irrational joys, and by way of compensation, it is destructive also
of irrational griefs. Truth resists analysis; it is our business to
seek in truth not only for the beautiful, but for the good. Take it
all in all, there is as much solid and enduring truth in enlightened
love of family, of country, of humanity, as in the most unquestionable
scientific fact, or in certain physical laws, like that of gravitation.
The great remedy for excessive analysis, such as Amiel, for example,
suffered from, is a little to forget one’s self, to widen one’s
horizon, and, above all, to do something. Action, by its very nature,
is a realized synthesis, a decision which necessitates the solution of
a certain number of problems, or the recognition that their solution is
not indispensable. Action is something too trenchant and provisional,
no doubt, but men must remember that they live in the provisional and
not the eternal, and that of their life, after all, what is least
provisional is action, motion, the vibration of an atom, the undulation
which traverses the great whole. Whoever lives immersed in the conduct
of life has no time for self-pity or self-dissection. Other forms of
oblivion are involuntary and sometimes lie beyond one’s power, but one
may always forget one’s self. The cure for all the sufferings of the
modern brain lies in an enlargement of the heart.

[Sidenote: The problem of distribution of wealth.]

It has been urged, it is true, that we suffer increasingly from a
growing sympathy and pity for each other. The problem of individual
happiness, owing to the increasing sense of the solidarity of mankind,
is more than ever dependent to-day upon the happiness of society at
large. Not only our immediate and personal griefs, but the griefs of
other people, of society, of humanity, present and to come, influence
us. So be it. To discuss the future would be endless. We have not
Macbeth’s privilege of being brought face to face with the file of
future generations, and cannot read in advance the destiny of our
descendants in their faces. The mirror of human life shows us nothing
but an image of ourselves, and in this image we are inclined, like the
poets, to emphasize the lines of pain. The labour problem, which at
present distresses us, is infinitely complex; but we believe that the
optimists have even more right to regard it with tranquillity than the
pessimists have to declare it insoluble; in especial when one considers
that it has assumed a threatening aspect only during something like
the last half century.

[Sidenote: How the economic half of the problem will be dealt with.]

The labour problem involves two distinct questions, one of them
relating to a conflict of interests, the other to a conflict of
intentions. We believe that the strictly economic problem will one
day be solved by a simultaneous increase in the difficulty of the
industrial situation and in the knowledge of how to deal with it, which
will lead the well-to-do classes to perceive that by endeavouring to
save everything they are running the risk of losing everything, and
will lead the lower classes to perceive that by endeavouring to obtain
too much they are running the risk of gaining nothing and of seeing
society’s coveted wealth melt away before their eyes, and that dividing
capital is like dividing a germ, and results in sterilization. The
remedy for socialism lies in science—even though the first effect of
a wider dissemination of knowledge would be to increase the strength
of socialism. Out of the very intensity of the crisis the solution
will come. The moment different interests are completely conscious of
their real points of antagonism, they are close upon a compromise. War
is never the result of anything but an incomplete knowledge of the
comparative powers and respective interests of the opposing parties;
people fight when they can no longer calculate, and the march of armies
and pitched battles may themselves be regarded as a sort of higher
arithmetic.

[Sidenote: The human half will settle itself.]

When it has once come to be understood that there is no fundamental
conflict of interest between the classes, the sense of antagonism
between them will gradually diminish. The most reassuring promise of a
complete solution of the industrial problem lies in human sociality.
All asperity of temper in the matter will be smoothed away by the
incontestable growth of sympathy and altruism.

[Sidenote: Love and admiration the panacea for pessimism.]

If sympathy, love, labour in common, recreation in common, sometimes
seem to augment the pains of life, they more than proportionately
augment the joys. Moreover, as is well known, to share trouble is to
lessen it; sympathy is itself a pleasure; poets know it, dramatic poets
in especial; even when pity is accompanied by a lively realization
of another’s pain it nevertheless induces love, and to that extent
still preserves a certain charm. That creature suffers, therefore
I love it; and there are infinite joys in love; it, multiplies the
value of life in one’s own eyes, by giving it a value in the eyes of
other people, a social value, which is in the best sense a religious
value. Man, Wordsworth says, lives in admiration, hope, and love,
but he who possesses admiration and love will always possess an
abundance of hope. He who loves and admires will possess the lightness
of heart that carries one through the day without fatigue. Love and
admiration are the great remedies of despair. Love, and you will wish
to live. Whatever may be the value of life from the point of view of
sensibility—knowledge and action, and principally action in behalf of
another, will always constitute reasons for living. And it is mainly
one’s reasons for living that justify one’s tenacity of life.

[Sidenote: Pessimism an optical illusion.]

Pessimism sees only the sensitive side of life; but life presents also
an active and an intellectual side; over and above the agreeable there
exist the great, the beautiful, and the generous. Even from the mere
point of view of pleasure and pain, pessimism is based on calculations
which are as open to discussion as Bentham’s hedonistic arithmetic. We
have seen elsewhere[141] that happiness and unhappiness are _ex post
facto_ mental constructions that are based upon a multitude of optical
illusions. Even the disillusionment of pessimism is itself a sort of an
illusion.

      [141] _Esquisse d’une morale sans obligation ni sanction_, p.
      89.

Leopardi hit upon an ingenious empirical argument in favour of
pessimism in his dialogue between an almanac seller and a passer-by:

_Almanac Seller._ Almanacs! New almanacs! New calendars! Who wants new
almanacs?

_Passer-by._ Almanacs for the new year?

_Almanac Seller._ Yes, sir.

_Passer-by._ Do you think this year will be a happy one?

_Almanac Seller._ Yes, to be sure, sir.

_Passer-by._ As happy as last year?

_Almanac Seller._ Much more so.

_Passer-by._ As the year before?

_Almanac Seller._ Still more so, sir.

_Passer-by._ Why, should you not like the new year to resemble one of
the past two years?

_Almanac Seller._ No, sir, I should not.

_Passer-by._ How many years have gone by since you began to sell
almanacs?

_Almanac Seller._ About twenty years, sir.

_Passer-by._ Which of the twenty should you wish the new year to be
like?

_Almanac Seller._ I do not know.

_Passer-by._ Do you not remember any particular year which you thought
a happy one?

_Almanac Seller._ Indeed, I do not, sir.

_Passer-by._ And yet life is a fine thing, is it not?

_Almanac Seller._ So they say.

_Passer-by._ Should you not like to live those twenty years, and even
all your past life from your birth, over again?

_Almanac Seller._ Ah, dear sir, would to God that I could!

_Passer-by._ But if you had to live over again the life you have
already lived, with all its pleasures and sufferings?

_Almanac Seller._ I should not like that.

_Passer-by._ Then what other life would you like to live? Mine, or that
of the prince, or whose? Do you not think that I, or the prince, or
anyone else would reply exactly as you have done, and that no one would
wish to repeat the same life over again?

_Almanac Seller._ Yes, I believe that....

_Passer-by._ And it is clear that each person is of opinion that the
evil he has experienced exceeds the good; ... but with the new year
fate will commence treating you, and me, and everyone well, and the
happy life will begin....

_Almanac Seller._ Almanacs! New almanacs! New calendars![142]

      [142] Dialogue cited by M. Caro in _Pessimisme_.

[Sidenote: Persistent novelty in the universe.]

Many of us no doubt would reply to the poet as the almanac seller
did—we should not wish to begin our life over again—but it is not
to be concluded from that that our past life, taken as a whole, has
been unhappy rather than happy. It is to be concluded simply that it
has lost its novelty, and with its novelty a great part of its charm.
Man, in effect, is not a purely sensitive being. His pleasures are,
so to speak, not blind. He not only enjoys, he knows that he enjoys,
and knows what he enjoys, and each of his sensations constitutes an
addition to his treasures of knowledge. Having once begun to amass
this treasure, he desires incessantly to augment it, though he cares
little enough futilely to handle and to contemplate the wealth already
acquired. Our past life, therefore, is to some extent tarnished and
deflowered. The number of hours that were so rich, so full that we
could not exhaust them at the time and desire to repeat them, is not
great; and, barring such hours, the principal charm of the rest of our
past existence lay in estimating its details, in comparing them with
each other, in exercising upon them our intelligence and our activity,
and in lightly passing them by; they were not worth lingering over;
they resembled the tracts of country that the traveller does not feel
tempted to turn and look back upon. If novelty possesses for mankind
a certain charm, if a repetition of identically similar circumstances
rarely affords as great pleasure the second time as the first, the
fact is owing in part to the very laws of desire, but in part to the
superiority of the human mind; the desired object should always offer
something new to the intelligence. Every desire contains an element of
philosophic and æsthetic curiosity that the past cannot satisfy; the
flower of novelty cannot be gathered twice from the same branch.

[Sidenote: And genuine novelty.]

But Leopardi might reply, What is the charm of novelty but an
illusion? For everything on earth is really old: the future is but
a repetition of the past and ought logically to be as repugnant as
the past. Abstract formulæ, and precipitate inductions like that,
offer no resistance either to reason or to experience. Whatever
pessimistic poets may say to the contrary, nothing is a repetition
of anything else, either in human life or in the universe. There is
always something new under the sun, if it be no more than the budding
leaves on a tree or the changing colour on a cloud. No two sunsets are
the same. Fairy-stories tell of a marvellous picture book, the pages
of which one may turn forever without weariness, for the instant the
picture has been looked upon and the page turned, its place is taken
by a new picture. The universe is such a book; when one wishes to turn
back to a familiar page it is no longer the same nor are we ourselves
the same, and if we consider the matter narrowly, the world should
always possess for us its first freshness.

[Sidenote: Perception of difference the mark of high intelligence.]

The distinctive sign of a really superior, really human intellect is
to be interested in everything in the universe, and in the difference
between things. When we look straight before us without, properly
speaking, seeing anything, we perceive resemblances only; when we
look with attention, with affectionate love of detail, we perceive an
infinity of differences; an intellectual activity, always awake, finds
everywhere objects of interest. To love anything is to find in it,
incessantly, elements of novelty.

[Sidenote: The world inexhaustibly interesting.]

When pessimists maintain that the charm of the future is an illusion,
it may be retorted that the illusion is theirs, that they do not
look at the world closely enough to see it as it is, and do not love
it because they do not know it. If one could view the Alps from the
surface of a passing aërolite, the Rigi, the Faulhorn, Mont Blanc,
Monte Rosa would all look alike, would all appear to be indifferent
points on the earth’s rind; but what shall be said of the naïve
traveller who confounds them, and professes to have seen the whole
of the Alps when he has climbed the Rigi? Life, also, is a perpetual
ascent, of which it is difficult to say one has seen the whole because
one has climbed the first peak. From childhood to old age, the horizon
grows larger and changes and is always new. Nature seems to repeat
itself only to a superficial gaze. Each of its works is original,
like those of genius. Æsthetically or intellectually considered,
discouragement is voluntary or involuntary blindness. If poets have
wished to forget past experiences which were too painful, even in
memory, no true scholar or man of science has ever expressed the desire
to forget what he knew, to make a blank space in his intelligence, to
reject the knowledge so slowly acquired—unless, indeed, it were for
the refined pleasure of learning it all over again and of owing nothing
to the labour of previous generations. Beneath every human desire,
we repeat, there exists this thirst for truth, which is one of the
essential elements of the religious sentiment, and all other desires
may be satiated or fatigued, but this one still subsists; one may be
weary of life without being weary of knowledge; even those who have
been most bitterly wounded by the conditions of life may still accept
them for the light that the intelligence brings them at the price
of pain, as a soldier, whose eyes have been injured by some chance
splinter, nevertheless strains them beneath his eyelids to follow the
course of the fight about him.

[Sidenote: Summary.]

In effect, the analysis that pessimism is based upon is, in many
respects, superficial. Even the word pessimism is inexact, for the
doctrine ascribes no progress from bad to worse, from pejus to
pessimum; it maintains simply that the world is bad and must be
recognized as such, and that this recognition is the consequence and
the condition of progress, of intellectual power and of knowledge.

[Sidenote: Suicide as a resource.]

The practical rules for the conduct of life that pessimism prescribes
from its principles are still more open to discussion. Granted the
wretchedness of life, the remedy that pessimists propose is the new
religious salvation that modern Buddhists are to make fashionable. This
novelty, which is older than Sâkya-Muni itself, is one of the most
ancient of Oriental ideas; it to-day proves attractive to a number of
Occidental peoples, as it has several times proved attractive to them
in former days, for traces of it may be found among the Neo-Platonists
and the Christian mystics. The conception is that of Nirvâna. To
sever all the ties which attach you to the external world; to prune
away all the young offshoots of desire, and recognize that to be rid
of them is a deliverance; to practice a sort of complete psychical
circumcision; to recoil upon yourself and to believe that by so doing
you enter into the society of the great totality of things (the
mystics would say of God); to create an inner vacuum, and feel dizzy
in the void and, nevertheless, to believe that the void is plentitude
supreme—Πλὴρωμα—these have always constituted temptations to
mankind; mankind has been tempted to meddle with them, as it has been
tempted to creep up to the verge of dizzy precipices and look over. The
pantheistic or monistic notion of Nirvâna eludes criticism precisely
because it is void of all precise content. Physiologically speaking,
Nirvâna corresponds to the period of repose and quietude which always
follows a period of tension and of effort. One cannot stop and take
breath in the eternal forward march that constitutes the phenomenal
life of humanity; it is good sometimes to feel lassitude, it is good a
little to understand the comparative cheapness and vanity of everything
one has hitherto attained, but good only on condition that such an
understanding of our past constitutes a spur to fresh effort in the
future. To rest content with lassitude—to believe that the deepest
existence is the meanest, the coldest, the most inert—is equivalent to
a confession of defeat in the struggle for existence. Nirvâna leads, in
fact, to the annihilation of the individual and of the race, and to the
logical absurdity that the vanquished in the struggle for existence are
the victors over the trials and miseries of life.

[Sidenote: Trial of Nirvâna.]

It would be interesting to perform a practical experiment in Nirvâna.
One of my acquaintances pushed the experiment as far as a European of
scientific tendencies could. He practised asceticism to the point of
rejecting all variety in his diet, he gave up meat (as Mr. Spencer
also did for some time), wine, every kind of ragout, every form of
condiment, and reduced to its lowest possible terms the desire that
is most fundamental in every living being—the desire of food, the
excitation of the famished animal in the presence of appetizing dishes,
the moment of heightened expectation before dinner which constitutes
for so many people the event of the day. For the protracted meals
that are customary, he substituted a certain number of cups of pure
milk. Having thus blunted his sense of taste and the grosser of his
appetites, having abandoned all physical activity, he sought to find
a recompense in the pleasures of abstract meditation, and of æsthetic
contemplation. He entered into a state which was not that of dreamland,
but neither was it that of real life, with its definite details. What
gives relief and outline to the life of each day, what makes each day
an epoch for us in our existence, is the succession of our desires
and our pleasures. One has no idea what a blank would be produced in
one’s existence by the simple omission of some hundreds of meals. By
a similar process of elimination, employed in regard to pleasures
and desires generally, he secured for his life a certain savourless,
colourless, ethereal charm. The whole universe recoiled by degrees
into the distance, for the universe was composed of things that he
no longer came into forcible contact with, that he no longer handled
vigorously, and that, therefore, came less violently into contact with
him, and left him, therefore, more indifferent to them. He entered the
cloud in which the gods sometimes envelop themselves, and no longer
felt the firm earth beneath his feet, but he soon found that, if he no
longer stood upon firm earth, he was not on that account the nearer
heaven; what struck him most was the enfeeblement of his thoughts
precisely at the time when, owing to his complete detachment from all
material cares, he was inclined to believe himself most intellectually
competent. The instant that thought ceased to rest upon a foundation
of solid reality it became incapable of abstraction; the life of
thought as of our whole being is contrast, and it gathers power by
dealing from time to time with objects which seem least readily to lend
themselves to its purposes. An endeavour to purify and to sublimate
thought robs it of its precision; meditation gives place to dream, and
dream gives place to the ecstasy in which mystics lose all sense of
the distinction between ἕν καὶ πᾶν, but in which a mind accustomed
to self-possession cannot long remain without a sense of vapidity.
Then a feeling of revolt supervenes, and one begins to understand
that abstract thought needs, if it is to achieve its highest point of
lucidity and concentration, to be spurred on by desire. Such at least
was the experience of the friend mentioned above, and I suggest his
experiment for imitation to those who speak of Nirvâna from hearsay
only, and have never practised absolute renunciation. The only danger
to fear is lest renunciation produce a certain brutalization, lest one
lose one’s self-control and be overcome by a sort of vertigo before
having measured the depth of the abyss, and having perceived that it is
bottomless. The safest paths in the mountains are those that have been
trodden out by asses and mules. “Follow the asses,” is the advice of
the guides. The advice is often good in real life; the good sense of
the multitude opens the way which must be followed, whether one will or
not, and philosophers may well at times “follow the asses.”

[Sidenote: Sanctity and egoism.]

Absorption in infinite substance, renunciation of the desire to live,
and inert sanctity will always constitute the ultimate form and
expression of human illusion. If all is vanity, nothing, after all, is
more vain than to be completely conscious that all is vanity; if action
is vain, repose is still more vain; life is vain, death is vainer.
Even sanctity is not the equal of charity, the equal, that is to say,
of what binds the individual to other individuals, and by that fact
renders him once more the slave of desire and of pleasure—if not of
his own desires and pleasures, at least of those of other people. One
must always serve someone, must always be in bonds to something, even
if only to the flesh. One must drag a chain, if one is to draw others
after one. Nobody forms a sufficient end and aim for his own activity;
nobody can emancipate himself by living ‘in and in,’ by forming
an ideal circle like the coiled serpent, by reflecting eternally,
according to the Hindu precept, on his navel; nothing is more like
servitude than liberty that is confined within the bounds of self. The
perfect sanctity of the mystics, Buddhists, and pessimists is a subtler
egoism simply; and the sole genuine virtue in the world is generosity,
which does not fear to set its foot in the dust, in the service of
another.

[Sidenote: Pessimism not destined to prevail.]

We do not therefore believe, with Schopenhauer and Von Hartmann,
that pessimism will be the religion of the future. Life will not be
persuaded to seek death, nor movement to prefer immobility. We have
said elsewhere that what renders existence possible renders it also
desirable; if the sum of the pains of human life were greater than the
sum of the pleasures, the species would become extinct by a gradual
decrease in the vitality of each succeeding generation. Occidental
nations, or rather the active people in the world, to whom the future
belongs, will never become converts to pessimism. Whoever acts, feels,
has power, and to be strong is to be happy. Even in the Orient, when
their pessimism, the great religions, is addressed to the multitude, it
is very superficial; commonplace maxims on the ills of existence, and
on the necessity for resignation, result as a matter of fact in a _far
niente_ which is appropriate to the manners of the Orient. And, when
it is addressed to thinkers, pessimism is only provisional—it points
to its own remedy in Nirvâna; but Nirvâna as a panacea and salvation
by negation, or by violent self-destruction, will not long captivate
modern common sense. It is ridiculous to attribute to man the power
to destroy the sacred germ from which life, with all its illusions,
has sprung, and will always spring, in spite of ascetics and partisans
of individual suicide, and even, if Von Hartmann will, of “cosmic
suicide.” It is perhaps less difficult to create than to annihilate, to
make God than to destroy Him.




