CHAPTER II.

RELIGIOUS METAPHYSICS.

    I. Animism or polydemonism—Formation of the dualist
      conception of spirit—Social relations with spirits.

    II. Providence and miracles—The evolution of the dualist
      conception of a special providence—The conception of
      miracles—The supernatural and the natural—Scientific
      explanation and miracles—Social and moral modifications
      in the character of man owing to supposed social relations
      with a special providence—Increasing sentiment of
      irresponsibility and passivity and “absolute dependence.”

    III. The creation—Genesis of the notion of creation—The
      dualistic elements in this idea—Monism—Classification
      of systems of religious metaphysics—Criticism of the
      classification proposed by Von Hartmann—Criticism of the
      classification proposed by Auguste Comte.


_I. Animism._

[Sidenote: Legitimate and illegitimate metaphysics.]

The upshot of the preceding chapter is that every religion in its
beginning consisted of a mistaken system of physics; and between a
mistaken system of physics and certain forms of metaphysics there
is often no difference but one of degree simply. Magnify some
scientific error, reduce it to a system, explain heaven and earth
by it, and it will be a metaphysics—in the bad sense. Whatever one
universalizes—error or truth—acquires metaphysical significance, and
possibly it is more easy to universalize in this way the false than
the true; truth possesses always a greater concreteness than error,
and therefore offers greater resistance to arbitrary fashioning. Let a
modern man of science develop his knowledge as he will, and enlarge the
circle of known phenomena; so long as he holds vigorously by scientific
methods he will never be able to pass at a bound from the sphere of
phenomena to the sphere of things in themselves. The conscientious
man of science is prisoned within the limits of knowledge, his
thought has no outlet. But let him once break the chain of logic which
confines him, and behold him free. His false hypothesis grows without
obstacle or check from reality; he lands at a bound up to his neck in
metaphysics. The fact is, one may arrive at a system of metaphysics
in two ways—incontinently, by a logical solecism and an exaggeration
of some false premise _ad infinitum_, or by following the chain of
known truth to the point at which it disappears in eternal night, and
by endeavouring to peer into the darkness by the light of hypothesis:
in the first case metaphysics is simply a logically developed mistake
which gains in magnitude what it loses in reality, an illegitimate
negation of science; in the second case it is a hypothetical extension
of truth, in some sort a legitimate supplement to science.

We are approaching the moment when religious physics became transformed
into metaphysics; the period when the gods retreated from phenomenon
to phenomenon, and took refuge ultimately in the supersensible; the
period when heaven and earth first became distinct and separate;
although, to be quite accurate, the distinguishing characteristic of
religion even at the present day is an incoherent mixture of physics
and metaphysics, of anthropomorphic or sociomorphic theories in regard
to nature and to the supernatural. The foundation of every primitive
religion is reasoning by analogy, that is to say, the vaguest and least
sound of logical methods. At a later date the mass of naïve analogies
constituting any one religion is criticised and systematized and
completed by tentative induction or regular deduction.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Primitive metaphysics a fetichistic monism.]

Man, as we have seen, begins by creating a natural society, including
animals, plants, and even minerals, which he endows with a life similar
to his own: he believes himself to be in communication with them in
matters of volition and intention, just as he is in communication with
other men and animals. But in thus projecting something analogous to
his own life, to his power of volition and of his social relations and
responsibilities, into the existence of external things, he does not,
at first, dream of any distinction between the animating principle and
the body which it animates; he conceives as yet no such distinction in
his own case. The earliest stage of religious metaphysics, therefore,
is not a sort of vague monism relative to the divine principle, the
indwelling divinity of things, τὸ θεῖον, as Messrs. Müller and Von
Hartmann affirm, but a vague monism in regard to the soul and body,
which at first are conceived as one. The whole world is a society of
living _bodies_.

[Sidenote: Becomes a dualistic animism. Separate existence of the soul.]

The conception which is most analogous to the preceding is that of
distinct and separate souls animating each its body, of spirits capable
of quitting each its dwelling-place. It is this that historians of
religion mean by animism. What is remarkable in this conception is its
dualistic character. It contains the germ of the opposition between
soul and body. The dualistic conception arises slowly from a number of
naïve analogies. The first are borrowed from the fact of respiration.
Does not one fairly hear the departure of the breath animating a living
body, in what one calls the last gasp? Other analogies are borrowed
from the physical fact of the shadow cast by the sun; one seems to see
the spirit marching side by side with the body, and even changing its
place when the body is motionless. Shadow has played a large rôle in
the paraphysics of primitive peoples; shadows people the other world.
In the third place, during sleep it is incontestable, on the premises
that primitive man has at his disposal, that the spirit sometimes makes
long journeys, for the sleeper often recollects wandering, hunting,
or making war in distant countries, at a time when his companions are
perfectly aware that his body has lain motionless. Fainting also seems
to be a case in which something dwelling in us suddenly leaves and
presently comes back again. Lethargy is a more striking example of the
same thing. Visions in delirium, hallucinations in madness, or even
in dreams, deal with beings who are invisible to others; fantastic
beings who appear to savages as real as any others. Also it is well
known that fools and innocents were regarded, until modern times, as
inspired and sacred. Other nervous maladies—hysteria, “possession,”
somnambulism—add their quota of precision to the conception of a
spirit animating the body, dwelling in it, quitting it more or less at
will, tormenting it, etc.

Thus, by degrees, there arises the conception of a subtle mode of being
eluding touch, and commonly vision even, capable of a life independent
of the body it inhabits, and more powerful than the body. Man comes to
believe himself to be living in a society with beings other than those
who appeal directly and grossly to his senses; he believes himself to
be living in a society of spirits.

[Sidenote: Ghosts.]

That is not all. The problem of death early engaged the attention of
primitive people. They considered it altogether as a physical affair;
they explained it, as Messrs. Tylor and Spencer (following Lucretius)
have shown, by a number of inductions drawn from observations on sleep,
lethargy, and dream. A sleeping body awakes, it seems to follow that a
dead body will awake; that is the line of reasoning. Moreover, the dead
come back in dreams, or in the demi-hallucinations of the night and of
fear. The modern conception of pure spirit is an indirect and later
consequence of a belief in immortality, it is not itself the principle
of it. A cult for the dead, for the manes, as the Romans said, is
partly explicable on moral or psychological grounds, as, for example,
by a prolongation of filial respect and fear, and partly on grounds
altogether material and gross. A cult for the dead rests on a naïve
theory based on sentiment; it is semi-physical and semi-psychological.
The nature of a departed soul has been conceived in very different
ways. Among the Dakota Indians of North America, one’s double goes up
into the air, one’s _third_ rejoins the spirits, one’s fourth and last
soul stays by the body; an instance of a very complicated theory formed
out of elements altogether primitive. In general, the belief is that
the souls of the dead go to join ancestral souls in another world,
which is commonly a distant land from which the tribe has migrated
in former times—affording an example of a social tie which survives
death. The Greeks and Romans believed that, if the body was deprived
of sepulture, its shadow could not penetrate into its proper place of
abode; it remained on earth and haunted the living—a remnant of former
beliefs in the necessity of sepulture and the maintenance of friendly
relations with the society of the dead.[36]

      [36] See the author’s _Morale d’Épicure_ (_Des idées antiques
      sur la mort_) 3d edition, p. 105.

[Sidenote: Analogies between ghosts and living people.]

The dead were to be conciliated by the same means as the living, by
supplications and gifts. The gifts were the same as those which are
acceptable to the living—food, arms, costumes, horses, servants. In
Dahomey, when a king dies, a hundred of his soldiers are immolated on
his tomb as a body guard. Much the same thing was done among the Incas
of Peru. At Bali all the women of the harem are immolated upon the
grave of the defunct sultan. In Homer, Achilles slaughtered his Trojan
prisoners on the funeral pyre of Patroclus, together with the horses
and the dogs of his dead friend. The Fiji islanders used to immolate a
man at the foot of each pillar in the home of a chief, as a guard for
the edifice. In our days, spirits are still so numerous, in the eyes
of certain people, that an Arab, for example, when he throws a stone,
breathes an apology to such spirits as he may strike.[37] The universe
is populated by anthropomorphic societies.

      [37] See Le Bon, _L’Homme et les Sociétés_, t. ii.

[Sidenote: Care of vengeance committed to ghosts.]

It was to spirits that the care of one’s vengeances was confided.
According to Tylor, two Brahmans, believing that a man had robbed them
of fifty rupees, took their own mother and, with her consent, cut off
her head in order that her shadow might torment and pursue the robber
till death. Among the Alfourous of Moluccas children are buried alive
up to the neck, and left there under the scorching sun with their
mouths full of pepper and salt, so that, dying in an agony of thirst,
their souls may go in a state of fury in search of the enemy against
whom they have been sent. It is always some social exigency, some
hatred, some vengeance, some punishment, that leads one to enter into
commerce with spirits.

[Sidenote: Summary.]

In effect, all historical treatises unite to show that animism or
polydemonism has at one time or other been universal. It immediately
succeeded fetichism or concrete naturism, the primitive belief, in
which animating soul and animated body were not distinguished.

A belief in separately existing spirits, or spiritism, as Mr. Spencer
calls it, which contains the germ of the belief in revisitants from
the other world, constitutes the primitive origin of the more refined
metaphysical system called spiritualism. This last system, founded also
upon the notion of the fundamental duality of man, and of every living
being, leads to the notion of a society of spirits.

Let us now consider the inherent necessity under which animism lies of
developing into theism.


_II. Providence and Miracles._

[Sidenote: From ghosts to divinity a single step.]

From the notion of a spirit to that of a divinity is but one step.
It suffices to conceive the spirit as sufficiently powerful and
redoubtable to reduce us in some considerable measure to a state of
dependence. Spirits, manes, gods, subsist in the beginning on an
indistinct sentiment of terror. The instant that spirits can separate
themselves from the body and perform mysterious actions of which we are
incapable, they begin to be divine; it is for this reason that death
may change a man into a species of god.

[Sidenote: Development of notion of special providence.]

Spirits are not only powerful, however; they are also clairvoyant,
prevoyant—they are acquainted with things that lie beyond our
knowledge. More than that, they are benevolent or hostile; they
are related to us in various social or antisocial ways. Here we
have the elements of the notion of divine providence. The second
semi-metaphysical idea, which lies in germ at the bottom of every
religion, is, therefore, this of perspicacious spirits, of favouring
or unfavouring deities, of providences. “This being is well or ill
disposed toward me; he may work me good or harm.” Such is the first
naïve formulation of the theory of divine providence. One must
not expect to find, in the beginning, the notion of a general,
directing intelligence, but simply that of a social tie between
particular voluntary, well-disposed or ill-disposed beings. The notion
of providence, like all other religious notions, was at first a
superstition. A savage, on his way to some undertaking, meets a serpent
and succeeds in his enterprise; it was the serpent that brought him
luck: behold a providential accident! Gamblers at the present time
are quite as superstitious. The fetich theory of providence still
subsists, in the belief in medals, scapularies, and so forth.[38]
Observation inevitably results in the perception of causal relations
among phenomena; the trouble is, simply, that to the primitive mind
every coincidence appears to be a cause; _post hoc, ergo propter hoc_.
Any object that is a party to any such coincidence is a lucky object,
good to have in one’s power, a portable providence, so to speak. Thus
there arises the notion of a destiny, a bias in phenomena toward good
or evil, which imposes itself upon the previously existing conception
of nature as animated or peopled by spirits. The _post hoc, ergo
propter hoc_—that is to say, the belief in the influence of phenomena
immediately preceding or concomitant to the main event, and in the
influence of a present action upon some future event—is the germ of
superstitions both in regard to providence and to destiny. And out of
the idea of destiny, of fortune, of necessity, grows in process of time
the scientific notion of determinism and universal reciprocity.

      [38] A belief in relics, pushed so far by the earlier
      Christians and by so many Catholics to-day, is, too, a sort
      of faith in fetiches or amulets. From the earliest period of
      Christianity the faithful were accustomed to go to the Holy
      Land to obtain water from the Jordan, and gather dust from the
      soil that the feet of Christ had trod, and to break pieces from
      the true cross, which St. Paulin of Nole says, “possesses in
      all its parts a vital force in so much that although its wood
      be every day clipped off by innumerable pilgrims, it remains
      intact.” Relics are supposed not only to cure the body, but
      the soul of those who touch them: Gregory sent to a barbarous
      king the chains that had served to manacle the apostle Paul;
      assuring him that the same chains which had manacled the body
      of the saint could deliver the heart from sin.

      This superstition for relics, common in the Middle Ages, was
      held in all its naïveté by Bishop Gregory of Tours. He relates
      that one day when he was suffering from a pain in the temples,
      a touch from the hangings about the tomb of St. Martin cured
      him. He repeated the experiment three times with equal success.
      Once, he tells, he was attacked by a mortal dysentery; he
      drank a glass of water in which he had dissolved a pinch of
      dust scraped up on the tomb of the saint, and his health was
      restored. One day a bone stuck in his throat, he began praying
      and groaning, and kneeled before the tomb; he stretched out
      his hand and touched the hangings and the bone disappeared.
      “I do not know,” he says, “what became of it, for I neither
      threw it up nor felt it pass downward into my stomach.” At
      another time his tongue became swollen and tumefied; he licked
      the railing of the tomb of St. Martin and his tongue became
      of its natural size. St. Martin’s relics go the length even
      of curing toothache. “Oh, ineffable theriac!” cries Gregory
      of Tours, “ineffable pigment! admirable antidote! celestial
      purge! superior to all the drugs of the faculty! sweeter than
      aromatics, stronger than all unguents together! Thou cleanest
      the stomach like scammony, the lungs like hyssop; thou purgest
      the head like pyrethrig.”

[Sidenote: Systematic subordination among the gods.]

Little by little, by the growth of experience, man achieves the
conception of an orderly subordination among the different voluntary
beings with whom he peoples the earth, a sort of unification of
special providences, a more or less regular organization of the world.
Responsibility for current events retreats from cause to cause into the
distance, from powerful being to still more powerful being; primitive
man still insists on believing that every event is still the sign,
the expression of a volition. Once more his faith is dualistic: he
conceives the world as dependent upon the will of some one or more
superior beings who direct it, or suspend at need the ordinary course
of things.

[Sidenote: Development of belief in miracle.]

It is at this stage in the evolution of religion that the conception
of miracles appears. The notion of miracles is at first very vague in
primitive religions; the period at which this notion begins to become
definite marks the initiation of a further step in the development
of religion. If, in effect, the marvellous has in all times formed
a necessary element in the constitution, it did not possess in the
beginning the same character as nowadays; it was not so definitely
distinguished from the natural order of things. Human intelligence
had not yet distinguished scientific determinism and supernaturalism.
A natural phenomenon! The bare idea is almost modern; that is to
say, the idea of a phenomenon subject to immutable laws, bound up
together with the whole body of other phenomena and forming with them
a single unit. What a complex conception, and how far above the reach
of primitive intelligence! What we call a miracle _is_ a natural
phenomenon to a savage, he sees miracles every hour; properly speaking,
he sees nothing else but miracles, that is to say, surprising events.
Primitive man, in effect, takes no notice of what does not surprise
him (surprise, it has been said, is the father of science), and one of
the immediate characteristics, in his opinion, of what surprises him,
is that it is intentional.[39] That it should be so no more shocks
him, than a paradox shocks a philosopher. The savage is not acquainted
with the laws of nature, he has no notion of their being universal
to prevent his admitting exceptions to them. A miracle is simply to
him a sign of a power like his own, acting by methods unknown to him
and producing effects above the limits of his own capacity. Are such
effects _infinitely_ above his capacity? No such notion enters into the
question; it suffices that they be above it at all to make him bow down
and adore.

      [39] Etymologically, miracle signifies simply surprising. The
      Hindus do not even possess a special word for a supernatural
      event; miracle and spectacle in their language are one. The
      supernatural, that is to say, is for them simply an object
      of contemplation and admiration, an event which stands out
      prominently from the general monotony which attracts the eye.

[Sidenote: Marks a degree of intellectual progress.]

The belief in miracles, so anti-scientific nowadays, marks a
considerable progress in the intellectual evolution. It amounts, in
effect, to a limitation of divine intervention to a small number of
extraordinary phenomena. A conception of universal determinism is, in
fact, beginning to make its appearance. The belief in dualism, in the
separation between spirit and body, becoming constantly more marked,
ends in the belief in distinct and separate powers.

[Sidenote: Conception of God as Providence more essential than that of
Him as First Cause.]

Belief in a power miraculously distributing good and evil, in a
Providence, is the most vital element in religion. The most important
act in every religion, indeed, is propitiation and entreaty; well,
this act is not simply directed toward God as such, but toward God as
a presiding divinity, a power capable of favouring or disfavouring
us. And the great Oriental religions have reached their present state
of perfection without any special effort to make the notion of God
precise, without specially insisting upon any of his distinguishing
attributes except such as are subsidiary to this notion of a Providence
awarding good and evil; and popular fancy hastens to ascribe the
accomplishment of this distribution to genii, to good and evil spirits;
it need go no further, it need not penetrate to the Great Being, to
the infinite, so to speak, to the noumenon, and to the abyss which,
in effect, is to it a comparative matter of indifference. Even in
religions of Christian origin—in especial, in Catholicism, and the
Greek Church—God is not always addressed directly; saints, angels,
the Virgin, the Son, the Holy Spirit, are much more frequently invoked
as mediators. There is something vague, and obscure, and terrible,
in God the Father; He is the creator of heaven and hell, the great
and somewhat ambiguous principle of goodness, and, in some dim way,
of evil. One may see in Him the germ of an indirect personification
of nature, which is so indifferent to man, so hard, so inflexible.
Christ, on the contrary, is the personification of the best elements
of humanity. The responsibility for ferocious laws, maledictions,
eternal punishments, is laid upon the shoulders of the Old Testament
Deity hidden behind His cloud, revealed only in the lightning and
the thunder, reigning by terror, and demanding the life even of His
Son as an expiatory sacrifice. At bottom, the real God adored by the
Christians is Jesus, that is to say, a mediating Providence whose
function is to soften down the asperities of natural law, a Providence
who distributes nothing but good and happiness, whereas nature
distributes good and evil with equal indifference. It is Jesus we
invoke, and it is to the personification of Providence rather than to
that of the first cause of the world that humanity has kneeled these
two thousand years.

[Sidenote: Increasing opposition between notion of Providence and
science.]

A belief in miracles and in a Providence comes, in the course of its
development, into sharper and sharper conflict with a belief in the
order of nature. Man gives himself up to an exclusive preoccupation
with what he supposes to be the means of ameliorating his destiny and
that of his fellows: providential interference with the course of
nature, sacrifice, and prayer are his great means of action on the
world. He lives in the supernatural. There exists always, in the early
stages of every religion, a certain sentiment of evil, of suffering,
of terror; and to correct it the believer takes refuge in miracles.
Providence is thus the primitive means of progress, and man’s first
hope lay in the superhuman.

[Sidenote: Practical evil of belief in Providence.]

Fear of evil, and belief that it can be cured by divine intervention,
were the origin of prayer. A positive religion, even in our days, can
scarcely rest content with the conception of a God who simply sits at
a distance and watches the march of a world which he regulated, once
for all, at the beginning of time. He must absolutely show himself
from time to time in our midst, we must feel the proximity of his hand
ready to sustain us, he must be able to suspend the course of nature to
our profit. Piety requires the stimulus of a belief in the immediate
and present possibility of miracles, in their past existence, in their
present existence even, and in one’s power of invoking them by prayer.
Thus the believer opposes to the conception of ordinary determinism,
as the regulating principle of the external world, a faith in a being
capable at any moment of tampering with it; and he counts upon this
power being exercised, he counts upon invoking it, he puts his hope in
supernatural means not less than in natural means, and sometimes even
to the neglect of the latter.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Miracles not frauds.]

As Littré remarked, the mind may behave in three ways in regard to
miracles: adore them, reject them as a mystification, or explain them
by natural means. Primitive times, Antiquity, and the Middle Ages
adored miracles; the eighteenth century rejected them as impostures
and made game of them. It was then that the theory, that the founders
of religion were impostors simply, was generally prevalent. One of
the most necessary and most serious incidents in the human drama was
simply mistaken for a bit of comedy. It was forgotten that men do not
devote a whole lifetime to falsehood; the theory of imposture was a
psychological as well as historical error. A man—even an actor or a
politician—is always sincere on some side or other; at some period or
other a man inevitably says what he thinks, even if only by mistake.
Even certain palinodes, provoked by self-interest, are explicable by an
unconscious deviation, under the influence of some passion, rather than
by an altogether conscious and brazen determination to deceive; and
even when one lies with all one’s heart, one inevitably believes, or
soon comes to believe, some part of one’s own falsehood. The reproach
of hypocrisy, of comedy and falsehood, has been uttered a hundred
times in the course of history, and it has usually been a mistake.
In the eighteenth century the same men who prepared and achieved the
French Revolution were fond of accusing the prophets and Apostles,
the revolutionists of an early date, of insincerity and fraud. To-day
such an accusation can no longer be sustained against the sacred
books, and the men of the eighteenth century are themselves accused
of hypocrisy. For M. Taine, for example, almost all the leaders of
the French Revolution lie under the reproach of insincerity, and the
very people who sustained them were not, in his judgment, moved by
the ideas which they proclaimed, but by the grossest self-interest.
The fact is, there are always two points of view from which historic
events may be regarded: that of personal interests, which come to the
surface as seldom as possible, and that of the general and generous
ideas which, on the contrary, are complacently given prominence in
public speeches and writings. If it is useful for the historian to
divine the interested motives which contributed to the production of
a historical event, it is irrational to refuse to lend some measure
of credence to the higher motives which justified it and which may
well have lent their influence to that of self-interest. The human
heart is not a one-stringed instrument. The revolutionists had faith
in the Revolution, in the rights which they were vindicating, in
equality and fraternity; they even believed, sometimes, in their own
disinterestedness, as the Protestants believed in the Reformation, as
Christ and the prophets believed in their own inspiration; as even in
our days, by a belated superstition, the Pope believes in his own
infallibility. There is in every faith some element of the naïveté
which a child shows in its little semi-conscious hypocrisies, in its
caresses which mask a demand and its smiles which are the efflorescence
of satisfied desire. But without a certain element of genuineness,
a certain element of real naïveté in the faith of the believers, no
religion could exist, no revolution would be achieved, no important
change would be produced in the life of humanity. Intellectual
affirmation and action are always proportionate: to act is to believe
and to believe is to act.

[Sidenote: But illusions.]

In our days, miracles are beginning to be scientifically explained.
They are phenomena simply; frequently they were witnessed and described
in good faith, but with insufficient knowledge. Everyone is acquainted,
for example, with the biblical miracle according to which Isaiah
“brought again the shadows of the degrees, which was gone down in the
sun dial of Ahaz, ten degrees backward”; indeed the miracle has been
reproduced. Mr. Guillemin[40] demonstrates by geometrical reasonings
that, by inclining the dial slightly toward the horizon, the shadow
may be made gradually to creep a certain distance backward. In the
same way, the successive appearances of Jesus after his burial have
been paralleled by a recent event in the United States: a criminal,
at whose execution all his fellow-prisoners were present, appeared to
all of them successively the next day, or the day after. The latter is
a remarkable instance of collective hallucination, which shows that
a group of individuals living in, so to speak, the same emotional
habitat may well be struck at the same time by the same vision, without
there being, on their part, either conscious or unconscious fraud or
collusion. A third miracle, of an altogether different kind, has also
been scientifically explained: I mean the colouring of the fleece of
the flocks of Laban and of Jacob; the effect was obtained by a process
well-known to the Egyptians, and mentioned by Pliny. Matthew Arnold
believes that the miraculous cures also are not pure legend simply,
that they bear witness to the great influence of mind over matter.
Jesus really did exorcise devils, that is to say, the mad passions
which howled about him. And thus may be understood in their true sense
the words: “What does it matter whether I say, _Thy_ sins are forgiven
thee! or whether I say Arise and walk?” and again: “Thou art made
whole; sin no more, lest a worse thing befall thee.” Jesus himself
must have known, as Socrates and Empedocles did, though even in a more
extraordinary degree, that he possessed a moral and physical power, a
virtue, which he himself did not understand and which seemed to him a
divine gift. He knew himself to be morally and symbolically the healer
of the deaf, the blind, the paralytic, a physician of souls; and the
cures that he wrought in cases of hysteria, more or less temporary but
real, forced him to attribute to himself a superhuman power over the
body also.

      [40] _Actes de la Société helvét. des sc. nat._, August, 1877.

[Sidenote: Usually explicable by the science of nervous phenomena.]

The science of the nervous system, which dates almost entirely from our
days, may be taken as a perpetual running commentary on the history
of miracles. Perhaps a full quarter of the marvellous facts observed
and revered by humanity fall into place within the limits of this
new science. A physician, or observer, in the midst of his subjects
is like a prophet; those who surround him are incessantly obliged to
recognize in him an occult power, which he himself does not understand;
physician and patient, observer and observed, live equally in the realm
of the extraordinary. The facts of partial insensibility, of catalepsy
followed by a reawakening like a rising from the dead, of mental
suggestion taking place even at a distance, all these facts, which are
well known, and are each day becoming more and more explicable, are
even for us at the present moment on the confines of the miraculous;
they are detaching themselves, under our very eyes, from the sphere of
religion, and falling within the compass of science. The observer who
notices for the first time that he can transmit an almost compulsive
command by a look, by a pressure of the hand, and even, it appears
nowadays, by a simple tension of his will, must experience a species of
surprise, even of fright, of almost religious disquietude at finding
himself armed with such a power. He must begin to understand that
the mythical and mystical interpretation of such facts is an affair
of delicate discrimination, that lay beyond the stretch of primitive
intelligence.

[Sidenote: Often by less recondite knowledge.]

Even the miracles which do not belong simply to the less explicable
phenomena of the nervous system tend increasingly to appear to the
historian as having been possessed of some foundation in fact. All
that was subjective in them is the element of the marvellous and the
providential. The miracles really were produced, but in the human
heart; and instead, in any proper sense, of engendering faith they
proceeded from it and are explicable by it. An English missionary[41]
who made a journey in Siberia relates that at the moment of his
arrival at Irkutsk a fire was consuming three-fourths of the town; a
chapel, however, had been spared and the Russian clergy saw in this
fact a miracle; the English missionary explained it very simply by the
observation that the rest of the town had been built up of wood, and
that the chapel was of brick. But the missionary, who denies anything
like providential intervention in the above mentioned case, admits
providential intervention the same day in regard to another point; for
he relates that but for one of his horses having run away he would have
arrived too soon at Irkutsk, and would have had his baggage burned in
the fire, and offers thanks to God because his horse had been inspired
to break the traces. The same natural causes which suffice, according
to this excellent gentleman, to explain why the Russian church was
spared, suffice no longer when the luggage of an Anglican missionary,
the special _protégé_, is involved. Every believer is inclined thus to
interpret miraculously the mercies that have been shown to him. From
the height of a stall or the pulpit of a church one sees the events of
this world at a particular angle; from the stall or pulpit of another
church one sees them at another angle, and for purposes of scientific
verity the events must be looked down upon from the stalls and pulpits
of every church—unless one rejects churches altogether.

      [41] _Through Siberia_, by Henry Lansdell, with illustrations
      and maps; London, 1882.

[Sidenote: Miracles essential to religion.]

Religions create miracles by the very need that they themselves feel
for them, they create them as evidence in their own support; miracles
enter as a necessary element into the process of mental evolution which
engenders religion. The distinguishing mark of the word of God is that
it alters the order of natural phenomena. Mohammedanism alone made its
way in the world without the assistance of visible and gross evidence
in its favour, appealing not to the eyes but to the spirit, as Pascal
would say; and in this respect it may perhaps claim an intellectual
elevation that Judaism and Christianity cannot. But if Mohammed refused
the gift of miracles, with a good faith that Moses seems not to have
possessed, his disciples hastened to force it upon him, and have
supplied his life and death with an appropriate setting of marvellous
legend. Ground of belief must be had; the messenger of God must present
some visible sign by which he may be recognized.

[Sidenote: Prevalence of belief in special providence.]

It is evident that divine providence or protection must have been
conceived in the beginning as quite _special_, and not as acting by
general laws. The course of the world was one continual series of
divine interventions in the natural order of things, and in the affairs
of men; divinities lived in the midst of mankind, in the midst of
the family, in the midst of the tribe. This result may be explained
as due to the very character of primitive humanity. Primitive man,
who is the most credulous, is evidently also the least responsible
of mankind; incapable of governing himself, he is always willing
to abandon himself to the management of somebody else; in every
circumstance of life he needs to share some part of his burden. If a
misfortune happens to him, he relies on anybody or anything rather
than on himself. This characteristic, which has been remarked in a
number of races of mankind, is especially visible in infants and in
infant peoples. They lack patience to follow without skipping a link
in the chain of cause and effect; they do not understand how any
human action can produce any great effect, and are, in general, much
astonished at the disproportion which exists between effects and their
causes—a disproportion which is only explicable in their eyes by the
intervention of some foreign cause. Hence the need, so remarkable in
feeble minds, to discover some other than the real explanation for
a phenomenon; the real explanation is never, in their eyes, truly
sufficient. For a vanquished soldier, the defeat is never sufficiently
explained by scientific grounds; for example, by his own cowardice, by
the ill-management of the men on the field, by the ignorance of the
leaders; before the explanation is complete the notion of treason must
always be added. Just so, if one of the lower classes has an attack
of indigestion, he will not admit that he has eaten too much; he will
complain of the quality of the food, and perhaps even suggest that
somebody has tried to poison him. In the Middle Ages, when there was
pestilence, it was the fault of the Jews; at Naples the people beat the
images of the saints when the harvest is not good. All these facts are
explicable in the same way; an uncultivated mind cannot bring itself
to accept a result which is disagreeable to it, cannot resign itself
to having been unexpectedly disconcerted by the mere brute course of
things, to say with Turenne, when he was asked how he lost a battle:
“By my own fault.” The notion of a special providence allies itself
with his natural disposition; it permits man to wash his hands of all
responsibility, no matter what happens. A result which it would be
too much trouble to foresee, and to obtain by mere natural means, can
always be demanded at the hand of Providence; one waits for it instead
of working for it; and if one is deceived in one’s expectations one
lays the blame on the Deity. In the Bible, kings are never guilty
except toward God, their incapacity is simply impiety; but it is always
easier to be pious than to be capable.

[Sidenote: Belief in Providence tames people for absolute monarchy.]

At the same time that the naïve irresponsibility of primitive people
thus accommodates itself to the providential government of the world,
it accommodates itself no less to the despotic government of a monarch
or of an aristocracy. The principle of despotism is at bottom identical
with that of a supernatural, external providence; the latter also
demands a certain renunciation or abdication in the direction of
events. One lets one’s self go, one confides one’s self to someone
else, and by this means one winks at the cruellest of frauds, the
defraudment of one’s own volition; another wills and determines in
one’s stead. One limits one’s self to desiring and hoping, and prayers
and supplications take the place of action and of work. One floats with
the stream in a state of relaxation; if things turn ill there is always
someone for one to blame, to curse, or to wheedle; if, on the contrary,
things turn out well, one’s heart overflows with benedictions, not to
mention that one secretly attributes some part (man is so made) of
the result obtained to one’s self. Instead of saying, “I determined
that it should be so,” one says, “I asked, I prayed for it.” It is so
easy to believe that one is helping to manage the state, or govern
the earth, when one has murmured two words into the ear of a king
or a god—when, like the fly in the fable, one has simply buzzed an
instant about the great rolling wheel of the world. Propitiatory prayer
possesses a power which is great in proportion to its vagueness; it
seems to be able to do everything precisely because it cannot ever do
anything in especial. It exalts man in his own eyes because it enables
him to obtain the maximum of effect with the minimum of effort. What a
penchant the people have always felt for destiny and men of destiny!
How every appeal to the people, in behalf of men of destiny, has in all
times succeeded in taking the suffrage of the masses! A sentiment of
submission to the decrees of Providence, who is destiny personified,
has been the excuse of every form of indolence, of every cowardly
adherence to custom. And if one carries it to its logical conclusion,
to what else does the indolent sophism of the Orientals amount? It is
true that the precept, “Heaven will aid thee,” is habitually corrected
by the precept, “Aid thyself.” But efficiency to aid one’s self demands
initiative, and audacity, and a spirit of revolt against an unwelcome
course of things; efficiently to aid one’s self one must not say,
“God’s will be done,” but “My will be done”; one must be a rebel in
the midst of the passive multitude, a sort of Prometheus or Satan. It
is difficult to say to one, “Whatever happens, whatever exists, is what
it is, by the irresistible and special will of God,” and nevertheless
to add, “Do not submit to the accomplished facts.” In the Middle Ages
men consoled themselves in the midst of tyranny and poverty by thinking
that it was God himself who was oppressing them, and dared not rise
against their masters for fear they might be rising really against God.
To preserve social injustice it had to be apotheosized. What was really
no more than a human right had to be made divine.

[Sidenote: Personal initiative a defiance of the gods.]

The sentiment of personal initiative, like that of personal
responsibility, is quite modern and incapable of being developed in
the atmosphere of bigotry and narrowness in which man has long lived
with his gods. To say to one’s self, “I can undertake something new;
I shall have the audacity to introduce a change into the world; to
make an advance; in the combat against brute nature I shall shoot the
first arrow, without waiting, like the soldier of antiquity, till the
auspices have been consulted”—would have looked like an enormity to
men of former times; to men who did not take a step without consulting
their gods and carrying their images before them to show the way.
Personal initiative was, on the face of it, a direct offence against
Providence, an encroachment on His rights; to strike the rock as Moses
did, before having received the order to do so from God, would have
been to expose one’s self to His wrath. The world was the private
property of the Most High. It was not permitted to a man to employ
the forces of nature without special leave; man was in the position
of a child, who is not allowed to play with the fire; except that the
reason for prohibiting the child is not the same—we do not prohibit
children from playing with the fire because we are “jealous” of them.
The jealousy of the gods is a conception which has survived till the
present day, although it is incessantly retreating before the progress
made by human initiative. Machinery, the product of modern times, is
the most powerful enemy that the notion of a Providence has ever had to
wrestle with. One knows how the innocent winnowing machine was cursed
by the priests, and looked upon with an eye of hatred by the peasants,
because it imprisoned and employed in the service of man an essentially
providential force—that of the wind. But malediction was useless,
the wind could not refuse to winnow the wheat; the machine vanquished
the gods. There, as everywhere, human initiative carried the day.
Science found itself in direct opposition to the special intervention
of Providence, and appropriated and subdued the forces of nature to
an end, in appearance, not divine but natural. A man of science is a
disturbing element in nature, and science an anti-providence.

[Sidenote: Man practically a domestic animal in the house of the gods:
resulting enfeeblement of character.]

Before the earliest developments of science, primitive man found
himself, as a result of his imagination, in a state of domesticity
in the world, analogous to that to which he had himself reduced
certain animals; and this state exerted a profound influence upon
the character of such animals, deprived them of certain capacities
and endowed them, in turn, with others. Some of them—certain birds,
for example—become under domestication almost incapable of finding
and providing themselves with their necessary food. More intelligent
animals like the dog, who might in a case of absolute necessity rely
upon himself for indispensables, contract nevertheless a habit of
subjection to man which creates a corresponding need: my dog is not
at ease except when he knows that I am near; if anything causes me
to go away, he is restless and nervous; in the presence of danger he
runs between my legs, instead of taking refuge in flight, which would
be the primitive instinct. Thus every animal which knows itself to be
watched and protected in the details of its life by a superior being,
necessarily loses its primitive independence, and if its primitive
independence should be once more restored, it would be unhappy, would
experience an ill-defined fear, a vague sentiment of enfeeblement.
Just so in the case of primitive and uncultivated man: once he is
habituated to the protection of the gods, this protection becomes
for him a veritable need; if he is deprived of it, he falls into
a state of inexpressible discomfiture and inquietude. Add that, in
this case, he will soon provide himself with a substitute; to escape
from the intolerable solitude which doubt creates within him, he
will take refuge in his gods or his fetiches, under the influence of
a sentiment identical with that which sends the dog to take refuge
between the legs of his master. To attain some idea of the force of
such a sentiment among primitive human beings, one must remember that
the surveillance of the gods is much more extended and more scrupulous
even than that of man over domestic animals, or of a master over his
slaves. Primitive man feels his god or his genii at his side at every
step, in all the circumstances of life; he is accustomed to being
never alone, to the presence of someone by him keeping step with him;
he believes that every word that he says and every act that he does
is witnessed and judged. No domestic animal is accustomed to so high
a degree of subjection; he knows perfectly that our protection is not
always efficacious and that we are sometimes mistaken about him, that
we caress him when he ought to be punished, etc. Cats, for instance,
know that man cannot see in the dark: one evening a white cat made
ready to commit an abominable misdemeanour within two steps of me,
not suspecting that its colour would betray it to an attentive eye,
even in the obscurity. Primitive men sometimes practised an analogous
cunning in regard to their gods; they did not yet believe in the
complete sovereignty, in the absolute ubiquity, of Providence. But by
a process of logical development, Providence is ultimately believed
to extend to everything, to envelop one’s whole life; the fear of God
becomes to man a perpetual prohibition against his passions, a hope in
God’s aid his perpetual recourse. Religion and science possess this
much in common, that they result in enveloping us equally in a network
of necessities; but what distinguishes science is that it makes us
acquainted with the real order and causes of phenomena, and by that
fact permits us to modify that order at will; by showing us the fact
and nature of our dependence, science supplies us with the means of
conquering a comparative independence. In religion, on the contrary,
the mythical and miraculous element introduces an unforeseen factor,
the divine will, a special providence, into the midst of events, and
by that fact deceives one as to the true means of modifying the real
course of things. The instant one believes one’s self to be dependent
upon Jupiter or Allah, one ascribes a greater efficacy to propitiation
than to action; and it follows that the greater one perceives one’s
dependence to be the more completely one believes one’s self to be
without defence against it; the more complete the submission is to God,
the more complete one’s resulting submission becomes to the established
fact. The feeling of an imaginary dependence upon supernatural beings
thus increases the general dependence of man in relation to nature.
Thus understood, the notion of a special providence, of a divine
tutelage, has resulted in the protracted maintenance of the human
soul in a state of genuine minority; and this state of minority,
in its turn, has rendered the existence and surveillance of divine
protectors a necessity. When, therefore, the believer refuses an offer
of emancipation from the dependence which he has voluntarily accepted,
the reason is that he feels a vague sentiment of his own insufficiency,
of his irremediably belated coming of age; he is a child, who does not
dare stray far from the paternal roof; he does not possess the courage
to walk alone. The child who should show a precocious independence,
and should early learn to go its own road, would not improbably become
simply dissipated; his precocity might well be depravity in disguise.
Similarly in history, the irreligious, the sceptics, the atheists,
have been frequently spoiled children, precocious in the bad sense;
their freedom of spirit was only a high form of mischief. The human
race, like the individual, long needed surveillance and tutelage; so
long as it experienced this need it leaned inevitably upon a belief
in a providence external to itself and to the universe, capable of
interfering in the course of things, and of modifying the general laws
of nature by particular acts of volition. Subsequently, by the progress
of science, Providence has been deprived day by day of some of its
special and miraculous powers, of its supernatural prerogatives. By
the evolution of human thought piety has been transformed; it tends
to-day to regard as an object of filial affection what was formerly an
object of terror, of deprecation, of propitiation. Science, enveloping
Providence in a network of inflexible laws, is day by day reducing it
to a state of immobility and, so to speak, paralyzing it. Providence
is becoming like an old man whom age has rendered incapable of
movement—who but for our aid could not raise a hand or foot, who lives
with our assistance, and who, nevertheless, is only the more beloved,
as if his existence became to us more precious in proportion to its
uselessness.


_III. Creation._

[Sidenote: Conception of creation dualistic.]

After the notion of Providence one must deal, in running through the
metaphysical principles of religion, with the notion of a creator,
which has acquired in our days an importance that it did not possess
formerly. This conception, like that of the soul and of a special
providence, presented itself originally under the form of dualism. Man
conceived in the beginning a god as fashioning a world more or less
independent of himself, out of some pre-existing material. It was only
later that this crude dualism was refined into the notion of creation
_ex nihilo_, which represented the traditional duality as produced by
a primitive unity—God, who had at first existed alone, created out of
nothing a world distinct and separate from himself.

[Sidenote: Conception of creation natural.]

The following conversation, of which I can guarantee the authenticity,
affords an example of naïve metaphysic. The two interlocutors were
a little peasant girl, four years old, who had always lived in the
country, and a young girl from town, the daughter of the owner
of the farm. They had gone out into the garden where a number of
flowers had opened that morning; the little peasant girl admired
them enthusiastically, and addressing her companion, for whom she
had long entertained a species of cult: “It is you, mistress, is it
not,” she cried, “who makes these flowers?” This interrogation did
not embody an incipient speculation in a sphere of physics; the child
simply attributed an unknown power to a visible and palpable being.
Her mistress replied laughingly, “No, not I. I haven’t the power.”
“Who does it then?” the child asked. One perceives the persistence,
in primitive intelligences, of the impulse to explain things by the
direct action of somebody’s volition, the impulse to place somebody
behind every event. “It is God,” replied the elder girl. “And where
is God? Have you ever seen Him?” No doubt the little peasant, who
regarded the city as a very surprising place, supposed one might meet
God there, face to face, and God did not, as yet, represent to her
anything supra-physical. But how admirably disposed she was for the
reception of a more or less illegitimate metaphysic! “I have never
seen God,” replied her mistress, “and nobody has ever seen Him. He
lives in heaven, and at the same time lives among us; He sees us and
hears us; it is He who made the flowers, who made you and me, and
everything that exists.” I shall not report the child’s replies, for
I believe that she was too much astonished really to say anything.
She was in a situation such as a savage finds himself in when a
missionary comes and talks with him about God, the supreme being,
creator of all things, a spirit existing without a body. Savages
sometimes refuse to understand, and point to their heads and declare
that they suffer; sometimes they believe that one is making fun of
them, and even among our children there is a good deal of persistent
and mute astonishment, which wears off slowly with the lapse of
time. What is striking in the little conversation reported above,
is the way in which the metaphysical myth necessarily rises out of
the scientific error. An inexact induction first gives rise to the
notion of a human being acting by means to us unknown and mysterious;
this notion, once obtained, fastens upon the body of such and such
an individual, the object antecedently of especial veneration; from
this individual it retreats in course of time to another more distant,
from country to town, from earth to heaven, from visible heaven to the
invisible essence of things, the omnipresent substratum of the world.
Simultaneously with this retrograde movement, the being endowed with
marvellous powers becomes increasingly vague and abstract. The human
intelligence, in developing its conception of the supernatural being,
employs what theologians call _the negative method_, which consists
in abstracting one known attribute after another. If men and races of
men have always followed this procedure, it is less because of any
refinement of thought on their part than in obedience to the pressure
of an external necessity. Directly as man becomes acquainted with
nature, he sees all traces of his god fly before him; he is like a
miner who, thinking that he recognizes the presence of gold in the soil
beneath his feet, begins to dig, and finding nothing, cannot make up
his mind to believe that the earth contains no treasure; he sinks his
shafts deeper and deeper in an eternal hopefulness. Just so, instead
of breaking with his gods, man exiles them to a greater and greater
distance as he advances in knowledge. What nature excludes tends to
take on a metaphysical character; every error which persists in spite
of the progress of experience takes refuge in heaven, in some sphere
more and more completely inaccessible. Thus the somewhat gross origins
of religions are not irreconcilable with the refined speculations
incident to their period of development. Human intelligence, once
launched into infinite space, inevitably describes a wider and wider
orbit about reality. A mythical religion is not a completely rational
and _a priori_ construction; it always rests upon alleged experience,
upon observations and analogies, which are tainted with error; it is,
therefore, false _a posteriori_, and therein lies the explanation of
the invincible and increasing divergence between myth and verity.

[Sidenote: God conceived as orderer rather than as creator.]

In the beginning men conceived God rather as an orderer of the
universe, as a workman fashioning a pre-existing matter, than as a
creator; we find this notion still predominant among the Greeks.
Its genesis was probably something as follows: Whoever supposes the
existence of God regards the world as an instrument in His hands; God
employs the thunder, the wind, the stars for purposes of his own, as
man employs his arrows and his hatchet. Does it not naturally result
from that conception that God fashions these marvellous instruments
just as man fashions his arrows and hatchet? If the little peasant
girl, of whom we spoke above, had not seen her father repair or make
his tools, make a fire, make bread, till the soil, she would never
have asked who made the flowers in the garden. The child’s first
_why_ involves the following reasoning: Somebody has acted on this
thing as I myself have acted on such and such another thing; who,
then, in the present case is it? The abstract notion of causality is
a consequence of the practical development of our own causality; the
greater the number of things that one can make one’s self, the greater
one’s astonishment at seeing things done by other people with greater
rapidity or on a larger scale. The more bound down one is one’s self,
to the employment of tedious artifice, the more one admires what is
produced suddenly by a power which is apparently extraordinary. So that
the notion of a miracle thus more naturally arose from one’s experience
of the practical arts, than, so to speak, from brute experience, and
for the rest contained no element which was contradictory to the naïve
science of the earliest observers. Every question presupposes a certain
kind and amount of action on the part of the questioner; one does
not demand the cause of an event until one has one’s self been the
conscious cause of such and such another event. If man possessed no
influence in the world, he would not ask himself who made the world.
The mason’s trowel and carpenter’s saw have played a considerable part
in the development of religious metaphysics.

[Sidenote: Notion of creation ex nihilo of empirical origin.]

Remark, also, how easy it is, even at the present day, to confound the
word make with the word create, which indeed did not exist in primitive
times. How should one distinguish precisely what one fashions from what
one creates? There is a certain element of creation in fashioning;
and this element sometimes positively assumes a magical character,
seems to rise _ex nihilo_. What a marvel, for example, is a spark of
fire obtained from stone or wood! The Hindus see in it the symbol of
generation. In fire the earliest races of men laid their fingers on
the miraculous. In appearance the pebble one strikes or the dried wood
one rubs to produce a spark is not itself consumed; it gives without
loss, it creates. The first man who discovered the secret of producing
fire seemed to have introduced something genuinely new into the world,
to have ravished the power of creation from the gods. In general, what
distinguishes the artist, properly so called, from the simple workman
is the feeling that he possesses a power which he does not understand,
that he produces in some sense more than he aims at, that he is lifted
above himself; genius is not fully conscious, as simple talent is, of
its resources; it contains an element of the unforeseen, a force which
is not calculable in advance, a creative power; and therein lies the
secret of the true artist’s personal pride. Even in a matter of purely
physical power a superexcitation of the nervous system may place at
one’s disposal an amount of muscular energy one did not suppose one
possessed: the athlete, no more than the thinker, at such times knows
the limits of his own strength and the marvels of which he is capable.
Each of us possesses thus, during certain hours of his existence,
the consciousness of a more or less creative power, of the direct
production of something out of nothing. One feels that one has produced
by force of will a result that one’s intelligence cannot wholly account
for, that one cannot rationally explain. Therein lies the foundation
and in a measure the justification of a belief in miracles, in the
extraordinary power of certain men, and, in the last analysis, in a
power of creating. This indefinite power that man sometimes feels well
up within him, he naturally ascribes to his gods. Since he conceives
them as acting upon the world in a manner analogous to himself, he
conceives them as capable of giving rise to new elements in the world;
and this notion of creative power once introduced continuously develops
till the day when it leads one, from induction to induction, to the
belief that the entire world is the work of a divinity, that the
earth and the stars have been fashioned and created by a supernatural
volition. If man can strike fire out of a stone, why might not God
strike a sun out of the firmament? The conception of a creator, which
seems at first a remote consequence from a chain of abstract reasoning,
is thus one of the innumerable manifestations of anthropomorphism;
one of the ideas which, at least originally, seems to have been rather
paraphysical than metaphysical. It rests at bottom upon an ignorance
of the possible transformation and actual equivalents of forces, owing
to which every apparent creation is resolvable into a substantial
equivalence and every apparent miracle into an exemplification of
immutable order.

[Sidenote: Summary.]

To sum up, the creative power once ascribed to God is in our opinion
an extension of the notion of special Providence, which itself is of
empirical origin. When theologians nowadays begin by establishing the
creation, in order therefrom to deduce a special Providence, they
are precisely inverting the order of things as they appeared in the
beginning. It is only through the continually increasing preoccupation
of abstract thought and metaphysical speculation with the question
of the first cause, that the idea of a creative deity has acquired
thus a sort of preponderance, and constitutes in our day an essential
element in religion. Dualism, as we have seen, is of the essence of
this notion; dualism is the principal form under which the union of
souls and bodies, the relation of a special providence to natural laws,
the relation of creator to created has been conceived. The notion,
however, of a supreme unity running through all things has been caught
more or less vague glimpses of, from remote times down to the present
day. And it is on this notion that pantheistic and monistic religions,
principally those of India, are based. Brahmanism and Buddhism tend to
what has been called “absolute illusionism” for the benefit of a unity
in which the supreme being takes for us the form of non-existence.

[Sidenote: Dangers of effort to classify systems of religious
metaphysics.]

The temptation is natural systematically to class diverse systems of
religious metaphysics and to represent them as evolving, one after the
other in a regular order, conformable to a more or less determinate
scheme; but one must be on one’s guard here against two things: first,
the seduction of a system, with the metaphysical abstractions to which
it leads; second, the pretense of finding everywhere a regular progress
constantly headed toward religious unity. Religious philosophers have
erred in both these respects; Hegel, for example, yielded to the
temptation of imposing upon the history of religion his monotonous
trilogy, of thesis, antithesis, and synthesis. In Von Hartmann the
Hegelian spirit, influenced by Schopenhauer, still survives. We have
seen Von Hartmann borrowing from Max Müller the abstract conception
of a divinity at once unified and multiple, a species of primitive
synthesis out of which historical religions were to arise by a process
of differentiation: out of henotheism, as out of matter still void
and without form, was to arise polytheism, and then by a process of
degenerescence was to arise polydemonism or animism, and finally
fetichism.[42] This order of development, as we have seen, is contrary
to matter of fact.

      [42] “Henotheism,” says Von Hartmann, “rests upon a
      contradiction. Man goes forth in search of divinity, and finds
      gods. He addresses each of these divinities in succession in
      the hope that he may be the divinity sought for, and confers
      upon him a multitude of predicates which call in question the
      divinity of the other gods. Obliged, however, as he is to
      look to different gods for the fulfilment of his respective
      demands he is unable to remain faithful to any one of them;
      he changes his object of adoration repeatedly and each time
      acts toward the god he is addressing as if he were god _par
      excellence_, without indeed himself observing at the time that
      he is denying the supreme divinity of any god by attributing it
      in turn to each of them. What renders the origin of religion
      possible is that this contradiction is not at first remarked;
      a persistent failure to recognize such a contradiction would
      not be possible in the midst of the progress of civilization,
      except in the case of an extreme intensity of religious
      sentiment, which shields all religious subjects from rational
      criticism. Such intensity of religious sentiment neither exists
      in all places nor at all times, and a spirit of intellectual
      criticism, operating intermittently, suffices in the long run
      to render the point of view of henotheism untenable. Two ways
      of avoiding the contradiction in question offer themselves.
      One may maintain the unity of God at the expense of the
      plurality, or, on the contrary, plurality of God at the expense
      of the unity. The first way leads to abstract monism, the
      second to polytheism; and out of polytheism, by a process of
      degeneration, arise polydemonism or animism and then fetichism.”

Fetichism, understood simply as the ascription of life to natural
objects, is primitive. Animism, or the conception of indwelling spirit,
arises subsequently. Polytheism, or the worship of a certain number
of analogous objects, such as the trees of a forest, implies some
distinction between the deity and the forest, whereas fetichism limits
itself strictly to the animation of each particular tree, and finally
henotheism, or the vague conception of an indwelling divinity in all
things, is ulterior and derivative. Monistic pantheism or monism lies
but one step beyond.

[Sidenote: Logically posterior often historically prior.]

Remark also that Von Hartmann, who endeavours to prove that a vague
monism is the primitive form of religion, regards the Vedas as a fair
example of the earliest form of natural religion, traces of which
remain more or less distinctly manifest in all mythologies. But this
is positively to forget that for an anthropologist the Vedas are
quite modern compositions, and that Hindu literature belongs to a
period of high refinement and civilization. Monistic metaphysics may
be the ultimate goal toward which all religions tend, but it is at
least not the point of departure. Finally, Von Hartmann endeavours to
establish the fact of a certain logical order in religious development,
a _progress_. This progress does not exist in history nor anywhere
outside of the abstract system constructed by Von Hartmann; it is
dialectic, not historic. The divers religious points of view have often
coincided in history; and sometimes a logically superior point of view
has even preceded an inferior.

[Sidenote: Comte’s classification logical, not psychological.]

Another classification, not less open to suspicion than that of Von
Hartmann, is the celebrated Comtist progression from fetichism to
polytheism and from polytheism to monism. In this classification the
framework no longer consists of metaphysical abstractions, but of
numbers. But numbers also possess their artificial and superficial
side; they do not express the most fundamental aspects of religion.
In the first place, it is a matter of extreme difficulty to perceive
any radical difference between naturistic fetichism and polytheism.
Multiplicity of divinities is a characteristic common to both. The
sole difference that Comte was able to establish is that in polytheism
a whole class of objects, for example all the trees of a forest, or a
whole class of phenomena, as lightning and storm, is represented by
one divinity. But this species of abstraction and generalization is
much less important, much more exterior and purely logical, than the
psychological and metaphysical progression from a grossly unitarian
and concrete naturism to a dualistic animism. This latter line of
development is in the direction of naturalistic and spiritualistic
metaphysics, which possess a deeper significance than a system of
mathematical enumeration and logical generalization. The passage from
polytheism to monotheism is also conceived by Comte somewhat too
mathematically. Polytheism early resulted in a certain hierarchy and
subordination of the whole body of individual deities to some one
powerful god: Jupiter, Fate, etc. On the other hand, monotheism has
always provided some place for secondary divinities—angels, devils,
spirits of every kind, to say nothing of the trinitarian conception of
the Godhead itself. Mathematical terms, in this connection, obscure
profound problems which belong really to metaphysics and to morals.

[Sidenote: The real classification.]

From the point of view of metaphysics the great question is that of the
relation which exists between the divinity and the world and mankind;
a relation of immanence or of transcendence, of duality or of unity.
We have seen that, from this point of view, religions have passed from
an extremely vague primitive immanence to a relation of transcendence
and of separation, ultimately to return, sometimes with comparative
rapidity (as in India), sometimes very slowly (as among Christian
nations), to the notion of an immanent God in whom we live and move and
have our being.

[Sidenote: Progressive encroachment of deterministic conception.]

Along with this difference of conception there necessarily goes
a corresponding difference in the parts ascribed respectively to
determinism and natural law, and to the arbitrary will of the deity or
deities. That is to say, the conflict between religion and science,
or what will one day become such, exists implicitly in the earliest
conceptions of the world. In the beginning, to be sure, there being
no such thing as science properly so called, no conflict is apparent;
one explains whatever one chooses as the product of an arbitrary will,
then little by little the regularity, the determinism, the orderliness
of certain phenomena are remarked. Divinities cease to be absolute
princes, and become more or less constitutional sovereigns. Therein
lies the law of religious evolution, which is much more significant
than the law promulgated by Comte; humanity tends progressively to
restrict the number of the phenomena with the natural course of which
the gods are supposed to interfere; the sphere of natural law tends
progressively to become more and more nearly all-comprehensive. The
Catholic nowadays no longer believes that a goddess brings his crops to
maturity or that a particular god launches a thunder-bolt, though he
is still profoundly inclined to imagine that God blesses his fields or
punishes him by destroying his house by a flash of lightning; arbitrary
power tends to be concentrated in a single being placed on a height
above nature. At a still further stage in the course of evolution, the
will of this being is conceived as expressed in the laws of nature
themselves without allowing for the existence of miraculous exceptions;
Providence, the Divinity, becomes _immanent_ in the scientific ordering
and determinism of the world. In this respect the Hindus and the Stoics
are far in advance of the Catholics.

[Sidenote: Unification of creeds incidental to that encroachment.]

The absorption of the respective worships of a number of deities into
the worship of one deity has been an incidental consequence of the
progress of science. Humanity began by offering up a multitude of
special services to a multitude of special gods. If one were to believe
certain linguists, it is true, natural objects—the sun, fire, the
moon—were at first adored as impersonal entities; their subsequent
personification being due to a too literal interpretation of figurative
impressions habitually employed to designate them, such as Ζεύς,
the brilliant. Certain myths, no doubt, did spring from this source:
_nomina, numina_; but humanity does not usually progress from the
general to the particular. Primitive religion, on the contrary, was
at first subdivided or rather simply divided into cults of all sorts;
it was only later that simplifications and generalizations arose. The
passage from fetichism to polytheism and to monotheism was simply the
consequence of a progressively scientific conception of the world; of
the progressive absorption of the several transcendent powers into a
single power immanent in the laws of the universe.

[Sidenote: Development of sociological and moral sides of religion.]

More important still than this metaphysical and scientific evolution
of religion is the sociological and moral evolution. What is really
important in a religious theory is less the conceived relation of the
primary substance to its manifestations in the universe, than the
attributes ascribed to this substance and to the inhabitants of the
universe. In other words, what sort of a society does the universe
constitute? What sort of social relation more or less moral between
the various members are derivable from the fundamental tie which binds
them to the principle which is immanent in all of them? That is the
great problem for which the others simply constitute a preparation. The
problem is to interpret the true foundation of beings and of being,
independently of numerical, logical, and even metaphysical relations.
Well, such an interpretation cannot be other than psychological and
moral. Psychologically, power was the first and essential attribute of
divinity, and this power was conceived as redoubtable. Intelligence,
knowledge, foreknowledge, were only at a later period ascribed to
the gods. And finally, divine morality, under the twofold aspects of
justice and goodness, is a very late conception indeed. We shall see it
develop side by side with the development of the systems of practical
morals that are incident to religion.




