CHAPTER III.

THEISM.

REVIEW OF THE PRINCIPAL METAPHYSICAL HYPOTHESES WHICH WILL REPLACE
DOGMA.

    I. Introduction—Progress of metaphysical
      hypothesis—Metaphysical hypotheses destined to increasing
      diversity in details, and increasing agreement on essential
      points—Importance of the moral element in metaphysical
      hypotheses—The part played by conscience in human morality
      will not diminish, as Mr. Spencer says—Sympathetic groups
      under which divers systems of metaphysics will be ranged.

    II. Theism—1. Probable fate of the creation hypothesis—The
      author of the world conceived as a prime mover—Eternity
      of movement—The author of the world conceived as a
      creator properly so called—Illusion involved in the
      conception of nothing—Criticism of the creation hypothesis
      from the point of view of morals: the problem of evil
      and of the responsibility of the creator—Attempts
      to save optimism—Hypothesis of a God creating free
      agents, “workmen” and not “work”—Reciprocal determinism
      and the illusion of spontaneity—Immorality of the
      temptation—Hypothesis of the fall, its impossibility—God
      the tempter—Lucifer and God—2. Probable fate of the
      notion of Providence—Hypotheses to explain a special
      Providence and miracles thus insufficient—Hypothesis of
      a non-omnipotent God proposed by John Stuart Mill—The
      God of Comtism—Religion should be not solely human but
      cosmic—The fate of the philosophical idea of God—Rational
      religion proposed by the neo-Kantians—Ultimate
      transformation of the notion of Divinity and of
      Providence—Human Providence and progressive Divinity in
      the world.


_I. Introduction—Progress of metaphysical hypothesis._

[Sidenote: Trend visible in metaphysical speculation.]

To say that humanity, in its search for a plausible explanation
of the world, finds itself in the presence of a great number of
hypotheses among which it must choose does not mean that these
hypotheses should be regarded with a benevolent neutrality, that they
are equivalent in the eyes of reason. Far from it: we believe that
metaphysical hypotheses already are following a certain general
direction and will continue to do so in the future. Our conception
of the unknown will become precise as our knowledge of the knowable
becomes complete. Even morals, which vary so markedly from country to
country, tend to approach a single type and to become identical among
all civilized peoples. The same may be said of the practical part of
all religions. Rites become every day simpler, and dogmas do the same,
and metaphysical hypotheses will do the same. By the progress of human
thought, the avenues that lead to truth will be better known. We regard
it as certain, for example, that all effort will be abandoned, if it
has not been abandoned already, to conceive mankind’s ideal as embodied
in the jealous and evil God of the Bible.

[Sidenote: Number of metaphysical hypotheses not destined to decrease.]

The angle at which different human beings look out upon the ideal
will continually diminish; and as the angle diminishes, the power of
vision will increase, and this unexpected result will follow: that
metaphysical hypotheses concerning the world, and its destiny will
never be less numerous nor less varied, in spite of the increasing
convergence. Human thought may even become more personal, more
original, fuller of delicate distinctions, and at the same time less
inconsistent as one passes from mind to mind. As mankind approximates
the truth its details will become more various, and the beauty of
the whole more marked. An approach to certitude augments the dignity
and probability of the possible hypotheses without diminishing their
number. Astronomy, for example, has increased the sum of the known
truths about celestial bodies and at the same time multiplied the
number of possible hypotheses concerning them; the most definite
knowledge may thus be the most fertile in views of every sort, even
of obscure ones. As the human mind progresses it will see the aspects
of nature diversify and the laws of nature unify. This evening from
Sermione, the peninsula dear to Catullus, I saw on the surface of Lago
di Garda the reflection of as many stars as I could have seen had
I lifted my eyes to heaven. Each star reflected in the lake was in
reality nothing but a brilliant drop of water, close to my hand; each
of the stars in heaven is a world separate from me by an infinite
reach of space; the stars of heaven and of the lake were, however, to
me the same. The real distance of things and the depth of the universe
escape the human eye. But science corrects the eye, measures distances
at their just worth, probes ever deeper into the vault of heaven,
distinguishing objects from their reflections. Science takes account
at once of the place of the ray in the water and of its origin in the
sky. It will perhaps one day discover, in an infinitely magnified
expanse of thought, the primitive and central spring of light which as
yet communicates with us only by reflection and broken rays and flying
scintillations from some unstable mirror.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Moralism.]

Since the Stoics and Kant, metaphysical hypotheses have come to be
regarded from a new point of view. What to-day has come to be the
great charm of such hypotheses is that they endeavour to lend a moral
significance to the world, to impress upon the course of universal
evolution a direction conformable to that of our conscience as
affectionate and sociable beings. The future history of religion may
be summed up in this law: that religious dogmas, transformed at first
into simple metaphysical conjectures, reduced later to a certain number
of definite hypotheses, among which the individual made his choice on
increasingly rational grounds, ultimately came to bear principally on
the problem of morals. Religious metaphysics, in effect, will result in
a transcendental theory of universality, an ideal sociology embracing
in its sweep all the beings that constitute the universe; and this
sociology will be founded, not upon physical inductions, like that
of the earliest religions, nor upon ontological inductions like that
of the first system of metaphysics, but upon the moral conscience of
mankind. Animism, theism, pantheism, are destined to fall under the
domination of what may be called moralism.

[Sidenote: Increasing interest in moralism.]

Such diverse solutions as may be given of the moral problem thus
understood will always interest mankind, but they will occupy a
smaller and smaller place in its practical life; they will lose the
extraordinary influence that religions have often possessed over
the conduct of men. As society progresses the moral agent will find
less and less need to appeal for support in the conduct of life to
metaphysical hypotheses and systematic uncertainty. Positive morality
will more and more completely suffice for the ordinary exigencies of
life. Generosity of heart will be less dependent on the intelligence
for its adventurous impulses; it will produce them unassisted.
Metaphysical speculations will tend to become, like the highest
æsthetic products, a luxury; they will be sought for their own sakes,
and for the general elevation of mind that they bestow, rather than for
guidance in particular matters of conduct. The destiny of the world
will interest us quite apart from any question of our own destiny, and
our voyages into the unknown will be prompted not by selfishness but by
disinterested curiosity.

[Sidenote: And in reflective rectitude.]

We do not believe, however, with Mr. Spencer that the part to be
played by the reflective conscience in human life is destined to
diminish, nor that man will come to do what is right in obedience to
a blind instinct—to rush into the fire or throw himself into the
water to save the life of a fellow-creature almost as irreflectively
as he would lift his hat to a friend in the street. On the contrary,
man will become more and more reflective and philosophical in all
things, and among others, in regard to the directing principles of
his conduct. And there is no room in all this for the belief that the
dissolving influence exercised by reflection upon primitive instincts
will seriously hinder the growth of the social instinct. Intelligence
paralyzes instincts only when it is obliged to oppose them, when it
does not justify them, when it aims really at displacing them.[129]
But speculative thought will always justify social instinct, even
considered purely from the scientific and positive point of view. As
we have shown, the most extraordinary manifestation of the social
instinct, devotion, belongs to the general law of life, and does not
in the least possess the abnormal character that has sometimes been
attributed to it; to run a risk for someone else is not to be purely
unselfish, for one is attracted by the sublimity of danger and of risk,
and a capacity for this attraction has been developed and rendered
powerful by natural selection in the higher species of the animal
kingdom; the desire to expose one’s self is almost normal in a morally
well-constituted individual. In morals as in æsthetics sublimity is
allied to beauty.[130] The speculative instinct will, therefore,
not counteract the social instinct; it will rather fortify it, and
human disinterestedness generally, for speculation itself is the most
disinterested act of the mental life. Generally speaking, reflective
conscience is always more disinterested than irreflective action, which
is typified in reflex action; it is less directly useful to life on
its simplest terms. Parallel to the development of conscience and of
speculative intelligence there goes always a development of our moral
activity. The more truly intelligent a human being is the more active
he is; and the more active he is, the less self-sufficing he becomes,
the greater his need to live for someone else. Antisocial beings are
almost always mentally and physically dawdlers, who are incapable of
continuous mental or physical labour. Activity of mind must inevitably,
therefore, indirectly fortify the moral instincts. Sociality is
developed by thought.

      [129] See upon this point the author’s _Problèmes
      d’esthétique_, p. 139 (_De l’antagonisme entre l’esprit
      scientifique et l’instinct_.)

      [130] _Esquisse d’une morale sans obligation_, p. 215.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Possible to classify the diverse systems of future.]

Although by the progress of analysis the complication of the great
mental and moral hypotheses must increase, it is possible, even at
the present day, to foresee the main synthetic groups under which the
several systems will be classifiable.

[Sidenote: Present interest in such systems.]

This book is not a treatise on metaphysics: an exposition and criticism
of these systems will not, therefore, here be expected; but their
characteristic spirit, which has also been the spirit of the great
religions, is of interest to us here, and, for us, constitutes their
value. It is this spirit which is at once speculative and religious,
in the true sense of the word, that it is important, accordingly, to
elicit, and that wholly without dogmatical or polemical aim of any
kind. Absolute sincerity, impersonal and passionate sincerity, is
the first duty of the philosopher. To arrange the world according to
one’s personal preferences, to be on the lookout, not for the most
probable, but for the most consoling hypotheses, is to resemble a
merchant who should count his credits only when he is making up his
books and should indulge in none but consoling additions. The strictest
probity is demanded of him who balances the great book of life; the
philosopher should hide nothing either from others or from himself. We
shall endeavour, therefore, to set forth, what are in our judgment the
diverse aspects under which the knowable as a whole, and therefore also
the unknowable, or if you prefer, the great unknown, present themselves
to-day. We shall endeavour to interpret the great metaphysical systems
sympathetically, without, however, any illusions in regard to their
incompleteness and their errors. In a certain church in Verona sacred
texts are inscribed on the marble slabs of which the floor is composed;
they interpret and complete each other, and, however obscure at first,
gradually become plain as one advances under the high arched roof; thus
it is in life: the religious and philosophical beliefs in the midst
of which we live seem to us at first enigmatical and mysterious, we
trample them under foot without understanding them; but, as we advance,
we discover their hidden meaning, their naïveté, and their profoundity.
At every step in life a new perspective into the heart of humanity is
thrown open to us; to live is to understand, and to understand is not
only to tolerate but to love. Such love, however, is not incompatible
with clearness of vision, nor with an effort to transform and
ameliorate the beloved object; on the contrary, a really active love
ought to be, more than all else, a desire for transformation and for
progress. To love a being or a belief is to seek to make it better.


_II. Theism._

[Sidenote: Theism and religion distinct.]

The majority of people scarcely see any possible alternative to such
and such a determinate religion except atheism. The fact is, of course,
quite otherwise. Religious thought manifests itself in a hundred
forms; why should free-thought be restricted to a single conception of
the universe? I have known a multitude of free-thinkers who believed
more sincerely in the existence of God, in the immortality of the
soul, and, in general, in spiritual principles than a great many
professed worshippers. Were they right to do so? Was Voltaire, for
example, who based his affirmation of the existence of God upon the
splendour of a sunrise, somewhat naïve, and inclined to mistake an
emotion for a bit of proof? It makes little difference; what we wish
to set in relief is that faith in a priest is not necessarily part and
parcel of faith in a God, and that the disappearance of the former may
lend an increase of power and of refinement to the latter. No single
philosophic doctrine is to be regarded as standing alone in opposition
to the whole body of religions; religions and philosophies together
are all philosophic doctrines, all hypotheses, and none of them above
discussion. We say to the individual: “Weigh and choose.” And among
these hypotheses we include that of which modern religions constitute
the symbolic expression, theism. If the religious anomy which we regard
as the ideal implies the suppression of everything in the nature of an
external revelation, it does not on that account exclude a subjective
and personal intuition of divinity. Even mystics may find their account
in the religious individualism of the future. Intuition, however, in
metaphysics as in morals, is every day losing ground. The progress
of ideas will result in the gradual triumph of scientific induction
over alleged natural intuition, of probability over faith. Subjective
revelation will disappear as objective revelation is doing, and give
place by degrees to reasoning. Dogmatic theism, like all dogma, is
doomed; but what is purest in the theistic spirit may survive.

[Sidenote: God conceived as prime mover a superfluity according to
modern physics.]

I. Let us first consider the probable fate of the dogma of the Creator,
which belongs to the great Jewish, Christian, and Islamite religions.
Science follows the law of parsimony; nature economizes force, science
economizes ideas. The first economy to be undertaken might well relate
precisely to the idea of the creation. The author of the world may
be conceived as the universal motor. But the conception of cause as
a source of movement, or as a prime motor, is full of contradictions
and is becoming more and more foreign to modern philosophy. For the
conception of a first cause implies a pre-existing state of repose, and
repose is no more primitive and absolute than nothingness. Nothing is
in repose, nothing has ever been in repose. The most motionless atom
in the atmosphere describes in its vibration, according to Clausius,
four hundred and forty-seven metres a second in a space of ninety-five
millionths of a millimetre; it receives during this time four billion
seven hundred million shocks. The vibrating atom of hydrogen describes
one thousand eight hundred and eighty-four metres in a second. Repose
is an illusion of the human mind, and the conception of a divine first
mover is a second illusion based on the first. The eternal movement
that stirred the molecules of the primitive substance, later grouped
them into spheres, and the spheres began whirling of their own accord
in the ether without need of a preliminary push from the sacred beetle
(as the Egyptian legend has it) that rolls his sacred ball, which is
the image of the universe. Where, as Strauss remarked, Newton felt
called upon to assume a “divine first impulse,” and Buffon was obliged
to resort to the hypothesis of a comet colliding with the primitive
sphere and breaking it up into the fragments which now constitute the
earth and the planets, we need invoke nothing but the fixity of natural
laws. Since Kant, Descartes, and Laplace, we possess an approximate
explanation of the formation of the stars, which are alternately
produced and dissolved by the concentration and resolution of material
masses—are born to be “devoured,” as Kant said, in the abyss of
eternity. One and the same cause, resistance of the ether, explains the
agglomeration of nebulous matter into nucleï, and the slowing down of
the motion of the spheres thus formed, and the ultimate fall of these
spheres upon some neighbouring centre of attraction and the resulting
dispersion into nebulæ.

[Sidenote: And with physiology.]

More than that, by the progress of physiology and natural history,
the organic and the inorganic worlds have come to be conceived
as so closely related that a true explanation of the first would
probably include a true explanation of the second. The chasm that once
existed between life and what sustains life has been closed. If our
laboratories do not enable us to catch spontaneous generation in the
act, the reason is simply that their resources are not equal to those
of nature, that they have not the same means at their disposal, that
the so-called primitive beings that we endeavour to produce in the
laboratory are really not primitive. Men of science who have attempted
such experiments resemble the followers of Darwin who have tried to
transform an anthropoid ape into a human being. Nature permits of an
infinite convergence of forces upon a determinate point, that cannot
be realized in a laboratory. More than that, time, which we are always
inclined to neglect, is a necessary factor in the evolution of things;
what is natural is slow. To find the earliest stages of organic life,
as to find the early stages in the formation of a star, we must go far
back into the remote past.

[Sidenote: God conceived as a Creator worse than superfluous.]

If there is no necessity for the conception of God as a prime mover,
is there any necessity for the conception of God as the Creator of
the universe? A creative cause seems to the modern mind less and less
needed for the explanation of the world, for the fact of existence
stands in no need of explanation; what rather needs explanation is
non-existence. Death, repose, are all relative and derived. Death
implies life, and is itself only a provisional stage, an interval
between two metamorphoses. There exists no _punctum mortuum_, no
one really dead point in the universe. It is by a pure artifice of
thought that religions have conceived the universe as beginning in
annihilation, in death (which is a remote consequence of life), in
order to afford an opportunity for the intervention of a creative
power: creation is a resurrection following on a fictitious death.

[Sidenote: Nothingness an aspect of existence.]

The real state of the case is not that existence springs from
non-existence, but that non-existence is a simple aspect of existence,
or rather an illusion of thought. The notion of creation will be more
and more widely displaced by that of evolution and variation. Different
worlds are eternal variations on the same theme, the _tat tvam asi_ of
the Hindus tends to become a scientific variety. A substantial unity
of the world and the solidarity of all the beings in the world will,
undoubtedly, be more and more clearly demonstrated.

[Sidenote: God responsible for evil.]

The creation may be considered, since Kant’s time, as a demonstrably
indemonstrable and even inconceivable hypothesis; but Kant did not
stay to inquire whether the Biblical dogma of the creation will not
tend to appear to us increasingly immoral; a tendency which, according
to Kant’s principles, would suffice to cause it to be rejected in the
future. A doubt, which some thinkers of antiquity felt keenly, has come
to be widely diffused in our days; a Creator is a being in whom all
things find their reason and their cause, and who, consequently, is
ultimately responsible for everything. He is responsible for all the
evil in the universe. As the idea of infinite power, of supreme liberty
of action became inseparable from the conception of God, God was
deprived of every excuse, for the Absolute is dependent upon nothing.
Everything, on the contrary, depends on Him and finds its reason in
Him. In the last resort He alone is culpable; His work, in the manifold
series of its effects, presents itself to modern thought as one sole
action, and this action, like any other, is capable of being sat upon
in moral judgment; the author is to be judged by his work, the world
passes judgment on God. Well, as evil and immorality in the universe,
with the progress of the moral sense, become more shocking, it seems
that to admit the creation hypothesis is to centralize, to concentrate,
all the immorality of the world in one being, and to justify the
paradox: “God is evil.” To admit the doctrine of a Creator is, in a
word, to banish evil from the world to God, its primordial source; to
absolve men and the universe and accuse the author of both.

[Sidenote: Evil of denying the existence of evil to exculpate God.]

There is something still worse than referring the source of all evil
thus to a creative will, and that is, for the purpose of exculpating
the Creator, to deny the evil itself, and to declare that this world
is the best of all possible worlds. Such is the choice that Leibnitz
and the theologians made. Religions are obliged to apologize for
the universe, to profess an admiration for the divine plan; they
hold in reserve excuses for the existence of injustice, and labour
unconsciously to falsify the moral sense, in order to relieve God of
his responsibility.

[Sidenote: Doctrine that physical or intellectual evil are conditions
of well-being.]

Many hypotheses have been devised in the service of optimism to excuse
the Creator, without compromising the moral sense, and mankind’s
instinct for progress. Physical evil (suffering), intellectual evil
(error and doubt), have been declared to be a condition _sine qua
non_ of moral good; which would justify them. Moral evil would thus
remain the sole verifiable evil in the universe, and as moral evil
consists simply in evil intentions on the part of men, men alone, on
this hypothesis, would be responsible. The universe itself, that is
to say, would contain no evil except in the person of the man who is
purposely evil by his own free choice, and the possibility of moral
evil might be considered as a supreme condition of moral goodness,
the latter presupposing freedom of choice, a selection by the will,
and an alternative to be refused. The evil in the universe would thus
be compensated for by morality, suffering would be compensated for by
virtue, mistakes by good will. The world itself would be simply a means
of producing morality and, in its apparent imperfection, it would be
the best world possible, because its apparent imperfection would be
necessary to produce what is best in it.

[Sidenote: Doctrine that the dignity of the world lies in its
spontaneity.]

The world, it has been said, cannot be in every respect absolute,
for it would then be God; it must always be in the position of a
recipient; the less it receives—the more it acts in independence
of external aid, the more it develops from within, and the more it
approaches the Absolute, insomuch that the very poverty of the earth
constitutes its grandeur, since it is the condition of its real
wealth, a wealth not borrowed from another but acquired by its own
effort. Everything, therefore, becomes transfigured according to this
hypothesis, every suffering becomes a merit; God wished to create the
most spontaneous world possible, that is to say at bottom to create
as little as possible, to leave as large an initiative as possible to
his creatures. _Laissez faire_ is God’s device, as it is the device of
all good government. A small result, but obtained by spontaneity, is
superior to a greater result obtained by mechanical artifice. “Divine
art,” says a philosopher, in commenting on some doctrines of Plato,
“is infinitely superior to human art; it creates individuals who are
ends unto themselves and self-evolved. These individuals are not, as
Leibnitz believed, automata ... true perfection is autonomous. If God
is only a demiurge, he may be accused, and ought to be accused, of
being a bad workman. Is the world not full of unsuccessful attempts,
of unfortunate combinations, of ends either missed altogether or ill
achieved? The critics of Providence will always have enough to say, but
these unfinished sketches are the work not of God but of his creatures,
of the forces and individual souls that he has set in operation. In a
word God is not a workman who produces works, but a workman who creates
workmen.”[131] This formula sums up in a striking manner what may be
called transfigured optimism. The new hypothesis does not deny evil,
but, on the contrary, hastens to admit it; but by converting evil into
a consequence of spontaneity, it subordinates it to good itself, makes
it labour in the service of its opposite; the most fragmentary sketch
becomes respectable when it is a step, and a necessary step, toward a
masterpiece.

      [131] A. Fouillée, _Philosophie de Platon_, t. ii. p. 639. See
      also M. Secrétan, _Philosophie de la liberté_, and Vallier,
      _L’Intention morale_.

[Sidenote: Criticised.]

The hypothesis in question is certainly one which, within the realm of
theism, may well continue to be long the most plausible. It gives rise,
however, to a great many difficulties. In the first place it assumes
the superiority of what is spontaneous to what is not; of what, so to
speak, does itself, as compared with what is done. Be it so, but in
what respect can beings in this world be said to lead a spontaneous
existence; in what respect can I be said to lead a spontaneous
existence? Am I not the result of a multitude of causes? I was born
and am maintained by the consilience of a multitude of little cellular
or atomic volitions. Should I be less than I am if I were the result of
a single volition, and that a divine volition? Over and above myself
there always exist my antecedents, the causes of me; my true cause does
not lie within the limits of myself: what difference does it make to
me, therefore, whether those causes lie within the universe or beyond?
Whether the world is the more or less harmonious work of a multitude of
blind spontaneities or the work of a single intelligent will, neither
diminishes nor increases the value of any given individual that is the
product of the world. My ancestors are indifferent to me the instant I
become dependent upon ancestors at all. Should the statue of Pygmalion
reproach the sculptor with having made it beautiful, and having made it
with his own hands, and definitively fashioned it for life? Providing
it lives and is happy, it matters little whence its life comes.
Obscurity lies behind, light and life lie before, and it is forward
that one’s face is set.

[Sidenote: Results in determinism.]

In the new Platonic hypothesis, transfigured as above, the organization
of the individual always becomes, in the last resort, the work of a
reciprocal determinism. According to the ordinary hypothesis, it is
the work of a single, absolute, determining will; but the absolute or
relative character of the determining principle in nowise affects the
nature of what is determined. The actual world is no more passive,
if it is produced directly by the operation of the first cause, than
if it is produced indirectly by the intermediation of a multitude
of derivative causes, even if these causes present individually the
character of spontaneity. After all, since the individual must always
be solidary, solidarity between it and divine perfection is preferable
to solidarity with derivative imperfection.

[Sidenote: And contradicts itself.]

There is, however, in the Platonic and Aristotelian notion of
spontaneity an element of profundity and of verisimilitude, but it
leads precisely to the refutation of the doctrine of creation: once
carry the hypothesis of the spontaneity of existence to its ultimate
conclusion, and the original fund of existence must be impoverished
until nothing but nude unqualifiable substance be left; but that is to
say, one must go back to Aristotle’s pure force, to Hegel’s pure being,
which is identical with not being; the masterpiece of spontaneity
would be self-creation. The instant such a spontaneity is possible God
is a superfluity; it is easier to say that becoming arose out of the
identity of being and not being, or rather that becoming is eternal on
its own account. Becoming thus becomes God and theism becomes atheism
or pantheism.

[Sidenote: Summary.]

To sum up, the Creator unable to create bare, virtual substance, must
have created beings endowed with some real quality; but, if so, they
are once for all his works and not simply independent workmen. More
than that, such a substance with such qualities once created, such and
such effects necessarily follow; qualities are determinations which
determine subsequent determinations in their turn. Behold therefore the
present, big with the future. The world becomes a determined succession
of “works” which develop fatally from their earliest stage.

[Sidenote: Doctrine that God has created beings free to choose
criticized.]

M. Secrétan will tell us that God simply created free wills but not
substances; but it must be confessed that these free wills have been
immersed in a deterministic universe which leaves them little liberty
of action. Why, therefore, did He not create us freer and still
freer and as free as Himself? But we should have been gods, it is
objected:—so much the better, might be replied; there could not be
too many gods; we do not see why God should have reduced himself to
a unity, “as if the laws of number constituted a limitation of His
power.”[132] It does not appear why the Creator should be unable to
create a double of Himself; why He should be obliged to hand on the
divine life, that He wishes to share, on lower terms only; we do not
see why God’s productivity should involve a certain degeneration.

      [132] M. Fouillée has effectively stated this in his _Systèmes
      de morale contemporains_, where he in some measure attacks the
      hypothesis that he had incidentally proposed in his commentary
      on Plato.

[Sidenote: A maximum of liberty.]

In any event, in default of other attributes, we ought to be given the
maximum of possible liberty; admitting that we could not be created
free and equal to God, our liberty should differ from His by a minimum.
This minimum, being susceptible of infinite diminution, might become
less than any conceivable difference; it might become, that is to say,
infinitely little, practically zero; but we are far from any such
exalted station, and if God gave us liberty He was very miserly about
it.

[Sidenote: An abuse of language to call us free.]

To say the truth, it is only by an abuse of language that any such
ideal liberty is ascribed to us as is attributed to God, and regarded
as of infinite value. The freedom that religion ascribes to us is
freedom of the will, power to do evil or good, a power the very
consequence of which is irreconcilable with the notion of God. Without
entering upon a consideration of what such a power would be and of its
moral worth, why does our free-will exist in the midst of conditions so
unfavourable to it, so calculated to render it ineffective? The sole
response is the classic theory of the temptation. The temptation, as
an explanation of the world, practically involves the hypothesis of a
father exposing his children, as a means of testing their virtue, to
temptations of vice and crime, and knowing beforehand that they will
succumb. Morally, the conception is simply inadmissible; is worthy of
the distant times when hearts were harder than they are to-day. More
than that, the only beings that could in any proper sense be put to
the proof are truly conscientious beings, for they alone are capable
of entertaining a moral alternative. A reflective conscience is so
rare in the world! By virtue of what temptation resisted are minerals
and vegetables permitted to exist in unconsciousness and sleep, while
animals are torn by the miseries of life and death without being able
to convert their sufferings into a confirmation of the moral will or
amelioration of their lot?

[Sidenote: Doctrine of the fall.]

The supreme resource of Christianity and of religions generally is
the doctrine of the fall, but this explanation of evil as the result
of a primitive imperfection is an explanation of evil by evil. The
fall must have been preceded by some defect in the will itself, or
the will would not have failed. Original sin is not an ultimate; one
does not stumble if there is no obstacle in the way, and one’s legs
are well made, and one is walking in the eye of the Lord. Sin involves
temptation, and the doctrine of the temptation necessarily implies
that God was the first tempter; morally, it was God himself who fell
in the fall of His creatures by Him planned. To explain original
sin, which is the root of all sin, the sin of Lucifer, theologians
have resorted not to a temptation within the realm of sense, but to
a temptation within the realm of intelligence. It was by pride that
the angels fell. Their sin rose thus out of the very centre of their
minds. But pride is incidental only to short-sightedness. Complete
science is aware of its own limitations. Pride, therefore, results from
insufficiency of knowledge. The pride of the angels was due to God. One
may have reasons for wishing to do and for doing evil, but reasons do
not hold in the face of reason itself. If, according to the partisans
of free-will, human intelligence is capable by virtue of pride and
inner perversity of creating out of nothing motives for evil-doing, it
is at least incapable of so doing except in so far as its knowledge
is limited, ambiguous and uncertain. Practically, nobody hesitates
except in the absence of absolute knowledge. There is no such thing
as rationally and consciously flying in the face of reason. Lucifer
was, therefore, by his very nature impeccable. The will to do evil is
borne of the opposition which an imperfect intelligence fancies it
perceives, in a world hypothetically perfect, between its own advantage
and the advantage of everybody else. But if God and his works are
really perfect, such an antinomy between the good of the individual
and the universal good, which even to the best human intelligences
appears provisional only, would _a fortiori_ appear so to one of the
archangels of the intelligence, to the Light-bearer of thought. To
know is to participate in the supreme truth, in the divine conscience;
to possess all knowledge would be to possess, among other things, the
moral insight of God; and how out the midst of all that divinity should
anything Satanic arise?

[Sidenote: God always responsible in the last resort.]

To-day, when a sin is committed among men and it cannot be traced
to any fault of education, or of environment, or of overwhelming
temptation, men of science look for the explanation among the ancestors
of the guilty person, in the conviction that they must be in the
presence of a case of atavism. No such explanation could exist in the
case of God’s firstborn. When the world was young and beautiful and
good, original sin was as wonderful as the first appearance of the
world itself; it was a veritable creation of something out of nothing.
Satan’s creation was superior to God’s. His moral _fiat nox_ was
greater in genius and creative power than God’s _fiat lux_. In effect,
every religious explanation of evil ultimately leads to the ascription
of it to God himself or to a being more powerful than God, and in
both cases equally the Creator is debased. That fact constitutes the
principal reason that compromises the creation hypothesis, properly so
called, for every philosophical mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Special Providence and miracles.]

II. The second notion of theism is that of Providence, which may
be either general or special. Along with the notion of a special
Providence governing the world from without, we have seen that the
notion of miracle must be included. The sole means by which these two
decrepit conceptions can be defended are the following: Conceive,
with Pascal, two worlds, a physical world and above it the moral
world enveloping it, and in places penetrating it. The points of
intersection, so to speak, between the moral and physical world are
miracles. They are not so much breaches in the laws of nature as
affirmations of superior laws. Such is the argument; but we reply
that the so-called superior laws are inevitably, in certain respects,
contradictory to those of nature, in the very respects in reference to
which the miracle has happened. One cannot, for example, suppose that
a saint, precipitated from the height of a rock, resists the law of
gravitation and floats up to heaven, without a manifest contradiction,
so far as natural laws are concerned; without a destruction, indeed, of
those laws. More than that, a moral law is such precisely in so far as
it differs in the lines of its applicability from natural law; just in
so far as a conflict between it and natural laws is inconceivable. Only
a natural law can suspend (and that apparently only) the operation of a
natural law.

[Sidenote: Attempt to limit its activity to the subjective side.]

It has been fancied that the difficulty about miracles may be done
away with by conceiving that Providence acts, not upon the material
universe, but upon human thought, by means of suggestion, inspirations
from on high, providential ideas; but contemporary science has
established so intimate a connection between motion and thought that
it is impossible to distinguish between an influence exerted in the
spiritual and an influence exerted in the material world. It is
hopeless to attempt to immaterialize Providence in order to save it.
The special intervention of Providence must be material or not at all.

[Sidenote: Universal Providence.]

The old conception of miracles and of the supernatural and special
Providence was therefore, in a certain sense, logical. Religions had
not been mistaken; they had perceived that the day Providence became
too exclusively universal religion would be absorbed in metaphysics,
and this result, in effect, will be produced in the future. Religions
have never supported the theory of a general Providence, and it is
certain that if a general Providence sufficed for the abstract reason
of a Malebranche, with his sense of order, symmetry, and law, it would
not suffice for the human heart, with its sense of justice and its
desire, if it is to sacrifice itself for God, to find in the God at
least a defender and a benefactor. A benefit loses its value as such
by being too indirect; humanity has little understanding of justice in
general which treats the individual as a means of securing the good of
the whole and sacrifices him at need—at least, for a time. Charity,
like justice, it seems to him, should be individual and special. A
universal Providence is so universal that no traces of it exist in
the details of life, and in especial in the particular evils and
sufferings which form so large a part of life. The God of Malebranche,
who is incapable of showing His effective benevolence to any of us
individually, is paralyzed, as Louis XIV. was, by His very greatness.
He is the sole being who cannot move without breaking a natural law,
and who consequently is condemned to eternal immobility. The least of
His interventions being a miracle, He cannot employ the means that
other beings employ without derogating from His dignity and His power;
so that God is reduced, if He is to remain God, either to standing
inert or to contradicting our intelligence. By that very fact He ceases
to be lovable, unless one pretend to love Him precisely for what He
cannot do, for the benevolence that He cannot show, as for the prayers
He cannot grant. Pity is the sole sentiment that can be roused in us by
a being who is so good that He cannot wish evil, and so powerless that
He is obliged to see nothing but evil accomplished in the world. No
human misery could be comparable to a divine misery like that. The very
height of suffering must be experienced by a God who should at once
be conscious of His own infinity and should feel the distance which
separates Him from the world which He has created. Only the clear and
profound vision of such a God could penetrate the abyss of evil to the
bottom, and it is He of all beings in the world who would suffer from
an eternal vertigo.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: God’s omnipotence.]

What is most unacceptable in the traditional notion of Providence is
the attribute of omnipotence. In the first place, divine omnipotence
is inconsistent with the existence of evil; in the second place, it
leads logically to the possibility of supernatural intervention in this
world, which, if it is to be of any service, must be special and not
general. To avoid these implications of the conception of Providence,
John Stuart Mill has conceived a superior and divine being who should
not be all-powerful. This being would be the principle of good, acting
in the universe according to natural laws, but hindered and retarded in
his action by these laws themselves, which bring suffering and death.
The existence of such a being once established, religion would be saved
and morality confirmed. Virtue would consist in a sort of co-operation
with this great unknown being, who is struggling against evil. The good
man would feel that he was aiding God and that God was aiding him in
so far as He found it possible.

[Sidenote: Non-omnipotent God.]

This amended conception of Providence is more admissible and more
reconcilable with the real and imperfect world that we are familiar
with. But it must be confessed that the amendment amounts to an almost
complete cancellation. If Providence is to be reduced thus simply to
one of the forces at work in nature, to the force that makes more or
less partially and provisionally for goodness, there is nothing to
distinguish it from the power that makes for evolution, from natural
selection, or from any other beneficent natural law. To personify such
laws is futile scientifically; and, practically, is it so very useful?
Or conceive the being as existent side by side with these laws and
watching their operation, but unable to contravene it; but so to do
is to return to the conception of an ineffective, immobile God. The
prime condition of existence for a God is to be good for something; a
non-omnipotent God soon comes to be an impotent God. The actual world
marks the extreme limits of the power of such a God, and at some stage
in the course of evolution the unconscious forces of nature, leagued
together against the principle of goodness, may succeed in paralyzing
it entirely.

[Sidenote: Is such a God to be conceived as eternal?]

More than that, is a non-omnipotent God to be conceived as eternal?
If not, He is in no very striking respect superior to man. His power
is so slight that He has not even been able to make it very clearly
manifest to mankind that it exists at all. Or if He is eternal, and
eternally present in all things, then His lack of power is growing and
becoming radical. One may in any event congratulate one’s self that a
blind and indifferent universe has, among all possible combinations,
fallen by chance into the one which constitutes our present world; but
a God who has pursued goodness conscientiously through a whole eternity
demonstrates His complete incapacity, if He has succeeded in producing
nothing better than such a miscarriage of the ideal as this universe.
The judgment that may fairly be passed upon the world is altogether
dependent upon the question who made it and who created life; if the
world is self-evolved, it may well appear to us as possessing a certain
beauty, as giving an earnest of better things; but if it is the work
of an intelligent will, present in all things, and persisting in its
designs throughout the eternity of the past, it is inevitable that
one should feel that this volition has not been possessed of great
power, that the importance of the victory is not in proportion to the
duration of the struggle, that such a God does not constitute a very
solid support, and that His existence is a matter of indifference to
the future of the universe. Is such a God more powerful than humanity,
or even so powerful? His eternity is but a proof of voluntary or forced
inaction; far from dignifying Him it debases Him. On the surface of
the earth there are many species of insects which were probably in
existence before the race of man. In the transparent amber that belongs
to tertiary strata may be seen the little corselet of the melipones
caught and held there these past five hundred thousand years. Are these
distant predecessors of the human race on that account more venerable?

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: The religion of humanity.]

John Stuart Mill, a disciple of Auguste Comte, put forth this theory of
a non-omnipotent Providence, conceived on the model of the human will,
with a certain mental reservation; his real meaning was that for many
cultivated men such a being, labouring for goodness, according to the
utmost of its limited power, would be confounded with humanity, taken
as a whole. Humanity is, in effect, according to Comte, a great being
of divine aspirations, to whom one might, with all one’s heart, render
homage; in especial, if one leaves out of account the individuals who
are, properly speaking, only parasites, and do not co-operate for the
production of the common result, whom progress consists precisely in
excluding from society. Religion, on this theory, is the state of
spiritual unity resulting from the convergence of all our thoughts and
all our actions toward the service of humanity. This, as Mill said,
is a genuine religion, quite capable of resisting sceptical attack
and of undertaking the labour of the older cults. According to this
doctrine, Providence is simply humanity, looking after the interest of
its individual members. Such a Providence, regarded as one with human
volition, might assuredly be accepted by any philosopher; it marks, as
we shall see later, the extreme limit of which the development of the
notion of a Special Providence is susceptible, the point at which this
notion and the conception of human morality become one. The precept
to love mankind in God becomes transformed into the precept to love
God in mankind. For a philosopher who identifies God with his ideal,
both precepts are equally true and beautiful. We have ourselves shown
how the religious sentiment in the course of its evolution tends to
become one with the respect and love of humanity, and how religious
faith tends to develop into a moral faith, and a simple and active
hopefulness in the triumph of moral goodness.

[Sidenote: Criticised.]

John Stuart Mill’s and Comte’s ideas are thus shielded against
criticism so long as they are taken in a general and almost
metaphorical sense; but if they are to be interpreted literally and
made the basis of a cult and a religion of humanity, they are puerile
simply. Precisely because Providence can be realized by humanity, the
cult for Providence, with all its ceremonies, invocations, adorations,
which are manifest and ridiculous paganism, must be suppressed. Every
organism exemplifies a certain sort of Providence—even the social
organism, which is the equilibrium of the laws of life. The totality of
an organism is truly admirable, and one may readily understand how any
individual member, if he is endowed with consciousness, might admire
the whole to which he belongs; but how could he make it the object of
a cult? The cellules which constitute me might well be interested in
the preservation of what I call myself and help each other, and by
that very fact help me to that end, but they could not adore me. Love
of humanity is one thing, and idolatry of humanity, or sociolatry,
according to Comte’s term, is another. A really sincere and enlightened
love of humanity is the very opposite of such idolatry; would be
by it compromised and corrupted. The cult for humanity reminds one
of the antique, naïve cult for the family, for the lares, for the
hearth, for the sacred fire kept alive beneath the ashes. To preserve
respect and love to-day does not require a resuscitation of all these
superstitions; respect and love pass from heart to heart without need
of ceremonial as a medium. The Positivist religion, far from being a
step in advance, is a step backward toward the superstitious beliefs
which have been banished because they were useless, and consequently
harmful.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: Religion must be cosmic.]

Religion ought to be not only human but cosmic, and such it will be by
the very nature of the case as the result of reflection. Theism will be
obliged, if it is to subsist at all, to confine itself to the vaguest
possible affirmation of a principle analogous to the soul as the
mysterious origin of the world and of its development. The essential
character of this principle must be that it is not really separate
from the world nor opposed to its determinism. Beliefs in the creation
and in a special Providence will give place more and more to belief in
some spontaneous action, which is essential to beings generally, and
in especial to those who are endowed with consciousness. Religion has
gradually come to be a metaphysics of immanent finality, consisting in
the single general proposition: the world possesses a significance, and
is making toward an end and aim of its own;[133] the world is a society
of beings who may come to discover in themselves an identity of moral
impulse.[134] God is the term by which we designate what renders the
movement of the world toward a state of peace, concord, and harmony
_possible_. And since for human intelligence the possible and the
real[135] are confused, a belief in the possibility of a better world
becomes the belief in something divine which is immanent in this world.

      [133] Kant’s _Kritik der Urtheils-Kraft_.

      [134] See M. A. Fouillée, _Les systèmes de morale
      contemporains_.

      [135] See Aristotle, _Metaphysica_, and Hegel’s _Logik_.

[Sidenote: Theism and atheism insensibly pass into each other.]

Between idealistic theism and atheism the distance may be
diminished _ad infinitum_. Many atheists, language to the contrary
notwithstanding, are already at one with theists, intoxicated with God.
If the actual existence of God be called in question, at least His
progressive existence, the progressive realization of an ideal, the
gradual descent of Christ from heaven to earth, may be admitted. The
presentiment of progress thus becomes merged in a sense of the actual
presence of the divine. The ideal seems to live and palpitate in the
world about one; it is as if an artist’s vision of his work should be
so intense that it should seem to float out of his brain and take its
place upon the untouched canvass before him.

[Sidenote: Theism must be furnished with a new vocabulary.]

The power of words is limited; there are shades and subtleties of
thought that cannot be expressed in language. What possible verbal
reply can be given to questions like those that Marguerite asks of
Faust? “It is a long time since thou wert at mass ... dost thou believe
in God?” “My beloved,” replies Faust, “who would dare to say I believe
in God?” ... “So thou dost not believe in Him?... Who would dare to say
that he does not believe when he listens to the voice of his heart,
when a sense of tenderness and happiness fills his soul? Pronounce
the first words that occur to thee. What difference what thou callest
it: happiness, heart, love, God? The feeling is everything, the word
is vain.” The deist philosopher who holds words cheap seems to the
superficial multitude to be simply a hypocritical sceptic; whereas the
rigid atheist displays the narrowness of a sectary. What is certain is
that the name of God has sometimes been associated with the greatest
of human conceptions, sometimes with the most barbarous. The theistic
hypothesis cannot continue to subsist unless it be freed once for all
from puerile and gross associations.

[Sidenote: Rational religion.]

It is toward this consummation that theism, at its best, and in
particular what Kant calls religion, within the limits presented by
reason, is tending. It merits a special examination.

[Sidenote: Neo-Kantianism.]

The neo-Kantian religion ascribes the supreme place to moral goodness
as the directing principle of every reasonable will. From that
premise the neo-Kantians deduce “moral liberty” as the condition of
goodness. For goodness, in their judgment, is simply freedom conceived
as appearing to itself in its intellectual purity, and dominating
the phenomenal self. Freedom thus conceived occupies a place above
phenomena, which belong essentially to necessity and to determinism.
Kantians found also implied in the notion of absolute liberty, subject
to the condition of time, the attribute of eternity. They say, with
Spinoza: “I feel, and I know that I am eternal; eternity is one with
divinity.” Is it not the eternal that all the nations of men have
adored? I feel God therefore present in myself. He reveals himself to
me in the moral ideal. But is this God that my conscience reveals to me
really myself? Is he each of us, and must one believe that the universe
in the last resort is, as has been said, a republic of free-wills—that
there are thus as many Gods as individuals, and that we are all Gods?
Or does this multiplicity of individuals and of personalities exist
only in appearance, and is the universe at bottom the expression of a
single will? Theism may choose between these two hypotheses—between
a sort of metaphysical and moral polytheism and a sort of monotheism,
and may subsequently arrange to its liking the relations which it may
suppose to exist between the absolute will and the world of phenomenon.
But a belief in a moral ideal does not in the least involve anything
more than a belief in something eternal and divine, as shaping the
universal course of things. One cannot bend it to the service of any
one determinate religion, rather than of any other. Within certain
limits, however, it may lend some support to the moral and religious
sentiments. The most acceptable form of theistic doctrine in the future
will, no doubt, be some moral philosophy analagous to that of Kant.
Kantianism itself, however, is too closely bound up with the notion of
duty, properly so called, and with the categorical imperative. It, like
Judaism, is a religion of law. Instead of the law, one will content
one’s self, in all probability, in the future, with an ideal conceived
as supreme above all things, and as exercising upon our thought and
will the highest attraction that can be exercised by what has been
called the power of an ideal.[136]

      [136] See the criticism of Kantianism in the _Systèmes de
      morale contemporains_, by M. Alfred Fouillée.

[Sidenote: Belief consists not in worship, but in action.]

A belief in the divine will then no longer consist in passive
adoration, but in action. A belief in Providence will no longer
consist in a justification of the existing world and of its evils in
the name of the divine intention, but in an effort to introduce by
human intervention a greater amount of justice and of goodness into
the world. We have seen that the notion of Providence was based among
ancient peoples on the conception of an exterior finality, forcibly
imposed upon things, of a secret and transcendent aim, which the
universe was warped to serve by force of some unknown will. With such
a theory of things, man was incessantly checked in his activity,
since he conceived it to be impossible to prevent the course of the
world from achieving its aim. The world seemed to him to be organized
definitively; he had no hope, except in prayer and miracle; everything
about him seemed to him to be sacred; the inviolability of nature
was both a principle and a consequence of the notion of Providence
thus understood. And, as we have seen, science was long regarded as
sacrilegious. It created both surprise and scandal to see science
intervene in the affairs of this world, disturbing everything, changing
the direction of natural forces, transforming the divine rulers of the
world into humble ministrants to human wants. In our days, however,
science is coming to be more and more held in honour. For the past
century nature has been, to the best of human ability, turned upside
down. Humanity’s long quietism has been succeeded by a feverish
activity. Everybody wishes to lend a hand in the universal mechanism,
and to contribute his part in the modification of the direction of the
whole; everybody wishes to bend things to his own views, and to become,
so far as in him lies, a minor Providence.

[Sidenote: Increasing power of mankind in the universe.]

Just as the individual is coming to feel himself more and more a
citizen of the state, so he is coming to feel himself more and more a
citizen of the universe, inseparably bound by relations of cause and
effect with the universal sum of phenomena. He recognizes that there
is nothing in the world that does not concern him, and that on every
side he can exert an influence, great or small, and leave his mark on
the great world. He perceives with astonishment the extent of the power
of his will and intelligence. Just in so far as his rational faculties
establish a connection between phenomena, they establish by that very
fact a connection between phenomena and himself, and he no longer
feels himself alone in the universe. Since, according to a celebrated
theory, the centre of the world is in each and every distinct being,
it follows that if this centre were exhaustively self-conscious it
would see all the rays in infinite space focussing in it, and all the
chains of phenomenal causation meeting in it, and the effects of its
volition stretching out into infinity, and its every action possessing
an influence upon the totality of things. It would perceive itself to
be a sort of universal Providence.

[Sidenote: A consequence of liberty of thought.]

If human beings are not so exhaustively self-conscious as all that,
the progress of science is carrying them forward in that direction.
A portion of the government of nature is in our hands, some part of
the responsibility for what takes place in the universe is on our
heads. At the beginning man conceived himself as living in a state of
dependence on the world, in a state which ancient religions symbolize;
at present he perceives that the world is equally dependent upon him.
The substitution of a human providence for the omnipresent influence of
a divine providence might be given as being, from this point of view,
the formula of progress; the increasing independence of mankind, in the
face of the natural universe, will thus result in an increasing inner
independence, in a growing independence of mind and thought.

[Sidenote: Mankind to be its own special providence.]

The vulgar conception of a special and exterior providence which, as
we have seen, is so closely bound up with the conception of man’s
place in the universe as one of subjection—nay, even the most refined
conception of providence as transcendent and distant and as assigning
to each being its determinate place in the totality of things—may
thus, without ground of regret, be displaced in the mind of humanity.
We shall some day perceive that we are stronger when we stand on our
feet, shoulder to shoulder, hand in hand, than when we kneel with bowed
heads and implore the unfeeling sky. Among the ancient Germans, when
one of the faithful was about to enter a sacred forest he had his hands
bound together as a symbol of his subjection to the gods; if he had
the misfortune to fall as he was making his way into the forest, he did
not dare to get up again; so to do would have been an affront to the
gods; he was reduced to squirming and rolling like a reptile out of the
immense temple. To this primitive conception of religious servitude,
the modern conception of mankind as free in the presence of its God,
of its beloved ideal, of its conceived work in the world, of its dream
of progress, is more and more opposed. Even at the present day a true
sense of the divine may be recognized by its giving man a consciousness
of his liberty and his dignity rather than his subjection; the true
gods are those who make us lift our heads higher in the struggle for
existence; adoration no longer consists in prostration but in standing
upright.

[Sidenote: Story of the anchorite.]

To borrow once more from the classic land of symbolism, from India,
whence our German or Gallic ancestors came, the great epic of Ramayana
tells us of a sainted and sage anchorite who exemplified in his own
person the whole sum of human virtue and piety. One day, confiding
in the justice of heaven, he was invoking Indra and the whole chorus
of the gods, and the gods were capricious and did not listen to him;
his prayer fell back from the heavens unheard. The man, perceiving
the indifference of the gods, was moved with indignation; and
gathering together the power that he had hoarded, by his sacrifices
and renunciation, and, feeling himself more powerful than his gods,
more powerful than Indra himself, began to issue forth commands to
the high heavens. And at his voice new stars rose and shone in the
crystal sphere; he said, “Let there be light!” and there was light;
he refashioned the world; his goodness became a creative providence.
Nor was this all: he conceived the notion of creating new and better
gods; and Indra himself was trembling toward his fall, for not even he
that commands the air and the skies shall prevail against sanctity.
Indra, the powerful, therefore hastened to yield and cried out to the
saint, “Thy will be done!” and he left a place in the heavens for the
new stars, and their light bears eternal witness to the omnipotence of
goodness, which is the supreme God and object of adoration among men.




