CHAPTER IV


The long wet season had drawn near its close. Signs of spring were
visible in the swelling buds and rushing torrents. The pine forests
exhaled the fresher spicery. The azaleas were already budding, the
ceanothus getting ready its lilac livery for spring. On the green upland
which climbed Red Mountain at its southern aspect the long spike of the
monkshood shot up from its broad-leaved stool, and once more shook
its dark-blue bells. Again the billow above Smith's grave was soft and
green, its crest just tossed with the foam of daisies and buttercups.
The little graveyard had gathered a few new dwellers in the past year,
and the mounds were placed two by two by the little paling until they
reached Smith's grave, and there there was but one. General superstition
had shunned it, and the plot beside Smith was vacant.

There had been several placards posted about the town, intimating that,
at a certain period, a celebrated dramatic company would perform, for
a few days, a series of “side-splitting” and “screaming farces”; that,
alternating pleasantly with this, there would be some melodrama and a
grand divertisement which would include singing, dancing, etc. These
announcements occasioned a great fluttering among the little folk,
and were the theme of much excitement and great speculation among the
master's scholars. The master had promised Mliss, to whom this sort of
thing was sacred and rare, that she should go, and on that momentous
evening the master and Mliss “assisted.”

The performance was the prevalent style of heavy mediocrity; the
melodrama was not bad enough to laugh at nor good enough to excite.
But the master, turning wearily to the child, was astonished and felt
something like self-accusation in noticing the peculiar effect upon her
excitable nature. The red blood flushed in her cheeks at each stroke of
her panting little heart. Her small passionate lips were slightly parted
to give vent to her hurried breath. Her widely opened lids threw up and
arched her black eyebrows. She did not laugh at the dismal comicalities
of the funny man, for Mliss seldom laughed. Nor was she discreetly
affected to the delicate extremes of the corner of a white handkerchief,
as was the tender-hearted “Clytie,” who was talking with her “feller”
 and ogling the master at the same moment. But when the performance was
over, and the green curtain fell on the little stage, Mliss drew a
long deep breath, and turned to the master's grave face with a
half-apologetic smile and wearied gesture. Then she said, “Now take me
home!” and dropped the lids of her black eyes, as if to dwell once more
in fancy on the mimic stage.

On their way to Mrs. Morpher's the master thought proper to ridicule
the whole performance. Now he shouldn't wonder if Mliss thought that the
young lady who acted so beautifully was really in earnest, and in love
with the gentleman who wore such fine clothes. Well, if she were in love
with him it was a very unfortunate thing! “Why?” said Mliss, with an
upward sweep of the drooping lid. “Oh! well, he couldn't support his
wife at his present salary, and pay so much a week for his fine clothes,
and then they wouldn't receive as much wages if they were married as if
they were merely lovers--that is,” added the master, “if they are not
already married to somebody else; but I think the husband of the pretty
young countess takes the tickets at the door, or pulls up the curtain,
or snuffs the candles, or does something equally refined and elegant. As
to the young man with nice clothes, which are really nice now, and must
cost at least two and a half or three dollars, not to speak of that
mantle of red drugget which I happen to know the price of, for I bought
some of it for my room once--as to this young man, Lissy, he is a pretty
good fellow, and if he does drink occasionally, I don't think people
ought to take advantage of it and give him black eyes and throw him in
the mud. Do you? I am sure he might owe me two dollars and a half a
long time, before I would throw it up in his face, as the fellow did the
other night at Wingdam.”

Mliss had taken his hand in both of hers and was trying to look in his
eyes, which the young man kept as resolutely averted. Mliss had a faint
idea of irony, indulging herself sometimes in a species of sardonic
humor, which was equally visible in her actions and her speech. But
the young man continued in this strain until they had reached Mrs.
Morpher's, and he had deposited Mliss in her maternal charge. Waiving
the invitation of Mrs. Morpher to refreshment and rest, and shading
his eyes with his hand to keep out the blue-eyed Clytemnestra's siren
glances, he excused himself, and went home.

For two or three days after the advent of the dramatic company, Mliss
was late at school, and the master's usual Friday afternoon ramble was
for once omitted, owing to the absence of his trustworthy guide. As he
was putting away his books and preparing to leave the schoolhouse, a
small voice piped at his side, “Please, sir?” The master turned and
there stood Aristides Morpher.

“Well, my little man,” said the master, impatiently, “what is it?
quick!”

“Please, sir, me and 'Kerg' thinks that Mliss is going to run away
agin.”

“What's that, sir?” said the master, with that unjust testiness with
which we always receive disagreeable news.

“Why, sir, she don't stay home any more, and 'Kerg' and me see her
talking with one of those actor fellers, and she's with him now; and
please, sir, yesterday she told 'Kerg' and me she could make a speech
as well as Miss Cellerstina Montmoressy, and she spouted right off by
heart,” and the little fellow paused in a collapsed condition.

“What actor?” asked the master.

“Him as wears the shiny hat. And hair. And gold pin. And gold chain,”
 said the just Aristides, putting periods for commas to eke out his
breath.

The master put on his gloves and hat, feeling an unpleasant tightness
in his chest and thorax, and walked out in the road. Aristides trotted
along by his side, endeavoring to keep pace with his short legs to the
master's strides, when the master stopped suddenly, and Aristides bumped
up against him. “Where were they talking?” asked the master, as if
continuing the conversation.

“At the Arcade,” said Aristides.

When they reached the main street the master paused. “Run down home,”
 said he to the boy. “If Mliss is there, come to the Arcade and tell me.
If she isn't there, stay home; run!” And off trotted the short-legged
Aristides.

The Arcade was just across the way--a long, rambling building containing
a barroom, billiard room, and restaurant. As the young man crossed the
plaza he noticed that two or three of the passers-by turned and looked
after him. He looked at his clothes, took out his handkerchief, and
wiped his face before he entered the barroom. It contained the usual
number of loungers, who stared at him as he entered. One of them looked
at him so fixedly and with such a strange expression that the master
stopped and looked again, and then saw it was only his own reflection in
a large mirror. This made the master think that perhaps he was a little
excited, and so he took up a copy of the RED MOUNTAIN BANNER from one of
the tables, and tried to recover his composure by reading the column of
advertisements.

He then walked through the barroom, through the restaurant, and into the
billiard room. The child was not there. In the latter apartment a person
was standing by one of the tables with a broad-brimmed glazed hat on his
head. The master recognized him as the agent of the dramatic company;
he had taken a dislike to him at their first meeting, from the peculiar
fashion of wearing his beard and hair. Satisfied that the object of his
search was not there, he turned to the man with a glazed hat. He had
noticed the master, but tried that common trick of unconsciousness in
which vulgar natures always fail. Balancing a billiard cue in his hand,
he pretended to play with a ball in the center of the table. The master
stood opposite to him until he raised his eyes; when their glances met,
the master walked up to him.

He had intended to avoid a scene or quarrel, but when he began to speak,
something kept rising in his throat and retarded his utterance, and his
own voice frightened him, it sounded so distant, low, and resonant. “I
understand,” he began, “that Melissa Smith, an orphan, and one of my
scholars, has talked with you about adopting your profession. Is that
so?”

The man with the glazed hat leaned over the table and made an imaginary
shot that sent the ball spinning round the cushions. Then, walking round
the table, he recovered the ball and placed it upon the spot. This duty
discharged, getting ready for another shot, he said:

“S'pose she has?”

The master choked up again, but, squeezing the cushion of the table in
his gloved hand, he went on:

“If you are a gentleman, I have only to tell you that I am her guardian,
and responsible for her career. You know as well as I do the kind of
life you offer her. As you may learn of anyone here, I have already
brought her out of an existence worse than death--out of the streets and
the contamination of vice. I am trying to do so again. Let us talk like
men. She has neither father, mother, sister, or brother. Are you seeking
to give her an equivalent for these?”

The man with the glazed hat examined the point of his cue, and then
looked around for somebody to enjoy the joke with him.

“I know that she is a strange, willful girl,” continued the master, “but
she is better than she was. I believe that I have some influence over
her still. I beg and hope, therefore, that you will take no further
steps in this matter, but as a man, as a gentleman, leave her to me. I
am willing--” But here something rose again in the master's throat, and
the sentence remained unfinished.

The man with the glazed hat, mistaking the master's silence, raised his
head with a coarse, brutal laugh, and said in a loud voice:

“Want her yourself, do you? That cock won't fight here, young man!”

The insult was more in the tone than in the words, more in the glance
than tone, and more in the man's instinctive nature than all these. The
best appreciable rhetoric to this kind of animal is a blow. The master
felt this, and, with his pent-up, nervous energy finding expression in
the one act, he struck the brute full in his grinning face. The blow
sent the glazed hat one way and the cue another, and tore the glove
and skin from the master's hand from knuckle to joint. It opened up
the corners of the fellow's mouth, and spoilt the peculiar shape of his
beard for some time to come.

There was a shout, an imprecation, a scuffle, and the trampling of many
feet. Then the crowd parted right and left, and two sharp quick reports
followed each other in rapid succession. Then they closed again about
his opponent, and the master was standing alone. He remembered picking
bits of burning wadding from his coat sleeve with his left hand. Someone
was holding his other hand. Looking at it, he saw it was still bleeding
from the blow, but his fingers were clenched around the handle of a
glittering knife. He could not remember when or how he got it.

The man who was holding his hand was Mr. Morpher. He hurried the master
to the door, but the master held back, and tried to tell him as well
as he could with his parched throat about “Mliss.” “It's all right,
my boy,” said Mr. Morpher. “She's home!” And they passed out into the
street together. As they walked along Mr. Morpher said that Mliss had
come running into the house a few moments before, and had dragged him
out, saying that somebody was trying to kill the master at the Arcade.
Wishing to be alone, the master promised Mr. Morpher that he would not
seek the agent again that night, and parted from him, taking the road
toward the schoolhouse. He was surprised in nearing it to find the door
open--still more surprised to find Mliss sitting there.

The master's nature, as I have hinted before, had, like most sensitive
organizations, a selfish basis. The brutal taunt thrown out by his late
adversary still rankled in his heart. It was possible, he thought, that
such a construction might be put upon his affection for the child,
which at best was foolish and Quixotic. Besides, had she not voluntarily
abnegated his authority and affection? And what had everybody else said
about her? Why should he alone combat the opinion of all, and be at last
obliged tacitly to confess the truth of all they predicted? And he had
been a participant in a low barroom fight with a common boor, and risked
his life, to prove what? What had he proved? Nothing? What would the
people say? What would his friends say? What would McSnagley say?

In his self-accusation the last person he should have wished to meet was
Mliss. He entered the door, and going up to his desk, told the child, in
a few cold words, that he was busy, and wished to be alone. As she
rose he took her vacant seat, and, sitting down, buried his head in his
hands. When he looked up again she was still standing there. She was
looking at his face with an anxious expression.

“Did you kill him?” she asked.

“No!” said the master.

“That's what I gave you the knife for!” said the child, quickly.

“Gave me the knife?” repeated the master, in bewilderment.

“Yes, gave you the knife. I was there under the bar. Saw you hit him.
Saw you both fall. He dropped his old knife. I gave it to you. Why
didn't you stick him?” said Mliss rapidly, with an expressive twinkle of
the black eyes and a gesture of the little red hand.

The master could only look his astonishment.

“Yes,” said Mliss. “If you'd asked me, I'd told you I was off with the
play-actors. Why was I off with the play-actors? Because you wouldn't
tell me you was going away. I knew it. I heard you tell the Doctor so.
I wasn't a goin' to stay here alone with those Morphers. I'd rather die
first.”

With a dramatic gesture which was perfectly consistent with her
character, she drew from her bosom a few limp green leaves, and, holding
them out at arm's length, said in her quick vivid way, and in the queer
pronunciation of her old life, which she fell into when unduly excited:

“That's the poison plant you said would kill me. I'll go with the
play-actors, or I'll eat this and die here. I don't care which. I won't
stay here, where they hate and despise me! Neither would you let me, if
you didn't hate and despise me too!”

The passionate little breast heaved, and two big tears peeped over the
edge of Mliss's eyelids, but she whisked them away with the corner of
her apron as if they had been wasps.

“If you lock me up in jail,” said Mliss, fiercely, “to keep me from the
play-actors, I'll poison myself. Father killed himself--why shouldn't
I? You said a mouthful of that root would kill me, and I always carry it
here,” and she struck her breast with her clenched fist.

The master thought of the vacant plot beside Smith's grave, and of
the passionate little figure before him. Seizing her hands in his and
looking full into her truthful eyes, he said:

“Lissy, will you go with ME?”

The child put her arms around his neck, and said joyfully, “Yes.”

“But now--tonight?”

“Tonight.”

And, hand in hand, they passed into the road--the narrow road that had
once brought her weary feet to the master's door, and which it seemed
she should not tread again alone. The stars glittered brightly above
them. For good or ill the lesson had been learned, and behind them the
school of Red Mountain closed upon them forever.




THE RIGHT EYE OF THE COMMANDER


The year of grace 1797 passed away on the coast of California in a
southwesterly gale. The little bay of San Carlos, albeit sheltered by
the headlands of the blessed Trinity, was rough and turbulent; its foam
clung quivering to the seaward wall of the Mission garden; the air
was filled with flying sand and spume, and as the Senor Commandante,
Hermenegildo Salvatierra, looked from the deep embrasured window of the
Presidio guardroom, he felt the salt breath of the distant sea buffet a
color into his smoke-dried cheeks.

The Commander, I have said, was gazing thoughtfully from the window of
the guardroom. He may have been reviewing the events of the year now
about to pass away. But, like the garrison at the Presidio, there
was little to review; the year, like its predecessors, had been
uneventful--the days had slipped by in a delicious monotony of simple
duties, unbroken by incident or interruption. The regularly recurring
feasts and saints' days, the half-yearly courier from San Diego, the
rare transport ship and rarer foreign vessel, were the mere details of
his patriarchal life. If there was no achievement, there was certainly
no failure. Abundant harvests and patient industry amply supplied the
wants of Presidio and Mission. Isolated from the family of nations,
the wars which shook the world concerned them not so much as the last
earthquake; the struggle that emancipated their sister colonies on the
other side of the continent to them had no suggestiveness. In short, it
was that glorious Indian summer of California history around which so
much poetical haze still lingers--that bland, indolent autumn of
Spanish rule, so soon to be followed by the wintry storms of Mexican
independence and the reviving spring of American conquest.

The Commander turned from the window and walked toward the fire that
burned brightly on the deep ovenlike hearth. A pile of copybooks, the
work of the Presidio school, lay on the table. As he turned over the
leaves with a paternal interest, and surveyed the fair round Scripture
text--the first pious pothooks of the pupils of San Carlos--an audible
commentary fell from his lips: “'Abimelech took her from Abraham'--ah,
little one, excellent!--'Jacob sent to see his brother'--body of Christ!
that upstroke of thine, Paquita, is marvelous; the Governor shall see
it!” A film of honest pride dimmed the Commander's left eye--the right,
alas! twenty years before had been sealed by an Indian arrow. He rubbed
it softly with the sleeve of his leather jacket, and continued: “'The
Ishmaelites having arrived--'”

He stopped, for there was a step in the courtyard, a foot upon the
threshold, and a stranger entered. With the instinct of an old soldier,
the Commander, after one glance at the intruder, turned quickly toward
the wall, where his trusty Toledo hung, or should have been hanging. But
it was not there, and as he recalled that the last time he had seen that
weapon it was being ridden up and down the gallery by Pepito, the infant
son of Bautista, the tortilla-maker, he blushed and then contented
himself with frowning upon the intruder.

But the stranger's air, though irreverent, was decidedly peaceful. He
was unarmed, and wore the ordinary cape of tarpaulin and sea boots of
a mariner. Except a villainous smell of codfish, there was little about
him that was peculiar.

His name, as he informed the Commander, in Spanish that was more fluent
than elegant or precise--his name was Peleg Scudder. He was master of
the schooner GENERAL COURT, of the port of Salem in Massachusetts, on
a trading voyage to the South Seas, but now driven by stress of weather
into the bay of San Carlos. He begged permission to ride out the gale
under the headlands of the blessed Trinity, and no more. Water he
did not need, having taken in a supply at Bodega. He knew the strict
surveillance of the Spanish port regulations in regard to foreign
vessels, and would do nothing against the severe discipline and good
order of the settlement. There was a slight tinge of sarcasm in his tone
as he glanced toward the desolate parade ground of the Presidio and the
open unguarded gate. The fact was that the sentry, Felipe Gomez, had
discreetly retired to shelter at the beginning of the storm, and was
then sound asleep in the corridor.

The Commander hesitated. The port regulations were severe, but he was
accustomed to exercise individual authority, and beyond an old order
issued ten years before, regarding the American ship COLUMBIA, there
was no precedent to guide him. The storm was severe, and a sentiment of
humanity urged him to grant the stranger's request. It is but just to
the Commander to say that his inability to enforce a refusal did not
weigh with his decision. He would have denied with equal disregard of
consequences that right to a seventy-four-gun ship which he now yielded
so gracefully to this Yankee trading schooner. He stipulated only
that there should be no communication between the ship and shore. “For
yourself, Senor Captain,” he continued, “accept my hospitality. The
fort is yours as long as you shall grace it with your distinguished
presence”; and with old-fashioned courtesy, he made the semblance of
withdrawing from the guardroom.

Master Peleg Scudder smiled as he thought of the half-dismantled fort,
the two moldy brass cannon, cast in Manila a century previous, and the
shiftless garrison. A wild thought of accepting the Commander's offer
literally, conceived in the reckless spirit of a man who never let
slip an offer for trade, for a moment filled his brain, but a timely
reflection of the commercial unimportance of the transaction checked
him. He only took a capacious quid of tobacco as the Commander gravely
drew a settle before the fire, and in honor of his guest untied the
black-silk handkerchief that bound his grizzled brows.

What passed between Salvatierra and his guest that night it becomes me
not, as a grave chronicler of the salient points of history, to relate.
I have said that Master Peleg Scudder was a fluent talker, and under
the influence of divers strong waters, furnished by his host, he became
still more loquacious. And think of a man with a twenty years' budget
of gossip! The Commander learned, for the first time, how Great Britain
lost her colonies; of the French Revolution; of the great Napoleon,
whose achievements, perhaps, Peleg colored more highly than the
Commander's superiors would have liked. And when Peleg turned
questioner, the Commander was at his mercy. He gradually made himself
master of the gossip of the Mission and Presidio, the “small-beer”
 chronicles of that pastoral age, the conversion of the heathen, the
Presidio schools, and even asked the Commander how he had lost his eye!
It is said that at this point of the conversation Master Peleg produced
from about his person divers small trinkets, kickshaws, and newfangled
trifles, and even forced some of them upon his host. It is further
alleged that under the malign influence of Peleg and several glasses of
aguardiente, the Commander lost somewhat of his decorum, and behaved in
a manner unseemly for one in his position, reciting high-flown Spanish
poetry, and even piping in a thin, high voice divers madrigals and
heathen canzonets of an amorous complexion; chiefly in regard to a
“little one” who was his, the Commander's, “soul”! These allegations,
perhaps unworthy the notice of a serious chronicler, should be received
with great caution, and are introduced here as simple hearsay. That the
Commander, however, took a handkerchief and attempted to show his guest
the mysteries of the SEMICUACUA, capering in an agile but indecorous
manner about the apartment, has been denied. Enough for the purposes of
this narrative that at midnight Peleg assisted his host to bed with many
protestations of undying friendship, and then, as the gale had abated,
took his leave of the Presidio and hurried aboard the GENERAL COURT.
When the day broke the ship was gone.

I know not if Peleg kept his word with his host. It is said that the
holy fathers at the Mission that night heard a loud chanting in the
plaza, as of the heathens singing psalms through their noses; that for
many days after an odor of salt codfish prevailed in the settlement;
that a dozen hard nutmegs, which were unfit for spice or seed, were
found in the possession of the wife of the baker, and that several
bushels of shoe pegs, which bore a pleasing resemblance to oats, but
were quite inadequate to the purposes of provender, were discovered
in the stable of the blacksmith. But when the reader reflects upon the
sacredness of a Yankee trader's word, the stringent discipline of
the Spanish port regulations, and the proverbial indisposition of my
countrymen to impose upon the confidence of a simple people, he will at
once reject this part of the story.


A roll of drums, ushering in the year 1798, awoke the Commander. The sun
was shining brightly, and the storm had ceased. He sat up in bed, and
through the force of habit rubbed his left eye. As the remembrance of
the previous night came back to him, he jumped from his couch and ran
to the window. There was no ship in the bay. A sudden thought seemed to
strike him, and he rubbed both of his eyes. Not content with this, he
consulted the metallic mirror which hung beside his crucifix. There
was no mistake; the Commander had a visible second eye--a right one--as
good, save for the purposes of vision, as the left.

Whatever might have been the true secret of this transformation, but
one opinion prevailed at San Carlos. It was one of those rare miracles
vouchsafed a pious Catholic community as an evidence to the heathen,
through the intercession of the blessed San Carlos himself. That their
beloved Commander, the temporal defender of the Faith, should be the
recipient of this miraculous manifestation was most fit and seemly. The
Commander himself was reticent; he could not tell a falsehood--he dared
not tell the truth. After all, if the good folk of San Carlos believed
that the powers of his right eye were actually restored, was it wise and
discreet for him to undeceive them? For the first time in his life the
Commander thought of policy--for the first time he quoted that text
which has been the lure of so many well-meaning but easy Christians, of
being “all things to all men.” Infeliz Hermenegildo Salvatierra!

For by degrees an ominous whisper crept though the little settlement.
The Right Eye of the Commander, although miraculous, seemed to exercise
a baleful effect upon the beholder. No one could look at it without
winking. It was cold, hard, relentless, and unflinching. More than that,
it seemed to be endowed with a dreadful prescience--a faculty of seeing
through and into the inarticulate thoughts of those it looked upon. The
soldiers of the garrison obeyed the eye rather than the voice of their
commander, and answered his glance rather than his lips in questioning.
The servants could not evade the ever watchful but cold attention that
seemed to pursue them. The children of the Presidio school smirched
their copybooks under the awful supervision, and poor Paquita, the prize
pupil, failed utterly in that marvelous upstroke when her patron stood
beside her. Gradually distrust, suspicion, self-accusation, and timidity
took the place of trust, confidence, and security throughout San Carlos.
Whenever the Right Eye of the Commander fell, a shadow fell with it.

Nor was Salvatierra entirely free from the baleful influence of his
miraculous acquisition. Unconscious of its effect upon others, he only
saw in their actions evidence of certain things that the crafty Peleg
had hinted on that eventful New Year's eve. His most trusty retainers
stammered, blushed, and faltered before him. Self-accusations,
confessions of minor faults and delinquencies, or extravagant excuses
and apologies met his mildest inquiries. The very children that he
loved--his pet pupil, Paquita--seemed to be conscious of some hidden
sin. The result of this constant irritation showed itself more plainly.
For the first half-year the Commander's voice and eye were at variance.
He was still kind, tender, and thoughtful in speech. Gradually, however,
his voice took upon itself the hardness of his glance and its skeptical,
impassive quality, and as the year again neared its close it was plain
that the Commander had fitted himself to the eye, and not the eye to the
Commander.

It may be surmised that these changes did not escape the watchful
solicitude of the Fathers. Indeed, the few who were first to ascribe the
right eye of Salvatierra to miraculous origin and the special grace of
the blessed San Carlos, now talked openly of witchcraft and the agency
of Luzbel, the evil one. It would have fared ill with Hermenegildo
Salvatierra had he been aught but Commander or amenable to local
authority. But the reverend father, Friar Manuel de Cortes, had no
power over the political executive, and all attempts at spiritual
advice failed signally. He retired baffled and confused from his first
interview with the Commander, who seemed now to take a grim satisfaction
in the fateful power of his glance. The holy Father contradicted
himself, exposed the fallacies of his own arguments, and even, it is
asserted, committed himself to several undoubted heresies. When the
Commander stood up at mass, if the officiating priest caught that
skeptical and searching eye, the service was inevitably ruined. Even the
power of the Holy Church seemed to be lost, and the last hold upon the
affections of the people and the good order of the settlement departed
from San Carlos.

As the long dry summer passed, the low hills that surrounded the white
walls of the Presidio grew more and more to resemble in hue the leathern
jacket of the Commander, and Nature herself seemed to have borrowed his
dry, hard glare. The earth was cracked and seamed with drought; a blight
had fallen upon the orchards and vineyards, and the rain, long-delayed
and ardently prayed for, came not. The sky was as tearless as the
right eye of the Commander. Murmurs of discontent, insubordination, and
plotting among the Indians reached his ears; he only set his teeth the
more firmly, tightened the knot of his black-silk handkerchief, and
looked up his Toledo.

The last day of the year 1798 found the Commander sitting, at the hour
of evening prayers, alone in the guardroom. He no longer attended
the services of the Holy Church, but crept away at such times to some
solitary spot, where he spent the interval in silent meditation. The
firelight played upon the low beams and rafters, but left the bowed
figure of Salvatierra in darkness. Sitting thus, he felt a small hand
touch his arm, and looking down, saw the figure of Paquita, his little
Indian pupil, at his knee. “Ah, littlest of all,” said the Commander,
with something of his old tenderness, lingering over the endearing
diminutives of his native speech--“sweet one, what doest thou here? Art
thou not afraid of him whom everyone shuns and fears?”

“No,” said the little Indian, readily, “not in the dark. I hear your
voice--the old voice; I feel your touch--the old touch; but I see not
your eye, Senor Commandante. That only I fear--and that, O senor, O my
father,” said the child, lifting her little arms towards his--“that I
know is not thine own!”

The Commander shuddered and turned away. Then, recovering himself, he
kissed Paquita gravely on the forehead and bade her retire. A few hours
later, when silence had fallen upon the Presidio, he sought his own
couch and slept peacefully.

At about the middle watch of the night a dusky figure crept through the
low embrasure of the Commander's apartment. Other figures were flitting
through the parade ground, which the Commander might have seen had he
not slept so quietly. The intruder stepped noiselessly to the couch and
listened to the sleeper's deep-drawn inspiration. Something glittered in
the firelight as the savage lifted his arm; another moment and the sore
perplexities of Hermenegildo Salvatierra would have been over, when
suddenly the savage started and fell back in a paroxysm of terror. The
Commander slept peacefully, but his right eye, widely opened, fixed and
unaltered, glared coldly on the would-be assassin. The man fell to the
earth in a fit, and the noise awoke the sleeper.

To rise to his feet, grasp his sword, and deal blows thick and fast upon
the mutinous savages who now thronged the room was the work of a moment.
Help opportunely arrived, and the undisciplined Indians were speedily
driven beyond the walls, but in the scuffle the Commander received a
blow upon his right eye, and, lifting his hand to that mysterious organ,
it was gone. Never again was it found, and never again, for bale or
bliss, did it adorn the right orbit of the Commander.

With it passed away the spell that had fallen upon San Carlos. The rain
returned to invigorate the languid soil, harmony was restored between
priest and soldier, the green grass presently waved over the sere
hillsides, the children flocked again to the side of their martial
preceptor, a TE DEUM was sung in the Mission Church, and pastoral
content once more smiled upon the gentle valleys of San Carlos. And
far southward crept the GENERAL COURT with its master, Peleg Scudder,
trafficking in beads and peltries with the Indians, and offering glass
eyes, wooden legs, and other Boston notions to the chiefs.




NOTES BY FLOOD AND FIELD


