LETTER MU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ETA WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER
MU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL
LETTER ALPHA WITH OXIA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER
EPSILON~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER SIGMA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK
SMALL LETTER OMICRON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER
ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER CHI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA WITH
OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER FINAL SIGMA~} {~GREEK SMALL LETTER
TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER EPSILON~}, have formed and executed the design
of bringing home for honourable interment the remains of their
illustrious Chief.

How many persons have actually inspected these relics, I have not
ascertained; but that a real coffin, containing real bones, was
brought from St. Helena to France, I see no reason to disbelieve.

Whether future visitors to St. Helena will be shown merely the
identical _place_ in which Buonaparte was (_said_ to have been)
interred, or whether another set of real bones will be exhibited in
that island, we have yet to learn.

This latter supposition is not very improbable. It was something of a
credit to the island, an attraction to strangers, and a source of
profit to some of the inhabitants, to possess so remarkable a relic;
and this glory and advantage they must naturally wish to retain. If
so, there seems no reason why they should not have a Buonaparte of
their own; for there is, I believe, no doubt that there are, or were,
several Museums in England, which, among other curiosities, boasted,
each, of a genuine skull of Oliver Cromwell.

Perhaps, therefore, we shall hear of several well authenticated skulls
of Buonaparte also, in the collections of different virtuosos, all of
whom (especially those in whose own crania the "organ of wonder" is
the most largely developed) will doubtless derive equal satisfaction
from the relics they respectively possess.




POSTSCRIPT TO THE NINTH EDITION.


The Public has been of late much interested and not a little
bewildered, by the accounts of many strange events, said to have
recently taken place in France and other parts of the Continent. Are
these accounts of such a character as to allay, or to strengthen and
increase, such doubts as have been suggested in the foregoing pages?

We are told that there is now a Napoleon Buonaparte at the head of the
government of France. It is not, indeed, asserted that he is the very
original Napoleon Buonaparte himself. The death of that personage, and
the transportation of his genuine bones to France, had been too widely
proclaimed to allow of his reappearance in his own proper person. But
"uno avulso, non deficit alter." Like the Thibetian worshippers of the
Dalai Lama, (who never dies; only his soul transmigrates into a fresh
body), the French are so resolved, we are told, to be under a
Buonaparte--whether that be (see note to p. 56) a man or "a
system"--that they have found, it seems, a kind of new incarnation of
this their Grand Lama, in a person said to be the nephew of the
original one.

And when, on hearing that this personage now fills the high office of
President of the French Republic, we inquire (very naturally) _how he
came there_, we are informed that, several years ago, he invaded
France in an English vessel, (the _English_--as was observed in p.
52--having always been suspected of keeping Buonaparte ready, like the
winds in a Lapland witch's bag, to be let out on occasion,) at the
head of a force, not, of six hundred men, like his supposed uncle in
his expedition from Elba, but of fifty-five,(!) with which he landed
at Boulogne, proclaimed himself emperor, and was joined by no less
than _one_ man! He was accordingly, we are told, arrested, brought to
trial, and sentenced to imprisonment; but having, some years after,
escaped from prison, and taken refuge in England, (_England_ again!)
he thence returned to France: AND SO the French nation placed
him at the head of the government!

All this will doubtless be received as a very probable tale by those
who have given full credit to all the stories I have alluded to in the
foregoing pages.




POSTSCRIPT TO THE ELEVENTH EDITION.


When any dramatic piece _takes_--as the phrase is--with the Public, it
will usually be represented again and again with still-continued
applause; and sometimes imitations of it will be produced; so that the
same drama in substance will, with occasional slight variations in the
plot, and changes of names, long keep possession of the stage.

Something like this has taken place with respect to that curious
tragi-comedy--the scene of it laid in France--which has engaged the
attention of the British public for about sixty years; during which it
has been "exhibited to crowded houses"--viz., coffee-houses,
reading-rooms, &c., with unabated interest.

The outline of this drama, or series of dramas, may be thus sketched:

_Dramatis Personae._

A. A King or other Sovereign.

B. His Queen.

C. The Heir apparent.

D. E. F. His Ministers.

G. H. I. J. K. Demagogues.

L. A popular leader of superior ingenuity, who becomes ultimately
supreme ruler under the title of Dictator, Consul, Emperor, King,
President, or some other.

Soldiers, Senators, Executioners, and other functionaries, Citizens,
Fishwomen, &c.

_Scene_, Paris.

(1.) The first Act of one of these dramas represents a monarchy,
somewhat troubled by murmurs of disaffection, suspicions of
conspiracy, &c.

(2.) Second Act, a rebellion; in which ultimately the government is
overthrown.

(3.) Act the third, a provisional government established, on
principles of liberty, equality, fraternity, &c.

(4.) Act the fourth, struggles of various parties for power, carried
on with sundry intrigues, and sanguinary conflicts.

(5.) Act the fifth, the re-establishment of some form of absolute
monarchy.

And from this point we start afresh, and begin the same business over
again, with sundry fresh interludes.

All this is highly amusing to the English Public to _hear_ and _read_
of; but I doubt whether our countrymen would like to be actual
_performers_ in such a drama.

Whether the French really are so, or whether they are mystifying us in
the accounts they send over, I will not presume to decide. But if the
former supposition be the true one,--if they have been so long really
acting over and over again in their own persons such a drama, it must
be allowed that they deserve to be characterized as they have been in
the description given of certain European nations: "An Englishman," it
has been said, "is never happy but when he is miserable; a Scotchman
is never at home but when he is abroad; an Irishman is never at peace
but when he is fighting; a Spaniard is never at liberty but when he is
enslaved; and a Frenchman is never settled but when he is engaged in a
revolution."




POSTSCRIPT TO THE TWELFTH EDITION.


"Time" says the proverb, "rings Truth to light." But the process is
gradual and slow. The debt is paid, as it were, by instalments. It is
only bit by bit, and at considerable intervals, that Truth comes forth
as the morning twilight to dispel the mists of fiction.

It is above forty years that men have been debating the question:--Who
were the parties that burned the city of Moscow?--without ever
thinking of the preliminary question, whether it ever was burnt at
all. And now at length we learn that it never was.

The following extract from a New Orleans paper contains the
information obtained by an American traveller--one of that great
nation whose accuracy as to facts is so well known--who visited the
spot.


  INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL--CITY OF MOSCOW.

  Senator Douglas is said to have made the discovery, while
  travelling in Russia, that the city of Moscow was never burned!
  The following statement of the matter is from the Muscatine
  (Iowa) Inquirer:

  "Coming on the boat, a few days ago, we happened to fall in
  company with Senator Douglas, who came on board at Quincy, on his
  way to Warsaw. In the course of a very interesting account of his
  travels in Russia, much of which has been published by
  letter-writers, he stated a fact which has never yet been
  published, but which startlingly contradicts the historical
  relation of one of the most extraordinary events that ever fell
  to the lot of history to record. For this reason the Judge said
  he felt a delicacy in making the assertion, that the city of
  Moscow was never burned!

  "He said, that previous to his arrival at Moscow, he had several
  disputes with his guide as to the burning of the city, the guide
  declaring that it never occurred, and seeming to be nettled at
  Mr. Douglas's persistency in his opinion; but, on examining the
  fire-marks around the city, and the city itself, he became
  satisfied that the guide was correct.

  "The statement goes on to set forth that the antiquity of the
  architectural city--particularly of its 'six hundred first-class
  churches,' stretching through ante-Napoleonic ages to Pagan
  times, and showing the handiwork of different nations of
  History--demonstrates that the city never was burned down (or
  up)."

  The Inquirer adds:

  "The Kremlin is a space of several hundred acres, in the heart of
  the city, in the shape of a flat iron, and is enclosed, by a wall
  of sixty feet high. Within this enclosure is the most magnificent
  palace in Europe, recently built, but constructed over an ancient
  palace, which remains, thus enclosed, whole and perfect, with all
  its windows, &c.

  "Near the Kremlin, surrounded by a wall, is a Chinese town,
  appearing to be several hundred years old, still occupied by
  descendants of the original settlers.

  "The circumstances which gave rise to the errors concerning the
  burning of Moscow, were these:--It is a city of four hundred and
  fifty thousand inhabitants, in circular form, occupying a large
  space, five miles across. There the winters are six months long,
  and the custom was, and still is, to lay up supplies of
  provisions and wood to last six months of severe cold weather. To
  prevent these gigantic supplies from encumbering the heart of the
  city, and yet render them as convenient as practicable to every
  locality, a row of wood houses was constructed to circle
  completely round the city, and outside of these was a row of
  granaries, and in these were deposited the whole of the supplies.
  Napoleon had entered the city with his army, and was himself
  occupying the palace of the Kremlin, when, one night, by order of
  the Russian governor, every wood house and every granary
  simultaneously burst into a blaze. All efforts to extinguish them
  were vain, and Napoleon found himself compelled to march his army
  through the fire. Retiring to an eminence he saw the whole city
  enveloped in vast sheets of flame, and clouds of smoke, and
  apparently all on fire. And far as he was concerned it might as
  well have been, for though houses enough were left to supply
  every soldier with a room, yet without provisions or fuel, and a
  Russian army to cut off supplies, he and his army could not
  subsist there. During the fire some houses were probably burnt,
  but the city was not. In the Kremlin a magazine blew up, cracking
  the church of Ivan more than a hundred feet up, but setting
  nothing on fire.

  "Mr. Douglas saw the fire-marks around the city, where wood
  houses and granaries for winter supplies now stand as of old; but
  there appears no marks of conflagration within the city."

Any wary sceptic, indeed, might have found much ground for doubt in
the very accounts themselves that were given of the conflagration.
For, the Russians have always denied that _they_ burned it; and the
French equally disclaimed the act. Each of the two parties between
whom the accusation lay, strenuously denied it. And it must be
acknowledged that each had very strong presumptions of innocence to
urge. It was certainly most _unlikely_ that the Russians should
themselves destroy their ancient and venerable capital; and that, too,
when they were boasting of having just gained a great victory at
Borodino over an army which, therefore, they might hope to defeat
again, and to drive out of their city. And it was no less unlikely
that the French should burn down a city of which they had possession,
and which afforded shelter and refreshment to their troops. This would
have been one of the most improbable circumstances of that most
improbable (supposed) campaign. To add to the marvel, we are told that
the French army nevertheless waited for five weeks, without any
object, amid the ashes of this destroyed city, just at the approach,
of winter, and as if on purpose to be overtaken and destroyed by snows
and frost!

However, all the difficulties of the question whether any of these
things took place at all, were by most persons overlooked, because
the question itself never occurred to them, in their eagerness to
decide _who_ it was that burned the city. And at length it comes out
that the answer is, NOBODY!


THE END.




POSTSCRIPT.


With respect to the foregoing arguments, it has been asserted (though
without even any attempt at proof) that they go to prove that the
Bible-narratives contain nothing more miraculous than the received
accounts of Napoleon Buonaparte. And this is indeed true, if we use
the word "_miraculous_" in the very unusual sense in which Hume (as is
pointed out in the foregoing pages) has employed it; to signify simply
"_improbable_;" an abuse of language on which his argument mainly
depends.

It is indeed shown, that there are at least as many and as great
_improbabilities_ in the history of Buonaparte as in any of the
Scripture-narratives; and that as plausible objections,--if not more
so,--may be brought against the one history as the other.

But taking words in their ordinary, established sense, the assertion
is manifestly the opposite of the truth. For, any one who does,--in
spite of all the improbabilities,--_believe_ the truth of _both_
histories, is, evidently, a believer in miracles; since he believes
two narratives, one of which is _not_ miraculous, while the other is.
The history of Buonaparte contains--though much that is very
improbable--nothing that is to be called, according to the established
use of language, miraculous. And the Scriptures contain, as an
_essential_ part of their narrative, _Miracles_, properly so called.

To talk of believing the Bible, all _except the Miracles_, would be
like professing to believe the accounts of Buonaparte, _except_ only
his commanding armies, and having been at Elba and at Saint Helena.

       *       *       *       *       *

One cannot doubt that in the course of the _forty years_ that this
little Work has been before the Public, some real, valid refutation of
the argument would have been adduced, if any such could have been
devised.

1860.

       *       *       *       *       *








