letter in time for the steamer.”

“Never mind the letter,” said Mr. Carlisle. “Come here, child; I am pining
to have you near me.”

Assunta laughed, as she replied:

“Would it not do just as well if I should give you the opera‐glass, and
let you amuse yourself by making believe bring me to you?”

“Pshaw! Assunta, I want you. Put away your writing. You know very well
that it is two days before the steamer leaves, and you will have plenty of
time.” And Mr. Carlisle drew a chair beside his own.

Assunta did know all about it; but, now that the invalid was so much
better, she was trying to withdraw a little from any special attentions.
She felt that, under the circumstances, it would not be right to make
herself necessary to his comfort; she did not realize how necessary he
thought her to his very life. However, though she would skirmish with and
contradict him, she had never yet been able sufficiently to forget how
near he had been to death to actually oppose him. Besides, she had not
thought him looking quite as strong this morning; so she put the
unfinished letter back in the desk, and, taking her work‐basket, sat down
beside her guardian, and tried to divert him from herself by pointing out
the wonderful loveliness of the view. His face did have a weary
expression, which his quondam nurse did not fail to perceive. She at once
poured out a glass of wine, and, handing it to him, said:

“Tell me the truth, my friend; you do not feel very well to‐day?”

“I do not feel quite as strong as Samson,” he replied; “but you forget,
Dalila, how you and the barber have shorn off the few locks the fever left
me. Of course my strength went too.”

“Well, fortunately,” said Assunta, “there are no gates of Gaza which
require immediate removal, and no Philistines to be overcome.”

“I am not so sure of that,” said Mr. Carlisle, putting down the wine‐
glass. “There are some things harder to overcome than Philistines, and
some citadels so strong as to bid defiance to Samson, even in the full
glory of his wavy curls. What chance is there, then, for him now, cruel
Dalila?”

Assunta wilfully misunderstood him, and, taking her work from her pretty
basket, she answered, laughing:

“Well, one thing is very certain: your illness has not left you in the
least subdued. Clara and I must begin a course of discipline, or by the
time your brown curls have attained their usual length you will have
become a regular tyrant.”

“Give me your work, _petite_,” said Mr. Carlisle, gently disengaging it
from her hand. “I want this morning all to myself. And please do not
mention Clara again. I cannot hear her name without thinking of that
miserable Sinclair business. It is well for him that I am as I am, until I
have had time to cool. I am not very patient, and I have an irresistible
longing to give him a horse‐whipping. It is a singular psychological fact
that Clara has been gifted with every womanly attraction but common sense.
But I believe that even you Catholics allow to benighted heretics the plea
of invincible ignorance as an escape from condemnation; so we must not be
too severe in our judgment of my foolish sister.”

“Hardly a parallel case,” said Assunta, smiling.

“I grant it,” replied her guardian; “for in my illustration the acceptance
of the plea, so you hold, renders happiness possible to the heretic, to
whom a ‘little knowledge’ would have been so ‘dangerous a thing’ as to
lose him even a chance among the elect; whereas Clara’s invincible
ignorance of the world, of human nature, and in particular of the nature
of George Sinclair, serves only to explain her folly, but does not prevent
the inevitable evil consequences of such a marriage. But enough of the
subject. Will you not read to me a little while? Get Mrs. Browning, and
let us have ‘Lady Geraldine,’ if you will so far compassionate a man as to
make him forget that he is at sword’s points with himself and all the
world, the exception being his fair consoler. Thank you, _petite_,” he
continued, as Assunta brought the book. “There is plenty of trash and an
incomprehensible expression or two in the poem; but, as a whole, I like
it, and the end, the vision, would redeem it, were it ten times as bad.
Well, I too have had a vision! Do you know, Assunta, that the only thing I
can recall of those weeks of illness is your dear form flitting in and out
of the darkness? But—may I dare say it?—the vision had in it a certain
tenderness I do not find in the reality. I could almost believe in your
doctrine of guardian angels, having myself experienced what their ministry
might be.”

“I am afraid,” interrupted Assunta, “that your doctrine would hardly
stand, if it has no other basis than such very human evidence. Shall I
begin?”

“No, wait a minute longer,” said Mr. Carlisle. “ ‘Lady Geraldine’ will
keep. I wish to put a question to your sense of justice. When I was sick,
and almost unconscious, and entirely unappreciative, there was a person—so
the doctor tells me—who lavished attentions upon me, counted nothing too
great a sacrifice to be wasted upon me. But now that I am myself again,
and longing to prove myself the most grateful of men, on the principle
that ‘gratitude is a lively sense of favors _to come_,’ that person
suddenly retires into the solitude of her own original indifference (to
misquote somewhat grandiloquently), and leaves me wondering on what hidden
rock my bark struck when I thought the sea all smooth and shining,
shivering my reanimated hopes to atoms. But,” he added, turning abruptly
towards her, and taking in his the hand which rested on the table beside
him, “you saved my life. Bless you, child, and remember that the life you
have saved is yours, now and always.”

The color had rushed painfully into Assunta’s face, but her guardian
instantly released her hand, and she answered quietly:

“It really troubles me, Mr. Carlisle, that you should attach so much
importance to a mere service of duty and common humanity. I did no more
than any friend so situated would have had a right to claim at my hands.
Your thanks have far outweighed your indebtedness.”

“Duty again!” exclaimed Mr. Carlisle bitterly. “I wish you had let me die.
I want no _duty_ service from you; and you shall be gratified, for I do
_not_ thank you for my life on those conditions. You spare no opportunity
to let me understand that I am no more to you than all the rest of the
world. Be it so.” And he impatiently snatched the _Galignani_ from the
table, and settled himself as if to read.

Assunta’s temper was always roused by the unjust remarks her guardian
sometimes made, and she would probably have answered with a spirit which
would have belied the angel had she not happened to glance at the paper,
and seen that it was upside down; and then at Mr. Carlisle’s pale and
troubled features, to which even the crimson facings of his rich dressing‐
gown hardly lent the faintest glow. The same sentiment of common humanity
which had prompted those days of care and nights of watching now checked
the reproach she would have uttered. She turned over the leaves of Mrs.
Browning, until her eye lighted upon that exquisite valediction, “God be
with thee, my beloved.” This she read through to herself; and then, laying
the book upon the table, she said with the tone and manner of a subdued
child:

“May I finish my letter, please?”

Mr. Carlisle scarcely raised his eyes, as he replied:

“Certainly, Assunta. I have no wish to detain you.”

It was with a very womanly dignity that Assunta left her seat; but,
instead of returning to her writing‐desk, she went to the piano. For
nearly an hour she played, now passages from different sonatas, and then
selections from the grander music of the church. Without seeming to
notice, she saw that the paper at last fell from her guardian’s hand; and
understanding, as she did, every change in his expressive face, she knew
from the smoothing of the brow and the restful look of the eyes that peace
was restored by the charm she wrought. When she was sure that the evil
spirit had been quite exorcised by the power of music, she rose from the
piano, and rang the bell. When Giovanni appeared, she said:

“I think that Mrs. Grey will not return until quite late, as she has gone
to Tivoli; so you may serve dinner here for me as well as for Mr.
Carlisle. If any one calls, I do not receive this afternoon.”

“Very well, signorina,” replied Giovanni. “I will bring in the small table
from the library.” And he left the room.

“It will be much pleasanter than for each of us to dine separately in
solitary state,” said Assunta, going towards her guardian, and speaking as
if there had been no cloud between them; “though I know that dining in the
drawing‐room must, of necessity, be exceptional.”

“It was a very bright thought of yours,” answered Mr. Carlisle, “and a
very appetizing one to me, I can assure you. Will you read ‘Lady
Geraldine’ now? There will be just time before dinner.”

Without a word Assunta took the book, and began to read. She had nothing
of the dramatic in her style, but her voice was sweet, her enunciation
very clear and distinct, and she showed a thorough apprehension of the
author’s meaning; so her reading always gave pleasure, and Mr. Carlisle
had come to depend upon it daily. The vision to which he had referred was
robbed, perhaps fortunately, of some of its sentiment, by Giovanni’s table
preparations; and his presence prevented all but very general comment.

When they were once more by themselves—Giovanni having left them to linger
over the fruit and wine—Mr. Carlisle said:

“By the way, Assunta, you have not told me yet what your friend Miss
Percival had to say for herself in her last letter. You know I am always
interested in her; though I fear it is an interest which partakes largely
of the nature of jealousy.”

“Well,” replied Assunta, “she tells me that she is going to be married.”

“Sensible girl! What more?”

“She regrets very much that her brother, whom she dearly loves, will not
return from his year’s exile in time for the ceremony.”

“So much the better,” exclaimed Mr. Carlisle with unusual energy. “I hope
he may lose himself in the deserts of Arabia, or wander off to further
India, and there remain.”

Assunta laughed. “Truly, my guardian is most charitable! I should not be
surprised if he did, one of these days, follow in the footsteps of S.
Francis Xavier. But what has he done to merit sentence of banishment from
you?”

“You know I am a student of human nature,” rejoined her guardian, “and I
have always observed that where a young girl has a brother and a friend,
she cannot conceive of any other destiny for the two objects of her
affection than to make of them one united object in the holy bonds of
matrimony; and, in order to bring about the desired consummation, she
devotes herself to intrigue in a manner and with a zeal truly feminine.
Mary Percival has a brother and a friend; ergo, may her brother be—induced
to become an Oriental; that is all.”

“In this case,” replied the young girl with a merry laugh, “your
observations are quite at fault. I am truly grieved to be compelled to
spoil such a pretty romance. But, seriously, Mary has a far higher choice
for her brother than her most unworthy friend. She has but one desire and
prayer for him, and that is that he may enter the holy priesthood. I
believe she will not be disappointed. Did you ever see Mr. Percival?”

“No, I have never had the pleasure,” replied Mr. Carlisle.

“I wish you might know him,” said Assunta enthusiastically. “I am sure you
would like him. He is not what would generally be considered handsome, but
I think his face beautiful, it is so very spiritual. It is the beauty of a
remarkable soul, which literally shines in his eyes. He has taken the
highest honors at college, and, if his health is only re‐established, I
think his sister’s very laudable ambition will be more than gratified.”

“He certainly has a most ardent admirer. I did not know you could be so
enthusiastic about any member of the _genus homo_,” said Mr. Carlisle.
Assunta was not to be daunted by the perceptible sneer, and she at once
added:

“I can hardly be said to admire him, but rather the power of grace in him.
I have so great a reverence for Augustine Percival that I could not
imagine it possible for any human affection to turn him from what I firmly
believe to be his great vocation. So my guardian may see him return to the
West with equanimity, and may perhaps even be induced to look with favor
upon another part of the letter.”

“And what is that?” asked Mr. Carlisle.

“Mary invites me very urgently to pass next winter with her in Baltimore.
Her husband‐elect is a naval officer, and his leave of absence expires in
October. She wishes me as a substitute, you understand.”

“Is it your wish to go, my child?” said her guardian, looking at her
earnestly.

“I never like to make any definite plan so long beforehand; but it seemed
to me a very suitable arrangement. You remember,” added Assunta, “that
Clara will probably be married before then.”

“I do not wish Clara to be mentioned; she has nothing to do with it,” said
Mr. Carlisle imperiously; and then he added more gently, “May I ask,
_petite_, what answer you have given her?”

“None, as yet; you remember you interrupted my letter. But I think I will
tell her that my guardian is such an ogre that I dare not reply to her
invitation until after August. Will that do?”

“Tell her what you will,” said Mr. Carlisle; “only, for heaven’s sake, say
no more to me upon the subject. I am not Augustine Percival, and
consequently not elevated above the power of human feeling.”

Poor Assunta! she too was not above human feeling, and sometimes it was
very hard for her to keep her heart from being rebellious; but she had
learned to put God before every earthly consideration, and to find her
strength in his presence. But it required constant watchfulness and
untiring patience to conquer herself. Therefore she could not but feel
great compassion for her friend, who must bear his disappointment with no
help outside of his own strong nature. She rose from the table, and moved
it a little to one side, in order that she might arrange the cushions for
her guardian, who looked unusually weary to‐night.

“Are you angry with me, Mr. Carlisle?” said she softly, as he sank back in
his chair.

“Angry, _petite_?” he repeated, looking steadily in her face. “Yes, I am
angry, but not with you, or with anything you have said to‐night, but
rather with that accursed barrier. Go, child, ring for Giovanni, or I
shall say what you will not like to hear.” As she turned away, he caught
her hand, saying:

“One moment. I have been very rude, and yet I would die for you! There, I
will not say another word. Please ring for Giovanni, since I am compelled
to be so ungallant as to request the favor of you; and then let us talk a
little about the Sienna plans. I must try and put myself into a good‐humor
before Clara comes; for she will have something to say about her handsome
Sinclair, and then I would not give much for my temper.”

The table having been removed, and the wood which had been laid ready in
the fire‐place kindled into a blaze—for the evenings were still cool
enough to admit of its cheery influence—the two, whose lives seemed so
united, and yet were, in reality, so far apart, drew towards the fire. The
heavy curtains, which had been put aside to admit the warm, genial air and
sunshine of mid‐day, were now closely drawn, in order to shut out the
chilling dampness of evening. A hanging lamp cast a soft, mellow light
through its porcelain shade upon an exquisite basket of roses and
carnations adorning the centre of the table, which was covered elsewhere
with books, arranged with studied negligence, and numberless little
suggestions of refinement and feminine occupation. Everything seemed
favorable to a most harmonious conversation, except that inevitable
something which, like a malicious sprite, awakens us from our dreams just
when they are brightest; breaks the spell of our illusions at the moment
when we are clinging to them most persistently; ruthlessly crosses, with
its fatal track, our promised pleasures; and unfeelingly interrupts us in
some hour of complete rest and satisfaction. Ah! we may fret in our
impatience, and wonder at the fatality which seems to pursue us. It is no
mischief‐loving Puck, no evil‐minded genie, but a good angel, who thus
thwarts us. This is no time to dream and cherish illusions which can but
deceive. It is no time for repose. To detach ourselves from all these
things which would make this world a satisfaction to us is the labor we
must all perform, more or less generously and heroically, if we would one
day enjoy the reality of the one dream that never fades—the vision of the
Apocalypse; the one repose that never palls—the rest that remaineth for
the people of God. Welcome, then, those misnamed “juggling fiends” that
“keep the word of promise to our ear, and break it to our hope.” Welcome
the many disappointments, trifling in themselves, the daily crossings of
our will and pleasure, which seem so petty; they perform a great mission
if they succeed in loosening ever so little the cords which bind down to
earth the souls that were meant for heaven. Thrice welcome whatever helps
to turn the sweetness of this world to bitterness!

Poor Mrs. Grey! it had never occurred to her that she had a mission, still
less such an one as we have now assigned to her. For it was her voice
which caused Mr. Carlisle to sigh so profoundly that Assunta could not but
smile, in spite of the regretful feeling in her own heart. It was
better—and she knew it—that the softening influence of the hour should be
thus rudely interrupted; but nature will not be crushed without an
occasional protest. The expression of annoyance still lingered on Mr.
Carlisle’s face when Clara entered the room, exclaiming:

“Come, _caro mio_, they have had the livelong day to themselves, and must
have talked out by this time, even if they had the whole encyclopædia in
their brains.” And as Mr. Sinclair followed with an apologetic bow, she
continued:

“This ridiculous man has conscientious objections to interrupting your
_tête‐à‐tête_. I am sure, Severn, if Assunta is not tired to death of you
by this time, she ought to be, particularly if you have been as solemn all
day as you look now. I would much rather spend the whole day in church—and
that is the most gloomy thing I can think of—than be condemned to the
company of a man in a mood. Make a note of that, George.

“I think, Clara,” said her brother, somewhat coldly, “that Mr. Sinclair
was judging others by himself, and in doing so he judged kindly in my
regard and gallantly in yours; but this is not always the true criterion.
Mr. Sinclair, I beg you will be seated, and excuse me if I do not rise. I
am still obliged to claim the invalid’s cloak of charity. No doubt a cup
of tea will be acceptable after your long drive; and it will soon be
served.”

The eyes of the two men met. They had measured each other before now, and
understood each other well; and each knew that he was most cordially
disliked by the other. Their ceremonious politeness was all the more
marked on that account. Assunta’s tact came to the rescue, and made a
diversion. As she assisted Mrs. Grey in removing her shawl and hat, she
said:

“And how have you enjoyed the day, Clara? You must be very tired!”

“Oh! I am nearly dead with fatigue,” replied the lady, looking very bright
and very much alive for a moribund; “but we have had a delicious time. You
should have seen George trying to support his dignity on a donkey which he
could easily have assisted in walking, as his feet touched the ground on
both sides; and which started with a spasmodic jerk every two or three
minutes when the donkey boy brought down a small club on its back. I
laughed so much at Mr. Sinclair’s gravity and the ludicrous figure he cut
that I narrowly escaped falling off my own donkey down a precipice.”

“ ‘Now, what a thing it is to be an ass,’ ” quoted Mr. Carlisle. “My
lovely sister visits a spot whose present beauty is hardly surpassed by
the richness of its classic associations; where romance lurks, scarcely
hidden, in the memory of Zenobia; where the olives that cover the
hillsides have a primeval look; and, like a very Titania under the love‐
spell, she wakes from her dream of the past, and, behold! her vision is—a
donkey!—no, I beg pardon—_two_ donkeys; one that nearly lost its burden;
and the other that its burden nearly lost!”

“How foolish you are, Severn!” said Clara, pouting very becomingly, while
the others laughed heartily. “Besides, you need not expect me to get up
any sentiment about Zenobia. The mistake of her life was that she did not
die at the proper time, instead of retiring to a country town—of all
places in the world—living a comfortable life, and dying a commonplace
death in her bed, for all I know. It was just stupid in her!”

Her brother smiled. “I think you are right, Clara. Zenobia should never
have survived her chains and the Roman triumph, if she had wished to leave
a perfect picture of herself to posterity. However, I doubt if we have the
right to exact the sacrifice of her merely to gratify our ideas of
romantic propriety. By living she only proved herself less heroine, more
woman. But, Clara, what _did_ you see?—besides the donkeys, I mean.”

Mr. Carlisle felt so keenly the antagonism of Mr. Sinclair’s presence,
that he must either leave the room or find some vent; and therefore his
sister was compelled to be safety‐valve, and submit to his teasing mood.
Perhaps she was not altogether an innocent victim, since she it was who
had somewhat wilfully introduced the discordant element into the family.

“We saw ruins and waterfalls, of course,” she replied to the last
question—a little petulance in her tone, which soon, however, disappeared.
“But the most enjoyable thing of the whole day was the dinner. I usually
cannot see any pleasure in eating out of doors, but today we were obliged
to do so, for the hotel was not at all inviting; and then it is the proper
thing to do to have the table spread in the portico of the Temple of
Vesta. Gagiati had put up a delicious dinner at Mr. Sinclair’s order, so
we were not dependent upon country fries and macaroni. Just as we were
sitting down Lady Gertrude came up with her mother and lover, and we
joined forces. I assure you we were not silent. I never enjoyed a meal
more in my life.”

“O Tivoli! ancient Tibur, how art thou fallen! Donkeys and dinner!”
exclaimed Mr. Carlisle. “Well, fair Titania, did you supply your gentle
animal with the honey‐bag of the ‘red‐hipped humble‐bee,’ or was his
appetite more plebeian, so that ‘a peck of provender’ was more
acceptable?”

“Assunta, do you allow your patient to talk so much?” said Mrs. Grey, her
amiability still proof against attack. “If he excites his imagination in
this way, he can hardly hope to sleep without a powerful anodyne.”

“My patient, as you call him,” replied Assunta, smiling, “is not quite so
submissive, I find, as when obedience was a necessity, and not a virtue.
Still, if he would allow me a very humble suggestion, I would remind him
that he has not been quite as well to‐day, and that it is some time past
his usual hour for retiring.”

There was no irritation in Mr. Carlisle’s face as he looked at Assunta
with one of his rare smiles. The very tones of her voice seemed to give
him a feeling of rest. “A very broad hint on the part of my tyrant,” he
replied, “which I will be wise enough to take, in its present form, lest
it should become more emphatic. Good‐night, Mr. Sinclair. I feel that
there is the less need of an apology for excusing myself, as I leave you
in good hands Clara, when Giovanni has served the tea, please send him to
me.”

In leaving the room Mr. Carlisle dropped his cigar‐case, which Assunta
perceived, and hastened with it to the library, where she knew she should
find him awaiting Giovanni.

“_Petite_,” he exclaimed, as she entered, “kill that man for me, and make
me everlastingly your debtor.”

“I am sure,” she answered, laughing, “you have had it all your own way to‐
night. I began to think he must have taken a vow of silence.”

“Still waters!” said her guardian. “He can afford to be silent; he is
biding his time.”

“Are you not the least bit unjust and uncharitable?” asked Assunta. “But
never mind, you shall not have a lecture to‐night, for you look very
weary. Promise me that you will take the medicine I send you.”

“I will take it, if you bring it yourself.”

“But I cannot do that. I have your enemy to entertain, you know.”

“And much joy do I wish you,” said Mr. Carlisle. “I intend to study up
affinities and repulsions psychologically; and then I shall perhaps be
able to understand why one person, without any assignable cause, should
act as a perpetual blister—genuine Spanish flies—and another, a certain
dear little friend of mine for instance, should be ever a soothing balm.”

“Cold cream!” suggested Assunta, “since you will use such pharmaceutical
comparisons. And now, if I have shocked your sense of refinement
sufficiently, I must say good‐night.”

“Good‐night, dear child,” returned her guardian cordially, but his next
thought was a bitter one, and an almost prophetic feeling of loneliness
came over him, as he watched the smoke curling up from his cigar.

As soon as the incubus of Mr. Carlisle’s presence was removed, Mr.
Sinclair threw off the silence which was so unnatural to him, and became
at once the attentive, gallant man of the world. Even Assunta, had she met
him then for the first time, would not have received that impression of
insincerity which had repelled her formerly. She could hardly wonder to‐
night that Clara Grey, who never looked below the surface, or cared, so
long as peace reigned on the outside, what elements of disturbance might
be working in the depths, should have suffered her heart to confide itself
to the keeping of one apparently so devoted. She had never before imagined
that they were so well suited to each other; and as Mr. Sinclair, after an
hour, arose to take his leave, she was surprised into most unusual
cordiality, as she bade him good‐night. But, unfortunately for the
impression he had been at such pains to produce, the glamour of
fascination disappeared with his retreating footsteps; so that even while
Mr. Sinclair was congratulating himself upon his success, Assunta found
herself wondering at the almost painful revulsion of feeling which
followed his departure.

Mrs. Grey’s bright face indicated no such change. She was perfectly
satisfied with her lover, and no less so with herself. She checked a
movement of Assunta’s to retire by saying:

“Do you mind waiting a little longer, dear? I want so much to have a quiet
chat. Come, let us draw our chairs up to the fire, the blaze is so
cheering.”

“You do not look as if you needed any help from outside influences,” said
Assunta, and there was a shade of sadness in her tone. “But I am all ready
for a talk.”

A cloud—a light summer one—overspread Mrs. Grey’s clear sky and shadowed
her face, as she said, after a pause: “Assunta, why does Severn dislike
George so much?”

Assunta was too truthful to deny the fact, so she simply said:

“We cannot always control our feelings, Clara; but, as a general thing, I
do not find Mr. Carlisle unreasonable.”

“He certainly is very unreasonable in this case,” returned Mrs. Grey
quickly, “and I am sorry it is so, for I love Severn very much. Still, I
shall not allow an unfounded prejudice to stand in the way of my
happiness. Assunta, I have promised Mr. Sinclair that I will marry him in
September, when we shall be in Paris, on our way to America.”

“I supposed,” said Assunta, “that it would come soon, and I hope, dear
Clara, that you will be very, _very_ happy.” Doubt was in her mind, but
she had not the heart to let it appear in her manner.

“And,” Mrs. Grey continued, “I want you to understand, dear, that with us
you will always have a home at your disposal, where you will be welcomed
as a sister. George wished me to tell you that this is his desire as well
as mine.”

“You are both too kind,” replied Assunta, touched by this thoughtfulness
of her at a time when selfishness is regarded as a special privilege. “My
arrangements can easily be made afterwards; but I do very much appreciate
your kindness.”

“Nonsense!” said Mrs. Grey, “you belong to us; and the difficulty will
probably be that we shall not be able to keep such an attractive bit of
property.”

“You are setting me the example,” said Assunta, laughing.

“Ah! yes,” returned Mrs. Grey; “but then, there is only one George
Sinclair, you know, as a temptation.”

Assunta fancied she could hear Mr. Carlisle exclaim, “God be praised!” to
that natural expression of womanly pride, and she herself wondered if it
would be possible for her to fall under such a delusion.

But Mrs. Grey had not yet reached the point of the conversation; what had
been said was only preliminary. The truth was, she dreaded her brother’s
reception of the news, and she wished to avoid being present at the first
outbreak.

“You have so much influence with Severn,” she said at last, “I wish you
would tell him about it, and try to make him feel differently towards
George. I am sure you can. We are going to the Villa Doria to‐morrow, and
this will give you an opportunity. I hope the storm will be over before we
return,” she added, laughing; “at any rate, the lightning will not strike
you.”

It was like Mrs. Grey to make this request—so like her that Assunta did
not think it either strange or selfish. She promised to break the news,
which she knew would be unwelcome. But she could not conscientiously
promise to use an influence in overcoming a prejudice she entirely shared.
An affectionate good‐night was exchanged, and then Assunta retired to her
room. It was not often that she indulged herself in a revery—in those
waking dreams which are so unprofitable, and from which one is usually
aroused with the spiritual tone lowered, and the heart discontented and
dissatisfied. But this had been a trying day; and now, as she reviewed it,
and came at last to its close, she found herself envying her friend the
joy which seemed so complete, and wondering why her lot should be so
different. Happiness had come to Mrs. Grey as to a natural resting‐place;
while she, to whom a bright vision of it had been presented, must thrust
it from her as if it were a curse and not a blessing. And here she paused,
and better thoughts came to replace the unworthy ones. This lot which she
was envying—was it not all of the earth, earthy? Would she change, if she
could? Had she not in her blessed faith a treasure which she would not
give for all the human happiness this world has power to bestow? And here
was the key to the difference at which she had for the moment wondered.
Much, very much, had been given to her; was it strange that much should be
required? Had she, then, made her sacrifice only to play the Indian giver
towards her God, and wish back the offering he had accepted at her hands?
No, she would not be so ungenerous. In the light of faith the brightness
which had illuminated the life of her friend grew dim and faded, while the
shadow of what had seemed so heavy a cross resting upon her own no longer
darkened her soul. And soon, kneeling before her crucifix, she could
fervently thank the dear Lord that he had granted her the privilege of
suffering something for his love; and she prayed for strength to take up
her cross _daily_, and bear it with courage and generosity.

To Be Continued.




Inscription For The Bell “Gabriel,” At S. Mary’s Of The Lake, Lake George.


Gabrielem olim Dominam ad Mariam
Evæ mutatum cecinisse nomen,
Gabriel tandem cecini sacratas
        Primus ad oras.




Switzerland In 1873. Lucerne. Concluded.


At this point we reached the first of the existing covered bridges. What a
transition! Like going back suddenly from the levelling monotony of steam
and the feverish present‐day life to the individuality and repose of the
middle ages! “It dates,” said Herr H——, “from the year 1300—just seven
years before William Tell and the Rüti, eight before the battle of
Morgarten, and eighty‐six before our great Sempach victory!”

“William Tell! What nonsense! Who believes now in William Tell?” muttered
the young school‐boy C—— to his sister; but the old man fortunately did
not hear him, and, his eyes beaming with affection for the old relic, he
went on: “Some modern improvers”—laying contemptuous emphasis on these
words—“talk of ‘clearing it away.’ But you see what a pleasant, cool walk
it still is for foot‐passengers, with the green Reuss swirling beneath,
and the lovely view from its open sides. I tell them that it would not
only be an act of vandalism, but, as there are so few antiquities to show
in Lucerne, it would be like ‘killing the goose with the golden eggs.’ ”
And so it would! It is in no one’s way, and is, with the other bridge, the
only remnant of antiquity worth looking at. On opening our _Wordsworth_ we
found that this is the one first mentioned by him after leaving Sarnen:


    “From this appropriate court renowned Lucerne
        Calls me to pace her honored bridge, that cheers
    The patriot’s heart with pictures rude and stern—
        An uncouth chronicle of glorious years.”


And we found it still as he describes it. The triangle of the rafters of
each arch is painted, and though as works of art they are of little value,
still they are clever and quaint representations of the scenes, certain to
make an impression on young minds in particular, and easily discernible to
an observant passer‐by. Going from the right bank of the river, reminders
of events in Swiss and local history meet the eye, and, returning from the
other side, the deeds of the two patron saints of the town, S. Leodegarius
and S. Maurice. Both lives were most striking, and equally belonged to the
earliest ages of the Christian era. S. Maurice especially is a favorite
Swiss patron. He was the commander of the Theban Christian Legion in the
time of the Emperor Diocletian, which is said to have consisted of sixty‐
six hundred men. This legion had been raised in the Thebaïs or Upper Egypt
amongst the Christians there, and, officered by Christians, was marching
with the rest of the Roman army against Gaul, under the command of
Maximian, when the latter ordered the army to offer sacrifices for the
success of the expedition. All encamped at the place called Octodurus,
represented nowadays by the modest Martigny in the Valais; but the Theban
legion, refusing to join in the pagan worship, retired to the spot where
now stands S. Maurice, and day by day they were killed by orders of
Maximian, until none remained. The Monastery of S. Maurice, built on the
spot of their martyrdom, is one of the oldest in the world, said to have
been first erected in A.D. 250, although the present edifice only dates
from 1489. Switzerland and Savoy formerly disputed the honor of keeping
the relics, but at last settled the matter by a small portion being handed
over to Piedmont, the abbey retaining the principal treasures. It is
therefore to this day one of the favorite places of pilgrimage in
Switzerland. A special connection seems to have occurred with Lucerne, for
two hundred bodies of S. Maurice’s companions are said to have been found
at the village of Schoz, about two leagues distant, where there was an old
chapel renowned for its privileges and indulgences. And this seems in no
way unlikely, for we read in Butler’s _Lives of the Saints_ and elsewhere
that several smaller corps of soldiers belonging to the legion were
scattered here and there in Switzerland, and were put to death for the
same reason. Most interesting it is, in any case, to trace on this bridge
the union of two such heroic, manly saints in the affections and
sympathies of the Lucerne citizens from olden times.

The bridge is five hundred feet long, and makes two sharp bends to suit
the current of the river, flowing swiftly and vigorously from the lake
close by through the old‐fashioned posts on towards old Father Rhine,
which it joins between Schaffhausen and Basel. This irregularity adds to
the picturesque effect, and at one of these corners stands a tower,
mentioned in some old documents of the year 1367. Possibly it may have
existed as part of the fortifications even before the bridge itself. It is
called the Water Tower, and has four stories of one room each, which
formerly served as treasury, prison, and record‐office; but at present it
is used only for the latter purpose, and contains the archives of the
city. What tales it might tell had we moderns the time to spare for
listening!

But we moved on along the left bank of the river, and turned into the
church, still called the “Jesuits’ Church.” It is large and unmistakably
in their well‐known style. Here Herr H—— explained how the order had been
introduced into Lucerne in 1574 by S. Charles Borromeo, who was such an
ally of these cantons. In less than four years they had founded a college
and increased rapidly. Within one hundred more they erected this church,
and the large buildings adjoining for their college, now used as
government offices—the post and telegraph departments. Everything went on
satisfactorily for a second hundred years, until the suppression of the
order by Clement XIV., in 1773, when it was also abolished in Lucerne. But
the towns‐people held their memory in grateful remembrance, and one of the
first acts of the _Sonderbund_ in 1845 was to call back seven Jesuit
fathers. When the Protestant cantons, however, finally succeeded in
crushing this League, they at once passed a law forbidding any Jesuit to
remain on Swiss territory; so again the order had to leave Lucerne, and
also Schwytz, where they also had a large house.

“And now,” continued Herr H——, “the liberals are clamoring for another
revision of our constitution—a constitution which needs no revising,
except in their sense of doing away with all faith, and meddling in our
religious affairs. But the people now will not bear that,” he added
grimly. “They will resist calmly at first, but I know many who will rather
fight than submit tamely to have their religion or their pastors
interfered with.”

It was sad to hear these forebodings in such an apparently peaceful
atmosphere, and gladly we turned to watch the water‐hens, which abound in
this corner of the river. Herr H—— knew them all, for they are public
property, like the bears at Berne, and protected by statutes as far back
as 1678. Nothing could be more graceful, gliding up and down the stream in
numbers, nor prettier than the friendly terms they are on with all the
inhabitants. The origin of the custom and cause of the protection,
however, seems lost in obscurity; at least he could tell us nothing but
the mere fact itself. A narrow footway runs along this side between the
houses and the river, up and down steps, and following the windings of the
rapid stream, while the massive, unadorned senate‐house is seen opposite,
and all the dwellings on that bank rise straight above the water. A true
mediæval picture it is—high and low gables intermixed; quaint old
balconies filled with flowers above; comely housewives busy washing the
household linen in the fresh waters below; merry young faces peeping
through upper windows or leaning out over the red‐cushioned sills to
gossip with a laughing neighbor—a locality made for a Walter Scott, and
another world of thought and association from the butterfly existence that
now borders the lake at only a few yards’ distance.

And by this ancient pathway we soon came to the second bridge, at the
furthest end of the town—the “Spreuner” or Mill Bridge, or, more truly,
the “Dance of Death” Bridge, celebrated by Longfellow in his _Golden
Legend_.

We took out the poem, and read that passage on the spot, and most
perfectly it answers his beautiful description. Prince Henry’s words were
uttered by us where he begins:


    “God’s blessings on the architects who build
    The bridges o’er swift rivers and abysses
    Before impassable to human feet,
    No less than on the builders of cathedrals,
    Whose massive walls are bridges thrown across
    The dark and terrible abyss of death.
    Well has the name of pontifex been given
    Unto the church’s head, as the chief builder
    And architect of the invisible bridge
    That leads from earth to heaven.”


This one is shorter than the Hafellbrücke, being only three hundred feet
in length, and making a sharp bend in the centre, and was built a century
later—in 1408—but somehow it is not venerable‐looking, and its grim
paintings give it a more sombre character. Elsie was quite right in
exclaiming: “How dark it grows!” It required many minutes to get
accustomed to the darkness after the brilliant light we had left, and she
must have been thankful when Prince Henry proceeded with his explanation,
saying that it was


              “ ‘The Dance of Death;’
    All that go to and fro must look upon it,
    Mindful of what they shall be, while beneath
    Among the wooden piles, the turbulent river
    Rushes, impetuous as the river of life,
    With dimpling eddies, ever green and bright,
    Save where the shadow of this bridge falls on it.”


By his aid we too followed the renowned pictures copied from those at
Basel. There we saw:


                “The grim musician, who
    Leads all men through the mazes of that dance,
    To different sounds in different measures moving.”


The


            “Young man singing to a nun,
    Who kneels at her devotions, but in kneeling
    Turns round to look at him; and Death, meanwhile
    Is putting out the candles on the altar.”


Here he


    “Has stolen the jester’s cap and bells.
    And dances with the queen.”


There,


    “The heart of the new‐wedded wife,
    Coming from church with her beloved lord,
    He startles with the rattle of his drum.”


And under it is written,


    “Nothing but death shall separate thee and me!”


In another division is seen


    “Death playing on a dulcimer. Behind him
    A poor old woman with a rosary
    Follows the sound, and seems to wish her feet
    Were swifter to o’ertake him.”


Underneath the inscription reads,


    “Better is death than life.”


And in this strain the paintings continue, until, what between the objects
and the general gloom, the effect becomes most melancholy, and we heartily
sympathized in Prince Henry’s cry—his _cri du cœur_:


    “Let us go forward, and no longer stay
    In this great picture‐gallery of Death!”


It led us straight into the heart of the old town, and with the poet we
exclaimed:


            “I breathe again more
    Freely! Ah! how pleasant
    To come once more into the light of day
    Out of that shadow of death!”


The streets were narrow, clean, and well paved, however, and everything
looked so bright and cheerful—perhaps doubly so after that gloomy
bridge—that our spirits at once revived. The shops were small, and all on
a homely, simple scale. But there were no signs of poverty or neglect in
any direction, and a general air of contentment was perceptible on all
sides.

The schools were just breaking up for their mid‐day hour’s rest as we
passed on, and the crowds of boys and girls flocking homewards made a
bright contrast to the gloomy bridge. Troops of neatly‐dressed little
maidens were especially pleasant to look at, with their books slung in
diminutive knapsacks across their shoulders. A happy‐faced, merry‐looking
juvenile population they all were.

Some fine religious prints in a small shop‐window next attracted our
attention, and, going in, we found it to be the principal bookseller’s of
Lucerne. Numberless pamphlets on all the leading topics of the day lay on
the counter, of which one caught my eye from its peculiarly local title:
_Festreden an der Schlachtfeier_, or _Speeches at the Festival_, held on
the anniversary of the battle of Sempach, on the 8th of July, 1873.

“What is this?” I asked.

“The celebration of our glorious victory over the Austrians!—the Marathon
of Swiss history, as its hero, Arnold von Winkelried, may be called our
Leonidas,” replied Herr H——. “It took place in 1386. You passed near the
site yesterday, for the railway runs beside the Lake of Sempach, if you
remember.”

“Oh! this, then, is a celebration, I suppose, in the style of the twelve
hundredth commemoration of Ely Cathedral which they are going to hold in
England next month. We might as well celebrate Agincourt or Crécy. But
this cannot be called a ‘centenary’ or any name of that kind, as it will
not be five hundred years since the battle until 1886!”

“No, it is nothing of the kind,” he replied, “but is an anniversary
religiously kept every year. The town council of Lucerne, and the mayor at
their head, with all the authorities and a vast multitude of people, go to
the battle‐field every 8th of July. We go there for two purposes: first,
to pray for the dead who lie buried there, and then in order to keep the
memory of the heroism of that day and of those who gained us our freedom
fresh in our own minds, and to transmit it to our children, as it has been
transmitted to us by our fathers. Allow me to present you with this
pamphlet. It contains the sermon preached on the last occasion by Herr
Pfarrer Haas of Hitzkirch, and the speech made at the Winkelried monument
by Herr Regierungrath Gehrig, and they have been printed by order of our
government here. You will find them interesting, and also these,” giving
me another bundle, “and they will show you that, next to love of our holy
faith, ‘love of fatherland’ and of ‘liberty’ are deep‐seated in the heart
of every man belonging to these Catholic cantons.”

“Do tell us about the festival!” we cried. “Is it a pretty sight?”

“You have no idea how pretty,” he answered—“pretty even if only as a
sight; for so many priests come that they have to erect altars in the open
air, and Masses are going on and congregations praying round them in all
directions over the ground the whole morning. This sermon,” he continued,
opening the pamphlet, and reading from it as he spoke, “opens poetically
by allusions to ’the green fields, the singing of the birds, and the
peaceful landscape, which alone form the decorations to the quiet prayer
of the priests—the ‘Stilles Priestergebet—which had been going on
uninterruptedly from the first rosy dawn of morning up to that hour’;
while the speech equally begins by a reference to the ‘lovely lake of the
forest cantons, whence came the men who achieved the victory, and whose
descendants are as patriotic now as in those far‐off days.’ You will
seldom hear a sermon, by the way, in these parts, without allusion to the
magnificence of our nation, and to the great deeds of our forefathers. Old
and young, clergy and laity, we are always exhorting each other to imitate
them. And is it not right? We feel the deep truth of the principle I have
lately seen so beautifully expressed by a Catholic writer that I learned
it by heart at the time. ‘Nations,’ he says, ‘live by traditions, more
even than individuals. By them the past extends its influence over the
present, illumines it with the reflection of its glory, and animates it
with its spirit. Traditions bind together the successive periods in a
nation’s existence, and preserve amongst its children the unity produced
by a long community of dangers and struggles, of triumphs and reverses.’
Revolutionists alone wish to break with the past, which, in this country
at least, is in direct opposition to their godless theories, and at
variance with all their passions. And long may it continue so! The last
passage of Herr Gehrig’s speech, by which he winds up, is very fine on
that point,” he said, again reading: “ ‘The Swiss, says an old proverb of
the XVIth century, have a noble land, good laws, and a wise Confederacy—a
Confederacy that is firm and strong, because it is not dictated by
passion. Comrades! let us keep this legacy of our fathers sacred. The
fatherland before all! God protect the fatherland!’ ”

As he spoke these words we came to the senate‐house square, in sight of
the glaring frescos of this same battle of Sempach, and the list of all
other Swiss victories, with which its tower has been recently covered.

“It is not by badly‐painted representations such as these,” he continued,
smiling, “that we try to keep up the old spirit, but by that true
eloquence which touches the heart and convinces the reason. These two
addresses were most soul‐stirring—the sermon and speech equally fine—and
made the greatest impression. The speech is a short summary of our history
and of Arnold von Winkelried, opening, as I said, by allusion to that
‘pearl of creation,’ that lake of the forest cantons, which is bordered by
the _Urschweiz_.”

“What does that mean?” asked Caroline C——. “I so often have noticed the
word without understanding it.”

“It simply means, ‘The original Switzerland.’ The particle _ur_ means in
German something very ancient, or the origin or root of anything. It is
the proudest title of these forest cantons, and therefore you will
constantly find it used, varied now and then as the _Urcantone_. They are
truly the cradle, not only of Switzerland, but of our freedom, and so far
preserve the same spirit of independence and of courage up to this hour.”

“And the sermon—what was that like?” asked young C——, whose interest,
notwithstanding his scepticism about William Tell, was now thoroughly
roused.

“The sermon was most suitable to the times,” replied Herr H——. “The
subject was concord or harmony; and its aim, to show how we ought to copy
those virtues of our ancestors which caused true harmony. It was divided,
as you may see here, into four points; First, _Fidelity_, when the
preacher drew a beautiful picture of Swiss fidelity from the earliest
ages—a fertile theme. Next, _Justice_—Christian justice, for he averred
that real justice never existed in the pagan world, and he again goes back
to the XIVth century to show how the men of that age acted, so that the
historian Zschokke calls it ‘the golden age’ of Switzerland! And he
fortifies his assertions by quotations from old annals. Here is one from
the celebrated oath of the Rüti, in 1307: ‘Every man must protect the
innocent and oppressed people in his valley, and preserve to them their
old rights and freedom. On the other hand, we do not wish to deprive the
Counts of Habsburg of the smallest portion of their property, of their
rights, or of their vassals. Their governors, followers, servants, and
hirelings shall not lose a drop of blood.’ Then, again, how the same men
in 1332 gave an order to the judges ‘not to favor any one in a partisan
spirit, but to deal justice according to their oaths.’ Again, in 1334,
they answer a proposition made to them by the emperor by proudly telling
him that ‘there are laws which even princes should not transgress.’ Of
their own government they require ‘that the citizens shall receive
security for honor, life, and property; that the magistrates shall listen
to the complaints of the poor, and not answer them sharply; that they
shall not pronounce judgment imperiously, nor, above all, condemn
capriciously.’ This was in 1335. He continues then to prove how
scrupulously they forbid feuds and lawless plundering; and the high
respect our ancestors showed for churches and ecclesiastical institutions
is supported by a quotation from a league that was sworn to at Zurich
immediately after this very battle of Sempach, called, in consequence, the
Sempacher Brief, where this remarkable passage occurs: ‘As the Almighty
has chosen the churches for his dwelling, so it is our wish that none of
us shall dare to break into, plunder, or destroy any convent or chapel
whatsoever.’ This took place in 1393, and Herr Pfarrer Haas ends this part
by an appeal to the present generation: ‘Do you wish to imitate your
ancestors? Then give weight in the council‐chamber, in the tribunals, in
the framing of laws, in their execution and administration, to that
Christian justice which gives and leaves to each man that which by right
belongs to him. By that means you will preserve harmony in the land—the
foundation‐stone of national prosperity, and the strength of the
Confederacy. States grow old and pass away, but Christianity has eternal
youth and freshness. When a nation reposes on the rock of Christian
justice, she never suffers from the changes of childhood, youth, manhood,
or old age, but flourishes for ever in perpetual freshness and vigor.’ ”

“That is very fine!” all exclaimed. “But it is the more striking when one
finds it was only spoken the other day. It sounds so like an old middle‐
age sermon addressed to men of the ‘ages of faith.’ ”

“You are right,” returned Herr H——; “but I assure you the tone is the
ordinary one of sermons in these districts, and elicited no astonishment,
though a great deal of sympathy. It will tire you, however, to hear more,
so we had better go on!” We had been lingering on the promenade while
listening to him, under the shady chestnuts facing the lake; but now all
unanimously begged he would continue, merely moving to a bench nearer our
hotel.

“Well, as you wish it, I shall obey!” he said, making us a bow, with a
smile of pleasure at our increasing interest in his country. “The next
division of the sermon, on virtue and morality, was ably argued, as you
will perceive whenever you read this pamphlet; especially in reference to
the modern doctrines on these subjects now propounded in other parts of
Switzerland.” (We thought here of our recent experience at the book‐stall
at Berne!) “And the preacher complimented the inhabitants of the rural
cantons on the Christian faith and simple, virtuous manners they still
retain, ending by quotations from our Lord’s words in the New Testament,
and saying that ‘enlightenment is not unbelief, but the true and proper
use of belief.’’ The fourth and last essential to harmony he shows to be
that interior peace which can be produced by the Christian faith alone. No
one can be a good citizen who does not conquer the passions of his own
nature, and obtain that inner tranquillity of mind which is the growth of
true religion. Amongst other proofs of his argument he quotes from Blessed
Nicholas von der Flüe. I presume you know who he was?”

Each of us in turn was obliged to answer “No,” although the name was not
unfamiliar to some. But the more we heard, the greater did our humiliation
gradually become at finding how slightly we were acquainted with this
Swiss life; and every one rejoiced when Herr H—— replied:

“Blessed Nicholas was a hermit, but as great a patriot as he was a saint.”
However, you will hear enough about him when you visit Stanz and Sarnen.
His words carried immense weight in his day, and he is still very much
revered, and is perpetually quoted. He lived in the XVth century, and our
Herr Pfarrer Haas here gives a long extract from one of his letters to the
Mayor of Berne in those years. After this he goes on to say: “Such was the
faith of your forefathers! The prayers which the combatants said on this
very spot amidst the scoffs of their enemies; the Sacred Host which the
priest carried at Lauffen; the anniversaries they founded; the Holy
Sacrifice they ordered should be offered on those days of commemoration;
the crosses they erected over the graves of all who fell in the combat,
prove where their souls sought and obtained rest and peace.” “Fidelity,
justice, virtue, and faith form the groundwork of the union and harmony of
a people. Let each one of us, in his circle, and amongst those whom he can
influence, strengthen these pillars of the edifice, and in this manner we
can best help to secure the happiness and solidity of our dearly‐loved
Swiss fatherland.” Then he winds up by a beautiful peroration, thus: “We
stand here on graves. Simple stone crosses rise above these tombs, where
for the last four hundred and eighty‐seven years the heroes of Sempach,
friends and enemies, repose after their hard day’s work. Sleep in peace,
ye dead! I envy ye your rest! There may be fighting and storm o’erhead,
but what matters that to the sleepers? Your eyes are closed! Ye do not
watch the troubles and sorrows of mankind, the cares and burdens of life,
the battle of the spirits, the play of passions. Once, too, your hearts
beat high in the decisive hour. Each Swiss and Austrian believed that he
defended the right. On both sides stood great men and great heroes. Death,
brave hearts, has united you in peace; and over your graves, for nearly
five hundred years, has stood the cross in token of conciliation—the
symbol of peace, the badge of the confederates; indicating that
Switzerland will still stand firm in harmony when the hotly‐contested
opinions surging in her midst at this day shall long since have sunk into
dust and ashes.


    “ ‘Our faith is firm in fatherland;
      Although brave sons may die,
    Swiss soil will still yield faithful band
      To wield the cross on high:
    The white, unsullied cross for aye
    O’er Switzerland shall fly.’ ”


“Magnificent!” all again exclaimed, “in language and sentiment! How we
should like to have heard it!”

“There was a great crowd this year,” continued Herr H——, “though numbers
never fail on any occasion. But a musical festival had taken place in
Lucerne the day before, so for that reason there were more than usual. The
majority now go by rail, but in my youth the procession of carriages was
much more imposing. And Lucerne then was a Vorort, or capital of the
Confederacy alternately with Zurich and Berne—a system long since done
away with; so that when the year came for its turn, all the deputies and
the diplomatic representatives were invited, and came too—all except an
old Austrian, whom nothing could move. I well remember hearing that his
colleagues used to laugh at him for keeping up the feeling after so many
hundred years; but it was so strong that he never could hear William
Tell’s name mentioned without calling him an ‘assassin’; and you may
imagine how the others amused themselves by always bringing up the
subject. The feeling against the Austrians is very strong, too, amongst
the Swiss.”

“I never understand it,” remarked Caroline C——. “I have always been taught
to look on Rudolph von Habsburg as a perfect character; and yet the moment
one comes to this country, one hears nothing but abuse of the Habsburgs.
Do explain it.”

“I should have to give you a lecture on Swiss history, dear young lady, I
fear, before you could understand it; and there is no time for that now.”

“Oh! do tell us something. There is still half an hour before the _table‐
d’hôte_, and it is so pleasant sitting here. We should all like to have a
clearer view of the reason of this dislike. I am always much puzzled, too,
in Schiller’s _William Tell_, at the conspirators always wanting to be
under the empire alone, and not through the Habsburgs; and it is so
troublesome to wade through a history when travelling,” she replied.

“But I should go back to the very beginning for that purpose,” he
answered. “However, if you insist, I shall give you a few leading facts
that you can find amplified whenever you feel inclined to read a Swiss
history right through. May I presume, then, that you know,” he continued,
laughing, “that the first inhabitants of Switzerland are supposed to have
been offshoots of Northern tribes—men driven from their homes by famine?
There were a few settlers before these, said to be refugees from Italy,
but only in a wild corner of the mountains, hence called Rhœtia; and they
were so few and so isolated that they are not worth mentioning. The stream
of inhabitants poured down by the Lake of Constance. Some say that the
same names are found to this day in Sweden as in the valleys of these
cantons. In any case, the tradition is that two brothers, Switer and Swin,
arrived with their families and followers, and settled at the upper end of
this lake, and from them the territory they occupied was called Schwytz.
It is quite certain that this was the first part occupied; therefore the
title it claims of ‘Urschweiz,’ or ‘original Switzerland,’ is most
appropriate. They spread all round this lake and through these forest
cantons, on from one valley to another, to the foot of the great snowy Alp
region, but not further. Other races came later, and settled at Geneva and
elsewhere, and, coming into collision with Rome, then mistress of the
world, were finally made part of the Roman Empire. Then came the inroad of
other barbarians on the downfall of Rome, and everything was in utter
confusion until the light of Christianity shone over the land. It was
introduced here, as in Germany, by missionaries who came from all parts,
and a bishopric even was founded at Chur in the earliest Frankish times.
Convents, too, rose on all sides. You will find remains of them in the
most remote valleys and out‐of‐the‐way corners of the country. S.
Sigebert, for instance, came from France, and built Disentis in the wilds
of Rhœtia, now the Grisons. S. Columba and S. Maughold preached along the
Reuss and the Aar, and the great S. Gall evangelized the wild district
round the Lake of Constance, girt by forests filled with all manner of
wild beasts. The celebrated convent of his name was built on the site of
his hermitage, and gave rise to the town of St. Gall. Einsiedeln, too, the
famous monastery which you are going to visit, dates also from that
period, over the cell of the hermit Meinrad, and so on in every direction.
Even Zurich and our own Lucerne owe their origin to convents. As in so
many other countries, so here likewise the monks spread civilization,
opened schools, and taught the people agriculture. Then came another
period of confusion after Charlemagne’s reign, which ended by the greater
portion of Switzerland falling to the share of his successors in the
German Empire. There were numberless dukes and counts all over the land
who already held large possessions, but had been vassals of the Dukes of
Swabia. Now, however, they set him at defiance, and would obey no one but
the emperor. Many of the monasteries, too, had acquired considerable
property by this time, and their abbots were often powerful lords. They
followed the example of the counts and dukes, and also assumed
independence. But, on the other hand, the towns equally rose in
importance, and often set the nobles and abbots at naught. These then, in
order not to lose their influence, strove to increase the number of their
vassals by making clearances in their forests, promoting the establishment
of villages, and granting privileges to their inhabitants, in all which
you will find the origin of the extraordinary number of rural communes for
which Switzerland has always been so noted. The nobles, who had no
occupation but war, were engaged in constant feuds amongst themselves or
with the towns of which they were most jealous, and, leading lawless
lives, wasted their inheritance little by little. The Crusades also
contributed to diminish them, for all the knights in the country flocked
thither. In the course of time their numbers dwindled considerably by
these means, or by the sale of their property and feudal rights to the
towns and even to the villages. At the period we are talking of, however,
they were amongst the heroes of the land, and often fought bravely and
made themselves respected.

“In one district, however, there were neither nobles, nor castles, nor
towns, nor monasteries, nor any inhabitants, except the descendants of the
first settlers. That was in the wild region of Rhœtia, and in what now
constitutes these forest cantons, or Vierwaldstätter, as they are called
in German. The latter all sprang from one common stock, and for a long
time had only one head and one church. This was in the Muotta Valley, and
thither came the entire population of Schwytz, Unterwalden, and Uri. At
last, when they increased and multiplied, they divided into these three
districts, built their own churches, and elected their own _Landamman_, or
chief magistrate, and their own council. No one claimed sovereignty over
this mountain district but the emperor. To him the people never objected;
on the contrary, they were rather glad to enjoy his powerful protection,
and willingly accepted, nay, often chose, the imperial judges to act as
arbitrators in cases of their own internal disputes. Now, these judges
were called governors, or Vogts, and, in order to distinguish them from
inferior governors, were entitled _Reichsvögte_, or governors of the
empire. It is well to bear this in mind, for on this point turned the
whole dispute with the Habsburgs, and it was the cause of the conspiracy
of the Rüti and of our subsequent freedom. It must also be remembered that
the object of every community in the country at that period was to free
itself from the yoke of the local laws, whether nobles or abbots, and to
place themselves directly under the empire. And in this almost every town
succeeded by slow degrees. The advantages were very great. First of all,
they were not liable to the constant petty exactions of near neighbors,
and the imperial government was so far away that they were allowed to
administer their own property and to choose their own authorities, being
only asked in exchange to pay some light taxes to the imperial treasury,
and to accept a _Reichsvögt_, or governor. His office was merely to uphold
the emperor’s rights, and to act as judge in matters of life and death—a
condition never refused; for it was held that, being a stranger, he would
be more impartial than one of their community.

“Amongst the nobles who had gradually grown powerful at this time were the
Counts of Habsburg, who lived in the Aargau, and, instead of diminishing,
had been daily extending, their possessions and influence. Suddenly and
unexpectedly Count Rudolph was chosen Emperor of Germany. There were great
disputes between the German princes on the death of the late emperor, and
the story runs that they elected him simply on the assurance of the
Elector of Cologne, who declared that Rudolph von Habsburg was upright and
wise, beloved by God and man.

“This, as you know, proved true, and you were perfectly right in believing
him to have been a ‘perfect character.’ Moreover, he never forgot his old
fellow‐countrymen, and showered favors on them as long as he lived. Many
places were made direct fiefs of the empire by him, amongst others our
town of Lucerne, but more especially these forest cantons; and he raised
the Bishop of Lausanne and the Abbot of Einsiedeln to the rank of princes
of the empire. As a natural result, the whole country grew devoted to him,
and came forward with gifts of money and assistance of every kind whenever
he required it.

“But with his successor, his son Albrecht, comes the reverse of the medal.
It was soon seen that he thought of nothing but increasing his own family
possessions, and had no respect for the privileges of the towns or rural
populations. Foreseeing evil times, therefore, Uri, Schwytz, and
Unterwalden met together, and made a defensive league, binding themselves
by oath to stand by each other and to defend themselves against all
enemies. Hence the origin of their name, ‘Eidgenossen,’ which in German
means ‘oath‐participators.’ The Bishop of Constance and Duke of Savoy made
a separate agreement, and so did various others. At last the princes of
Germany also became so discontented with Albrecht that they elected a
Prince Adolf of Nassau in his stead. The whole country was soon divided
into two parties, one for and the other against Albrecht of Austria, as he
had then become. Down he marched with a large army, devastated the
territory of the Bishop of Constance, and Adolf of Nassau lost life and
crown in a desperate battle. The confederates had taken no part against
Albrecht openly as yet, and sent ambassadors to beg he would respect their
ancient rights, as his father of glorious memory had always done. But he
only answered ‘that he would soon change their condition.’ Meantime, the
majority of the nobles joined his side; but the towns resisted him, and
Berne gained such a great victory that he got alarmed and made peace with
Zurich, confirming all its privileges. He then sent word to the
Waldstätter cantons that he wished to treat them as the beloved children
of his own family, and that they had better at once place themselves under
Austrian protection. But the sturdy, free‐hearted mountaineers replied
that they preferred the old rights they had inherited from their fathers,
and desired to continue direct vassals of the empire. Albrecht was not
prepared to enforce their submission, so he resorted to the expedient of
sending them _Reichsvögte_ who were wicked and cruel men, that were
ordered, besides, to oppress and torment them in such a manner that they
should at last desire in preference to place themselves under Austro‐
Habsburg protection. Chief of these was the now far‐famed Gessler, and
also Landerberg, whose castle at Sarnen was the first destroyed later. Not
only were they cruel, but they insisted on living in the country, although
all previous _Reichsvögte_, or governors, had only come there
occasionally, and had allowed the people to govern themselves. Unable to
bear it, the celebrated ‘three,’ Stauffacher, Fürst, and Melchthal, whom
you now know through Schiller, if from no other source, met together.
Stauffacher came from Schwytz, Walther Fürst from Uri, and Arnold von
Melchthal represented Unterwalden, and they chose for their meeting the
central spot of the meadow, called the Rüti, which you will pass when
sailing up the lake. Each brought ten others with them, and in their name
and that of all their fellow‐countrymen they took that oath which was
quoted in the sermon as I read it just now. This union of the three
cantons was the foundation of the Swiss Confederation. Lucerne joined it
in 1332, and then it became the League of the Four Forest Cantons, all
surrounding this lake. Some say that Tell was one of the ten from his
canton, but others deny this. It does not much matter, for one fact is
certain: that the whole country was discontented, and Gessler grew alarmed
without knowing of the conspiracy, which alarm was the cause of his
conduct towards Tell.”

“Oh! William Tell is all a myth,” exclaimed young C——, who never could
conceal his sentiments on this point. “No one believes in him nowadays.”

“My dear young gentleman,” answered Herr H—— quietly, “it is easy for
modern critics to say this. They may laugh and sneer as they like. Nothing
is more easy than to argue against anything. I remember often hearing that
Archbishop Whately—your own archbishop—was so convinced of this that he
once undertook to write a pamphlet in this style, disproving the existence
of the First Napoleon, and succeeded triumphantly. But _I_ hold with
Buckle—your own Buckle too!” he said, laughing—“who declares that he
relies more on the strength of local traditions and on native bards than
on anything else. The great argument against William Tell, I know
perfectly well, is that the same story is to be found in Saxo‐Grammaticus,
and also in Sanscrit; but that does not disturb me, for there is no reason
why the same sort of thing may not have happened in many a place. These
mountaineers certainly had no means of studying either the one or the
other in what _you_, no doubt, will call the ’dark ages’! Just have
patience until you see the Tell chapels and hear a little more on the
subject, and I hope you will change your mind. One thing is certain,
namely, that Tell was not the _cause_ of the conspiracy, and that his
treatment did not make the confederates depart from their original plan,
which was to rise on the New Year’s night of 1308. In _my_ humble opinion,
Schiller has done poor William Tell no good, for between him and the opera
the story has been so much popularized that this alone has raised all the
doubts about it. People fancy it was Schiller’s creation more or less,
altogether forgetting that the chapels and the veneration for Tell have
existed on the spot these hundreds of years. It is fortunate Arnold von
Winkelried has not been treated in the same way, or we should doubt his
existence too.”

“You have not told us anything about Sempach yet,” broke in Caroline C——,
anxious to stop the discussion, which seemed likely to vex the old
gentleman, especially as she well knew her brother’s school‐boy
disposition for argument.

“Morgarten and much more occurred before that, mademoiselle,” answered
Herr H——, “all tending to increase the national hatred of Austria. As a
natural consequence of the Rüti and its uprising, Albrecht became enraged
against the forest cantons, and marched at once to Switzerland with a
large force. But a most unexpected, startling event happened. He had a
nephew, Duke John of Swabia, who was his ward, but from whom he continued
to withhold his patrimony on one pretext or another. The young man at
length grew furious, and, as they were crossing this very same river Reuss
at Windisch, Duke John stabbed his uncle, whilst a noble, a conspirator of
John’s, struck him on the head. There were a few others present, but in a
panic they all fled, and left the Emperor of Germany to die in the arms of
a poor woman who happened to be passing.

“The deed was so fearful that even Albrecht’s worst enemies were
horrified, and it is said that the murderers wandered over the world, and
ultimately died as outcasts. Zurich shut its gates against them, and the
forest cantons refused them all shelter. But Albrecht’s family not only
pursued them, but behaved inhumanly. His widow and two children, Duke
Leopold and Agnes, Queen of Hungary, came at once to Switzerland, and
seized innocent and guilty right and left, destroying without scruple the
castle of any noble whom they suspected in the slightest degree, and
executing all without mercy. Agnes in particular was cruel beyond measure.
One story related of her by Swiss historians is that, after having
witnessed the execution of sixty‐three innocent knights, and whilst their
blood was flowing at her feet, she exclaimed: ‘Now I am bathing in May‐
dew!’ Whether literally true or not, it shows what she must have been to
have given cause for such a tale. In fact, the stories of her merciless
character are too numerous and terrible to repeat now. At last she and her
mother, the widow, built a magnificent convent on the site of the murder,
which you may have heard of as _Königsfelder_, or the King’s Field. There
she subsequently retired to ‘end her days in piety’; but the people
detested her, and Zschokke says that once when she was passing through the
convent, and bowed to one of the monks, he turned round and boldly
addressed her thus: ‘Woman! it is a bad way to serve God, first to shed
innocent blood, and then to found convents from the spoils of the
victims.’ She died there, and we have a piece of silk in the arsenal in
Lucerne which formed part of her funeral apparel.”

“Oh! how horrible,” exclaimed Caroline C——. “But I would give anything to
see it! How could we manage it?”

“Very easily,” replied Herr H——. “If you only have time, we might go there
after dinner. It is close to the Spreuner Brücke, and I can get you in.
There are many trophies also from Sempach, and other victories besides.”

“Do tell us about Sempach,” I interposed. “It is getting late, and I fear
the dinner‐bell will soon ring.”

“First came the battle of Morgarten, of which you will see the site from
the top of the Rigi. Albrecht’s son Leopold followed up his father’s
grudge against the forest cantons, and gave them battle there in 1308,
when he was signally defeated. It was a glorious victory by a handful of
peasants. But you will read about it on your journey. Sempach is our
Lucerne property. It did not take place for sixty‐nine years after
Morgarten, but in the interval there had been constant fighting with the
house of Austria, which still kept its possessions in Switzerland, and
also with the nobles, who hated the towns‐people, and clung to the
Habsburgs more or less. It was about this time that a castle belonging to
the latter, on this lake, just round the projecting corner to our left,
was destroyed by the people. It was called here Habsburg, and has lately
been restored by a foreigner. On all sides the worst feelings were kept
alive, and it only required a spark to set all in a blaze. This eventually
happened by some angry Lucerners levelling to the ground the castle of a
knight who had imposed undue taxes upon them. He, on his side, appealed to
the Habsburg of the day, who, by a curious coincidence, was also a Duke
Leopold, son of the Leopold who was defeated at Morgarten. Full of anger,
he gathered all his forces, and marched in hot haste against Lucerne. But
on the heights near the Lake of Sempach he encountered the confederates.
They had come from Lucerne, with contingents, though in small force, from
all the forest cantons. It was hilly ground, most unfitted for cavalry;
but Leopold would not wait for his infantry, and, making his heavily‐armed
knights dismount, he ordered them to rush with their pointed lances in
close ranks on the enemy. It was like a wall of iron, and at first the
confederates could make no impression upon it. They fell in numbers, and
were just beginning to despair when a voice cried out, ‘I will open a path
to freedom! Faithful, dearly‐loved confederates, take care of my wife and
child!’ and a man, rushing forward, seized as many lances as he could
clasp, buried them in his own body, and fell dead. This was Arnold von
Winkelried, an inhabitant of Stanz, about whom little else is known. Over
his corpse his comrades pressed forward through the opening he had thus
made, and they never again yielded the dear‐bought advantage. The struggle
became fearful on both sides; prodigies of valor were performed, and it is
said that three standard‐bearers were killed before the flag of Austria
could be captured. Eventually the knights turned in order to retreat; but
their heavy armor impeded them, and their men, sure of victory, had led
their horses far away. So they were cut down by hundreds. Duke Leopold was
killed by a man from Schwytz; but they all fought bravely, and defended
their banners with such tenacity that one was found torn into small
shreds, in order that the enemy might not get it, while its pole was
firmly clenched between the teeth of the dead man who had been carrying
it. That was the glorious battle of Sempach, which finally crushed the
power of the Habsburgs in Switzerland, and after which our liberty was
firmly established. Is it any wonder, then, that we celebrate it so
religiously, or that the antipathy to Austria was so deeply rooted in the
nation? The whole aim of the Habsburgs after Rudolph’s reign, and of the
nobles who were their vassals, was to crush our privileges and freedom. In
consequence, they were so hated that no one could even venture to wear a
peacock’s feather, merely because it was the favorite ornament of the
Austrian dukes. In fact, peacocks were forbidden in Switzerland; and a
story is told, to show how far the feeling went, of a man having broken
his wine‐glass at a public tavern, merely because he fancied that he saw
the colors of a peacock’s tail in the play of the sun’s rays on the
glass.”

As Herr H—— pronounced these words the first dinner‐bell rang, and we all
rose, thanking him cordially for his most interesting lecture. Caroline
C—— in particular was most grateful, declaring that she never could
understand anything of Swiss history before, but now had the clearest view
of its general bearings.

After dinner all except myself and Mrs. C—— started off at once for the
arsenal to see the “relics,” as they now called them; but we two adjourned
to the Hofkirche at four o’clock to listen to the organ, played there
daily for strangers, as at Berne and Freyburg. The Lucerne instrument is
not so well known as those two, but it is equally fine, if not finer. It
was admirably played, too, and we sat entranced by its tones, especially
by its heavenly Vox Angelica, fully sympathizing with Wordsworth when
standing on the old Hofbridge that came up to the church hill in his day,
and writing:


    “Volumes of sound, from the cathedral rolled,
    This long‐roofed vista penetrate.”


We had arranged to sleep that night at Vitznau, at the foot of the Rigi,
in order to ascend by the first train next morning, and for this purpose
were to leave in a six o’clock steamer. It seemed difficult to tear
ourselves so quickly away from Lucerne, and the hurry was considerable.
The remainder of our party, however, returned just in time, full of all
they had seen—“Agnes’ shroud,” a dreadful title for a piece of heavy silk
used at her funeral, striped yellow and black, the Habsburg colors; Duke
Leopold’s coat‐of‐mail, in which he was killed at Sempach, and a dozen
others; a heap of lances taken there; numbers of trophies from Grandson
and Morat, the battles with Charles the Bold; but, what interested them
most, the great standard of Habsburg, of yellow silk with a red lion on
it, taken at Sempach, and another, a white flag, covered, they said, with
blood, also captured there. Young C—— was most struck besides with a very
old vase decorated with the meeting at the Rüti.

It was a lovely evening, but, though the sail promised to be delightful,
we left Lucerne and its worthy citizen with regret, thanking him
cordially, over and over again, for the interest he had given us in his
country, and at last persuaded him to come and meet us in a day or two,
and act as our cicerone in part of the forest cantons, which by his means
already assumed a place in our affections.




A Legend Of Alsace. Concluded.


From The French Of M. Le Vicomte De Bussierre.



VIII.


Odile, who had returned to Hohenbourg without her father’s consent, was
now forced to remain against her own will. Her reputation so spread
throughout the province that people of the highest rank went to see her,
and several aspired to her hand. Among these suitors was a young German
duke whose station, wealth, and personal qualities gave him an advantage
over his rivals. Adalric and Berswinde joyfully gave their consent, and
the marriage settlements were agreed upon. The arrangement was then made
known to Odile, who declared firmly but respectfully that she had chosen
Christ for her spouse, and could not renounce her choice. But this
projected marriage flattered the pride and ambition of her father, and,
after vainly endeavoring to persuade her to consent to it, he sought to
obtain by force what mildness had not been able to effect. Odile, seeing
that her liberty of action was to be infringed upon, felt that flight was
her only resource. Commending herself to God and Our Blessed Lady, she
clothed herself early one morning in the rags of a beggar, and left the
castle unobserved, descending the mountain by an obscure and almost
impassable ravine. It was in the year 679. Her first intention was to take
refuge in the Abbey of Baume, but, considering that would be the first
place to seek for her, she resolved to conceal herself from all mankind,
and lead henceforth a difficult and solitary life for the love of her
Redeemer. She therefore directed her steps toward the Rhine, and, meeting
a fisherman, she gave him a small piece of money to take her across the
river.

Odile had been accustomed to seclude herself several hours a day for
prayer and meditation, so her non‐appearance excited no surprise. She was
supposed to be at her devotions, and was already several miles from home,
when the report of her disappearance spread consternation throughout the
manor. The duke, distressed by her flight, assembled all his followers,
ordered his four sons to pursue her in four different directions, and
directed his servants to scour the surrounding country. Berswinde alone
did not share the general grief. She would indeed have been pleased by the
marriage of her daughter and the German duke, but Odile’s motives for
declining the alliance, the remembrance of the miracle wrought at her
baptism, and the manifest protection of heaven she was so evidently under,
made her mother sure that the support of the Most High would not in this
case be wanting.

Adalric himself set off with several esquires, and unwittingly took the
same route as his daughter. He soon came to the Rhine, where he heard that
a young beggar‐girl, whose rags could not conceal her noble air and
extreme beauty, had crossed the river and gone towards Fribourg. The duke,
sure it was his daughter, likewise crossed over, and came so close upon
her steps that it seemed impossible for her to escape. But the princess,
says the old chronicle of Fribourg containing these details, coming in
sight of the city near a place called Muszbach, was so overcome with
fatigue that she was obliged to sit down and take breath. She had hardly
thanked God for his protection thus far when she perceived, at some
distance, a company of horsemen swiftly approaching. Then recognizing her
father and his followers, she raised her eyes to heaven, whence alone she
could expect succor, and prayed fervently: “O my Saviour!” cried she,
“spotless protector of virgins! I am lost unless thou shieldest me from
their eyes, and coverest me with the shadow of thy wings!” And our Lord,
says the legend, heard this earnest prayer: the rock on which she was
seated opened to shelter her from her eager pursuers, and had hardly
closed upon her when Adalric came up. As soon as he had passed by Odile
came out, and, that posterity might not lose the remembrance of this
miracle, a limpid stream of healing waters flowed henceforth from the
rock. This fountain became eventually the resort of pilgrims, and the
saint herself had a chapel built over it in commemoration of her
deliverance.

The duke, unsuccessful in his search, returned to Hohenbourg. Unable to
resign himself to the loss of his daughter, he fell into a state of
sadness and discouragement. Weeks, nay, months, passed, but no news of the
fugitive. Adalric finally proclaimed throughout his duchy, at the sound of
the trumpet that he would henceforth leave his daughter free to pursue her
own course of life, if she would only return to her family.

Having no longer any excuse for remaining away from her family, where she
might be called to labor for God, Odile left her retreat at Brisgau, and
returned home.(63)



IX.


Adalric’s promises were sincere. He was eager to aid Odile as much as he
could in the realization of her most cherished hopes. “For it was in the
decrees of divine Providence,” says an old Latin chronicle, “that this
light should be placed in a candlestick, that it might give light to all
who were in the house; and God had inspired Odile with the resolution to
found a community of noble virgins who would live in retirement and
observe the evangelical counsels.”

The saint opened her heart to her father, representing to him that Alsace
had already convents for men, but no retreat for women who wished to
renounce the world, and that such a refuge would be useful and at the same
time pleasing to God. Adalric listened favorably to his daughter, and,
whether the proposition pleased him or he did not wish to oppose her
inclinations, he gave her in due form, in the year 680, the Castle of
Hohenbourg with its vast dependencies and immense revenues, that she might
convert what had till then been the principal bulwark of Alsace into an
inviolable asylum for noble ladies of piety who wished to consecrate
themselves to God.

Odile then assembled a number of workmen, and had all the buildings
removed that would be of no use to a religious community. This done, they
proceeded to construct the convent. It took them ten years. Adalric
generously defrayed all the expenses, and even directed the architects,
enjoining on them to neglect nothing that could contribute to the solidity
and beauty of the edifice.

As soon as it was known that Odile intended forming a community of women,
a crowd of young ladies of rank came to Hohenbourg, renouncing their
families and earthly possessions for the love of Christ. They besought her
to receive them as her companions, and to direct them in the way of
salvation. There were one hundred and thirty of them before the convent
was finished. Among them were Attale,(64) Eugénie, and Gundeline, the
daughters of Odile’s brother Adalbert,(65) and her own sister
Roswinde.(66) All these renounced the joys of the world without regret,
hoping to obtain eternal life. They united themselves to God by silence,
recollection, and prayer. Manual labor and the chanting of the Psalms
varied their occupations. Like the first Christians, they seemed to have
only one heart and one soul. Their only study seemed to be to equal their
superior in humility, sweetness, piety, and self‐renunciation. They lived
on barley bread and vegetables cooked in water. They took wine only on
festivals, and passed their nights in vigils and prayer, permitting
themselves only some hours of sleep when exhausted nature absolutely
required it. Then they slept only on a bear’s skin with a stone for a
pillow. In a word, they only allowed the body what was necessary for the
preservation of life.

Adalric had a profound respect for Odile, as one under the special
protection of the Divinity. The system of her community, the devotion and
the rigid and holy lives of those who composed it, and above all their
inexhaustible charity, led him to lavish his wealth on their monastery.
Not satisfied with giving them his palace and its domains, and
establishing a foundation in perpetuity for one hundred and thirty young
ladies of noble birth, he likewise gave fourteen benefices for the priests
who served the convent chapels.

Odile, in her ardent charity, wished there should be free access to her
abbey, not only for all the members of her family and persons of high rank
who came often to discourse with her on the things of God, but also for
the poor, the unhappy, and the sick. The steepness of the mountain in some
places made its ascent impossible for the aged. Our saint had an easy
pathway constructed, paved with broad flag‐stones. Thenceforth the
unfortunate of all grades of society flocked to the abbey—the poor to
obtain assistance, the infirm for remedies, and sinners for salutary
advice. All who were unhappy or unfortunate, whoever they might be, were
the objects of Odile’s tender affection. “The Gospel,” she constantly
repeated to her companions, “is a law of love,” and she exhorted them, in
imitation of Him who gave his life for us, to be charitable to their
fellow‐creatures. Odile’s charity was boundless. Not satisfied with
distributing alms, she cheered all with sweet words, carried them
nourishment and remedies with her own hands, and dressed the most
frightful wounds. “There came one day,” says a writer of that time, “a man
covered with a horrid leprosy to the gates of Hohenbourg for alms,
uttering most lamentable cries. He was so revolting, and he diffused so
infectious an odor, that none of the servants would approach him. One of
them, however, informed the saint of his condition. She at once prepared
some suitable food, and hastened to serve the leper. In spite of her
tenderness towards the unfortunate and her habitual control over her
senses, her first movement was one of horror at the sight of so disgusting
a being. Ashamed of her weakness, and resolved to conquer it, she folded
the leper affectionately in her arms, and burst into tears. Then she broke
the food she brought into small pieces, and fed him. At the same time she
raised her eyes to heaven, and, with a voice trembling with emotion,
exclaimed: ‘O Lord! deign to restore him to health or give him the courage
necessary to support such an affliction!’ Her humble prayer was
immediately heard. The leprosy disappeared, and the repulsive odor gave
place to one of sweetness, so that those who avoided him a short time
before were now eager to approach, to touch him, and to wonder.”

Odile gave bread, wine, and meat to all the poor who came to the abbey;
she was unwilling any should go away hungry. On feast days a great crowd
of beggars would besiege the gates, and on one occasion, all the food of
the community, and even the wine, being given them, the Sister who had
charge of the wine‐cellar sought Odile in church to tell her there was
none left for dinner. The abbess replied with a gentle smile: “He who fed
five thousand persons with five loaves and two fishes will provide for us,
if it be his will. Forget not, my daughter, that he has promised to those
that seek first the kingdom of heaven all other things shall be given. Go
where duty calls you.” The Sister went away, and at the hour of repast,
going to the wine‐cellar, found a supply of excellent wine.



X.


The two chapels already built by the duke were too small for celebrating
the divine service with suitable pomp. There was hardly room enough in
them for the sisterhood. The crowds from the neighboring villages were
often obliged to kneel outside. A larger church was indispensable. Adalric
provided the materials, and it was completed by the year 690. Two square
towers of pyramidal form rose beside the grand entrance. The abbess had it
consecrated to the Blessed Virgin, her chosen patroness and her model. One
of the side chapels she styled the Oratory of the Mother of God. There she
loved to take refuge in her mental troubles, in tribulation, and in
seasons of spiritual dryness. A second chapel she called Holy Rood Chapel.
In commemoration of her baptism she wished also to erect a small church in
honor of S. John the Baptist. Undecided about the location, she went out
of the monastery one night about midnight, and, kneeling on a great rock,
she remained a long time buried in profound meditation. Suddenly, says the
old legend, she was surrounded by a dazzling light, and before her stood
the radiant form of the precursor of our Lord in a garment of camel’s
hair, such as he wore in the desert. He seemed to indicate the spot where
the chapel should be erected. The next day it was commenced, and was
finished in the autumn of 696. The night before it was to be consecrated
S. Odile spent in prayer therein. The prince of the apostles himself, with
a choir of angels, descended and performed the ceremony.


    “The air of paradise did fan the house,
    And angels officed all.”


This miraculous chapel was sometimes called the _Sacrarium_, because the
abbess deposited in it the _cassette_ of relics Bishop Erhard gave her on
her baptismal day. It was afterwards more commonly called the Chapel of S.
Odile, because she was buried there herself. Besides these, she built the
Chapel of Tears and the Hanging Chapel, so called because it stood on a
steep precipice looking down into a deep chasm. All these chapels were so
many stations where the abbess and her companions betook themselves to
meditate in silence and solitude.

Adalric and Berswinde, weary of power and grandeur, retired to the Convent
of Hohenbourg with their daughter. Advanced in age, they now thought only
of preparing themselves for death by prayer and good works. The duke,
naturally violent and hard, had sometimes in his moments of passion
forgotten his duty. There were many faults for him to expiate before God,
and many scandals to repair before men. While he was practising all the
virtues of a holy penitent, he was attacked with a serious malady. Odile
felt that his last hour was at hand, and hardly left his bedside, wishing,
not only to give him the care his illness required, but to console,
encourage, and prepare him for a holy death. Contemporary testimony
expressly declares: “_Consolante eum et roborante beata Odilia_.” She
received his last breath and closed his eyes on the 20th of February. The
year is variously stated. It was between 690 and 700.

A witness of her father’s sorrow for his sins, and of his resignation in
his last moments, Odile hoped the mercy of God would be extended to him.
She imposed on herself the severest mortifications, and shed floods of
tears for the solace of his soul in the chapel, called from this
circumstance the Chapel of Tears. On the fifth day she had an inward
assurance of his salvation.

There are numberless traditions in Alsace respecting S. Odile. They have
been handed down from one generation to another in the villages grouped
around the foot of Mount Hohenbourg. One of these legends changes the
tears of the saint into a limpid stream, where the blind, or those who
have any disease of the eyes, go for a remedy. Another says her tears
perforated a rock. A third makes her and all her community behold her
father convoyed heavenward by a choir of angels led by S. Peter in
sacerdotal robes. The more we examine S. Odile’s life, the more numerous
become these brilliant legends, and the more fully do we find her life
marked by acts of beneficence and by miracles.

Berswinde survived her husband only nine days. She died suddenly while
praying in the Chapel of S. John.

The descendants of the duke and duchess assembled at Hohenbourg to deplore
their double loss. A magnificent funeral service was performed. All the
people of Alsace flocked to the convent to weep over their death. One
would have thought they had lost dear parents, say the chronicles. The
duke’s sons gave abundant alms on this occasion. The remains of the
deceased were placed in the Chapel of the Virgin, according to their
request, and thither came pilgrims to pray by their tomb till they were
removed.

Adalric, notwithstanding his generosity to the church, left immense
domains to his children. His oldest son, Etton, or Etichon, became Duke of
Brisgau and Count of Argovie. He was the progenitor of the houses of
Egisheim and Lorraine. The second son, Adelbert, had the duchies of
Alsace, Swabia, and Sundgau. From him sprang the houses of Habsburg and
Zähringen. Hugo, the third son, died before his father, but left three
sons. The oldest, Remigius, was Abbot of S. Gregory in the Val de Münster,
and finally Bishop of Strasbourg. He was a great friend of Charlemagne’s,
and built the celebrated nunnery of Eschau,(67) where two of his nieces
were successively abbesses.

After the death of her parents, Odile kept up most intimate relations with
the rest of her family. She saw them frequently, and labored for their
sanctification. Following her counsels, they founded a great number of
convents and churches, which, in that barbarous age, became the refuge of
science, literature, and the arts, and for centuries contributed
powerfully to the prosperity of Alsace.



XI.


Hitherto the inmates of Hohenbourg had been subjected to no written rule.
Our dear saint was their living guide. But notwithstanding the ardor of
their piety, she thought it proper to adopt some definite rule to obviate
the inconstancy of the human heart, and to restrain an excess of fervor.
Assembling all her spiritual children, she gave them, after invoking the
Holy Spirit, a fixed rule, probably drawn from that of S. Augustine.

The steepness of Hohenbourg made it so difficult of ascent for the aged
and infirm, the very ones whom Odile desired the most to aid, that she
resolved to build at its foot, on the south side, a spacious hospice with
a chapel, under the invocation of S. Nicholas.

Berswinde, who was still living, gave up a part of her revenues for the
benefit of the poor who were received there. S. Odile daily descended this
mountain, too steep and rough for others, to visit the hospice. She used
to visit each inmate, and give him alms and advice with all the tenderness
Christianity alone can inspire. Her children shared in her labors. They
loved the freshness and solitude of the spot where the hospice stood, and
there was an abundance of water there, which was lacking on the summit.
The number of the infirm that resorted hither became so large as to
require, night and day, the constant attendance of the Sisters, and they
begged the abbess to build another monastery near S. Nicholas, and
dependent on that of Hohenbourg. Odile consented.

One day, while she was occupied in overseeing the workmen, an aged man
brought three branches of a linden‐tree, begging her to plant them. He
predicted that the faithful would come to sit beneath their shade. Odile
did as he requested, planting the first in the name of the Father, the
second in the name of the Son, and the third in the name of the Holy
Ghost. In fact, successive generations have sought repose beneath them,
according to the old man’s prediction. Odile gave this new monastery the
name of Niedermünster (Lower Minster). She established there one‐half of
the community of Hohenbourg, retaining herself the direction of both
houses. She placed in the new house those who were most zealous in nursing
the sick, and had the greatest aptitude for it.

Many foreign ladies, drawn to Alsace by Odile’s reputation for sanctity,
were among their number. They lived at Niedermünster in obedience to the
rule of Hohenbourg, and led lives of austerity. These two cloisters, says
Father Hugo Peltre, might be compared to two trees, apparently separated,
but really drawing nourishment from the same root.

Odile, though advancing in years and broken down by her excessive
austerities, daily descended the mountain. Neither frost nor rain nor
fierce winds prevented her from visiting the hospice, which was her place
of delight, for there she found a vast field for her charity. She was in
the habit of saying: “Jesus Christ has given us the poor to supply his
place. In caring for them we serve the Saviour in their person.” The whole
of Alsace blessed her name, seeing her constantly occupied in solacing
suffering humanity, in guiding her spiritual children in the paths of
holiness, and in instructing the people in the sublime truths of the
Gospel.

There is a legend that Odile, bent down by the weight of years, was one
day ascending the mountain alone when she saw lying in the path an old man
dying of thirst and apparently breathing his last. Our saint tried to
raise him, but, too feeble to do so, she had recourse to the divine
assistance. After a fervent prayer, remembering what Moses did, she smote
a rock close by with her staff. A stream burst forth immediately, which
restored the old pilgrim to life. This fount is still venerated and
frequented. The water is considered miraculous.



XII.


Odile was ripe for heaven. Whether the state of her health announced it,
or God gave her a secret presentiment of her approaching end, on the 13th
of December (S. Lucius’ Day) she called together her companions in the
Chapel of S. John the Baptist, which had become her oratory, and, after
begging them not to be afflicted at what she had to say, she sweetly
announced to them that she was near the end of her earthly pilgrimage, and
her soul, ready to quit its prison of clay, would soon enjoy the liberty
God has promised his children. Then the holy abbess exhorted them to
remain faithful to the Lord, not to allow their fervor to relax, to resist
with all their strength the temptations of the adversary, and to submit
their wills to that of the Almighty.

While she was speaking to them her three nieces, Attale, Eugénie, and
Gundeline, shed floods of tears. Our dear saint, seeing their profound
grief, turned towards them and said: “Weep not, beloved children. Your
tears cannot prolong my existence here below. Go rather, all of you, to
the Chapel of Our Blessed Lady, pray together, recite the Psalms, and beg
for me the grace of a happy death.” As soon as all the community had gone
out to obey her wishes, the saint fell into an ecstasy, in which she had a
foretaste of heavenly joys. Her companions, returning from the chapel and
finding her insensible, began to express their sorrow that she had
departed without receiving Holy Communion. The saint, aroused by their
sobs and groans, opened her eyes and said: “Why have you returned so soon,
my dear children, to disturb my repose? I was in the presence of the
Blessed S. Lucius, and inexpressibly happy; for, as the apostle says, the
eye hath not seen, nor the ear heard, nor hath it entered into the heart
of man to conceive it.” She then expressed an ardent desire to receive the
most Sacred Body and Precious Blood of our Lord. All at once, says the old
legend, a flood of dazzling light pervaded the chapel. The saint fell on
her knees, all the Sisters imitating her example. A celestial ministrant,
radiant with glory, appeared at the altar. He approached the dying abbess,
placed in her hands a wonderful chalice, and then reascended to
heaven.(68) She communicated therefrom, murmured a last farewell to her
children, joined her hands, and then the eyes, once opened by a miracle,
closed for ever to the light.

According to her wishes, her body, extenuated with fasts and other
austerities, was laid on a bear’s skin, and exposed for eight days in the
Chapel of S. John the Baptist, on the Gospel side, and with the feet
turned towards the altar. During this time a sweet odor spread throughout
the abbey. Her children felt that, instead of weeping for her who had
fought the good fight, and never been wanting in her fidelity to God, they
should rather rejoice that she was called to receive the crown of
righteousness, and they to imitate her example and seek through her
intercession for as happy an end.

Thus died, on the 13th of December, 7—,(69) Odile, eldest daughter of
Adalric, Duke of Alsace, abbess of the convents of Hohenbourg and
Niedermünster. Her mortal remains were covered with mastic, which, at
first soft, became hard; then placed in a tomb of stone, which is still to
be seen.

The inmates of the two monasteries celebrated her obsequies with all the
solemnity due to their abbess and foundress, and with the recollection due
to her sanctity. All the people of Alsace flocked to Hohenbourg to look
once more on the face of her to whom the unfortunate and the afflicted
never appealed in vain. Her inexhaustible charity, her zeal for Christian
perfection, her austere and penitential life, and her good works without
number, had during her life rendered her the object of public veneration.
As soon as she was dead a particular honor was paid her, first at
Hohenbourg, then throughout the whole province, which to this day invokes
her as its patroness. This honor has been sanctioned by the church. Her
venerated sepulchre is in our day the most frequented place of pilgrimage
in Alsace.



XIII.


Odile had acquired a taste for letters at the Abbey of Baume. She had a
thorough knowledge of the Latin language, the Holy Scriptures, and
ecclesiastical history. Her last will and testament, which has been
preserved, proves that she was as enlightened as holy.(70) The monasteries
she founded did not degenerate in this respect. They were the asylums of
learning. In the XIIth century, says Grandidier, while a large part of
Europe was plunged in ignorance and barbarism, the love of literature and
the sciences was to be found among some women of Alsace. Hohenbourg was
inhabited by canonesses equally learned and regular. Three abbesses were
especially distinguished for their taste for poetry and literature in
general. The first, Ricklende or Kilinde, reformed the monastery in 1141.
Some of her Latin verses, and the fragments of other works in that
language, have been preserved. Herrade de Landsberg, who succeeded her in
1167, became still more celebrated. Grandidier, speaking of her, says:
“The polite arts, painting, music, and poetry, charmed the leisure of this
illustrious abbess.” A collection of poetry in Latin, composed for the
instruction of her community, under the title of _Hortus Deliciarum_,(71)
is still preserved. Gerlinde, her sister or cousin, succeeded her, and
equalled her in taste and knowledge.

The first abbesses after S. Odile were her two nieces, S. Eugénie and S.
Gundeline. They divided the authority. The first was Abbess of Hohenbourg,
the second of Niedermünster. The revenues, which had hitherto been in
common, were divided by Odile before her death. Only Oberehnheim remained
undivided, that there might be a common tie between them.

Regularity of monastic life and observances was maintained till the XIth
century. The church was accidentally destroyed in 1045, but was rebuilt
and consecrated to the Blessed Virgin by Bruno, Count of Dagsbourg, Bishop
of Toul, and Landgrave of Alsace, a descendant of Odile’s brother Etton. A
few years after it was again destroyed by the Hungarian invaders, and
again Bruno, who had become the Sovereign Pontiff in 1049 under the name
of Leo IX., had it rebuilt. This pope, called to Germany by the interests
of the church, went himself to Hohenbourg to consecrate the edifice and
reassemble the dispersed sisterhood. He did not leave this place, so dear
to his heart, till he had re‐established the monastic discipline.

About a hundred years after this the community of Hohenbourg greatly
relaxed its fervor, the number of its subjects diminished, their revenues
decreased, and the buildings were decaying. The monastery would perhaps
have been abandoned had not Frederick Barbarossa, in his quality of Duke
of Alsace, interfered to save so celebrated a house from falling. He sent
to reform it Ricklende or Kilinde, whom he took from the Convent of Bergen
in the Diocese of Eichstadt, and to whom he gave the title and rights of
Princess of the Holy Empire, and also bestowed on her large sums of money
for the reparation of the monastery. Ricklende, whom we have already
mentioned, joined great zeal and piety to an enlarged mind and much
information. Sustained by the authority of the emperor, she re‐established
discipline in less than two years, as her successor, Herrade de Landsberg,
formally testifies. The religious habit worn in this house was white,
_albens quasi lilium_, says the _Hortus Deliciarum_. The bull of Pope
Lucius III. says they followed the rule of S. Augustine. Ricklende had
under her thirty‐three choir Sisters. In Herrade’s time there were forty‐
seven and thirteen lay Sisters. It was in the time of Herrade that the
Emperor Henry VI., disregarding his oath, had Sibylla, the widow of
Tancred, and Constance, her daughter, arrested and conducted to Hohenbourg
to take the veil.

In 1354 the Emperor Charles IV. visited S. Odile’s tomb, Agnes de
Slauffenberg being the abbess. He had the saint’s body exhumed, and Jean
de Lichtenberg, Bishop of Strasbourg, detached a part of the arm to be
deposited in the Cathedral of Prague. But, at the request of the
sisterhood, Charles IV. drew up an act which forbade any one, under the
severest penalties, from ever opening the tomb again. The bishop
pronounced the sentence of excommunication on whomsoever should violate
this decree of the sovereign.(72)

The Abbey of Hohenbourg, or of S. Odile, as it was also called, was
destined to terrible disasters. It was sacked in the XIVth and XVth
centuries by the _grandes Compagnies_ by the Armagnacs and the
Burgundians. It was still more unfortunate in the XVIth century.
Niedermünster was burned in 1542, and Hohenbourg on the 24th of March,
1546. The canonesses and prebends then dispersed, and Jean de
Manderscheidt, Bishop of Strasbourg, fearing the Lutherans would seize the
property belonging to the two abbeys, obtained permission from the Holy
See to annex it to the episcopal domains by paying the canonesses an
annual pension. The monastery, rebuilt in 1607 by Cardinal Charles de
Lorraine and the Archduke Leopold, Bishops of Strasbourg, was burned anew
in 1622 by the Lutheran army of the Count de Mansfeldt. The church was
repaired in 1630, but again devastated by the Brandenburg soldiers in
1633. They removed the lead from the windows and organs for ball.
Subsequent wars were also disastrous for Hohenbourg, and on the 7th of
May, 1681, the whole convent was again burned. Only the Chapel of Tears
and that of the Angels remained standing.

The Premonstratensians of the ancient observance established themselves at
Hohenbourg in 1663, converting it into a priory. They began to rebuild it
in 1684. Two of the monks, Father Hugues Peltre and Father Denys Albrecht,
carefully collected all the ancient accounts of S. Odile, and wrote
biographies of the saint, which we have freely made use of in this
account.

Niedermünster, which was given to the Grand Chapter of Strasbourg in 1558,
is now only a heap of ruins. Rosine de Stein, who died in 1534, was the
last abbess.

The French Revolution had also its effect on Hohenbourg. A few days after
the decree of the National Assembly on the 13th of February, 1790,
suppressing the monastic vows, the Convent of S. Odile was vacated.
Nevertheless, pilgrimages to the shrine of the holy Patroness of Alsace
continued to be frequent.

Nearly all that could nourish or excite the piety of the pilgrim had
disappeared from the antique cloister of Altitona, but Odile’s tomb still
remained and sufficed to attract a great number from all the surrounding
countries.



XIV.


On the 7th of July, 1841, at nine o’clock in the morning, the remains of
S. Odile were taken out of the tomb where they had reposed so many
centuries, and exposed to public veneration on the altar of the chapel
which bears her name. On the eve of this festival Mount Hohenbourg
presented an animated spectacle. People from Alsace, Lorraine, and around
Metz arrived in crowds. In ascending the mountain they dispersed to gather
foliage and wild flowers to deck the old Church of S. Odile with. Large
vases were placed on the altars and the _boiserie_ around the church to
receive these floral offerings of successive groups. A fir‐tree from a
neighboring forest stood beside each column of the nave. Garlands of box
and of oak‐leaves hung from tree to tree and covered the trunks. S.
Odile’s tomb and altar were richly decorated and her statue crowned with
flowers. The _châsse_ of the saint was placed on an elevation elegantly
draped. Thousands of pilgrims roamed around the precincts in the evening,
visiting successively the various sanctuaries.

The Chapel of Calvary particularly attracted them. It contained Adalric’s
remains, and among others a large painting in which were displayed the
genealogies of the houses of Alsace, Lorraine, France, and Austria, all of
which drew their origin from Adalric and Berswinde, and, finally, an
antique bedstead which tradition declared once belonged to King Dagobert.

At three o’clock in the morning of July 7th the bells announced to the
impatient pilgrims that the doors of the church were open and the first
Mass about to commence. The edifice was immediately crammed; even the
sanctuary was invaded. The neighboring chapels, the large court of the
monastery, and the green in front, were soon filled; but order reigned
everywhere in the multitude of all ages, sexes, and ranks. Every face
expressed faith and the most fervent devotion. Eighty priests from Alsace,
Lorraine, the Grand Duchy of Baden, and even from Holland, enhanced by
their presence the brilliancy of this festival, at once religious and
national. Masses succeeded each other till afternoon. The venerable Curate
of Oberehnheim (the place of S. Odile’s birth), who was the bishop’s
delegate, gave the signal for the ceremony at nine o’clock A.M. The
remains of S. Odile were borne in procession by six priests. Censers waved
and the sound of the bells mingled joyfully with the music and the ancient
hymns of the church. The crowd opened for the procession to pass. Every
face lights up, hands are clasped, and tears flow from all eyes. The
president of the festival, more than eighty years of age, pronounced the
panegyric of the saint. Then followed a grand Mass, during which, and for
two hours after, a constant file of pilgrims approached to venerate a
relic of the saint. The ceremonies closed with Benediction.

The _châsse_ was exposed during the whole Octave. From that time the
concourse of pilgrims has continued. There were fifteen hundred the
following Sunday. Hundreds of Communions are daily made at Hohenbourg, and
perhaps the number of pilgrims has never been greater than of late.

Glorious Patroness of Alsace, whose great heart, while on earth, was so
full of pity for the unfortunate, pray for thy unhappy country, now
devastated and full of woe!




Wind And Tide.


I stood by the broad, deep river,
  The tide flowed firm to its mouth;
I saw the sweet wind quiver,
  As it rose in the golden south.
On the river’s bosom it fluttered,
  And kissed and caressed all day,
And joys of the south it muttered:
  But the tide kept its northern way.
Tender and chaste was its suing,
  Till the face of the river‐bride
Rippled and gleamed in the wooing:
  But northward flowed the tide.

And so, thought I, God’s graces
  Woo our souls the livelong day,
Which brighten and smile in their faces:
  Sin bears us another way.




Matter. IV.


To complete our investigation about the essential properties of matter,
one great question remains to be answered, viz.: _Is the matter of which
bodies are made up intrinsically extended so as to fill a portion of
space, or does it ultimately consist of unextended points?_ We call this a
great question, not indeed because of any great difficulty to be
encountered in its solution, but because it has a great importance in
metaphysics, and because it has been at all times much ventilated by great
philosophers.

That bodies do not fill with their matter the dimensions of their volume
is conceded by all, as porosity is a general property of bodies. That the
molecules, or chemical atoms, of which the mass of a body is composed, do
not touch one another with their matter, but are separated by appreciable
intervals of space, is also admitted by our best scientists, though many
of them are of opinion that those intervals are filled with a subtle
medium, by which calorific and luminous vibrations are supposed to be
propagated. But with regard to the molecules themselves, the question,
whether their constitution is continuous or discrete, has not yet been
settled. Some teach, with the old physicists, that bodies are ultimately
made up of particles materially continuous, filling with their mass the
whole space occupied by their volume. These last particles they call
_atoms_, because their mass is not susceptible of physical division,
although their volume is infinitely divisible in a mathematical sense.
Others, on the contrary, deny the material continuity of matter, and hold
with Boscovich that, as all bodies are composed of discrete molecules, so
are all molecules composed of discrete elements wholly destitute of
material extension, occupying distinct mathematical points in space, and
bound by mutual action in mechanical systems differently constituted,
according to the different nature of the substances to which they belong.

Which of these two opinions is right? Although scientists more generally
incline to the second, metaphysicians are still in favor of the first. Yet
we do not hesitate to say, though it may appear presumptuous on our part,
that it is not difficult to decide the question. Let the reader follow our
reasoning upon the subject, and we confidently predict that he will soon
be satisfied of the truth of our assertion.

_Groundless assumption of continuous matter._—As the true metaphysics of
matter must be grounded on real facts, we may first inquire what facts, if
any, can be adduced in favor of the intrinsic extension and material
continuity of molecules. Is there any sensible fact which directly or
indirectly proves such a continuity?

We must answer in the negative. For sensible facts are perceived by us in
consequence of the impressions which objects make on our senses; if,
therefore, such impressions are not calculated to reveal anything
concerning the question of material continuity, no sensible fact can be
adduced as a proof of the continuity of matter. Now, the impressions made
on our senses cannot reveal anything about our question. For we know that
bodies contain not only millions of pores, which are invisible to the
naked eye, but also millions of movable and separate particles, which are
so minute that no microscope can make them visible, and which, though so
extremely minute, are composed of millions of other particles still more
minute, which have independent movements, and therefore possess an
independent existence. There are many species of animalcules (_infusoria_)
so small that millions together would not equal the bulk of a grain of
sand, and thousands might swim at once through the eye of a needle. These
almost infinitesimal animals are as well adapted to life as the largest
beasts, and their movements display all the phenomena of life, sense, and
instinct. They have nerves and muscles, organs of digestion and of
propagation, liquids and solids of different kinds, etc. It is impossible
to form a conception of the minute dimensions of these organic structures;
and yet each separate organ of every animalcule is a compound of several
organic substances, each in its turn comprising numberless atoms of
carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen. It is plain from this and other examples
that the actual magnitude of the ultimate molecules of any body is
something completely beyond the reach of our senses to perceive or of our
intellect to comprehend.(73) We must therefore concede that no impression
received by our senses is calculated to make us perceive anything like a
molecule or to give us a clue to its constitution. To say that molecules
are so many pieces of continuous matter is therefore to assert what no
sensible fact can ever reveal.

Moreover, we know of no sensible phenomenon which has any necessary
connection with the continuity of matter. Physicists and chemists, in
their scientific explanation of phenomena, have no need of assuming the
existence of continuous matter, and acknowledge that there are no facts
from which the theory of simple and unextended elements can be refuted.
And the reason of this is clear; for the phenomena can be made the ground
of experimental proofs only so far as they are perceived by our senses;
and since our perception of them is confined within the narrow limits
above described, it is impossible to draw from sensible phenomena any
distinct conclusion regarding the constitution of molecules. Hence it is
plain that no sensible fact exists which directly or indirectly proves the
continuity of matter.

Secondly, we may ask, Can the intrinsic extension and continuity of matter
be proved from the essence of material substance?

The answer must again be negative. For nothing can in any manner be
involved in, or result from, the essence of material substance, unless it
be required either by the matter, or by the substantial form, or by the
relation and proportion which must exist between the form and the matter.
But neither the matter, nor the substantial form, nor their mutual
relation requires material continuity or material extension. Therefore the
essence of material substance cannot supply us with any valid argument in
favor of the extension and continuity of matter.

In this syllogism the major proposition needs no proof, as it is evident
that material substance, like all other created things, essentially
consists of act and potency; and it is known that its act is called the
substantial form, while its potency is called _the_ matter.(74) It is
therefore manifest that, if anything has a necessary connection with the
essence of material substance, it must be of such a nature as to be needed
either by the matter or by the substantial form, or by both together.

The minor proposition can be demonstrated as follows: In the first place,
continuous quantity is not needed by the matter, whether actuated or
actuable. For, as actuable, the matter is a “mere potency” (_pura
potentia_) which has yet to receive its “first actuality” (_primum esse_),
as philosophers agree; and accordingly it has no actual quantity or
continuous extension, nor is it potential with respect to it, as its
potency regards only existence (_primum esse_), and evidently existence is
not dimensive quantity. Hence the schoolmen unanimously maintain with
Aristotle that the first matter has “no quiddity, no quality, and no
quantity” (_nec quid, nec quale, nec quantum_)—a truth which we hope fully
to explain in some future article. As actuated, the matter is nothing else
than a substantial term susceptible of local motion; for we know from
physics that material substance receives no other determination than to
local movement, and for this reason, as we remarked in another place, it
has been defined _Ens mobile_, or a movable thing. Now, a term, to be
susceptible of local motion, needs no dimensions, as is evident. And
therefore the matter, whether actuated or not, has nothing in its nature
which requires continuous extension.

In the second place, material continuity is not required by the nature of
the substantial form. This form may, in fact, be considered either as a
principle of being or as a principle of operation. As a principle of
being, it gives the first existence to its matter; and it is plain that to
give the first existence is not to give bulk. Our adversaries teach that
what gives bulk to the bodies is quantity; and yet, surely, they will not
pretend that quantity is the substantial form. On the other hand, it is
evident that _to be_ and _to have bulk_ are not the same thing; and since
the substantial form merely causes the matter _to be_, it would be absurd
to infer that it must also cause it _to be extended_. As a principle of
operation, the form needs matter only as a centre from which its exertions
are directed. Now, the direction of the exertion, as well as that of the
movement, must be taken from a point to a point, not from a bulk to a
bulk; and therefore the form, as a principle of operation, needs only one
point of matter. Thus it is clear that no material extension is required
to suit the wants of the substantial form.

In the third place, material extension is not required to make the matter
proportionate to its substantial form. We shall see later that no form
which requires a determinate quantity of mass can be a substantial form in
the strict sense of the expression; at present it will suffice to keep in
mind that the substantial form must give the first being to its matter,
and that the matter is therefore perfectly proportioned to its substantial
form by merely being in potency to receive its first being. Now, such a
potency implies no extension; for if it did, the accident would precede
the substance. Besides, the matter before its first actuation is _a
nonentity_, and, as such, is incapable of any positive disposition, as we
shall more fully explain in the sequel. But a determinate bulk would be a
positive disposition. Hence the matter which receives its first actuation
is proportionate to its form independently of material extension. We can
therefore safely conclude that the essence of material substance supplies
no proof whatever of the continuity of matter.

Thirdly, we ask, Can the continuity of matter be proved from mechanics?

Here also our answer must be negative. For the theorems of mechanics are
each and all demonstrated quite independently of the question of material
continuity. The old writers of mechanical works (or rather the old
metaphysicians, from whom these writers borrowed their notion of matter)
admitted the continuity of matter on two grounds: first, because they
thought that _nature abhorred a vacuum_; and, secondly, because they
rejected the _actio in distans_ as impossible. But we have already shown
that no action of matter upon matter is possible, except on the condition
that the matter of the agent be distant from the matter of the patient;
which implies that all the material particles, to act on their immediate
neighbors, must be separately ubicated, with intervening vacuum. And thus
the only reasons by which the ancients could plausibly support the
continuity of matter have lost all weight in the light of modern
mechanics.

Fourthly: Can the continuity of matter be inferred from geometrical
considerations?

We reply that it cannot. For geometric quantity is not a quantity of
_matter_, but a quantity of _volume_—that is, the quantity of space
mensurable within certain limits. Hence it is evident that the continuity
of the geometric quantity has nothing to do with the continuity of matter,
and is not dependent on it, but wholly depends on the possibility of a
continuous movement within the limits of the geometric space. In fact, we
have in geometry three dimensions—length, breadth, and depth, which are
simple lines. Now, a line is not conceived as made up of material points
touching and continuing one another, but as the track of a point moving
between certain limits; so that the continuity of the geometric dimensions
is not grounded on any extension or continuation of material particles,
but on the possibility of continuous movement, on which the continuity of
time also depends. We must therefore remain satisfied that no geometrical
consideration can lend the least support to the hypothesis of material
continuity.

We have thus exhausted all the sources from which any _à priori_ or _à
posteriori_ argument in favor of material continuity might have been
drawn, if any had been possible; and the result of our investigation
authorizes the conclusion that the hypothesis of continuous matter is both
scientifically and philosophically gratuitous.

_False reasonings in behalf of continuous matter._—But some philosophers,
who are afraid that the denial of material continuity may subvert all the
scholastic doctrines (to which they most laudably, but perhaps too
exclusively, adhere in questions of natural science), contend that the
existence of continuous matter can be established by good philosophical
reasons. It is therefore our duty, before we proceed further, to acquaint
our reader with such reasons, and with our answers to them.

The first reason is the following: Geometry is a real, not a chimerical,
science; and therefore it has to deal with real bodies—not indeed inasmuch
as they are substances, but inasmuch as they have a quantity which can be
considered in the abstract. Hence we must admit that the geometric
quantity is a quantity of matter considered in the abstract; and
accordingly, if the geometric quantity is continuous and infinitely
divisible, as no one doubts, the quantity of matter in the bodies must
also be continuous and infinitely divisible.

We reply that bodies have two very different kinds of quantity—the
quantity of the mass and the quantity of the volume—and that geometry
deals indeed with the latter, but has nothing to do with the former. Hence
the geometric quantity is a quantity of volume or bulk, not a quantity of
matter; and therefore to argue that, because the geometric quantity is
continuous and infinitely divisible, the same must be true of the quantity
of matter, is to make an inexcusable confusion of matter with space. The
argument might have some value, if the quantity of the volume could be
measured by the quantity of the mass; but no one who has studied the first
elements of physics can be ignorant that such is not the case. Equal
masses are found under unequal volumes, and unequal masses under equal
volumes. Volumes preserve the same geometric nature and the same geometric
quantity, be they filled with matter or not. A cubic inch of platinum and
a cubic inch of water contain different amounts of matter, since the
former weighs twenty‐one times as much as the latter; and yet they are
geometrically equal. Geometry is not concerned with the density of bodies;
and therefore geometrical quantities are altogether independent of the
quantity of matter, and cannot be altered except by altering the relative
position of the extreme terms between which their three dimensions are
measured. These dimensions are not made up of matter, but are mere
relations in space, with or without interjacent matter, representing, as
we have already observed, the quantity of continuous movement which is
possible between the correlated terms; and their continuity depends on the
continuity of space, not of matter.

The author from whom we have taken this objection pretends also that the
geometric quantity possesses no other attributes than those which belong
to all quantity, and are essential to it; whence he concludes that
whatever is predicated of geometric quantity must also be predicated of
the quantity of matter. But the assumption is evidently false; for it is
not of the essence of all quantity to be continuous as the geometric
quantity, it being manifest that discrete quantity is a true quantity,
although it has no continuity. The general notion of quantity extends to
everything which admits of _more_ or _less_; hence there is intensive
quantity, extensive quantity, and numeric quantity. The first is measured
by arbitrary degrees of intensity; the second is measured by arbitrary
intervals of space and time; the third is measured by natural units—that
is, by individual realities as they exist in nature. It is therefore
absurd to pretend that whatever can be predicated of geometric quantity
must be predicated of all kinds of quantity.

The second reason adduced in behalf of material continuity is as follows:
To deny the continuity of matter is to destroy all real extension. For how
can real extension arise from simple unextended points arranged in a
certain manner, and acting upon one another? The notions of simplicity,
order, and activity transcend the attributions of matter, and are
applicable to all spiritual beings. If, then, extension could arise from
simple unextended elements by their arrangement and actions, why could not
angels, by meeting in a sufficient number and acting on one another, give
rise to extension, and form, say, a watermelon?

This argument has no weight whatever; but, as it appeared not many years
ago in a Catholic periodical of great reputation, we have thought it best
to give it a place among other arguments of the same sort. Our answer is
that to deny the continuity of matter is not to deny real extension, but
only to maintain that _no real extension is made up of continuous matter_.
And we are by no means embarrassed to explain “how _real_ extension can
arise from simple unextended points.” The thing is very plain. Two points,
_A_ and _B_, being given in space, the interval of space between them is a
_real_ interval, _really_ determined by the _real_ points _A_ and _B_, and
_really_ determining the extension of the _real_ movement possible between
the same points. Such an interval is therefore a _real_ extension. This is
the way in which real extension arises from unextended points.

Nor can it be objected that nothing extended can be made up of unextended
points. This is true, of course, but has nothing to do with the question.
For we do not pretend that extension is _made up_ by composition of
points—which would be a very gross error—but we say that extension
_results_ from the simple position of real points in space, and that it
results not _in_ them, but _between_ them. It is the mass of the body that
is _made up_ of its components; and thus the sum _A_ + _B_ represents a
mass, not an extension. The geometric dimensions, on the contrary, consist
entirely of relations between distinct points intercepting mensurable
space. The distinct points are _the terms_ of the relation, while the
extent of the space mensurable between them by continuous movement is _the
formal reason_ of their relativity. And since this continuous movement may
extend more or less, according as the terms are variously situated, hence
the resulting relation has the nature of continuous quantity. This
suffices to show that to deny the continuity of matter is _not_ to destroy
all real extension.

And now, what shall we say of those angels freely uniting to form a
watermelon? It is hardly necessary to say that this bright idea is only a
dream. There is no volume without dimensions, no dimension without
distance, and no distance without terms distinctly ubicated in space and
marking out the point where the distance begins, and the point where it
ends. Now, nothing marks out a point in space but matter. Angels, as
destitute of matter, mark no points in space, and accordingly cannot
terminate distances nor give rise to dimensions. Had they matter, they
would, like the simple elements, possess a formal ubication in space, and
determine dimensions; but, owing to their spiritual nature, they transcend
all local determinations, and have no formal ubication except in the
intellectual sphere of their spiritual operation. It is therefore owing to
their spirituality, and not to their simplicity, that they cannot form
themselves into a volume. Lastly, we must not forget that the “angelic”
watermelon should have not only volume, but mass also. Such a mass would,
of course, be made up without matter. How a mass can be conceived without
matter is a profound secret, which the author of the argument very
prudently avoided to reveal. But let us come to another objection.

A third reason adduced in favor of continuous matter is that we cannot,
without employing a vicious circle, account for the extension of bodies by
the notion either of space, distance, or movement. For these notions
already presuppose extension, and cannot be formed without a previous
knowledge of what extension is. To think of space is, in fact, to think of
extension. So also distance cannot be conceived except by imagining
something extended, which lies, or can lie, between the distant terms.
Hence, to avoid the vicious circle, it is necessary to trace the origin of
our notion of extension to the matter we see in the bodies. And therefore
our very notion of extension is a sufficient proof of the existence of
continuous matter.

We reply that this reason is even less plausible than the preceding one.
To form the abstract notion of extension, we must first directly perceive
some extension in the concrete, in the same manner as we must perceive
concrete humanity in individual men before we conceive humanity in the
abstract. But in all sensible movements we directly perceive extension
through space and time. Therefore from sensible movements, _without a
previous knowledge of extension_, we can form the notion of extension in
general. Is there any one who can find in this a vicious circle?

This answer might suffice. But we will further remark that the argument
may be retorted against its author. For if we cannot conceive movement as
extending in space without a _previous_ knowledge of extension, how can we
conceive matter as extending in space without a _previous_ knowledge of
extension? And how can we conceive matter as continuous without a
_previous_ knowledge of continuity, or time as enduring without a
_previous_ knowledge of duration? To these questions the author of the
argument can give no satisfactory answer without solving his own
objection. Space, distance, and movement, says he, involve extension; and
_therefore_ they cannot be known “without a previous knowledge of what
extension is.” It is evident that this conclusion is illogical; for if
space, distance, and movement imply extension, we cannot perceive space,
distance, and movement without directly perceiving extension; and, since
the direct perception of a thing does not require a _previous_ knowledge
of it, the logical conclusion should have been that, to perceive space,
distance, and movement, no previous knowledge of extension is needed.

On the other hand, while our senses perceive the extension of continuous
movement in space, they are not competent to perceive material continuity
in natural bodies. Hence it is from movement, and not from matter, that
our notion of continuous extension is derived. In fact, to form a
conception of the dimensions of a body, we survey it by a continuous
movement of our eyes from one end of it to the other. In this movement the
eye glides over innumerable pores, by which the material particles of the
body are separated. If our conception of the geometric extension of the
body depended on the continuity of its matter, these pores, as not
consisting of continuous matter, should all be thrown away in the
measurement of the body. Why, then, do we consider them as contributing
with their own dimensions to form the total dimensions of the body? Merely
because the geometric dimensions are estimated by movement, and not by
matter.

Nor is it in the least strange that we should know extension from
movement, and not from matter. For no one can perceive extension between
two terms, unless he measures by continuous movement the space intercepted
between them. The local relation between two terms cannot, in fact, be
perceived otherwise than by referring the one term to the other through
space; hence no one ever perceives a distance between two given terms
otherwise than by drawing, at least mentally, a line from the one to the
other—that is, otherwise than by measuring by some movement the extent of
the movement which can take place between the two given terms. And this is
what the very word _extension_ conveys. For this word is composed of the
preposition _ex_, which connotes the term from which the movement begins,
and of the verb _tendere_, which is a verb of motion. And thus everything
shows that it is from motion, and not from continuous matter, that our
first notion of extension proceeds.

A sharp opponent, however, might still object that before we can perceive
any movement we need to perceive something movable—that is, visible
matter. But no matter is visible unless it be extended. Therefore
extension must be perceived in matter itself before we can perceive it in
local movement.

But we answer, first, that although nothing can be perceived by our senses
unless it be extended, nevertheless we can see extended things without
perceiving their extension. Thus we see many stars as mere points in
space, and yet we can perceive their movement from the east to the west.
Hence, although matter is not visible unless it be extended, it does not
follow that extension must be first perceived in matter itself.

Secondly, we answer that when we perceive the movable matter as extended,
we do not judge of its extension by its movement, but by the movement
which we ourselves have to make in going from one of its extremities to
the other. This is the only way of perceiving extension in space. For how
could we conceive anything as extended, if we could not see that it has
parts outside of parts? And how could we pronounce that anything has parts
outside of parts, if we did not see that between one part and another
there is a possibility of local movement? On the other hand, as soon as we
perceive the possibility of local movement between distinct parts, we have
sufficient evidence of geometric extension. And thus we have no need of
continuous matter in order to perceive the volume of bodies.

Before we dismiss this subject, we must add that the advocates of
continuous matter, while fighting against us, shield themselves with two
other arguments. If matter is not continuous, they say, bodies will
consist of mere mathematical points acting at a distance; but _actio in
distans_ is the extreme of absurdity, and therefore bodies cannot consist
of mathematical points. They also allege that _nature abhors a vacuum_,
and therefore all space must be filled up with matter; which would be
impossible, were not matter continuous. That nature abhors a vacuum was
once considered a physical axiom; but, since science has destroyed the
physical grounds on which the pretended axiom rested, metaphysics has in
its turn been appealed to, that the time‐honored dictum may not be
consigned to complete oblivion. It has therefore been pretended that space
without matter is a mere delusion, and consequently that to make extension
dependent on empty intervals of space imagined to intervene between
material points is to give a chimerical solution of the question of
material extension.

The first of these two arguments we have fully answered in our last
article, and we shall not again detain our readers with it. Let us notice,
however, that when the elements of matter are called “mathematical”
points, the sense is not that they are not physical, but only that those
physical points are mathematically, or rigorously, unextended.

The second argument assumes that space void of matter is nothing. As we
cannot enter here into a detailed examination of the nature of absolute
space, we shall content ourselves with the following answer: 1st. All real
relations require a real foundation. Real distances are real relations.
Therefore real distances have a real foundation. But their foundation is
nothing else than absolute space; and therefore absolute space is a
reality. 2d. If empty space is nothing, then bodies were created in
nothing, occupy nothing, and all spaces actually occupied are nothing. To
say, as so many have said, that empty space is nothing, and that space
occupied by matter is a reality, is to say that _the absolute is nothing
until it becomes relative_—a proposition which is the main support of
German pantheism, and which every man of sense must reject. 3d. Of two
different recipients, the greater has a greater capacity independently of
the matter which it may contain; for, whether it be filled with the rarest
gas or with the densest metal, its capacity does not vary. It is therefore
manifest that its capacity is not determined by the matter it contains,
but only by the space intercepted between its limits. In the same manner
the smaller recipient has less capacity, irrespective of the matter it may
contain, and only in consequence of the space intercepted. If, therefore,
space, prescinding from the matter occupying it, is nothing, the greater
capacity will be a greater nothing, and the less capacity a less nothing.
But greater and less imply quantity, and quantity is something. Therefore
nothing will be something.

We hope we shall hereafter have a better opportunity of developing these
and other considerations on space; but the little we have said is
sufficient, we believe, to show that the assumption of the unreality of
space unoccupied by matter is a philosophical absurdity.

We conclude that the existence of continuous matter cannot be proved, and
that those philosophers who still admit it cannot account for it by
anything like a good argument. They can only shelter themselves behind the
prejudices of their infancy, which they have been unable to discard, or
behind the venerable authority of the ancients, who, though deserving our
admiration in other respects, were led astray by the same popular
prejudices, owing to their limited knowledge of natural science. We may be
allowed to add that if the ancient philosophers are not to be blamed for
admitting continuous matter, the same cannot be said of those among our
contemporaries who, in the present state of science, are still satisfied
with their authority on the subject.

_Mysterious attributes of continuous matter._—Now, let us suppose that
bodies, or their molecules, are made up of continuous matter, just as our
opponents maintain; and let us see what must necessarily follow from such
a gratuitous assumption. In the first place, it follows that _a piece of
continuous matter cannot be actuated by a single substantial act_. This is
easily proved.

For a single act gives a single actual being; which is inconsistent with
the nature of continuous matter. Matter, to be continuous, must actually
contain distinct parts, united indeed, but having distinct ubications in
space. Now, with a single substantial act there cannot be distinct actual
parts; for all actual distinction, according to the axiom of the schools,
implies distinct acts: _Actus est qui distinguit._ Therefore continuous
matter cannot be actuated by a single substantial act.

Again, a piece of continuous matter has dimensions, of which the beginning
and the end must be quite distinct, the existence of the one not being the
existence of the other. But it is impossible for two things which have a
distinct existence to be under the same substantial act; for there cannot
be two existences without two formal principles. Hence, if there were any
continuous matter, the beginning and the end of its dimensions should be
actuated by distinct acts; and the same would be true of any two distinct
points throughout the same dimensions. Nor does it matter that the
dimensions are supposed to be formed of one unbroken piece; for, before we
conceive distinct parts, or terms, as forming the continuation of one
another, we must admit the substance of such parts, as their continuation
presupposes their being. Hence, however intimately the parts may be
united, they always remain substantially distinct; which implies that each
one of them must have its own substantial act.

Moreover, continuous extension is divisible. If, then, there is anywhere a
piece of continuous matter, it may be divided into two, by God at least.
But as division is not a magical operation, and does not give the first
existence to the things which are divided, it is plain that the parts
which after the division exist separately must have had their own distinct
existence before the division; and, evidently, they could not have a
distinct existence without being actuated by distinct substantial acts.
What we say of these two parts applies to whatever other parts are
obtainable by continuing the division. Whence it is manifest that
continuous matter needs as many substantial acts as it has divisible
parts.

The advocates of continuous matter try to decline this consequence by
pretending that matter, so long as it is undivided, is _one_ matter and
needs only one form; but this form, according to them, is divisible; hence
when the matter is divided, each part of the matter retains its own
portion of the substantial form, and thus the same form which gives
existence to the whole gives existence to the separate parts. This is,
however, a mere subterfuge; for the undivided matter is indeed one
accidentally, inasmuch as it has no _division_ of parts; but it is not one
substantially, because it has _distinction_ of parts. This distinction
exists before the division is made, and we have already seen that no
actual distinction is possible without distinct acts. And again, the
hypothesis that substantial forms are divisible, is a ridiculous fiction,
to say the least. For nothing is divisible which has no multiplicity of
parts and consequently a multiplicity of acts. How, then, can a
substantial act, which is a single act, be conceived as divisible?

They also argue that as the soul, which is a simple form, actuates the
whole matter of the body, so can the material form actuate continuous
matter. This comparison may have some weight with those who confound the
_essential_ with the _substantial_ forms, and believe that the soul gives
the first being to the matter of the body. But the truth is that the
substance of the soul is the _essential_ form of the living organism, and
not the _substantial_ form giving the first being to matter. The organism
and its matter must have their being in nature before being animated by
the soul; each part of matter in the body has therefore its own distinct
material form and its own distinct existence. The soul is a principle of
life, and gives nothing but life.(75) Hence the aforesaid comparison is
faulty, and leads to no conclusion.

In the second place it follows that _no continuous matter can be styled a
single substance_.

For within the dimensions of continuous matter there must be as many
distinct substantial acts as there are material points distinct from one
another; it being clear that distinct points cannot have the same
substantial actuation, and accordingly require distinct substantial acts
and constitute distinct substances. Against this some will object that a
mere point of matter is incapable of supporting the substantial form. But
we have already shown that the substantial form is not _supported_ by its
matter, as the objection assumes, but only terminated to it, the matter
being the substantial term, not the subject, of the substantial form.(76)
On the other hand, it is manifest that a form naturally destined to act in
a sphere, by actuating a single point of matter, actuates just as much
matter as its nature requires. For it is from a single point, not from
many, that the action must be directed. Hence nothing more than a point of
matter is required to terminate the substantial form and to constitute a
perfect substance. Additional proofs of this truth will be found in our
next article, where we shall rigorously demonstrate the impossibility of
continuous matter. Meanwhile, nothing withstands our conclusion that there
must be as many distinct substances in continuous matter as there are
distinct points within its dimensions.

In the third place, it follows that _this multitude of distinct substances
is not merely potential, but actual_.

This conclusion is very clear. For every multitude of actual parts is an
actual multitude, or, as they say, a multitude in act. But in continuous
matter all the parts are actual, although they are not actually separated.
Therefore the multitude of such parts is an actual multitude.

The upholders of continuous matter do not admit that this multitude is
actual; they contend that it is only potential. For were they to concede
that it is actual, they would be compelled to admit either that it is
actually finite, or that it is actually infinite. Now, they cannot say
that it is actually finite, because this would be against the well‐known
nature of continuum, which admits of an endless division, and therefore
contains a multitude of parts which has no end. On the other hand, they
cannot say that it is actually infinite; because, even admitting the
absolute possibility of a multitude actually infinite, it would still be
absurd to assert that such is the case with a piece of matter having
finite dimensions. Indeed, Leibnitz and Descartes did not hesitate to
teach this latter absurdity; but they could not make it fashionable, and
were soon abandoned even by their own disciples. Thus the difficulty
remained; and philosophers, being unable to solve it, tried to decline it
by denying that there can be in the continuum an _actual_ multitude of
parts. This was, in fact, the view of the old advocates of continuous
matter, who uniformly admitted that the parts of an unbroken continuum are
merely _potential_, and form a potential multitude. For, they say, the
_actual_ multitude results from actual division, and therefore has no
existence in the undivided continuum.

This last view would be very good, if the continuum in question were
_successive_—as is the case with movement and time, which are always _in
fieri_, and exist only by infinitesimals in an infinitesimal present, or
if the continuum in question were _virtual_, as is the case with any
mensurable interval of space; for evidently in these continuums no
_actual_ multitude is to be found. But the case is quite different with
continuous matter. For he who asserts the existence of continuous matter
asserts the existence of a thing having parts _formally_ distinct and
_simultaneous_. He therefore affirms the actual existence of a formal
multitude of distinct parts, or, in other terms, an actual multitude. To
deny the actual multitude of the parts, on the plea that there is no
actual division, is to take refuge in a miserable sophism, which consists
in denying the substantial distinction of the parts on the ground that
they are not divided, and in ignoring their actual being solely because
they have not a certain special mode of being.

As to the axiom that “Number results from division,” two things are to be
noticed. The first is that the term “division” here means _mensuration_,
not separation. Thus we divide the day into twenty‐four hours, without
discontinuing time for all that; and in like manner we divide the length
of a journey into miles without discontinuing space. This shows that the
numbers obtained by the division of the continuum are only artificially or
virtually discrete, and that the continuum remains unbroken. The second is
that a number is not merely a multitude, but a multitude measured by a
certain unit, as S. Thomas aptly defines it: _Numerus est multitudo
mensurata per unum_. Hence, if the unit of measure is arbitrary (as is the
case with all continuous quantities), the same quantity can be expressed
by different numbers, according as a different unit is employed in
measuring it. But so long as the unit is not determined, the quantity
cannot be expressed by any definite number. And if the unit employed be
less than any given finite quantity, the thing which is measured will
contain a multitude of such units greater than any given number. All such
units exist in the thing measured prior to its mensuration; and as such
units are actual and distinct, there can be no doubt that they constitute
an actual multitude.

Some modern advocates of continuous matter have imagined another means of
evading the difficulty. Tongiorgi admits extended atoms of continuous
matter, but denies that their parts are _actually_ distinct. As, however,
he confesses that extension requires parts outside of parts (_Cosmol._, n.
143), we may ask him: Are not such parts _actually_ distinct? Distinction
is a negation of identity; and surely parts existing actually outside of
one another are not actually identical. They are therefore actually
distinct. Now, to use the very words of the author, “where there are
distinct parts there is a plurality of units, that is, a multitude,
although the parts which are distinct be united in a common term, as is
the case with the parts of continuum”;(77) and therefore it is manifest
that the continuous atom involves actual multitude.

Liberatore does not entirely deny the actual distinction of the parts in
continuous matter, but maintains that the distinction is _incomplete_, and
accordingly cannot give rise to an actual multitude. The parts of a
continuum, says he, are united in a common term; hence they are
incompletely distinct, and make no number, but are all one. They are
outside of one another, yet in such a manner as to be also inside of one
another. They do not subsist in themselves, but in the whole. The whole
displays many parts, but it is one, and its parts are so indeterminate
that they cannot be measured except by an arbitrary measure.(78)

This view scarcely deserves to be discussed, as the author himself owns
that it makes continuous matter seem somewhat
contradictory—_Contradictoriis quodammodo notis subditur_—though he
attributes this kind of contradiction to the opposition which exists
between the matter and the form—an explanation which we do not admit for
reasons which we shall give in our next article. But as to the assertion
that the parts of a continuum, on account of their having a common term,
are only _incompletely_ distinct, we can show at once that the author is
much mistaken. Incomplete distinction is a distinction which does not
completely exclude identity. Hence where there is incomplete distinction
there is also incomplete identity. Now, not a shadow of identity is to be
found between any two parts of continuum. Therefore any two parts of
continuum are completely distinct. Thus each of the twenty‐four hours into
which we divide the day is completely distinct from every other, although
the one is united with the other in a common term; for it is evident that
the common term, having no extension, is no part of extension, and
therefore cannot originate identity between any two parts of extension. To
say that there is some identity, and therefore an incomplete distinction,
between two extensions, because they have a common term which has no
extension, is to pretend that the unextended has some identity with the
extended; and this pretension is absurd. We conclude that, in spite of all
the efforts of our opponents, it is manifest that continuous matter would
be an _actual_ multitude of distinct, though not separated, substances.

Lastly, it follows that _actual continuous matter would be an actual
infinite multitude of substances_.

This conclusion is fully warranted by the infinite divisibility of the
continuum. But here again the advocates of material continuity contend
that this divisibility is potential, and can never be reduced to act;
whence they infer that the multitude of the parts is not actual, but
potential. We, however, repeat that if the division is potential, the
divisible matter is certainly actual; and therefore the potency of an
infinite division presupposes an infinite multitude of distinct terms
actually existing in the divisible matter. And as we have already shown
that each distinct term must have a distinct substantial act, we must
conclude that the least piece of continuous matter would consist of an
infinite actual multitude of substances—a consequence whose monstrosity
needs no demonstration.

Hence we are not surprised to see that Goudin, one of the great champions
of the old physics, considers continuous matter as “a philosophic mystery,
about which reason teaches more than it can understand, and objects more
than it can answer.”(79) He tries, however, to explain the mystery in some
manner, by adding that “when the continuum is said to be infinitely
divisible, this must be understood mathematically, not physically—that is,
by considering the quantity as it is in itself, not as it is the property
of a corporeal form. For in the process of the division we might finally
reach a part so small that, if smaller, it would be insufficient to bear
any natural form. Nevertheless, mathematically speaking, in that smallest
physical part there would still be two halves, and in these halves other
halves, and so on without end.”(80)

This explanation is taken from S. Thomas (I _Phys._, lect. I.), and shows
philosophical thought; but, far from solving the difficulty, it rather
proves that it is insoluble. For if, mathematically speaking, in the
smallest bit of continuous matter there are still halves, and halves of
halves, clearly there are in it distinct parts of matter, and therefore
distinct forms actuating each of them distinctly, as the being of each
part is not the being of any other part. It is therefore false that
nothing smaller is sufficient to bear any natural form. And hence the
difficulty is not solved. On the other hand, the necessity of resorting to
purely mathematical (geometric) quantity clearly shows that it is _the
space_ inclosed in the volume of the body (of which alone geometry
treats), and not _the matter_ (of which geometry has nothing to say), that
is infinitely divisible; and this amounts to a confession that continuous
matter has no existence.

While making these remarks, we willingly acknowledge that S. Thomas and
all the ancients who considered air, water, fire, and earth as the first
elements of all things, were perfectly consistent in teaching that natural
forms require a definite amount of matter. For by “natural forms” they
meant those forms from which the specific properties of sensible things
emanate. Now, all things that are sensible are materially compounded in a
greater or less degree, and possess properties which cannot be ascribed to
a single material point. So far, then, these ancient philosophers were
right. But they should have considered that the required amount of matter
ought to consist of distinct parts, having their own distinct being, and
therefore their own distinct substantial acts. This would have led them to
the conclusion that the natural form of air, water, etc., was not a form
giving the first being to the material parts, but a form of natural
composition giving the first being to the compound nature. But let us stop
here for the present. We have shown that continuous matter cannot be
proved to exist, and is, at best, a “philosophic mystery.” In our next
article we shall go a step further, and prove that material continuity is
a metaphysical impossibility.

To Be Continued.




New Publications.


    ALZOG’S UNIVERSAL CHURCH HISTORY. Pabisch and Byrne. Vol I.
    Cincinnati: Robert Clarke & Co. 1874. (New York: Sold by The
    Catholic Publication Society.)


This manual for ecclesiastical students is confessedly the best extant.
Dr. Pabisch, the chief translator and editor, is well known for his vast
erudition, and his associate, the Rev. Mr. Byrne, has paid careful
attention to the style of rendering the German into English. The
publishers have made the exterior of the work worthy of its contents. We
need not say any more to recommend a work which speaks for itself and has
received the sanction of names the highest in ecclesiastical rank and
theological repute in this country.


    HISTORY OF THE CATHOLIC CHURCH IN SCOTLAND. By James Walsh.
    Glasgow: Hugh Margey. 1874. (New York: Sold by The Catholic
    Publication Society.)


This is a valuable work, because it is the only one of its kind, and, even
were there others, it would stand on its own merits and still be valuable.

Scotland being so closely united in its history and destinies, and having
so much in common with the sister countries, the history of the Scottish
Church must necessarily have a close affinity and throw much light upon
the ecclesiastical annals of England and Ireland; so that the interest and
importance of this work is greatly heightened by the fact that it supplies
an integral part of the history of Christianity in the British Isles.
Hitherto that history was not complete. It may be said to be completed
now. If those among our separated brethren who pretend to seek so
diligently after truth in the teachings and practices of the early church
will deign to glance at these pages, they will find that Scotland too was
evangelized by the popes, and that its first Christians professed, not a
mutilated Christianity, but the whole cycle of Catholic doctrine. They
will learn, moreover, that the so‐called Reformation in Scotland was
entirely a political job, and that there, as elsewhere, the Protestantism
in which they pride themselves was tinkered up by a herd of fanatics and
foisted upon the people by a rapacious, profligate, unprincipled nobility.
Never was there a more truthful page of history written than this. The
author, though he modestly claims for himself nothing more than the title
of compiler, has many of the qualifications of an historian; his research
has been long and laborious, and he notices only the most authentic
documents and records of the past. In no instance do we discover any
attempt to color or gloss over any of his statements, and he is never
betrayed into exaggerating the virtues or concealing the faults of his
countrymen.


    MANUAL OF MYTHOLOGY: GREEK AND ROMAN, NORSE AND OLD GERMAN, HINDOO
    AND EGYPTIAN MYTHOLOGY. By Alexander S. Murray, Department of
    Greek and Roman Antiquities, British Museum. Second Edition.
    Rewritten and considerably enlarged. With forty‐five plates. New
    York: Scribner, Armstrong & Co., 654 Broadway. 1874.


As a manual of mythology this seems to be as concise, complete, and
accurate as such a book can be made. As a specimen of art it is
remarkable. The author is apparently one of our modern, cultivated pagans,
very much at home among the heathen religions he describes. The very brief
exposition of his own theological opinions contained in his introduction
ignores the true and primitive religion revealed from heaven altogether,
and propounds the utterly unhistorical, pernicious, and false notion that
monotheism is a development from polytheism produced by intellectual
progress. The author does not, however, put forth anti‐Christian views in
an offensive or obtrusive manner, and indeed all he says is included in a
few sentences. We cannot, certainly, recommend the study of pagan
mythology to young pupils, or consider the present volume as suitable for
indiscriminate perusal. Those who are fit for such studies, and for whom
they are necessary or proper, will find it a very satisfactory compendium
of information and a work of truly classical taste and elegance.


    CURTIUS’ HISTORY OF GREECE. Vol. V. New York: Scribner, Armstrong
    & Co. 1874.


This volume completes the work of Dr. Curtius. We have already given it
the high commendation which it deserves in our notices of previous
volumes. It is one of the first‐class historical works of German
scholarship, and this is the highest praise that can be given to any work
in those departments in which German scholars excel, so far as learning
and ability are concerned.


    A THEORY OF FINE ART. By Joseph Torrey, late Professor of Moral
    and Intellectual Philosophy in the University of Vermont. New
    York: Scribner, Armstrong & Co. 1874.


Looking through this treatise of Prof. Torrey, whose intellectual head,
stamped in gold on the cover, leads the reader to expect a thoughtful work
on the most attractive subject of æsthetics, our impression is decidedly
favorable. The University of Vermont used to be considered as quite
remarkable for an elevated, philosophical tone. Such seems to be the
character of this condensed summary of the retired professor’s lectures on
art, evidently the result of much study and observation, and given to the
reader in that pleasing style which best suits such a very pleasant branch
of knowledge.


    PROTESTANT JOURNALISM. By the author of _My Clerical Friends_.
    London: Burns & Oates. 1874. (New York: Sold by The Catholic
    Publication Society.)


It is enough to name the author of this collection of short, lively
essays—Dr. Marshall. It is the cream of the London _Tablet’s_ articles,
during the author’s active connection with that journal, on the most
living and interesting topics of the day in regard to the warfare between
the Catholic Church and her enemies. We recommend it to universal reading
and circulation in the warmest possible manner, and with the most sincere
desire that the author may long be spared to continue his admirable and
useful career as a champion of religion and truth.


    CHARTERIS; A Romance. By Mary M. Meline. Philadelphia: J. B.
    Lippincott & Co. 1874.


This romance does not belie its name in its contents. Its plot and
incidents are romantic and tragic in the highest degree. Bordering, at
least, on the improbable, as they are, they are nevertheless managed with
a very considerable degree of skill and power by the author, who has
improved very much on her last story, _In Six Months_. The characters are
drawn with free and bold strokes, and have dramatic individuality. The
plot excites even a painful interest all through, and there is no mawkish
sentimentalism anywhere. Some scenes are remarkably well drawn. There are
no lectures on religion or morals, but the purity of a true Catholic
woman’s faith and morality shines through the whole story. We may
congratulate the fair author on her success.


    KATHERINE EARLE. By Miss Adeline Trafton. Boston: Lee & Shepard.
    1874.


An interesting story, beautifully illustrated and neatly bound.


    SUMMER TALKS ABOUT LOURDES. By Cecilia Mary Caddell. London: Burns
    & Oates. 1874. (New York: Sold by The Catholic Publication
    Society.)


In this little book the authoress relates some of the wonderful miracles
of Lourdes. Its style is simple and chaste, and, we should say,
particularly suited for children.





THE CATHOLIC WORLD. VOL. XX., NO. 117.—DECEMBER, 1874.




The Persecution Of The Church In The German Empire.


The Catholics are suffering today, in the very heart of Europe, a
persecution which, if less bloody, is not less cruel or unjust, than that
which afflicted the Christian Church in the beginning of the IVth century,
under the reign of the brutal old emperor, Diocletian. The prisons of
Germany are filled with confessors of the faith, who, in the midst of
every indignity and outrage, bear themselves with a constancy and heroism
not unworthy of the early martyrs. And it is strange, too, that this
struggle should be only a renewal of the old conflict between Christ and
Cæsar, between the Son of Man and the prince of this world. In fact, anti‐
Christian Europe is using every exertion to re‐create society on the model
of Grecian and Roman paganism. This tendency is manifest in all the
various realms of thought and action.

We perceive it—and we speak now more particularly of Germany—in
literature, in science, in the manner of dealing with all the great
problems which concern man in his relations with both the visible and the
unseen world; and it looms up before us, in palpable form and gigantic
proportions, in the whole attitude of the state toward the church. There
has never lived on this earth a more thorough pagan than Goethe, the great
idol of German literature, to whom the very sign of the cross was so
hateful that in his notorious Venetian Epigram he put it side by side with
garlic and vermin. The thought of self‐sacrifice and self‐denial was so
odious to his lustful and all‐indulgent nature that he turned from its
great emblem with uncontrollable disgust, and openly proclaimed himself a
“decidirter Nichtchrist.” “Das Ewig Weibliche”—sensualism and
sexualism—were the gods of his heart, in whose praise alone he attuned his
lyre. And Schiller, in his _Gods of Greece_, complained sorrowingly that
all the fair world of gods and goddesses should have vanished, that one
(the God of the Christian) might be enriched; and with tender longing he
prayed that “nature’s sweet morn” might again return.

Both the religion and the philosophy of paganism were based upon the
deification of nature, and were consequently pantheistic. Now, this pagan
pantheism recrudescent is the one permanent type amid the endless
variations of modern German sophistry. It underlies the theorizing of
Schelling, Fichte, and Hegel, as well as that of Feuerbach, Büchner, and
Strauss. They all assume the non‐existence of a personal God, and transfer
his attributes to nature, which is, in their eyes, the mother of all, the
sole existence, and the supreme good. This pantheism, which confuses all
things in extricable chaos, spirit with matter, thought with sensation,
the infinite with the finite, destroying the very elements of reason, and
taking from language its essential meaning, has infected all non‐Catholic
thought in Germany. When we descend from the misty heights of speculation,
we find pantheistic paganism in the idolatry of science and culture, which
have taken the place of dogma and morality. It is held to be an axiom that
man is simply a product of nature, who knows herself in him as she feels
herself in the animal.

The formulas in which the thought is clothed are of minor importance. In
the ultimate analysis we find in all the conflicting schools of German
infidelity this sentiment, however widely its expression may vary: that
nature is supreme, and there is no God beside. The cosmos, instead of a
personal God, is the ultimate fact beyond which science professes to be
unable to proceed; and therefore the duality of ends, aims, and results
which underlies the Christian conception of the universe must necessarily
disappear. There is no longer God and the world, spirit and matter, good
and evil, heaven and hell; there is not even man and the brute. There is
only the cosmos, which is one; and from this it necessarily follows that
the distinction between the spiritual and the temporal power is unreal and
should cease to be recognized.

Now, here we have discovered the very germ from which the whole Prussian
persecution has sprung. In the last analysis it rests upon the assumption
that the spiritual power has no right to exist, since the truths upon
which it was supposed to be based—as God, the soul, and a future life—are
proven to be myths. Hence the state is the only autonomy, and to claim
authority not derived from it is treason. Thus the struggle now going on
in Prussia is for life or death. It rages around the very central citadel
of the soul and of all religion. The Catholics of Germany are to‐day
contending for what the Christians of the first centuries died—the right
to live. To understand this better it will be well to consider for a
moment the attributes of the state in pagan Greece and Rome.

Hellenic religion, in its distinctive forms, had its origin in the
deification of nature and of man as her crowning work, and both were
identified with the state. Hence religion was hero‐worship; the good man
was the good citizen, the saint was the successful warrior who struck
terror into the enemies of his country, and thus the religious feeling was
confounded with the patriotic spirit. To be a true citizen of the state,
it was necessary to profess the national religion; and to be loyal to the
state was to be true to its protecting gods. The highest act of religion
was to beat back the invader or to die gloriously on the battle‐field.
Indeed, in paganism we find no idea of a non‐national religion. The pagan
state, whether imperial, monarchical, or republican, was essentially
tyrannical, wholly incompatible with freedom as understood in Christian
society. To be free was to be, soul and body, the slave of the state.
Plato gives to his ideal Republic unlimited power to control the will of
the individual, to direct all his thoughts and actions, to model and shape
his whole life. He merges the family and its privileges into the state and
its rights, gives the government absolute authority in the education of
its subjects, and even places the propagation of the race under state
supervision.

The pagan state was also essentially military, recognizing no rights
except those which it had not the power to violate. Now, the preaching of
Christ was in direct contradiction to this whole theory of government. He
declared that God and the soul have rights as well as Cæsar, and
proclaimed the higher law which affirms that man has a destiny superior to
that of being a citizen of any state, however glorious; which imposes upon
him duties that transcend the sphere of all human authority. Thus religion
became the supreme law of life, and the recognition of the indefeasible
rights of conscience gave to man citizenship in a kingdom not of this
world. It, in consequence, became his duty as well as his privilege to
obey first the laws of this supernatural kingdom, and to insist upon this
divine obligation, even though the whole world should oppose him.

This teaching of Christ at once lifted religion above the control of the
state, and, cutting loose the bonds of servitude which had made it
national and narrow, declared it catholic, of the whole earth and for all
men. He sent his apostles, not to the Jew, or the Greek, or the Gentile,
but to all the nations, and in his church he recognized no distinction of
race or social condition—the slave was like the freeman, the beggar like
the king.

This doctrine, the most beneficent and humanitarian that the world has
ever heard, brought forth from the oblivion of ages the all‐forgotten
truth of the brotherhood of the race, and raised man to a level on which
paganism was not able even to contemplate him; proclaiming that man, for
being simply man, irrespective of race, nationality, or condition, is
worthy of honor and reverence. Now, it was precisely this catholic and
non‐national character of the religion of Christ which brought it into
conflict with the pagan state. The Christians, it was held, could not be
loyal citizens of the empire, because they did not profess the religion of
the empire, and refused to sacrifice to the divinity of Cæsar. They were
traitors, because in those things which concerned faith they were resolved
not to recognize on the part of the state any right to interfere; and
therefore were they cast into prison, thrown to the wild beasts in the
Amphitheatre, and devoured under the approving eyes of the worshippers of
the emperor’s divinity. This history is repeating itself in Prussia to‐
day.

Many causes have, within the present century, helped to strengthen the
national feeling in Germany. The terrible outrages and humiliations
inflicted upon her by the pitiless soldiers of the first Napoleon made it
evident that the common safety required that the bonds of brotherhood
among the peoples of the different German states should be drawn tighter.
The development of a national literature also helped to foster a longing
for national unity. In the XVIIth, and even down to nearly the end of the
XVIIIth, century, French influence, extending from the courts of princes
to the closets of the learned, gave tone to both literature and politics.

Leibnitz wrote in French or Latin, and Frederick the Great strove to
forget his own tongue, that he might learn to speak French with idiomatic
purity—an accomplishment which he never acquired.

As there was no German literature, the national feeling lacked one of its
most powerful stimulants. But in the latter half of the XVIIIth century,
and during the first half of the XIXth, a literature rich, profound,
thoroughly German, the creation of some of the highest names in the world
of letters, came into existence, and was both a cause and an effect of the
national awakening. Goethe especially did much, by the absolute ascendency
which he acquired in the literature of his country, to unify and harmonize
the national mind.

Still, a thousand interests and jealousies, local and dynastic, old
prescriptive rights, and a constitutional slowness and sluggishness in the
Germanic temperament, stood in the way of a united fatherland, and had to
be got rid of or overcome by force before the dream of the nationalists
could become a reality.

Prussia, founded by rapine, built up and strengthened by war and conquest,
has always been a heartless, self‐seeking state. The youngest of the great
European states, and for a long time one of the most inconsiderable, she
has gradually grown to be the first military power of the world. Already,
in the time of Frederick the Great, she was the formidable rival of
Austria in the contest for the hegemony of the other German states. This
struggle ended, in 1866, in the utter defeat of Austria on the field of
Sadowa. Hanover, Saxony, Hesse‐Cassel, and other minor principalities were
at once absorbed by Prussia, who, besides greatly increasing her strength,
thus became the champion of German unity. But German unity was a menace to
France, who could not possibly maintain her preponderance in European
affairs in the presence of a united Germany. Hence the irrepressible
conflict between France and Prussia, which ended in the catastrophe of
Sedan.

The King of Prussia became the Emperor of Germany, and German national
pride and enthusiasm reached a degree bordering on frenzy.

By a remarkable coincidence the Franco‐Prussian war broke out at the very
moment when the dogma of Papal infallibility was defined, and immediately
after the capitulation of Sedan, Victor Emanuel took possession of Rome.
The Pope was without temporal power—a prisoner indeed. The feeling against
the newly‐defined dogma was especially strong in Germany, where the
systematic warfare carried on by the _Janus_ party against the Vatican
Council had warped the public mind. France, the eldest daughter of the
church, was lying, bleeding and crushed, at the feet of the conqueror. The
time seemed to have arrived when the bond which united the Catholics of
Germany with the Pope, and through him with the church universal, might
easily be broken.

The defection of Döllinger and other rationalistic professors, as well as
the attitude of many of the German bishops in the council, and the views
which they had expressed with regard to the probable results of a
definition of the infallibility of the Pope, tended to confirm those who
controlled the policy of the new empire in the opinion that there would be
no great difficulty in forming the Catholics of Germany into a kind of
national religious body wholly subject to the state, even in matters of
faith. If we add to this the fact that the infidels of our day have a kind
of superstition which leads them to think that all religious faith has
grown weak, and that those who believe are for the most part hypocritical,
insincere, and by no means anxious to suffer for conscience’s sake, we
shall be able to understand how Bismarck, who is utterly indifferent to
all religion, and who believes in nothing except the omnipotence of the
state, should have persuaded himself to destroy the religious freedom
which had come to be considered the common property of Christendom.
Already, in the month of August immediately following the close of the war
with France, we find the Northern German press, which obsequiously obeys
his orders, beginning to throw out hints that Rome had always been the
enemy of Germany; that her claims were incompatible with the rights of the
state and hurtful to the national development; and that, in presence of
the newly‐defined dogma of Papal infallibility, the necessity of resisting
her ever‐increasing encroachments upon the domain of the civil authority
had become imperative. The watchword given by the official press was
everywhere re‐echoed by the organs of both infidel and Protestant opinion,
and it at once became evident that the German Empire intended to make war
on the Catholic Church.

There was yet another end to be subserved by the persecution of the
church. Bismarck made no secret of his fears of a democratic movement in
Germany after the excitement of the French campaign had died away, and he
hoped to avert this danger by inflaming the religious prejudices of the
infidel and Protestant population.

On the 8th of July, 1871, the Catholic department in the Ministry of
Public Worship was abolished, and the government openly lent its influence
to the Old Catholic movement.

According to the Prussian constitution, religious instruction in the
gymnasia is obligatory; but where a portion or all of the students were
Catholics, the state recognized that their religious instructors should
not be appointed until they had received the approbation of the bishop.
Dr. Wollmann, who had for a long time held the office of teacher of
religion in the Catholic gymnasium of Braunsberg, apostatized after the
Vatican Council, and was, in consequence, suspended from the exercise of
the priestly office by his bishop, who declared that, since Wollmann had
left the church, he could no longer be considered a suitable religious
instructor of Catholic youth. Von Mühler, the Minister of Public Worship,
refused to remove Wollmann; and since religious instruction is compulsory,
the pupils who could not in conscience attend his classes were forced to
leave the school.

This act of Von Mühler was in open violation of the Prussian constitution,
which expressly recognized in the Catholic Church the right of directing
the religious instruction of its members.

To require that Catholics should send their children to the lessons of an
excommunicated priest was to trample upon the most sacred rights of
conscience. By declaring, as in this case, that those who rejected the
dogma of infallibility were true Catholics, the German government plainly
showed that it intended to assume the competency of deciding in all
matters of faith, and consequently to wholly ignore the existence of any
religious authority distinct from that of the state.

Bismarck’s next move was not less arbitrary or tyrannical. He proposed to
the Federal Council and Reichstag a law against what was termed the abuse
of the pulpit, by which the office of preaching should be placed under the
supervision of the police.

This law, which was passed by a feeble majority, was simply a renewal of
the attempt to suppress Christianity made by the Jewish Council in
Jerusalem when the apostles first began to preach in the name of Jesus,
without asking permission of the rulers of the people: “But that it may be
no further spread among the people, let us threaten them, that they speak
no more in this name to any man. And calling them, they charged them not
to speak at all, nor teach in the name of Jesus” (Acts iv. 17, 18).

The injustice of this law was very well shown by the Saxon member of the
Federal Council, who pointed out the fact that, whilst liberty of speech
was denied to Catholic priests, socialists and infidels were permitted
every day to attack the very foundations of all government and
civilization.

This, however, is but the necessary consequence of the theory of the
_state‐God_. To preach in the name of any other God is treason; whereas
atheism is the correlative of the omnipotence of the government. That the
present tendency in Germany is to put the nation in the place of God is
expressly recognized by the _Allgemeine Evang. Luth. Kirchenzeitung_,
which is the organ of orthodox Lutheranism. These are its words: “For the
dogmatic teaching of Christianity they hope to substitute the national
element. The national idea will form the germ of the new religion of the
empire. We have already seen the emblems which foreshadow the manner in
which this new worship is to be organized. Instead of the Christian
festivals, they will celebrate the national memories, and will call to the
churches the masses to whom the road is no longer known. Have we not seen,
on the anniversary of Sedan, the _eidolon_ of the emperor placed upon the
altar, whilst the pulpit was surrounded with the busts of the heroes of
the war?

“During eight days they wove crowns of oak‐leaves and the church was
filled; whilst out of ten thousand parishioners, scarcely a dozen can be
got together to listen to the word of God. Such is the religion of the
future church of the empire. Little more is needed to revive the ancient
worship of the Roman emperors; and if the history of Germany is to be
reduced to this duel between the church of the emperor and that of the
Pope, we must see on which side the Lutherans will stand.”

The next attack on the church was made under cover of an enactment on the
inspection of public schools. A project of law was presented to the House
of Deputies, excluding all priests from the inspection of schools, and at
the same time obliging them to undertake this office whenever asked to do
so by the state authorities. This latter clause was, however, so openly
unjust that it was rejected by the House. But the law, even as it stands,
is a virtual denial that Catholic schools have any right to exist at all,
and is an evidence that the German Empire intends to destroy Christian
faith by establishing an atheistic system of popular education.

And now war was declared against the Jesuits. The Congress of the Old
Catholics, which met at Munich in September, 1871, had passed violent
resolutions against the order; and later the Old Catholic Committee at
Cologne presented a petition against the Jesuits to the imperial
Parliament.

The debate was opened in the month of May, 1872. A project of law,
restricting the liberties of religious orders, and especially directed
against the Society of Jesus, was brought before the Federal Council and
accepted by a large majority. When it came before the imperial Parliament,
amendments were added rendering it still more harsh and tyrannical. The
order was to be shut out from the empire, its houses to be closed, foreign
Jesuits were to be expelled, and the German members of the society were to
be confined to certain districts; and the execution of these measures was
to be entrusted to the Federal Council.

On the 4th of July the law received the approval of the emperor, and on
the 5th it was promulgated.

Thus in the most arbitrary manner, without any legal proceedings, hundreds
of German citizens, against whom there was not the slightest proof of
guilt, were deprived of all rights and expelled from their country.
Besides, the measure was based upon the most ignorant misconception of the
real condition of the church, and was therefore necessarily ineffective.
The religious orders and the secular priesthood do not represent opposite
tendencies in the church; their aims are identical, and, in our day at
least, the secular priests are as zealous, as active, and as efficient as
the members of the religious orders.

What end, then, was to be gained by expelling the Jesuits, whilst devoted
and faithful priests were left to minister to the Catholic people, whose
faith had been roused by this scandalous persecution of men whom they knew
to be guilty of no crime except that of loving Jesus Christ and his
church? The blow struck at the Jesuits was, in truth, aimed at the church,
and this the bishops, priests, and entire Catholic people of Germany at
once recognized. They saw now, since even the possibility of doubting was
no longer left to them, that the German Empire had declared open war
against the church; and Bismarck, seeing that his half‐way measures had
deceived no one, resolved to adopt a policy of open violence. With this
view a new minister of Public Worship was appointed in the person of Dr.
Falk, who drew up the plan of the famous Four Church Laws to which he has
given his name, and which was adopted on the 11th of May, 1873.

In virtue of these laws—which it is unnecessary to transcribe in full—the
state arrogates the right of appointing to all ecclesiastical offices,
since the government claims authority to approve or annul all nominations
made by the bishops; and the President of the Province (_Oberpraesident_)
is bound to interdict the exercise of any religious function to
ecclesiastics appointed without his consent. The bishop who makes an
appointment to the cure of souls without the consent of the civil
authority is fined from two hundred to one thousand thalers; and the
priest who, appointed in this way, exercises spiritual functions, is
visited with a proportionate fine. This is an attempt to change the very
nature of the church; it is a denial of its right to exist at all.

The third of these laws creates the “Royal Court of Justice for
Ecclesiastical Affairs,” which claims and possesses by act of Parliament
the right to reform all disciplinary decisions made by the bishops in
relation to the ecclesiastics under their jurisdiction. This same court
has by law the right to depose any ecclesiastic whose conduct the
government may see fit to consider _incompatible with public order_.

The Pope is interdicted from the exercise of disciplinary power within the
territory of the Prussian monarchy.

The state takes control of the education of the young men destined to the
priesthood. It requires them to pass the _arbiturienten‐examen_ in a
German gymnasium, and then to devote three years to the study of theology
in a German university, during which time they are not to be permitted to
live in an episcopal seminary; and thereafter they are to pass a public
examination before the state officials. All educational establishments for
the clergy, especially all kinds of seminaries, are placed under the
superintendence of the government, and those which refuse to submit to
this supervision are to be closed. The education of priests, the fitness
of candidates for holy orders, appointments to the cure of souls, the
infliction of ecclesiastical censures, the soundness of the faith of the
clergy, are, in the new German Empire, matters to be regulated by the
police.

This is not a struggle between Catholicity and Protestantism; it is a
battle between the Atheist State and the Kingdom of God. The Protestant
Church in Germany does not alarm Bismarck, because it is feeble and has no
independent organization, since its ministers are appointed and ruled by
the emperor, and it is also well understood that very few of them have any
faith in positive religion.

But the orthodox Protestants of Germany thoroughly understand that the
attempt to crush the Catholic Church is meant to be a fatal blow at the
vital principle of all religion. This is recognized by the _Allgemeine
Evang. Luth. Kirchenzeitung_ in the article from which we have already
quoted. “It is a common remark,” says this organ of orthodox Lutheranism,
“that the blows struck at the Church of Rome will tell with redoubled
force against the evangelical church. But what is meant to injure, only
helps the Roman Church. There she stands, more compact than ever, and the
world is amazed at beholding her strength. Once the word of the Monk of
Wittenberg made her tremble, but to‐day the blows of power make her
stronger. Let us beware of illusion; it is certain that in the Protestant
North of Germany there has grown up a public opinion on the Church of Rome
which provokes the respect even of the liberals. We have enough to do,
they say, to fight the socialists; it is time to leave the Catholic
bishops in peace.”

To Be Concluded Next Month.




The Veil Withdrawn.


Translated, By Permission, From The French Of Mme. Craven, Author Of “A
Sister’s Story,” “Fleurange,” Etc.



XXVI.


Among the amusements of the Carnival, there was one in which I was not in
the least tempted to take part—that of the _bal masqué_, or, as it was
called, the Festino di San Carlo. I ought to remark here, however, that it
was with respect to this amusement, above all, Naples differed from Paris.
There was no resemblance between the _bals masqués_ at San Carlo and those
given at the opera in Paris. No virtuous or even prudent woman, I imagine,
would think of venturing to attend the latter; whereas at San Carlo it was
not only common to find married women of rank, but even young ladies under
their mothers’ protection as at any other ball. They wore their masks
awhile, amusing themselves, if they had the turn, with mystifying their
friends; then, at a certain hour, several rooms having been formed by
uniting a number of boxes, and illuminated, they all laid aside their
masks, and the various coteries, in groups of ten, fifteen, or twenty
persons, took supper together. I certainly do not pretend to deny (my
story itself would forbid it) that the opportunity of profiting by this
disguise, in order to pass the evening in a less inoffensive manner, was
not made use of by more than one of the company. It could not be
otherwise, perhaps, in a place where this kind of folly reigns, even in a
mitigated form. I only wish to describe its general character at that
time.

I had not, however, the least inclination to attend. The very thought of
wearing a mask was repugnant to me, and to see anybody else with one on
caused me a kind of fear. Besides, I never could understand what pleasure
was to be found in a mystery of this kind, which always seemed childish
and trivial, if not culpable and dangerous. I had neither the faculty of
disguising my voice nor of making use of the jargon that constitutes the
spirit of a _bal masqué_. I therefore flatly refused to join a party of
twenty persons who were to attend the _Festino_ on _Jeudi‐Gras_, and,
after participating for awhile in the amusements of the ball‐room, were to
take supper together.

Stella had neither my repugnance nor my incapacity. She knew how to play
the part of another with grace and skill, and had been urged, as well as
I, to join this merry party; but she denied herself the pleasure in order
to attend a family supper with her aged relatives and their friends, and
we decided with mutual accord that our amusement for the day should be
confined to that which awaited us on my aunt’s balcony on the Toledo.

The hour came at last, and found us under arms—that is to say, our faces
protected by a kind of visor of wire netting, and all of us, except my
aunt, dressed in such a way as not to fear the clouds of flour we were to
face, as well as the missiles which, under the name of _confetti_, were
fearful to encounter, and had nothing sweet about them but the name. Some
carried their precaution so far as to prepare a _costume de bataille_
expressly for the occasion. Of this number were Teresina and Mariuccia,
who, at Lando’s suggestion, had provided themselves with dresses of white
cotton ornamented with bows of rose‐colored ribbon, which enabled them to
encounter the showers of missiles, and were so becoming that they looked
like two of Watteau’s shepherdesses. But my aunt disdained this mixture of
elegance and economy. She did not give a thought to what was to take place
in the street; her whole mind was absorbed in what was to occur in her
drawing‐room. Regardless of danger, she put on a dress of yellow silk of
the brightest shade, and set off her _chignon_ and false braids with a cap
adorned with poppies and corn‐flowers, above which was fastened a bow of
red ribbon, which streamed like a flag from the summit of a tower. This
display was intended to do honor to the visitors who merely came for their
own convenience. For the most part, they only entered her house with an
eye to her balcony: but in order to obtain access to it, they were obliged
to pass through the drawing‐room, where Donna Clelia herself was stationed
to arrest the passers‐by and exact a tribute of politeness no one could
refuse, and which, brought to such close terms, every one liberally paid.
Never had she, therefore, in a single day reaped a like harvest of new and
distinguished acquaintances; never had she received at once so great a
number of desirable invitations, for could they do otherwise than requite
hospitality with hospitality? My aunt thus had at the beginning of the day
one hour of happiness without alloy!

At length the battle began in earnest. To those who have taken part in
such combats it is useless to describe the enthusiasm and madness which
every one ends by manifesting; to those who have not had the experience it
is equally useless to try to give an idea of it. It must be acknowledged,
however, that the first volley of _confetti_ is by no means very amusing
to the recipient, and he is tempted to withdraw ill‐humoredly from what
seems at first mere rough, childish sport. Then he endeavors to defend
himself by retaliating. By degrees the ardor of combat is awakened; he
yields to it, he grows furious, and for hours sometimes he persists in
returning volley for volley, unmindful of fatigue, and regardless of the
blows he receives. One thing is hurled after another—hard _confetti_,
fragile eggs, flour, sugar‐plums, flowers, and immense bouquets.... If the
ammunition fails, he throws out of the window whatever comes to hand. He
would rather throw himself out than give up the contest!

This sport had been going on for an hour, and we were still in full glee,
when the Venetian gondola made its appearance in the street. It was
welcomed with shouts and cries of applause from the crowd. In fact,
nothing so splendid of this kind had ever been seen before. It came slowly
along, stopping under every balcony. When it arrived before ours, it
remained a long time, and a furious combat took place. Notwithstanding the
visor that concealed Lorenzo’s face, I easily recognized him by his
slender, stately form. Lando and Mario looked very well also, but Lorenzo
surpassed them all by the grace and ease with which he wore his costume,
as well as the skill with which he threw his bouquets to the precise spot
he aimed at. He soon recognized me likewise, and threw me a bunch of
roses!...

Alas! those withered roses. I preserved them a long time in memory of a
day that was to end in so strange a manner!...

After the gondola had gone entirely out of sight, I concluded to leave the
balcony, in order to take some rest while awaiting the return of the
brilliant masquerade. This would not be till nightfall, when the gondola
was to be illuminated throughout. I had therefore nearly an hour before me
in which to repair my strength. But when I entered the drawing‐room, I was
frightened at the sight which met my eyes. My poor aunt’s brilliant toilet
had undergone the most disastrous consequences possible to imagine, and I
found her so covered with flour and blood that I scarcely recognized her!

In this kind of war, as in all others, nothing is more dangerous than to
attract the attention of the enemy. A hat, a ribbon, any dress whatever
the least remarkable in its color, instantly becomes the object of
universal aim. It seems Donna Clelia, after welcoming her company in the
drawing‐room, was tempted to go and see in her turn what was taking place
on the battle‐field; but no sooner had she stepped her foot on the
balcony, no sooner were her poppies visible, and her red ribbons began to
wave in the air, than from every balcony, every window, in the
neighborhood, there fell on her head such a hail‐storm of missiles of all
kinds that, in a second, not only had her flowers, ribbons, and _chignon_
disappeared under a thick layer of flour, but, having neglected to provide
herself with a visor, she had been struck in the very middle of the face
by some of the _confetti_ I have spoken of, which are merely hard balls of
plaster in the centre. No one perceived this in the ardor of the combat,
no one left the _mélée_ to go to her assistance, and she was still in the
arm‐chair where she had thrown herself, stunned by the violence of the
attack!...

I sprang towards her, and hastened to bathe her face with cold water. I
then saw it was only her nose (a somewhat prominent feature in her face)
that had suffered a slight contusion, though sufficient to inundate her
laces and yellow dress with blood, so that the damage they sustained, as
well as her head‐dress, was irreparable!...

But in the midst of all this my aunt remained cool and courageous. Like a
general wounded on the day of victory, she smiled at the result of her
rashness, and, while I was ministering to her wants, she exclaimed:

“It is nothing; no matter! Thanks, Ginevrina mia! _Che bel divertimento!_
I never passed such a day in my life!... Do you know, the Duchessa di L——
has invited me to play _la pignata_(81) at her house a week from Sunday.
And then the gentleman with H.R.H., the Count of Syracuse, has promised to
get me an invitation to one of the amateur comedies. And the gondola—what
do you say to that? Didn’t your husband look handsome enough for you?...
How _simpatico_ that Lorenzo is!... Ah! _figlia mia_, the Madonna has done
well for you!... I hope she will think of us some day!...”

My aunt rambled on in this way while I was trying to repair her disordered
attire, after dressing her wounds. This took some time; but I still
hesitated about leaving her, though she begged me to return to the balcony
and not trouble myself any more about her. I obeyed her at last; but this
interruption had put an end to my enthusiastic gayety, and, when I
returned to my place, I no longer felt any disposition to resume the sport
I found so amusing only a short time before. Besides, it was growing dusk
and the combat was slackening, though the noise and confusion in the
street increased as the time approached for the return of the gondola.
While I was thus standing motionless in the obscurity of one corner of the
balcony where we were assembled, I suddenly heard some words from the
adjoining balcony of the next house that attracted my attention:

“Valenzano must be fabulously rich, but he is going to ruin at full speed,
the dear duke.”

“In the first place, he is really very wealthy,” was the reply; “and when
he gains his lawsuit in Sicily, he will be the richest man in this part of
Italy. I do not consider his entertaining company, however distinguished
it may be, or giving his pretty wife a new set of ornaments now and then,
or throwing away a few hundred dollars as he has done to‐day, as an
extravagance that will ruin a man of his means.”

“No, of course not, if that were all.”

“What else is there?... He used to play high, but they say he never
touches a card now.”

The other speaker burst into a loud laugh, and, after a moment’s silence,
resumed in a lower tone:

“He no longer plays in company, but I assure you _Qui a bu boira_ and _Qui
a joué jouera_. I should be satisfied with an income equal to what he
spends in one evening at _lansquenet_ or _baccara_ since he stopped
playing whist and _écarté_ in the drawing‐rooms to which he accompanies
the duchess.”

Their voices grew still lower, and the few words I heard were so
indistinct that I only caught the following:

“But as there is no doubt as to the result of the lawsuit in Sicily, there
is no danger of a catastrophe.”

At that moment the uproar in the street became deafening. Shouts and wild
applause announced the approach of the gondola, and redoubled in
proportion to its nearness. It really presented a fairy‐like appearance.
It was lit up with a thousand lamps of all colors, and from time to time
brilliant rockets were sent up, casting a momentary gleam over the crowd,
and then vanishing, leaving everything in obscurity except the dazzling
gondola, which proceeded slowly along without stopping this time beneath
the balconies. No _confetti_ or flowers were thrown; the combat was over.
It was now merely a magnificent picturesque spectacle. I saw Lorenzo
again, and more distinctly than before, for he had taken off his visor;
but he could not see me in the obscurity of our balcony. He was standing
in a group on the deck of the gondola as it went by. They were all dressed
in Venetian costumes, which produced an extremely picturesque effect. It
was like a living representation of one of Paul Veronese’s paintings. I
could not take my eyes off so brilliant and extraordinary a spectacle, and
the gondola had gone some distance when I suddenly saw Lorenzo (it was
really he; I should have known him, even if his face had not at that
moment been turned towards the bright light) rapidly ascend the light
staging at one end of the gondola, holding in his hand a small bunch of
jasmine tied with a white ribbon, which, when he arrived at the top, he
threw towards a window in which gleamed a little light. ... It reached its
destination. The window immediately closed, the light disappeared, and
Lorenzo descended and was lost in the crowd that thronged the gondola. All
this took place so quickly that I could hardly account for the attention
with which I watched this little evolution and the degree of vexation it
caused me. Lorenzo, in the course of the day, had thrown more than a
hundred bouquets of the same kind. Why was I more curious to know the
destination of this one than I had been of the rest? But fatigue and the
deafening noise rendered me incapable of reflecting any length of time on
what I had just witnessed and what I had heard on the balcony. There was
almost immediately a general confusion, for the return of the gondola was
the signal for dispersing. I remained till the last to ascertain the
condition of my aunt after her accident, and did not leave her till she
had promised to go to bed and let the baroness, who willingly accepted the
charge, accompany her daughters to the _Festino_ at midnight.

Having returned home, I likewise returned to my room, where I threw myself
on a sofa, exhausted with fatigue. Lorenzo returned at a later hour. He
came up to my room, spoke affectionately, advised me to take some repose,
and inquired if I had absolutely decided not to go to San Carlo. I replied
that, even if I had intended going, I should be obliged to give it up now.
He did not insist, and my eyes were already beginning to close when he
embraced me, as he was going away, and said: “Till to‐morrow, Ginevra; for
the _Festino_ will not be over till daylight, you know.”



XXVII.


I slept as the young do when suffering from unusual fatigue—that is to
say, with a sleep so profound that, when I awoke, I had no idea of the
lateness of the hour or where I was, and I felt as completely rested as if
I had slept the entire night. The sound of carriage‐wheels on the gravel
of the avenue facing my room had roused me from my slumbers, and I now
heard steps and the sound of voices in a subdued tone in the chamber
adjoining mine. My door soon opened, and Ottavia entered, moving
cautiously, as if she supposed me asleep. But as soon as I spoke, I heard
a silvery laugh behind her, and, to my great surprise, Stella made her
appearance. She had on a black domino with the hood thrown back, and in
her hand she held two masks and another domino like her own.

“You see I was right, Ottavia,” she exclaimed. “I was sure we should find
her awake, and, what is still better, she is dressed! That is fortunate!
Now, Ginevra, you must absolutely consent to indulge in the pleasure of
spending an hour with me at San Carlo—only an hour! Here, look at the
clock; it is half‐past twelve. I promise to bring you back before two to
continue the fine nap I have disturbed.”

I rubbed my eyes and looked at her, without comprehending a thing she
proposed.

“Come, come, Ginevra!” she continued, “wake up, I tell you, and listen to
what I say. In the first place, you must know we have had no supper or
company at our house to‐night. My uncle had an attack of the gout and went
to bed at nine o’clock, and I played cards with my aunt till midnight. But
just as we were both going to our rooms, she all at once
remembered—perhaps touched by my good‐humor—how much she used to enjoy
going to the _Festini_, and told me, of her own accord, it was not too
late to go, if I knew of any friend to accompany me. It occurred to me at
once, Ginevra, it would be very amusing for you to go and quiz _il Signor
Duca_ a little. He is absolutely sure you are in bed fast asleep. You can
tell him a thousand things nobody knows but yourselves, which will set him
wild with amazement and curiosity. You can acknowledge everything to‐
morrow, and he will be the first to declare it an excellent joke. As for
me, I am not sorry to have an opportunity of telling your august brother a
few truths in return for certain remarks about my exuberant gayety and
levity not quite to my liking. . . . Come, come, Ginevra, we must not lose
any time. Consent, and I will tell you the rest on the way.”

It is useless to enumerate the additional arguments she used. The result
was, she not only triumphed over my repugnance, but she succeeded in
exciting a lively desire to meet Lorenzo in disguise. It seemed to me I
could say many things I should not dare breathe a word of to his face, and
I could thus relieve my mind of the two or three incidents that had
troubled it within twenty‐four hours.

Stella saw I was ready to yield.

“Quick! quick! Ottavia, help me to put on her domino, and above all, put
back her hair so it cannot be seen. The least curl peeping out of her hood
would be sufficient to betray her. Now, let us see; as we shall have to
separate on entering the hall, we must wear something not too conspicuous
which will enable us to find each other in the crowd of black dominos. Let
me hunt for something.”

She looked around, and soon discovered a large basket, in which remained a
number of small bouquets tied with ribbons of all colors, prepared for the
contests that morning.

“The very thing,” said she. And while Ottavia was executing her orders and
concealing my hair, Stella selected two small bunches of flowers, one tied
with red, and the other with white, ribbon.

“Nothing could be better,” said she. “The flowers are alike; the ribbons
alone different. Look! see where I have put my badge. Here is yours. Put
it in the same place, on the left side near the shoulder.”

But when I saw that the little bouquet she gave me was of _jasmine tied
with a white ribbon_, the emotion I felt was extreme. I did not manifest
it, however, for I knew if I told Stella the reason, she would burst into
laughter, and ask if I was going to worry myself about all the bouquets my
husband had thrown by the dozen that day upon all the balconies on the
Toledo, and if I intended to bring him to an account for them. I therefore
made no comment on this singular coincidence; but while I was fastening
the bouquet on, as Stella had directed, I suddenly recollected, I know not
why, it was by giving Lorenzo a sprig of jasmine I pledged myself to be
his for life!

Having completed my preparations, with the exception of my mask, which I
carried in my hand to put on at the last moment, I drew up my hood and
followed Stella, escorted to the foot of the staircase by my good old
Ottavia, who, though accustomed to the follies of the Carnival, shook her
head as she saw me depart, and looked at me with a more anxious expression
than usual. Was she thinking of the evening when she saw me set out for my
first ball—of fearful memory? Did she recall my mother’s anxiety? And did
she remember to beg her to watch over her child and pray for her, as she
did then? . . .

As we approached San Carlo, I was again seized with fear, and regretted
having yielded to Stella’s entreaties.

“What will become of us alone in the crowd with no one to protect us?”
said I.

“Our masks are a sufficient protection, especially to‐night. There will be
so large a number of ladies of rank at the _Festino_ that no one will
venture to say a word to us that surpasses the bounds of pleasantry. There
would be too much danger of addressing some one who would resent it. As to
our masks, you need not be anxious. The rules of the _bals masqués_
absolutely forbid any one’s touching them, and these rules are respected
even by those who do not respect any other. But, apropos of masks, it is
time to put yours on.”

I still hesitated. But at last, as I was on the point of descending from
the carriage, I decided to fasten my mask on, and I tremblingly followed
Stella, or rather, she took my arm and drew me along.

My first feeling, on finding myself in such a crowd, was one of
inexpressible terror. I was seized with an invincible embarrassment and a
sensation of suffocation so painful that it was with all the difficulty in
the world I kept myself from tearing off the mask that seemed to hinder me
from breathing. But Stella laughingly encouraged me in a whisper, and by
degrees I became accustomed to the deafening sound of the music, the
exclamations and resonant voices on every side, as well as the sight of
the dominos and masks of all colors in circulation around us. She led me
on some distance, cautioning me in a low tone to make no reply, and making
none herself, to the observations here and there addressed the two “fair
masks” who were gliding through the crowd. At length we came to a pillar,
against which we leaned, and she whispered:

“Let this place be our rendezvous. You will certainly see Lorenzo pass by
in a few moments. As for me, I do not see your brother anywhere, but
yonder is Landolfo. I will amuse myself by talking nonsense with him. Do
not be afraid, and, above all, do not lose your badge, or I shall be
unable to find you. I will be careful of mine also. If I arrive here
first, I will wait for you. You must do the same.”

She disappeared as she uttered these words, and I stood still for some
minutes, looking around with uneasiness and terror caused by the
impossibility of persuading myself I was not seen and recognized by
everybody. But after three or four gentlemen of my acquaintance passed by
with a mere glance of indifference, I began to take courage, and finally
became sufficiently cool to consider what I should do and the means of
attaining my object.

I began by looking around on all sides, but for some time it was in vain.
I could not see Lorenzo anywhere, and had decided to leave my post in
order to search for him in some other part of the hall, when all at once I
saw him some distance off, coming in my direction. He was walking slowly
along, looking around with a certain attention, as if he was also in
search of some one. We were separated by the crowd, and it was not easy to
reach him. I advanced a few steps, however, and at that instant, but only
for an instant, there was an opening in the crowd which enabled him, in
his turn, to see me. I saw a flash of joy on his face. He recognized me,
it was evident; by what means I did not ask. I no longer remembered my
intention of mystifying him. I sprang towards him, and he towards me. I
passed my arm through his, still too much excited by my previous fears and
my joy at finding him to utter a word....

A moment passed—a single moment, brief and terrible,... for he spoke—yes,
at once, and with vehemence, with passion!... But ... it was not to me!...
No, it was to her he expected to meet. I heard his lips murmur the
detested name that had not met my ear since I left Paris!...

I was so astounded that I gave him time to say what I ought not to have
heard, what I did not wish to hear!... Then ... I know not what impulse I
yielded to, for I lost the power of reflection—I abruptly withdrew my arm
from his, and fell back with so quick and violent a movement that the
crowd opened a moment to make way for me, and then closed, completely
separating me from him.... I tore off the flowers and ribbon I wore, and
threw them on the ground. I could not now be distinguished from the other
black dominos around me. But I was no longer afraid. I cared for nothing
now but to get away—to fly as fast as possible from so horrible a place. I
hurried along in such a wild, rapid way that every one looked at me with
surprise, and stood aside for me to pass. I thus succeeded in leaving the
hall and reaching the passage, where I was obliged to stop to take breath.
The passers‐by addressed me, but I heard nothing but the words that still
resounded in my ears. I was conscious of nothing but a fearful anguish and
the rapid beating of my heart.

While standing there, all at once ... O merciful heavens!... I saw a lady
pass only a few steps off.... She was of my height, and, like me, wore a
black domino with a sprig of jasmine tied with a white ribbon, similar to
the one I had just torn off, and doubtless the same my eyes had followed a
few hours before! I recognized her at once, and imagined I saw through her
mask the sinister gleam of two large blue eyes! She traversed the passage
and entered the hall, where she disappeared. I trembled fearfully from
head to foot, my sight grew dim, my strength began to fail me. I felt as
if I should die on the spot if I did not take off the mask that was
suffocating me, and yet I was still conscious I ought to keep it on at all
hazards. I threw around a glance of despair, hoping to see Stella, and
forgetting she would not be able to recognize me, even if she thought of
looking for me so far from the spot where she left me. What torture! Great
God!... My strength was gone, my voice failed me, I felt my knees give
way, when, O unlooked‐for happiness! I saw Mario pass by. The stifled cry
I uttered died away on my lips before it could reach his ear, but he saw
the effort I made, he felt my hand on his arm, and stopped. He began to
address me in the customary way on such occasions, but I made no reply. I
had recovered strength enough, however, to draw him towards the door, and
he unresistingly followed my lead; but, as we were going out, he stopped
me with an air of surprise, and said:

“I am ready to follow you wherever you wish, fair mask, but do you know
yourself where you wish to go?”

I was only able to incline my head as a sign of affirmation, and he
suffered me to lead him into the street. As soon as we were out of doors,
I tore off my mask, and found strength enough to say:

“It is I, Mario. Help me to get away from this detestable place!”

“Ginevra!” exclaimed he, drawing me along several steps to look at my face
by the light of the torches not far off. He seemed frightened at my looks.
My face was convulsed and lividly pale.

“Good heavens, sister!” said he gravely, “what has happened? How is it you
are alone in this place at such an hour? Where is Lorenzo? Shall I go for
him?”

“No, no! Oh! no,” I exclaimed with anguish. “For pity’s sake, Mario, be
silent. Help me to get away, I say. That is all I ask. Do this, and ask me
no questions.”

His face darkened He silently took hold of my arm, and led me to the place
where he had left his carriage. I entered it, and was on the point of
going away without another word when I bethought myself of Stella. I
hesitated, however, to expose her to his sarcastic comments, and perhaps
to the suspicions I saw were already excited in my brother’s distrustful
mind, and said in a supplicating tone:

“One favor more, Mario, which I am sure you will no more refuse your
sister than any other lady. I did not come here alone.”

At these words his face assumed an expression which I answered with a
smile of disdain.

“Do you suppose, Mario, if I did not come here with Lorenzo, I would
accept the escort of any other gentleman?” I stopped a moment, at once
irritated and impatient, but finally continued:

“The fact is, Mario, if you must know it, it was he, it was Lorenzo
himself, I came to see. I wished to play a joke on him and mystify him a
little, by way of amusing myself.”

I think my smile must have been frightful as I said this, for my brother
looked anxiously at me, though he seemed satisfied with my explanation.

“But I have been punished,” I continued, “terribly punished.... I failed
in my object,... and thought I should die in the crowd.”

I could say no more. The tears I could not repress choked me. Mario at
once softened.

“I understand, sister—the noise, heat, and so forth were overpowering.
Those who go to a _bal masqué_ for the first time often experience this,
but another time it will not happen.”

“God preserve me from ever going to another!” said I in a low tone. “But I
was about to say, Mario, that the person, the lady, who came with me is
probably looking for me by this time. Search for her. Her domino is like
mine, and you will know her by a sprig of jasmine tied with a red ribbon.”

“I saw such a domino not long ago on Lando’s arm.”

“It was she. Find her, and tell her not to be anxious; that I was ill, and
could not wait for her. That is all. Thanks, Mario. One word more,
however. As I did not succeed with regard to Lorenzo, I do not wish him to
know anything about it.”

He made a sign that he understood me, and closed the door of the carriage,
which soon took me home. Ottavia, who alone sat up for me, was alarmed at
seeing me return in such a condition. I repeated the account I had given
Mario, and had no difficulty in convincing her I was ill. The change in my
face was sufficient to prove it; but what was this paleness, great God! in
comparison with the change that had come over my life within the hour that
had scarcely elapsed?



XXVIII.


This time the thunderbolt had really fallen on my head! Many times had I
heard it rumbling afar off, and once I thought myself fatally injured; but
after a few stormy days, calmness was restored, the blue sky became
visible, and the sun once more diffused the light and warmth of renewed
confidence and happiness. The desire of being happy seconded my effort to
become so. And, as I have remarked, the liveliness, buoyancy, and love of
pleasure natural to the young, as well as the beauty of Naples and the
influence of its climate, all tended to surround me with an atmosphere at
once enervating and intoxicating. But now, in an instant, without any
warning, all my hopes were crushed, annihilated, for ever at an end!

“Should Lorenzo become treacherous, unfaithful, and untrue to his word,
could I continue to love him? What would become of me in such a case?”
Such were the questions I once asked myself, and they were the sincere cry
of my heart.

Now all this was realized. A person more treacherous, more deceitful, more
untrue than he it seemed impossible to find. Everything now became clear.
The words I heard, so plainly interpreted by the instinct they awakened
and that had already warned me so strangely, enabled me to comprehend
everything. Whether there was any good reason or not for his frequent
absence, it was evident he had always met her. It was therefore from these
interviews he had derived the cheerfulness and good‐humor that apparently
made him enjoy so much the comfort and splendor he afterwards came to
participate in with me. Once—who can tell for what reason?—he had delayed
going. It was then, probably, she came herself to meet him, not
foreseeing, or he either, it would be before my very eyes!...

Even at the present time it would perhaps agitate me and disturb the
tranquillity of my soul, should I dwell too long on the thoughts which
then overwhelmed me, and from which I derived the conviction that I no
longer loved Lorenzo. But I suffered from the deadly chill his treachery
had struck to my heart. I would rather have experienced the torment of
jealousy than the chill of indifference. To suffer from that would still
have been life. To suffer as I did was like being paralyzed, petrified,
dead.

Women more generous, more courageous, and more devoted than I, had, I was
aware, won back such inconstant hearts, and found happiness once more in
the sweetest of victories; but their example occurred to me without
producing any impression. I was not in a condition to be influenced by it.
My aimless life had resulted in the almost complete prostration of my
strength of volition. In this condition I could neither suffer with
courage, nor act with wisdom, nor resist temptation with any energy of
will....

O my God! it is with my face prostrate in the dust I desire to write the
pages that are to follow. It is not without hesitation I continue my
account. But the remembrance of thy mercy prevails over everything, and
effaces the very recollection of the faults and follies that serve to make
it manifest! Like our divine poet wandering in the mazes of that gloomy
forest which is the image of life, I, in my turn, attempt


    “To discourse of what there good befell;
    All else will I relate discovered there.”(82)


Mario, Stella, and Ottavia were the sole confidants of my secret, and they
kept it faithfully. Lorenzo had the less reason for suspecting I had been
to the ball when, returning home at six o’clock in the morning, he learned
I had had a violent attack of fever in the night, and was not able to
rise. There was no deception in this. It was not a mere pretext for
keeping my chamber, but the too natural consequence of the terrible
excitement of the night I had passed.

Lorenzo came several times to know how I was, and manifested more apparent
affection than usual; and yet once or twice, though perhaps my imagination
deceived me, I thought I saw something like embarrassment or uneasiness in
his face. I was, however, too ill all the morning to observe him closely
or make any reply to what he said.

Towards evening I felt better, and, though still weak, I got up. Lorenzo
came to see if anything serious was likely to result from my
indisposition, and, being reassured on this point, he went out as usual,
leaving me alone with Stella, who had spent part of the day at my bedside,
though I had not been able to talk with her any more than with him. Her
face was as grave that day as it was usually smiling. Stella’s
cheerfulness resulted from her complete lack of egotism. She regarded the
happiness of others as a treasure from which she took all she needed for
herself; and was happy, therefore, through sympathy. It was, so to speak,
a reflected happiness. Admirable disposition! Incapable of exacting
anything in view of her own lot, or of envying that of others, she was a
delightful friend in times of prosperity, and, at the same time, a devoted
adherent in misfortune, and the sweet, compassionate confidant of others’
sorrows. My disappearance the evening before, the condition in which she
found me in the morning, the incoherent words I uttered, prepared her for
something serious, and she knew beforehand I, of all people in the world,
would not hesitate to tell her the truth. In fact, as soon as we were left
alone in a small sitting‐room next my chamber, I gave her for the first
time a full account of all that had taken place at Paris, as well as the
night before. She listened without interrupting me, and, after I ended,
remained silent for some time.

“This is indeed a good lesson for me,” said she at length. “I am cured for
life, I hope, of a folly like that I committed last night.”

“What folly do you allude to?”

“Why, that of coming here and persuading you to go to a place where you
learned what you might for ever have remained ignorant of.”

“And continue to be taken in, deceived, and blinded, to live in an
atmosphere of deception, hypocrisy, and lies, to love what no longer
merits affection? No, Stella, no; do not regret that, thanks to you, it is
no longer the case. Were I to suffer even a thousand times more, were I to
die of anguish, as I thought I should on the spot when I saw that woman
pass by, I should be glad the veil had been torn from my eyes. I can no
longer be happy, it is true. My happiness is ruined beyond repair, but I
love truth better than happiness.”

“And do you think,” said Stella after a fresh pause, “that you can never
forgive Lorenzo?”

“He must, at least, desire it, as you will acknowledge, and this is
precisely what will never happen.”

“Why not?”

“Because I know Lorenzo. If I utter a reproach, it is he who thinks he has
something to forgive. He really obeys no law but the impulse that happens
to predominate. It is not in his nature, doubtless, to show me openly any
ill treatment, but he would break my heart without any scruple in order to
gratify his inclinations. I have no doubt he thinks he has acted with
great delicacy, because he has taken pains to conceal the base course he
has pursued; and when he finds out I have discovered it, it is he who will
think he has a right to be angry. That will be the result. What room is
there for forgiveness in such a tissue of falseness?”

“What can I say to you? It will be no consolation to hear there are many
women who have husbands like him. It is sad to feel there is nothing in
the world so rare as happiness. Nevertheless, it is true, and, for my
part, it has often consoled me for having had so little in my life. And
had I been happy in the beginning, who could tell what the future had in
reserve for me?”

“And you have never thought of marrying again? You can content yourself
with a life devoid of happiness, as well as of suffering?”

She smiled.

“My life is not so exempt from suffering as you may suppose. Neither is it
devoid of happiness while I have my Angiolina. As for marrying again, I
have never happened to meet a person who inspired me with the least desire
of that kind, and I imagine I never shall.”

“It is certain, however, if you wish to marry, you would only have the
trouble of choosing.”

“Perhaps among men not one of whom pleases me. Who knows how it would be
if I took it into my head to fancy some one? But let us leave my affairs
and return to you. Tell me, are you sure Lorenzo has not discovered you
were at the ball?”

“Yes, I am certain he has not. If he had any suspicion, he would not
conceal it from me. Besides, he found me too ill at his return to conceive
such an idea. And yet...”

“Well, go on.”

“Well, I noticed something that seemed to indicate he is not so sure as he
was yesterday of my utter ignorance of all he has thought proper to hide
from me.”

“I agree with you, Ginevra. And shall I tell you what I think?”

“Tell me.”

“That he supposes me to be the mask he addressed by mistake, and does me
the honor of supposing I have denounced him.”

“What an idea!... Why should he suppose it was you?”

“Oh! by that aberration of mind common to gentlemen who frequent masked
balls and persist in thinking they are right every time they are
mistaken.”

“But once more: Why should he suppose you were at the ball? Your secret
has been as well kept as mine, I imagine.”

“Not quite. In the first place, I spoke to several persons. And when Mario
came to deliver your message, I could not repress an exclamation of
surprise, which betrayed me, not only to your brother, but to Lando, on
whose arm I was then leaning. I do not know whether it was he or not who
spread the report, but it has certainly been whispered around that I
attended the _Festino_. Lorenzo has taken the idea I have mentioned into
his head, and of course supposes what I know has been communicated to you,
or will be. This is what I have been wishing to say to you.”

My faithful Ottavia now made her appearance to warn me it was time to
retire. Stella left me, and, after her departure, I began to reflect on
her conjecture and consider what reply I should make, should Lorenzo
question me on the subject. I was far from suspecting the means he would
adopt to anticipate the scene he foresaw.

I was alone the following morning when I saw him enter, calm, smiling, and
self‐possessed, as if there was no actual or possible cloud between us. He
spoke of my health, and, satisfied that I was really better, proceeded to
more indifferent subjects, and then suddenly, with an assurance the
recollection of which still astonishes me, he said:

“Apropos, Ginevra, the Marchesa di Villanera has been in Naples several
days.”

I turned pale.

“Oh! do not be alarmed,” said he. “I have not the slightest intention of
asking you to receive her. I remember too well the sentiments you
expressed on this point at Paris. No, I wish instead to let you know I am
going to escort her to Milan myself, and shall remain there till after the
Carnavalone.”(83)

My heart gave a violent bound. I could not utter a word, but the surprise
that rendered me dumb enabled me to be calm, and, when I finally recovered
my voice, I said:

“You are at liberty to go where you please, Lorenzo. It is a liberty,
moreover, you have always had, and have already made use of, and I cannot
conceive why _this time_ (I emphasized these words) you feel obliged to
tell me the precise object of your journey.”

“Because I wish to be frank with you this time, and I should have been so
before had I not remembered your reproaches, and wished to spare you the
occasion of renewing them. Besides, I no longer have it in my power to
prevent your jealousy, or forbid the conjectures you think proper to
indulge in.”

“Lorenzo!” I said almost in a scream, and I was on the point of giving
utterance to all that filled my heart to overflowing when, with the stern,
imperious accent he knew how to assume, though without rudeness or the
least violence, he stopped me.

“Not another word, Ginevra; not one, I beg, out of love for yourself. Do
not destroy your future happiness in a moment of anger! There are some
things I _will not_ listen to, and which, for your own interest as well as
mine, I forbid your saying!”

I had no chance to reply, for he took my hand before I could prevent it,
and said:

“_Au revoir_, Ginevra. I hope, at my return, to find you as calm and
reasonable as I desire.”

He kissed my hand and left the room.

The state in which he left me cannot be described. I need not say how
incapable I was of reflection, of effort, or any struggle whatever against
the feelings it was natural I should have. I felt outraged as it seemed to
me no woman had ever been. My mind lost its clearness, my judgment was
impaired, and for some hours I was wild.

After Lorenzo’s departure, it seemed impossible to remain alone. I could
not endure inaction and repose for an instant. I ordered my carriage for a
drive—not, as usual, with Stella and in a direction where I should find
solitude, but, on the contrary, where I was most sure of meeting a crowd.
I smilingly returned the numerous salutations I received, and, instead of
appearing troubled or downcast, I looked around with eager interest, as if
hoping to find some means of escaping from myself and leaving my troubles
forever behind me.

I returned home as late as possible, and found Stella awaiting me. She had
been disappointed at my not calling for her, and had come to ascertain the
reason. Finding I had gone out, she was surprised I had forgotten her, but
was still more so when I told her I should go to the ball at the French
ambassador’s that evening. I seldom went anywhere alone, and it was only
the day before I had told her decidedly I should never attend another
ball. Her eyes were fastened on me with a look of sympathy, as she said:

“Poor Ginevra!”

I begged her in a hasty, irritated manner not to waste any pity on me, and
then added:

“To‐morrow, if you like, we will talk about it; but not to‐day, I beg. Let
us give our whole thoughts to the ball. You will go, I hope.”

“Yes, if you have really decided to go.”

“That is right. Good‐by till this evening, then.”

Thus dismissed, she left me, and I summoned my waiting‐maid to do what I
had never required before. I ordered everything I was to wear to be spread
out before me. I examined my diamonds and pearls, and gave the most minute
directions about the way I intended to wear them. I then began my toilet,
though long before the time, and was as long about it as possible. So many
women, thought I, seem to take infinite pleasure in creating a sensation
when they enter a ball‐room, receiving compliments and homage on all
sides, why should I not try this means of diversion as well as other
people? I am beautiful, there is no doubt; very beautiful, they say. Why
should I not endeavor to excite admiration? Why not become vain and
coquettish in my turn?

In a word, the hour had arrived spoken of in the first part of this story,
as the reader will recollect—the hour when, for the first and only time
after my mother’s death and the tragical end of Flavio Aldini, the lively
vanity of girlhood, roused by irritation, jealousy, and grief, broke
through the restraint which an ineffaceable remembrance and the grace of
God had imposed upon it, and for once I saw what I should doubtless have
been without the divine, mysterious influence that warred within me
against myself. I had corresponded to this grace, it is true, by my
sincere, determined will, but my volition had now become feeble and
uncertain, and I set out for the ball after thus carefully preparing in
advance the draught of vanity I wished to become intoxicated with.

I had the satisfaction I desired in all its plenitude. I was handsome,
stylish, and elegantly dressed; and yet all this is not the chief cause of
a lady’s success in society. Let those who think so be persuaded of their
error. People accord to these gifts a certain respectful admiration, but
such a success as I obtained that evening—brilliant, demonstrative, and
universal—does not depend on the beauty a person is endowed with, but on
the wish to please she manifests, and this is why the victory is sometimes
so strangely awarded!... I was changed in no respect, except in the
disposition with which I attended the ball, and yet I did not seem to be
the same person. I was surrounded as I had never been before. I excited a
kind of enthusiasm. I received compliments that evening I had never
listened to before. And when, contrary to my usual custom, I announced my
intention to dance, everybody contended for my hand. But, as the evening
advanced, I grew weary of it all, and began to feel my factitious,
feverish gayety subside. When I rose to waltz for the last time, it was
with an effort, and, after my partner led me back to my seat, my smile
vanished, and a cold sense of my wretchedness came over me with unpitying
grasp. “All is useless,” a secret, sorrowful voice seemed to say; “you
must awaken to the reality of your sufferings....”

At that moment I heard beside me a familiar, half‐forgotten voice—calm,
sonorous, and sweet, but now somewhat sarcastic:

“I cannot aspire to the honor of dancing with the Duchessa di Valenzano,
but I hope she will not refuse to recognize me.”

I eagerly turned around, and there beside me I saw the person who uttered
these words was Gilbert de Kergy.



XXIX.


During the week following the ball a most unexpected change took place in
my feelings—a change that at once afforded me so much comfort that I did
not hesitate to think and say that heaven had, in the hour of my greatest
need, sent me a friend.

It must be acknowledged, however, the hour when Gilbert de Kergy so
suddenly made his appearance was not exactly that in which I should have
expected an extraordinary intervention of divine Providence in my behalf.
I ought even to say that the first feeling I experienced at seeing him
again was one of extreme confusion at exhibiting myself under so different
an aspect from that he had seen me in before, and, in fact, so different
from that which was usually mine. This confusion, added to my fatigue and
the painful reaction and disgust which inevitably follow such intoxication
as I had voluntarily indulged in, sent me home in a totally different
frame of mind from that I was in when I left. Two hours before, I beheld
myself in the mirror with great complacency; but when I now saw myself in
this same glass resplendent with jewels and flowers, I turned away with
displeasure, and do not think I should have felt the least regret had I at
that moment been told I wore this brilliant array for the last time.

I hastily took off my diamonds and pearls, and changed my dress; and when
at length I found myself alone, face to face with the thoughts I had
vainly tried to escape from, for the first time since my interview with
Lorenzo a flood of tears came to my relief. The nature of the distraction
I had sought now appeared in all its vanity, and the shame I felt was
increased by the remembrance of Gilbert’s smile and the sarcastic accent
of his words. It was not in this way he had addressed me at Paris. This
was not the grave, respectful manner, so different from that of any other
person, which had so touched and flattered me then. The contrast made me
blush, and I longed to meet him again, that I might efface as completely
as possible the impression now left on his mind.

I longed also to inquire about his mother and Diana. In short, a thousand
recollections, as foreign as possible to everything that surrounded me
now, came to my mind and diverted it more effectually than any amusement
could have done from the cause of my present troubles. I slept more calmly
than I should have supposed after so exciting a day, and the following
morning when I awoke, though my first thoughts were of all I had suffered
the day before, I could not forget the pleasant event that had also
occurred to lighten my burden.

Gilbert had asked at what o’clock he could see me, and, at the appointed
hour, I was ready to receive him. I anticipated his arrival with pleasure,
and felt no embarrassment, except that which resulted from the
recollection of the previous evening. He came punctually, and, after an
observant look and a few minutes’ conversation, he became the same he once
was; which reconciled me a little to myself. We talked about Paris, the
Hôtel de Kergy, and a thousand other things, and his conversation, as
formerly, absorbed my attention, diverted my mind from my troubles, and
awoke an interest in a multitude of things unconnected with him or myself.

As he was on the point of leaving, he smiled, as he said with something of
the sarcastic tone of the evening before:

“I suppose, madame, I cannot flatter myself with the hope of finding you
at home, at least as long as the Carnival lasts.”

“Allow me to undeceive you,” I hastened to reply with a blush. “Whatever
you may have thought last evening, I am not fond of dancing. I very seldom
go to a ball of my own accord, and am sure I shall not attend another this
year. This _soirée_ was every way an exceptional one, as far as I was
concerned.”

“Really! I hope you will not think me too bold if I acknowledge that what
you say affords me pleasure.”

He said this in so frank and natural a way that I was restored to my ease,
and laughingly replied:

“You prefer my former manner? Well, Monsieur de Kergy, I acknowledge you
are right, and let me assure you it was my true one.”

As he was going away, I expressed the hope of seeing him again, and from
that time not a day passed in which I did not meet him. When I had no
engagement elsewhere, I usually spent my evenings at home, where I
invariably received a certain number of friends who were in the habit of
meeting in my drawing‐room. These _soirées_ were not interrupted when
Lorenzo was absent from home, but the number of those who composed the
little circle was more restricted. Stella, of course, never failed to
come, and the other _habitués_ consisted of friends and some of the
foreigners who lived in Naples, or were there temporarily, and preferred a
quiet circle to gayer society.

On the first story, to the right and left, were two long, lateral
terraces, united by a third which extended all along the front of the
house. These terraces surmounted a Greek portico, whose colonnades
surrounded a small square court, like those of Pompeii, into which looked
all the windows of the ground floor. All that part of the house, with the
exception of Lorenzo’s studio, was reserved for large parties, while the
first story was used for ordinary reunions. We therefore generally
assembled in an upper drawing‐room, which opened on one of the lateral
terraces; and from the day I allude to Gilbert regularly formed a part of
the little coterie which met there every evening. His influence was
speedily felt, and the atmosphere once more changed around me as at Paris,
and this change seemed even more beneficial than before. Every one felt
Gilbert’s influence more or less. He possessed the enviable faculty of
elevating the minds of others above their usual level, and of
communicating to them the interest he felt in whatever he was conversing
about. Not that he tried to introduce subjects he had made a special study
of, or to advance theories or opinions that first excited wonder and
afterwards wearied the minds of those on whom he wished to impose them. On
the contrary, he seemed to take an interest in everything except what was
low, repulsive, and absolutely trivial. But subjects of this kind were
rather not thought of than avoided intentionally in these conversations,
which were lively, natural, unrestrained, and agreeable, and at the same
time different from those I took a part in anywhere else.

It soon became evident that this addition to our daily reunions added
singularly to their charm. Never had the annual influx of foreigners been
so favorable to us. Stella, I observed, sometimes looked pensive while
listening to him, and one day she remarked to me she had never seen any
one like M. de Kergy. As for me, I felt the beneficial influence of his
society, and welcomed it without analyzing the enjoyment that had come so
opportunely to divert me from my present trials and renew the influences
of the past, which seemed the best in my life.

The lively indignation that filled my heart every time I thought of
Lorenzo’s absence and its cause continued to be felt. I bitterly compared
the world of perfidy and deceit he had forced me to know, with that to
which Gilbert belonged. I thought of the hopes I once had, and how
irreparably they had been deceived, and these reflections were my only
danger at the time I am speaking of.

The Carnival was now over, but it excited no surprise that Lorenzo wished
to prolong it by remaining at Milan during the Carnavalone. No one even
seemed to think it extraordinary he had gone there with a beautiful woman
who was returning without any escort. Naples, as I have said, was not a
place where evil reports were readily credited. People were not much in
the habit of discussing the deeds and actions of others. Rather than give
themselves up to conjectures common elsewhere, they would make a sign, by
putting the hand to the chin, to signify a thing was nothing to them or
concerned them but little. But this charitable indifference did not
exactly spring from love of their neighbor, and sometimes went so far, it
must be confessed, as to be scandalized at nothing.

I soon perceived, therefore, that though the true cause of Lorenzo’s
absence was known to almost everybody, and though his course inspired a
universal sympathy and compassion for me which wounded my pride, it by no
means excited against him the indignation that at least would have
somewhat avenged me.

Mario alone appeared grave and anxious, but Lando, who was not slow in
discovering the real state of the case, confined himself to some
characteristic remarks which would have appeared insulting had I not
learned never to take anything he said seriously, or attach any importance
to it. One evening, however, finding himself by chance near me in the
drawing‐room, he said in his incorrigible way:

“If I were in your place, I would punish that dear Lorenzo in the way he
deserves. Unfortunately, you are not the woman for that, I know. And,
after all, you need not take the trouble, for I can assure you the fair
Milanese herself will be sure to avenge you.”

I did not utter a word in reply to this language, which wounded all the
pride and self‐respect in my nature, and, at the same time, excited a
torrent of bitterness and contempt for Lorenzo. I thought at that moment
of the fearful vow Livia once spoke of, and asked myself if he, this
perjured partner of my life, did not make this vow as well as I. By what
law, then, was I bound to it, when he had chosen to be free?

I abruptly turned away from Lando as he said this, and left the drawing‐
room, where we happened to be alone.

The fineness of the weather and some indications of activity in Mt.
Vesuvius had drawn all the company that evening out on the terrace. I went
out as if intending to join them, but I did nothing of the kind. On the
contrary, I sought a place apart, where I could enjoy in peace the serene
brilliancy of the heavens, and took a seat overlooking the garden and
commanding a view of the Villa Reale, the bay, and the long line of
mountains beyond It was one of those incomparable evenings in spring‐time
when all you see or hear, and the very air you breathe, at once softens,
enchants, and predisposes the heart to melancholy. I had thrown over my
white dress a large veil of black lace, which I drew up over my head; and,
thus protected from the scarcely perceptible dampness of the night, I gave
myself up without restriction to my feelings of admiration, as well as the
sadness, indignation, and bitterness that filled my heart. Afar off on the
sombre azure of the cloudless heavens streamed a reddish flame whose
brilliancy formed a strong contrast with the trembling, silvery light the
growing moon cast over the waters of the sea. It was one of those
awakenings of Vesuvius, the fearful but magnificent spectacle of which is
always regarded at Naples with a pleasure that greatly surpasses the
anxiety it would be natural to feel at the probable consequences of a new
eruption.

All my guests were at that moment at the end of the terrace, where they
could have a full view of the flaming crater. But I was by no means
disposed to follow their example. I remained in the seat I had taken, my
face uplifted and my eyes gazing into the blue, mysterious depths, which
seemed to direct my thoughts to something far beyond the visible, starry
heavens. I know not how long I had been in this attitude when I perceived
Gilbert, who had been on the other side of the terrace, now standing
before me.

“May I have a seat here, madame,” said he, “or do you prefer continuing
your reverie alone?”

“Oh! no; remain. It is better for me to talk than to dream.”

“And yet, to judge from your looks while thus absorbed, your dreams must
have been delightful I longed to participate in them.”

“I know not whether they were delightful or otherwise, but they were
commonplace and true. Alas! I was thinking that the heavens are as
beautiful as the earth is sad.”

“Sad?... Yes, without doubt, but likewise very beautiful at times,
something like the sky above our heads, so glorious to‐night, but which
does not always look as it does now.”

“But the clouds pass away, and the sky again appears in its unchangeable
beauty; whereas....”

“Whereas, a single day is sometimes sufficient to render our lives totally
different from what they were before. Yes, you are right,” said he.

He was silent for an instant, and then resumed with a smile:

“But these gloomy thoughts do not always prevail. It was very far from the
case the evening I first saw you in Naples.”

“Oh! never speak again of that evening, Monsieur de Kergy, I conjure you,”
I exclaimed with a warmth I could not repress. “Have I not already told
you that I was wretched, infatuated, desperate?...”

I stopped short, confused at what had escaped me. I saw his expression of
surprise, and noticed again the look of sympathy and emotion he had shown
at Paris, as I wept while listening to Diana’s music—a look that silently
asked me the cause of my tears. Alas! the day I last visited the Hôtel de
Kergy was that on which the sadness that now wholly surrounded me first
cast its shadow over my path. But I did not wish to betray what I felt
now, any more than I did then, and I instantly regretted the words I had
just uttered. I think Gilbert perceived it.

“I assure you,” said he after a moment, as if I had never spoken,
“notwithstanding the brilliancy of your attire, you were far less imposing
in my eyes than you are at this moment; and yet I am going to show a
boldness I certainly should not have thought of manifesting that evening,
to which I shall never allude again.”

“What do you mean?”

“You seemed that night to belong to a world whose manners and language I
was ignorant of, and where I felt more out of place and uninitiated than a
savage. I could not have said such a word then. I hardly dared look at you
afar off; whereas—but you will think me presumptuous.”

“No, say what you were going to.”

“Well, then, you seem now, on the contrary, as you did at Paris, a member
of the world I live in—an inhabitant, a queen if you like, or a sister,
perhaps, whose language I speak, as you can mine. That is why ...”

He hesitated an instant, and then continued with an accent of truth and
simplicity that prevented his manner from appearing singular: “That is why
I venture—and it is showing myself very bold—yes, venture, madame, to
consider myself worthy of being your friend, and, should you deign to
accord me this title, I think I can safely promise never to show myself
unworthy of it.”

What reply I made I hardly know, but what I am only too sure of is that
these words were welcome to a heart at once crushed and embittered as mine
then was. The void occasioned by Lorenzo’s treachery caused a suffering
like that of intense hunger. My dignity, even more than my conscience,
forbade my alleviating this hunger by giving vent to my grievances; nor
was I tempted to do so. But was there any reason why I should refuse
myself the solace of such a friendship as Gilbert now offered me? Had I
any other duty now, with regard to Lorenzo, than to show a respect he had
not manifested to the tie that united us? Could not Gilbert, as he had
just offered, be truly my brother in heart and soul? Was he not different,
as Stella acknowledged, from any one I had ever met? And was I not myself
in a position without parallel?

I pass over the remainder of my reflections in silence, merely remarking
here that if all the women who believe themselves to be in an exceptional
position could be counted, they would be astonished, I imagine, to find
their number so great, and would perhaps have to renounce some of the
privileges they lay claim to by virtue of the singularity of their
destiny.

To Be Continued.




Church Chant _Versus_ Church Music.


Concluded.

“Ah! but it is sad to think,” objects a friend at our elbow, “that your
rigid principles deprive the church of the use of the _best_ music. _I_
think she ought to have the very best of all that this world can offer.”

We have already given our friend his answer, from one point of view, in a
former article. We will endeavor to give a fair interpretation of the
answer which the church herself would make:

“It is not the best music, as such, that I want for my divine offices, any
more than I wish my priests to decorate the walls of my churches with the
_chefs‐d’œuvre_ of painting and sculpture simply because they are
masterpieces of art. I certainly want, and rejoice to possess, _the best
that is suitable_ in art, whether of melody, painting, or sculpture, and
even of scientific discovery or invention; but my canons of suitability
would be a besom of destruction to gas‐lighted altar‐candles and sanctuary
lamps, fixed or portable opera‐glasses for the use of distantly‐placed
worshippers, the manufactured mimic rain, hail, and thunder storms at the
beck of organ pedals, the statues of the Apollo Belvidere or the Greek
Slave, valuable paintings of first‐class yachts, fast horses, or prize
cattle, even if they came from the pencil of a Landseer or a Rosa Bonheur;
and if I cared for melody of any style for its own sake, my child, I would
strongly advise my American clergy to engage the services of Theodore
Thomas or Patrick J. Gilmore, whose orchestral performances are truly
delicious, and the best for their purpose that can be procured in my
beloved dominions of the western hemisphere. _But the purpose of these
delightful concerts is not a part of my programme._ The disciples of the
Grand Lama, I am told, turn off their rosaries and other prayers by means
of a crank, as music is often made by mechanical organs; but my prayers
and melodies are not made in this fashion. Have your _best_ music, as you
define it, sung and performed where it suits the best; go and hear it, and
God bless you; but please do not let me hear of your inventing and using a
small patent steam‐whistle to replace the acolyte’s altar‐bell, nor a
large one either in lieu of the church‐bell, for that would smack a little
too much of the cotton‐mill or the iron‐foundry; and I do not think I
_would_ tolerate that.”

We must confess to having our patience severely tried when the question of
“suitability” comes under discussion, and we burn to cry out, Where is the
honest musician who is not so engrossed with, and mastered by, his art as
to become, like it, deprived of ideas, or at least of the power of
expressing them in one single logical affirmation, and who has a principle
which he will fairly state and reason from instead of taking us into the
pathless dreamland of sentiment, or enticing us for ever off the track on
to side switches of individual tastes and special pleas that lead nowhere?
Discussing the relative suitability of music and plain chant for the use
of the Liturgy of the church is, in our experience, only equalled by the
purgatory of suffering one’s reason endures when talking “controversy”
with a Protestant. Has art no first principles? Is there no relation
between art and the nature and purpose of the object to be expressed or
illustrated by it? Do you _dare_ define “suitability” to be the harmony of
the subject with _your_ present mood, with the fashion of the hour, or
with the demands of ignorance and prejudice, or presume to close all
discussion with your “_Sic volo, sic jubeo; stet pro ratione voluntas_”?

But this is a digression. Let us return to our argument.

_Thirdly._ If we were to say that, contrasted one with the other, the
expression of plain chant is unimpassioned, and that of modern music is
impassioned—in other words, that the former has not much, if any, capacity
for expressing human passions, and that the latter has not only a great
capacity for expressing them, but also for exciting them, we think we are
affirming what every one who knows anything of the philosophy of music, as
well as every one who has been subjected to the influence of both, will
readily acknowledge to be true. There is martial music for soldiers, to
excite them to combat, or cheer them in victory, or stir their enthusiasm
on the triumphant return from battle. There is music for the dancers, and
distinct kinds of dance music which invite and sustain those who may wish
to waltz or polka, thread the figures of the quadrille, or indulge in the
lascivious mazes of other such‐like enjoyments not worthy of our mention
or consideration outside of our duty as confessor or preacher. There is
funny music to make us laugh, and there are funereal dirges to keep us in
fit mood as we march after a coffin. There is music which we know will
rouse the wrath of our enemy, and there is amorous music which awakes the
passion of love, pure and impure.

We have already signalized the cause which gave to music its sensuous
character. Lest it may be supposed that we are endeavoring to create a
theory without sufficient warrant, we quote from one who holds an
undisputed post of honor in the musical world:

“Very well! that which musical doctrine had condemned, that which ages had
proscribed, a man one day dared to do. Guided by his instinct, he had more
confidence in what it counselled him than in what the rules commanded, and
in spite of the cries of horror which arose from a whole nation of
musicians, he had the courage to bring into relation the fourth note of
the gamut, the fifth, and the seventh (the tritone). By this one act he
created the natural dissonances of harmony, a new tonality, the kind of
music called _chromatic_, and, as a consequence, modulation. What a world
of things produced by one single harmonic aggregation! The author of this
wonderful discovery is Monteverde.(84) He gives himself the credit, in the
preface of one of his works, for the invention of the modulated, animated,
and expressive style of melody. In fact, the impassioned accent (_l’accent
passionné_) does not exist, and cannot exist, except in the leading note
(_la note sensible_), and this cannot itself be produced, except by its
relation with the fourth and fifth degrees of the gamut—in other words
that any note placed in the harmonic relation of augmented fourth with
another note produces the sensation of a new tone, without the necessity
of hearing the tonic or making a cadence, and that by this faculty of the
augmented fourth to create immediately a leading note, modulation—that is
to say, the necessary succession of different tones—is rendered easy.
Admirable coincidence of two fruitful ideas! The musical drama is born;
but the drama lives on emotions, and the tonality of plain chant, grave,
severe, and calm, could not furnish it with impassioned accents; for the
harmony of its tonality does not contain the elements of transition. Hence
genius found inspiration in the demand, and all that could give life to
the music of the drama was brought into existence at one blow.”(85)

We cannot refrain from adding the reflections of another eminent
musician—M. Jos. d’Ortigue:

“Is it not evident that a new order of ideas, a new social element, and a
novel spirit, were introduced in music by the fact alone of the creation
of a tonality, and that dissonance, modulation, transition, the leading or
_sensible note_, the _impassioned accent_ (mark the words), were but the
material clothing, the means, the outward expression, thanks to which this
new principle—namely, the _moi humain_—which had already, so to speak,
broken through the upper strata of thought, made for itself a vent by
means of the art of music? For just as the ancient tonality, by the fact
of its constitution, inspired the sentiment of repose—that is to say, gave
birth to the ideas of permanence, of immutability, of the infinite, which
comport with the expression of divine things—so also disturbance,
agitation, the febrile and tumultuous expression of the passions, which
are the essential characteristics of all earthly things, are inherent in
the modern tonality precisely in virtue of its constitution, which depends
upon _dissonance_ and _transition_.”(86)

Those wise old Spartans who made it a capital crime to add a new cord to
the lyre, lest the people should be rendered effeminate, would certainly
despair of finding a man living in our XIXth century who was fit to be
called a man, if they were told that the chord of the minor seventh was in
such common use that hardly one melody can be found where its effeminate
dissonance is not made to appear and to be felt.(87) We pray to be
understood when we call the tonality of “impassioned accent” effeminate. A
few words from M. Victor de Laprade will convey our meaning: “I dare to
class music, and even women themselves, in the order of femininity—that is
to say, in that class in which sentiment rules ideas, in which the heart
is more manifestly active than reason. It is bold, I acknowledge. We are
no longer living in the age of the Book of Wisdom, of the sacred
lawgivers, of the prophets, of the philosophers, nor simply of Molière; we
are of the age of Saint‐Simon, of Fourier, of Auguste Comte, and we have
changed all that. We have put the heart on the right side. I am obstinate
enough to feel it beating on the left.”

In his famous Instructions (we beg our readers to recall our proposed
amendment of their title) the cardinal vicar feels the necessity of
protesting against this emotional tendency of music. “We forbid,” he says,
“too lively or exciting movements,” and dreads lest some composers may be
led to express “the unbridled liveliness of the dance.” He would not
“deprive the music of that grace and coloring which art and _good taste_
suggest,” but thinks it necessary to add that “an effeminate softness is
to be avoided.”

Without question, the best music, allied to words, as music, is in the
compositions for the opera. Those eminent composers who have written for
the opera and for the church have indisputably produced works of a higher
order of musical merit for the former than they have for the latter.(88)
And is not operatic music the most intensely impassioned of all melody,
and is it not, alas! becoming a vehicle for the expression of the most
debased and lascivious passions of the human heart? Give to modern music
language and a stage, free it from all the restraints of Catholic
morality, and who does not see, after the experience of an operatic season
in one of our great cities, that it would soon become the most powerful
and dangerous of all the forces which are now threatening to enervate and
demoralize our modern society? We must not be surprised, therefore, nor
should we much regret, that “modern composers have failed in their works
to meet the requirements of Catholic devotion.”

Let us see what spirit marks the ceremonies of the church when considered
as opportunities for exhibiting, or as exciting causes of awakening, the
passions. It is not possible to find one such occasion. All gesture which
might suggest aught but the most perfect calm and repose of the soul in
the actors is absolutely out of place. It is very difficult in sudden,
unlooked‐for instances of disturbance for the priest not to show in his
countenance or by his manner symptoms of alarm, disgust, or annoyance; but
he ought not to do so, and would not fail to scandalize the people, unless
such disturbance happened to be extraordinary. To betray by look, gesture,
or intonation of voice the slightest emotion of sensual passion, however
innocent in itself, would disgust and horrify all observers. Neither do
the rubrics permit him or his assistants to excite any passion in the
hearts of others; for the ceremonial directs their most simple movements,
the position of the body, the _tenue_ of the eyes, the hands, and the
feet. That “ecclesiastical modesty” which forms so constant a theme of
instruction to candidates for the sacred ministry here finds its perfect
realization, and is exacted in the highest degree.

The sacred offices are essentially unlike opera, and the church has the
good sense to dread the introduction of anything in connection with her
divine ceremonies that might be suggestive of it. We now understand why
the cardinal vicar throughout the Instructions vehemently proscribes, and
over and over again warns composers not to write, operatic or theatrical
music, or anything like it, either in its _melodies_ or its character, nor
borrow from it, nor imitate it in the use of ariettas, duets, trios,
recítative, _finales_, or _cabaletta_. Truly, “the best music” is pretty
well ruled out by his eminence. By his cautious discrimination, and
prudent lopping off, and general toning down he has pretty closely clipped
the wings of the steed of Helicon, and, after all, it must be
acknowledged, has made of him rather a sorry and unreliable nag, not worth
half the old horse who all his lifetime has never given out, or baulked,
or behaved in any unseemly manner.

We trust that a distinct disavowal of any intent on our part to treat with
flippancy and disrespect the oft‐quoted Instructions of his eminence is
not needed, for nothing could be further from our thought; but that our
readers will perceive that the point of our lance is directed against the
endeavor to impose a restrictive and prohibitory circular‐letter of the
cardinal vicar as a brief in favor of modern music with apostolic
sanction. We complain, also, that the words of Benedict XIV. have been
quoted by the same writers in such a way as to leave the impression on the
mind of the general reader that the learned pope treated modern music as
_un fait accompli_, and rather preferred it if composed according to
certain demands which he makes of musicians. Wherefore we quote again his
words, by which we get at his real sentiments: “The Gregorian chant is
that song which excites the minds of the faithful to piety and devotion;
it is that music, therefore, which, if sung in our churches with care and
decorum, is most willingly heard by devout persons, and is justly
preferred to that which is called figured or harmonized music. The
titillation of figured music is held very cheaply by men of religious mind
in comparison with the sweetness of the church chant, and hence it is that
the people flock to the churches of the monks, who, _taking piety for
their guide_ in singing the praises of God, after the counsel of the
prince of psalmists, skilfully sing to their Lord as Lord, and serve God
as God with the utmost reverence.”

The learned Suarez has also been cited in favor of modern church
music—rather a strange fact, as the great theologian was dead and buried
before the system of modern music was invented! S. Alphonsus—no mean
theologian, nor a rigorist either—says: “The devil usually gets more by it
than God does.”

This attempt to argue a positive approval from prohibitory enactments
reminds us of “a little story.”

“I had the honor this morning,” boasted a vain soldier, “of holding a
conversation with his majesty the king.”

“_You_ converse with his majesty?” exclaimed his companion. “And what did
you say to him?”

“Oh! _I_ said nothing. His majesty alone conversed.”

“And pray, what did _he_ say to _you_?”

“He said: ‘Fellow, stand out of the way!’ ”

Who has ever thought of denying that the old plain chant suits exactly the
ceremonies of the church? There were never any “Instructions” promulgated,
that we know of, to curb its worldly, operatic, sensual, or effeminate
tendencies, simply because by its essential melodic form it does not lend
itself to any such aberrations. By its short intervals, its grave and
unmeasured movement, and its intellectual character,(89) it is freed from
all sensuousness. You can neither march to it, dance to it, nor make love
with it. But you can appropriately accompany any of the ceremonies of the
church with it, and pray with it; that is—to forestall the special plea of
a theological “distinction”—you can _adore_ with it, _propitiate_ the
divine justice with it, _supplicate_ with it, _praise_ and _thank_ God
with it; and doing all this, we respectfully ask, what more do you want,
and, if you do want more, what right have you to ask it?

In the interests of art, do you say? Pshaw! You know well that the church
can offer but a very confined field for the cultivation of music _as an
art_, and, compared with music inspired by other wants and tastes, the
music written for her use is not worth mentioning. It is only fit to be
consigned to the flames, as our friend observes. Besides, the church is
not an Academy of Arts and Sciences. Try again.

If being content with what the church prescribes, refusing to admit what
she has not distinctly commanded, and contending stoutly for the fitness
of that melody for the expression of her divine prayer, and as an
accompaniment to her sublime offices, and which she has never declared to
be unsuitable, be to “censure the whole church, and even the Pope
himself,” as it is insinuated we do, then we offer ourselves at once for
safe conduct to a lunatic asylum, for assuredly we have lost our senses.

_Fourthly._ We hear much of the _coloring_ in the phraseology of modern
music. That it is essentially rhetorical is plain enough. It is pretty
much all made up of figures of speech, musically expressed. It is
especially antithetical, full of striking contrasts, and highly
metaphorical. We used to hear frequently in our own church, when we had a
“mixed” choir and a gallery, a _finale_ of the Gloria in Excelsis which
the unlearned in musical gymnastics were accustomed to say sounded like
the men scampering after the women, and the women scampering after the
men, and neither coming out ahead of the other. This rhetorical character
of music, this dealing in figures of musical speech, which we dare affirm
is not free in many an instance from the faults of tautology, bombast, and
mixed metaphor, lucidly explains the reason why the frequent repetition of
_morceaux de musique_, whether anthems, motets, “grand Masses,” or
“musical Vespers,” by any celebrated composer whomsoever, soon grows
tiresome. The same rhetorical phrases and identical figures of speech in
the discourses of a preacher Sunday after Sunday would set all the people
yawning, and, if the sacredness of the place and of the speaker were not a
hindrance to such emotional display, laughing and hissing as well.

The metaphorical character of music is the result of its theme, which may
be, as we have already said, either pastoral, martial, amorous, saltatory,
funereal, or even prayerful, etc.; but it is not really pastoral, for
there are no green fields to pipe in or any hay‐making going on. It is
_like_ pastoral music, and would be only tolerable, even in a concert‐
room, on the strength of the maxim, “Art for art’s sake”—a principle we
contend to be unphilosophical at best, and absolutely intolerable when
applied to sacred ceremonies, and not sanctioned by a single instance in
the rubrics. So, also, there are no military evolutions, no love‐making or
dancing, going on, for which reason the music is not _really_ martial,
amorous, or saltatory, but only _like_ such music. But there may be a
funeral, and there certainly is prayer going on; and what objection can
there be to funereal and prayerful music? We have never heard any funereal
_music_ that was fit to accompany a Requiem Mass. We have heard musical
howling, wailing, sobbing, groans and sighs of despair, and even the
spiteful cursing and gnashing of teeth of the damned, as in the
_confutatis maledictis_ of Cherubini’s _Requiem_; but let that pass for
the present. Prayer_ful_ music there is of incomparable sweetness and
ravishing harmony, but _prayer_ music—_i.e._, music which _is_ prayer—is
quite another thing. Music does not lose its metaphorical character
because its theme is prayerful. There is the greatest difference in the
world between first‐class paste and real diamond, or between vermeil and
pure gold, although it is possible that neither you nor we could
distinguish them without the application of a scientific test. The paste
may have a perfect diamond_ful_ glitter, if you will; but that this
glitter is the expression of the substance of real diamond needs no
argument to disprove.

Let us again apply our test. The official acts of the celebrant and his
assistants at the altar are not figurative, but real. The priest acts _as_
a priest, and not _like_ a priest. The chorus rise, kneel, bow, prostrate,
as a chorus should, and not as a chorus might. All their acts are real,
finding their _ratio_ in themselves, and not in something else of which
they are now a good and admirable, or now a poor and far‐fetched, figure.
Melody for such performances should be a faithful and _true_ expression of
these realities. That is to say, when you hear the melody, you should hear
the prayer which is the form of the _corpus rubricarum_, as the soul is
the form of the human body. Subjected to this test, the paste is easily
distinguished.

Now, will the diamond, as we choose to typify the church chant, be as
readily known by the like test? There is nothing corresponding or similar
to figures of speech in the chant, neither is it based upon metaphorical
themes. It has properly no theme, but only modes, with their special
intonations, mediations, and cadences. Considered in its melodic form, it
is a rhythmic combination of unities, the purest artistic expression of
communion with the Infinite Unity—with God. Sung in or out of the
celebration of the divine offices, if it be not simple rehearsal, it is
prayer, and nothing else but prayer. It rejoices in the “perennial
freshness” of the Holy Mass and Divine Office, because, like these, it is
not metaphorical, but real; and hence we deduce at once the explanation of
its lasting character. Its melodies do not wear out or become tiresome. It
would never occur to a child of the church, although he were the most
accomplished musician the world ever knew, if his age surpassed that of
Mathusala, and he had heard High Mass every day of his life, that the
Preface or the Pater Noster (and wherefore any other chant?) was a worn‐
out or tiresome melody. There is a truth for the lovers of church _music_
to digest.

The essential reason—to go to the very bottom of the matter—of the lasting
character of the chant, lies in the form of its phraseology, which is
purely didactic, consisting of simple and therefore sublime affirmations;
this simplicity of its phraseology being often reduced to the utterance of
pure substantives, as if the soul were in rapture, meditating upon God and
his attributes, the Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End, the Being
of beings, the Eternal, the Omnipotent, the Everlasting, the All in all,
the All wise, the All fair, and the All good.

There is an instance of this sublime simplicity of language in Holy
Scripture which is an apt example to illustrate our meaning. It is the
twelfth verse of the viith chapter of the Apocalypse: “Amen. Benedictio,
et claritas, et sapientia, et gratiarum actio, honor, et virtus, et
fortitudo Deo nostro in sæcula sæculorum, amen”—Amen. Benediction, and
glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, honor and power, and strength to our
God, for ever and ever, amen.

The test being applied, we think we may affirm and certify the diamond.

_Fifthly._ From what we have already said, and to judge from the
extraordinary pretensions of its capacity for expression put forth in
these later days, modern music is essentially dramatic, mimetic, or
imitative. That it is especially suitable as the melody to accompany and
aid the expression of dramatic representation there is no question. There
appears also to be hardly any limit of its capacity, as musicians affirm,
for word‐painting and scene‐painting. If the musical critics are not
deceived, we think that, with the full score of some genius who may be
even now about to graduate in the school of “the music of the future,” a
Thomas or a Gilmore might dispense with the actors on the stage
altogether, and with the services of the scene‐painter as well. What is
thought of this power of word‐painting, when employed to illustrate the
sacred text of the church’s offices, we quote from the _Dublin Review_,
Oct., 1868:

“What is called word‐painting in music is, of course, very effective, but,
as a rule, it cannot be carried so far in sacred as in secular music
without detriment to the dignity of the subject. Indeed, even where it is
not otherwise objectionable, it sometimes becomes tiresome from its
conventionality. The run down the notes of the scale at the _descendit de
cœlis_, and such like effects, do not bear much repetition. Indeed, the
attempt at minute expression has often led to odd blunders, such as in the
passages _resurrectionem mortuorum_, where the music for the first word is
usually made to have a joyful effect, the latter a lugubrious one (and
that, too, sometimes drawn out into musical passages cut off from the
previous word, as if it were a fresh sentence), the composer forgetting
that the phrase only comprehends one idea—that of the resurrection. So
with the passage _remissionem peccatorum, exaltavit humiles_, and others
that might be named.”

We have already mentioned a notable instance of this word‐painting—the
_confutatis maledictis_ from the _Dies Iræ_ of Cherubini. The vividly
descriptive and intensely dramatic power of that passage is well known;
and if it were further heightened by a mechanically‐darkened church, with
a flash or two of stage‐lightning and the rumbling of sheet‐iron thunder,
we are sure the effect would be quite as much as we could bear, whether as
celebrant or as near relatives of the departed. Overpowered with the
emotions of horror and fear which we are sure we would experience in thus
having hell opened to us, we would be thinking a great deal more of the
devil than of the God of mercy and compassion when the cry of fright broke
from our lips, “Libera me, Domine, de morte æterna!” Certainly, deprived
even of any stage effects, we have never listened to it without a shudder.
And now comes the pertinent question, Is dramatic, theatrical effect what
the church desires to obtain from her melody, or, at least, is she willing
that there should be anything of this kind at all employed to illustrate
her liturgy? We refer to the Instructions of his eminence the cardinal
vicar. He is “polarized,” as we say in America, on that subject. We also
quote from the late articles on church music in this magazine:

“ ‘Humana nefas miscere divinis’ finds its application here. To carry the
minds of worshippers in the church back to the theatre by the music is a
crime, for it is a desecration.”

Musicians themselves are not wholly devoid of the sense of propriety. Mme.
de Sévigné relates that _Baptiste_—the celebrated Lulli—hearing at Mass
one day an air which he had composed for the theatre, cried out: “Lord,
Lord, I crave your pardon. I did not write it for _you_!”

We wonder if the correspondent of the _Herald_ was aware of the satire
contained in the following late announcement: “Signor Verdi protests
indignantly against his _Requiem_ being played in a circus at Ferrara.”

Yet let us see if our comparison with the ceremonies of the liturgy and
the character of the actors holds good as before.

There is no scenery, nor should there be any for any occasion. No, good
reader, not even for the Repository of Holy Thursday. Those puppet‐show
“tombs,” with pasteboard soldiers sleeping and watching before pasteboard
rocks, are not prescribed by the rubrics, or even tolerated, and are
therefore entirely out of order and unmeaning. The Holy Mass is a
continuation of the crucifixion and sacrificial death of our Lord on Mount
Calvary; but there is no dramatic representation of that event, for the
reason, among others that we have alleged before, that it is not a
representation, but a reality. We could readily understand its propriety
if the Episcopalians or other sects of Protestants were to have a stage
erected with scenery of the “upper room,” and a supper‐table with living
actors or wax‐figure ones, _à la_ Mme. Tussaud or Mrs. Jarley, in order to
vividly represent to their people the celebration of the Last Supper,
because their “celebrations,” high, low, broad, or evangelical, expect to
have nothing more at best than a representative sacrifice or commemorative
supper; but the Catholic Mass is a perfect and real sacrifice in itself,
and mimics nothing.

Apart from the Mass, we have a remarkable example in our own day of a
sacred drama, the Passion Play of Ober‐Ammergau, which is not a real but
an imitative crucifixion, mechanical in the highest degree, passional,
figurative, and dramatic. Music for that, _à la bonne heure_!

Let us again bring the chant into comparison. When we say that it is pre‐
eminently the chant of priests, each one of whom is “alter Christus,”(90)
the chorus song of psalmists, we at once proclaim it as pre‐eminently
fitted for the expression of the liturgy, and therefore to be wanting in
dramatic or word‐painting capacity. There have been a few insignificant
attempts made by late composers to express, after a musical fashion, the
_descendit de cœlis_ with square notes on a four‐lined staff, in the hope,
probably, that it would be mistaken for plain chant; but the guise is too
thin!

Here is a fitting opportunity to explain our former intimation that
horrifying, tearful, and groaning melody is not suitable even for a
requiem. How often have we not heard it said, “Oh! Gregorian chant is
admirable for occasions of sorrow; just the thing for a Dead Mass”; or
again, “I think the chant is so lugubrious and solemn; every inflexion
seems to be in the minor key,” to which we reply:

In the first place, they who suppose plain chant to be in the minor key
are simply in ignorance of its tonality. These we advise to study enough
of the chant of their church to avoid making ridiculous objections to it.
The others evidently suppose, 1st, that the church intends to excite
emotions of sadness at a requiem, and to perform, especially with the
services of the choir, the office of a paid mute; and if the friends and
relatives are moved to weep bitterly and for a long time, every one will
say, “How impressive, how touching!” meaning, “How saddening! How
depressing to the spirits!” 2d. That the Gregorian chant Requiem is most
admirably suited to this purpose, being a melody of _such_ a sorrowful
character and of _so_ lugubrious a tone.

On which we remark that they are most egregiously mistaken in both
suppositions. The object which the church has in view at a requiem is not
to make people weep and wail, but to console, comfort, and soothe the
bleeding hearts of the bereaved mourners; to pray herself, and to excite
them to pray earnestly, for the soul of the departed. Nothing could be
further from her thought than to horrify them with visions of the grave
and imaginations of the torments of the damned. No, it is rest, eternal
rest, the rapture of the soul’s enjoyment of the everlasting light of
glory in heaven, that forms the burden of her funereal refrain,


    “Requiem æternam dona ei Domine,
    Et lux perpetua luceat ei!
      Requiescat in pace!”


Those who love to indulge in the luxury of woe, and who fancy that
plentiful tears and a thoroughly broken‐hearted manner are the proper
accompaniments to a mourning dress, highly approve of the anti‐rubrical
exhibition of painted or embroidered skulls and cross‐bones, heightened in
effect by a diapering of gigantic tears, which the artist in funereal
trappings has intruded upon the altar or about the catafalque. The Requiem
Masses of Mozart and Cherubini would certainly admit of these imitative
skeletons and mechanical grief; but not so the Gregorian Requiem.

Hark! what are those strange words which break the silence as the coffin
is borne into the church? “Subvenite sancti Dei, occurrite Angeli Domini,
suscipientes animam ejus, offerentes eam in conspectu Altissimi. Suscipiat
te Christus qui vocavit te, et in sinu Abrahæ angeli deducant te.”(91)

And now the Introit begins, which gives the keynote, so to speak, to the
whole Mass:

“Requiem æternam dona eis Domine; et lux perpetua luceat eis.”(92)

What a world of comfort in those words! How soothing and hopeful; and
chanted to such a smooth, sweet melody, like oil poured out upon the
troubled waters, calming the agitated and fretted spirits of the mourners,
and gently turning all hearts away from the thoughts of the irreparable
loss they have sustained, and shutting out the memory of the scenes of
anguish and horror that marked the hours of the agony and death, solicits
them to pray for the soul of the beloved departed, and to cast all their
sorrow at the feet of God.

Doubtless you presume the chant is very sorrowful; and, like all Gregorian
chant, this is, of course, “in the minor key.” Not at all, however
inexplicable it may appear to you. Read over again what we have just
written above, and now learn one more astonishing fact. The chant for this
Introit is written in the sixth mode, the only one of all the Gregorian
modes whose scale is identical with the scale of the modern major key!

There is not an invitation to weep in the whole Requiem, neither in the
words nor in the melody. It is true the church takes care to improve the
occasion by preaching her sermon on the Judgment in the chant of the _Dies
Iræ_; but she soon returns to her keynote of comforting prayer, and at the
_Communio_ (which, of course, is not sung at all at our concert requiems)
she essays even a bright and cheerful melody in the triumphant eighth
mode, to the old refrain,

“Lux æterna luceat eis,”

and, addressing the sweet mercy of God, inspires hope and submission to
the divine will by the reminder that he is ever kind and good—“quia pius
es.”

Oh! what is this? It is the sympathizing pressure of the hand of the old,
old friend who has always been true in sunshine and storm, in our sins and
our miseries; it is her sheltering arm that folds our drooping head upon
her gentle breast, and her cheery voice that has so often gladdened us in
days gone by, soothing our broken heart with the only words that have
power with us now—“God is good,” “It is his holy will.”

When we were aforetime groping in the darkness of heretical error, and
denied all privilege of stretching out our hands in prayer to help our
beloved dead through the mysterious way that death had opened to them, and
sternly forbidden to hope for a deeper look into the future than the
yawning chasm of corruption opened to our gaze in the earth, we felt—alas!
how keenly—the appropriateness of the only burial service we knew of then,
whose doleful burden—“ashes to ashes, dust to dust,” and “We commit this
body to the _ground_”—expressed well the faith that was of the earth,
earthy. But now our voice is lifted up in praise, and our heart‐strings
tuned to strains of festive joy, when God has spared our innocent loved
ones the dangers and sorrows of life, chanting their translation to the
skies in robes of white, and in words of joy that erst were sung by angels
proclaiming “Glory to God in the highest, and peace on earth to men”; and
at the borders of the tomb which hides from our sight the forms of those
who for many a year have grown with our growth, and knit our very
existence unto theirs, the earth with its darkening clouds is made to
disappear, and heaven itself is revealed as the herald who precedes the
soul to the gates of everlasting light, chants in our hearing its
melodious welcome to the home of rest and glory.

“In paradisum deducant te angeli; in tuo adventu suscipiant te martyres,
et perducant te in civitatem sanctam Jerusalem. Chorus angelorum te
suscipiat, et cum Lazaro quondam paupere æternam habeas requiem.”(93)

The Catholic Church calm in the face of death, and triumphant at the edge
of the grave! Why does not the sight convert every Protestant and
unbeliever before the setting of the sun? This is our answer: Because you
have brought upon the true Israel the calamity which Mardochai the just
prayed God to avert when “the mouths of them that sing unto God are shut,”
and by your music have bedimmed one of the most sublime manifestations of
the church, and by the banishment of her chant have silenced her voice in
that supreme, faith‐inspiring hour!

_Music_ at a funeral! We would as soon think of getting an Episcopalian
parson to read his gloomy burial service, or of hiring a Methodist
preacher to declaim by the hour, for the purpose of exhibiting his own
vanity and ministering to ours.

The reason why the much‐lauded musical Masses, whether of requiem or for
other occasions, have failed to meet the requirements of Catholic
devotion, is because their composers have sought by word‐painting to
illustrate the words, as separately defined in a dictionary, instead of
grasping the chief and leading ideas to which the church strives to give
expression; pretty much as if a painter, intending to paint a man, should
most carefully sketch apart every separate bone, muscle, nerve, artery,
and organ in the body. The result obtained would be a series of most
excellently delineated anatomical drawings, no doubt, but no bodily form
of a man, and no expression of what makes the body a living body, which is
the soul.

Hence we deduce a most important conclusion. The _form_ of modern music is
not prayer, but recreation, the delectation of the imaginative faculty. It
aims at producing the impressions which material things excite by their
contact with the senses. It seeks to imitate motion in direction or
velocity, light and darkness, cold and heat, serenity or disturbance in
nature. The piano alone is supposed to make us hear the booming of cannon,
the galloping and neighing of horses (the _tritone Si, Fa_, which in the
palmy days of Gregorian chant was called _diabolus in musica_, and which
is the _essential_ chord in the tonality of modern music, will be found to
give the exact notes of an ass’ braying), the dying moans of the wounded
in battle, the rising and setting of the sun, and a host of other equally
curious things. “I shouldn’t wonder,” exclaims a witty writer, “if one day
I might see upon a piece of sheet music, ‘_Demonstration of the square of
the hypothenuse_,’ or ‘_The theory of free trade_!’ ” Will not some
composer produce a “work” which will give the impressions produced on the
souls of the people at Mass and Vespers? It might be found convenient for
home use on rainy Sundays!

This suggestion quite tickles our fancy. It has the smack of originality
about it, and we feel like playing with it, as a cat plays with a mouse.
Who does not see at once that it opens a vast field for development of
music as an art, and _precisely in the order in which musicians are now
striving to give it expression_? Yes, the glory of the invention is ours.

“PATENT MUSICAL IMPRESSIONS, adapted to every want in church and state.”

“Save your fuel! _Summer Impressions_, warranted for the coldest climate.”

“Watering‐places superseded! Refreshing _Winter Impressions_, deliciously
cool, flavored with hops, serenades, moonlight excursions, sea‐views,
Adirondack trips, etc., according to taste.”

“_Sermon Impressions_, a great variety. Parties ordering will please state
their religious views or the particular branch of the Episcopalian or
other denomination to which they belong.” _N.B._—Agents and composers
wanted.

If our readers think this to be nonsensical trifling, let them read a few
of those lucubrations styled “musical criticisms.”

Musical _coloring_ has only been equalled in its fantastic conceptions by
the so‐called _ocular harmony_ and _visual melody_ imagined by the French
Jesuit, Father Castel, who lived about the beginning of the last century.
Starting with a fancied principle that colors are reducible to a harmonic
scale corresponding to the scale of musical sounds, he had manufactured
what he called his _universal ribbon_, on which were graduated all colors
and their most minute shades. Of this ribbon he made a little book, which
he ingeniously attached to a harpsichord in such a manner that certain
leaves would open at the touch of the different keys, thus presenting to
the sight a particular shade of color at the same time that the hearing
perceived the musical note. It is said that he spent large sums of money
on this hobby. He wished also to have silks and other stuffs woven after
this principle and “_dans ce goût_” of which the sacerdotal vestments
ought to be made, so that every feast and season would be not only
distinguished by those parti‐colored robes, but also, according to his
principle of the harmonic proportions of color, that by a scientific
arrangement of the colors derived from his graduated ribbon one might,
and, as he contended, _should_, note upon the vestments melodies, and even
harmony, so that a chasuble would _sing_ the Gloria in Excelsis or a cope
the Antiphons at Vespers! We do not find, however, in his works, any
proposal to _sing_, in colors, either at Mass or Vespers, thunder and
lightning, landscapes and sunrises, jigs and waltzes, serenades of love‐
sick swains, the shrieks and gnashing of teeth of devils and lost souls,
as our modern musicians have done with their musical coloring.

_Sixthly._ One of the chief complaints justly made against church music is
its liability to the abuse of bringing certain singers of remarkable
talent into an undue and often indecent prominence, and thus ministering
rather to personal vanity, to petty jealousies and envies, and to the
critical delectation of the audience (?), than to the praise and glory of
God. That music can be written so as to preclude such an offensive result
we are not prepared to deny; but that there is any reasonable hope that it
ever will be we do not believe. The principle upon which choice is made of
it in preference to chant, and which has extorted the restricted and
evidently unwilling toleration of it, forbids us to entertain such a hope.
We fancy that such a chastened style of music, composed so as to meet this
requirement, would soon be voted as “confessedly unequal to the task of
evoking and expressing the feelings of Christian joy and triumph,” and,
with plain chant under the same ban, this world would become indeed a vale
of tears and


                “... plain of groans,
    Whose arid wastes resound with moans
    Of weepers over dead men’s bones.”


The style inherent in music certainly calls for more or less of personal
display, and consequently for some sign of appreciation from the
listeners, if it be nothing more than that entranced silence which is
often the most flattering applause, especially in church.

A little incident has just occurred in connection with our own church
choir—we hardly need say that no women sing in it, or that chant is its
accepted melody—which illustrates better than long argument the spirit
that Gregorian chant inspires in the hearts of the singers. One of their
number, a little chorister, lies sick in a hospital. The members of the
chorus have made an offering of all the merit they gain in the sight of
God, on account of their singing, for his recovery. We imagine the look of
puzzled surprise if such an “act” were proposed to the singers of a
musical chorus in one of our ordinary gallery‐choirs.

We would furthermore ask whether music for the church could be, or is at
all likely to be, composed so as not to betray the hand of the composer
and elicit applause for him? Ought the people, or priest either, to suffer
the distraction of remarking interiorly, “We have Mgr. Newsham’s Mass to‐
day, but it is not so pleasing as Mr. Richardson’s revised Mozart that we
had last Sunday. I do hope the organist will soon give us one of those
Mechlin prize Masses; but we cannot have that, I suppose, until we get a
better tenor, for ours is rather a poor voice, etc., etc., etc.”?

We say that all such reflections are out of order, and are a valid
argument against the use of musical compositions.

What of personal display in church ceremonies? It is not only in bad
taste, but irrational, stupid, and contemptible, if it be not grievously
scandalous, as it might very easily become. Does any one ever dream of
applause to be either given or acknowledged? Why does not the church offer
prizes for the composition of “Masses” which will vie with each other in
their literary style, their devotional phraseology, and other
characteristics, so that the people may have the enjoyment of hearing a
Mass, now of the celebrated Dr. Brown, now of Dean Jones, and now of Canon
Robinson, instead of being obliged to listen week after week to the same
old, tiresome Masses of the Feasts of our Lord, the Blessed Virgin, and
the saints, the productions of the same “barbarous” age which formed the
chant, and whose composers are not known to one in a million? Do not the
exigencies of modern progress, and the aspirations to see themselves in
print of more literati than she can find room for in her contracted temple
of fame, demand that the church shall take this matter into serious
consideration? We advise the American daily press to press this matter
into the notice of the hierarchy at once, or at the reassembling of the
Vatican Council at furthest.

As to plain chant, it corresponds exactly with this anonymous character of
the present liturgy of the church, as every one can see—immortal works,
that immortalize only the common faith which produced them—and then _that_
will be got rid of, which is all we need or care to say on this point.
_Verbum sap._

_Seventhly_ (and lastly, for the present). Modern music is essentially
national and secular. It is the product of a natural and sensual
civilization (a question we have not the space to fully discuss here), and
advances in a degree corresponding to the cultivation of the arts for
their own sake by this or that nation, besides receiving a marked impress
from the national habits and tastes.

Art for art’s sake! What else could we expect from a civilization which
has ignored the supernatural and placed scientific investigation above the
revelations of God, whose painters have abandoned the ideal for servile
copying of nature, and whose highest type of beauty for the sculptor’s
chisel is a naked Venus?

The secular character of music—by which we mean its variability with
succeeding centuries or still shorter periods of time—is also
unquestionable. It is of this age or of that; now “all the rage,” and now
“old‐fashioned” and “out of date.” Modern musical airs enjoy a very short‐
lived popularity. Fashion is the autocrat, almost the divinity, of modern
civilization. It is the logical expression of cultivated sensualism, and
the art of music has basely given itself up to its tyrannical rule and
whimsical lusts. Church music has been forced to bend its neck and go
under the same yoke, and we do not believe it has the power to shake it
off. Talk of making the style of music “alla Palestrina” popular now! We
have been offered Chevalier Pustet’s costly _Musica Divina_ for a song;
and Herr Franz may call the attention of church musicians to the works of
Durante until he is hoarse. We tell you that such music is “out of
fashion”; and fashion’s ban in the kingdoms of this world is as blasting
as the ban of the church’s excommunication in the kingdom of Christ.

There must be nothing national or secular, nothing suggestive of the petty
partisanship and strifes of the world, about the melody which expresses
the universal and everlasting liturgy of the church. Kenelm Digby, whose
judgment is of worth, says: “Sooth, no tongue can be adequate to give an
idea of the impression produced by the plain song of the choir. It is full
of poetry, full of history, full of sanctity. While the Gregorian chant
rises, you seem to _hear the whole Catholic Church behind you
responding_.”

Music may do for religions that are national or fashionable. Hymns in the
German style may do for German Protestants; hymns and anthems in the
English style may do for English Protestants; and American music (if there
be such) may answer for all the requirements of devotion among the fifty
odd sects that are struggling for existence amongst us—and we advise them,
if they wish to make their churches “pay,” to keep their music well up to
the fashion—but the Catholic Church, who knows no present, past, or future
in her eternal faith, whose liturgy has never been subjected to the genius
of national language, whose motto, “Quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab
omnibus,” has defied the attacks of fashion, as her rock‐founded edifice
defies the gates of hell, she must have, and, thank God, she has a melody
no nation or age shall call “its own,” whose purity no _soí‐disant_
“civilization” shall ever be able to defile, which her faithful children
shall always recognize as the voice of their true mother, and know it well
from the voice of a foreign step‐dame or of a hireling housekeeper—a voice
which, through the mysterious link of divine generation, will ever speak
to the child of the Father, who is his through the church, and whose
Paternal compassion is sure to be moved by the tones of that song which
the Mother taught him to sing.




Assunta Howard. V. Sienna.


It was on a beautiful evening in June, just when spring was merging into
summer, that Mr. Carlisle’s family arrived in Sienna, and found a truly
delightful home awaiting them, thanks to Giovanni’s energy and thoughtful
skill. The soft but somewhat enervating air of Rome had failed to restore
Mr. Carlisle’s strength; and the physician imperatively ordered that
panacea which seems, in the opinion of the faculty, to be the last
resource when other prescriptions have failed—complete change. An almost
unaccountable attraction had drawn their thoughts towards Sienna, and
Giovanni had been despatched to Tuscany with _carte blanche_ as to
preparations. He had proved himself entirely worthy of confidence; and the
praises bestowed upon him by all the family, as they inspected the result
of his efforts, were not unmerited. He had succeeded in engaging, for the
season, a pleasant, airy villa about a mile beyond the Florentine gate of
that quaint, proud city, and no expense had been spared to render it
comfortable and home‐like. A small grove in front of the house and a
flower garden on one side promised many a pleasant hour during those days
when shade and beauty afford relief and divert the mind from the power of
the midsummer sun. The _loggia_ in the rear of the house, where Mr.
Carlisle, his sister, and ward were now standing, commanded a most
extensive and beautiful view. Directly beneath them the land sloped down
into a graceful valley covered with vineyards. Beyond was a long stretch
of _campagna_; and in the far distance, like a giant sentinel, rose
Radicofani, on the summit of which still lingered the glory of a sunset
whose gorgeousness had already departed. There is much in first
impressions—more, perhaps, than we are willing to acknowledge—and it may
well be doubted whether any after‐sunshine would have secured for Sienna
the favor it now enjoyed had Radicofani appeared for the first time before
the little group assembled on the balcony, rising weird‐like from out a
veil of mist and cloud.

Mrs. Grey actually sighed, as, instantly spanning with a loving, womanly
thought the distance which separated her from the lover she had
regretfully left in Leghorn, she turned to her companions, saying: “Oh! I
wish George were here. I think Sienna is lovely. There! I have seen the
new moon over my left shoulder, and now I am sure he will not come this
month.”

Mrs. Grey was evidently very much in love. Mr. Sinclair’s presence and
absence formed the light and shade of her life’s picture; and a picture it
was whose colors were too glaring, its contrasts too striking, and it
lacked deep feeling in its tone. After a pause she continued:

“But then I have always noticed that George does not like views.” And
removing her pretty travelling‐hat, she went away to superintend Amalie’s
unpacking.

“He certainly did not like _my_ views,” said Mr. Carlisle in a low voice
to Assunta, “when I expressed them to him rather freely the other day. But
neither did I like his; so we were quits there.”

But the attention of the traveller was soon entirely engrossed in securing
the rest needful after so fatiguing a journey; and it was some days before
Mr. Carlisle was sufficiently strong to explore the city, whose walls and
towers could be seen, in all their mediæval picturesqueness, from the
_loggia_.

At last, however, the change recommended began to tell upon the invalid,
and each day added its portion of renewed strength, until Mr. Carlisle
threatened every possible and impossible herculean labor, by way of
proving that he was, as he said, “ready for anything.”

The ladies had insisted upon postponing any sight‐seeing until all could
enjoy it together, though Clara protested that complete stagnation was
evidently her fate. One could not find much excitement in a grove and a
mountain after the first hour of novelty. Still, as long as the mail
brought her a daily letter from Mr. Sinclair, and took in return the
dainty, perfumed envelope containing so many pretty, loving nothings, she
did not appear to be hopelessly inconsolable.

Assunta had, without scruple, made one exception to the generous
resolution of waiting. But it was because she knew that the expedition she
wished particularly to make alone would afford no pleasure to the others,
while their presence might be the occasion of much pain to herself. Of
course the interest Sienna had for her was its association with S.
Catherine; and she longed to see the spot consecrated by the heroic
sanctity of one whose humility was as profound as her influence on the
world was powerful. She took the opportunity on Sunday, after she and
Marie had assisted at Mass in a little suburban church, to visit the house
of the dyer whose honor and privilege it was to be the father of a woman
the life and character of whom might well be studied by the women of to‐
day. S. Catherine possessed all that the most ambitious of her sex in the
present day could desire—an immense public influence. How did she gain it?
Only by seeking to lose herself in the obscurity of an ignoble origin; in
labors and privations for the sake of a love whose consuming fire many
waters of tribulation could not quench; and in that truly hidden life in
which God delights to work his wonders. The only right she claimed was
that of loving, and consequently of suffering, more than others. The only
insignia of rank she coveted was a crown of thorns, and it was granted to
her by her Eternal Lover, who could refuse her nothing. Her power was in
God’s exaltation of the humble, in his use of the weak things of the world
to confound the mighty. Well might those hands, which were privileged to
bear in them the marks of the Lord Jesus—the sacred stigmata—be made
instrumental in leading back to Rome its exiled pontiff‐king. Self‐
annihilation was the secret of the influence of those glorious women of
the ages of faith who have since been placed upon the altars of the
church. O restless, self‐seeking women of to‐day! striving for a power
which will curse and not bless you, where is the sweet perfume of your
humility? Where are the fruits of mortification? Where the aureola of
sanctity? Where are those grand works for God, offspring of a faith that
believes all and a love that dares all? For these are the virtues in a S.
Catherine or a S. Teresa which all can imitate. Or, if these standards are
too high for modern souls, where are the homely qualities of those women
commended by S. Paul, who adorn themselves with modesty, learn in silence,
are faithful in all things, having a care of the house? Thank God, the
hand of the Lord is not shortened, and holy mother church cherishes many a
hidden gem of sanctity which will one day adorn the bride at the coming of
her divine Spouse! Yet these are but the exceptions, unknown in the midst
of the vast, ever‐moving multitude seeking the open arena of life, and
desiring a part in its contests, animated by hopes as false as they are
human, placing that almost insuperable barrier of pride between their
souls and the Sacred Heart of our divine Lord. S. James has given us this
simple rule of a holy life: “To visit the fatherless and widows in their
tribulation, and to keep ourselves unspotted from the world”—in two words,
charity and purity. May the ever Blessed Mother of God and her glorious
servant S. Catherine intercede for the women of the church, that they may
never covet those empty baubles for which the women of the world are now
spending their lives!

Assunta, simple child of the faith, thought nothing of all this, as she
passed reverently over the threshold of the house, whose rooms, retaining
still something of their original appearance, are now converted into
chapels. The sacristan, perceiving in the young girl an earnestness of
piety to which he was not accustomed in most of the strangers who visited
this holy spot, showed to her, without solicitation, the crucifix before
which S. Catherine was kneeling when she received the stigmata. With kind
attention the good man placed a _prie‐dieu_ before the precious object of
veneration and, then retiring, gave Assunta an opportunity to satisfy her
devotion. Making a place for Marie beside her, she was soon absorbed in
prayer. Here, where the very atmosphere was filled with a spirit of love
and sacrifice, where the crucifix before her spoke so eloquently of the
closeness of the union between the faithful soul and its suffering Lord,
how easy it seemed to make aspirations and resolutions which would of
necessity lose something of their heat when exposed to the chilling air of
the world’s indifference! How far off now was Mr. Carlisle’s affection, of
whose influence she never ceased to feel something; how near the divine
love of the Sacred Heart, that one sole object of S. Catherine’s desire
and adoration! It had been the last request of Father Du Pont, when he
gave Assunta his good‐by and blessing, that, while in Sienna, she would
often visit this holy house. He judged rightly that the evident presence
of the supernatural would help to counteract the spirit of worldliness
which surrounded her in her daily life. She herself already felt that it
was good for her to be there; and though, when she returned home, the
sensible fervor of the moment died away, the effects remained in
reanimated strength. “Courage, my child, and perseverance; God is with
you,” were the last words she had heard from the good priest’s lips; and
they kept singing on in her soul a sweet, low harmony, like the music of
seashells, soothing her in many an anxious hour.

When once Mr. Carlisle was able to go out without danger of fatigue, Mrs.
Grey could no longer complain of stagnation. The cathedral, the academy,
and the numberless places of interest within the city walls, the drives,
the walks through the shady lanes near the villa, twilight strolls through
the vineyards, and excursions into the surrounding country, filled up the
time through all those pleasant weeks. Before they could realize it
Assunta’s birthday, her day of freedom, was at hand. A week before the
eventful occasion Mr. Sinclair had arrived in Sienna, making Mrs. Grey
superlatively happy. The joy he imparted to the others must be expressed
in something less than the positive degree.

The sun rose brightly on the 15th of August. Nature responded to the
joyous Benedicite, and “all the works of the Lord” seemed to “magnify him
for ever” for the great things he had done in giving to heaven a Queen, to
earth an Advocate. Nor was man silent. The grave city of Sienna put off
its wonted dignity, and, by the unfurling of its gay flags, the spreading
of tapestries, and the ringing of bells, testified its share in the common
rejoicing of Christendom. It was the Feast of the Assumption, and Assunta
Howard’s twenty‐first birthday. Was it strange that the young girl should
have arisen with a heavy heart but little in sympathy with the glad sights
and sounds that greeted her in these first waking moments? Surely, to
those who understand the workings of the human heart it was most natural.
On this day ended the relations between herself and her guardian. However
hard the tie which bound her had made her duty towards him, it was harder
still to nature to sever the bond. She was free now to go where she would;
and it would soon be right for her to separate from him who was no longer
her guardian, and was not satisfied to be only her friend. She had not
realized before how much happiness she had experienced in the relationship
which existed no longer; how she had rested content in the very face of
danger, because the peril had in it so much more of pleasure than of pain.
How sweet had been the intercourse which duty had sanctioned, and which
duty must now interrupt! The feeling was all wrong, and she knew it, and
she would not fail to struggle against it. Her will was resolute, but it
was evident that she was not to conquer in life’s battle by throwing aside
her arms and withdrawing from the contest. The bearing of the cross must
be daily, and not only day after day, but year after year. Only to‐day she
seemed to feel its weight more, and she sank a little beneath it. Was it
her guardian angel that whispered courage to her soul, or was it the
Blessed Mother, to whose loving protection she had been specially
confided, who reminded her that our dear Lord fell three times beneath the
overwhelming burden of his cross, and bade her be comforted? Yes, it was
the feast of that dear Mother, and no mere human feeling should prevent
her joining in the church’s exultation and corresponding to her salutation
in the Introit: “Gaudeamus omnes in Domino.”

Assunta had ordered the carriage to be in readiness to take her to San
Domenico for early Mass, and Marie’s knock at the door informed her that
it was waiting. She had before visited the church, but only in the way of
sight‐seeing. She had then been struck with its many points of interest;
she had no idea until this morning how devotional it was. After Mass, at
which she had received, in the Holy Communion, strength and peace, she
remained a long time before the chapel containing those most beautiful
frescos, by Razzi, of incidents in the life of the great saint of Sienna.
The finest of all, S. Catherine in Ecstasy, is a treasure both of art and
devotion. Apparently fainting, supported by two of her nuns, the
countenance of the saint has that indescribable expression of peace which
we see in those whose conversation is in heaven. But, more than this, the
evident absence of all sensation indicates that the soul is rapt into an
ineffable union with its divine Lord, and has passed, for the moment,
beyond the confines of earth. Seemingly dead, and yet alive, the frail
body, with its beautiful, calm face, rests upon its knees in the arms of
the two Sisters, who, with all the tranquillity of the cloister, yet form
a contrast to her who is so wholly dead to the world.

Assunta gazed upon the picture until it seemed to impart rest to her own
soul; and yet the impression was very different from that she always
received in looking at the other S. Catherine whom angels are bearing to
her sepulture. Marie at last interrupted her, and, reminding her that she
was the important personage at the villa on that day, suggested that she
should return to breakfast. And Assunta determined that no cloud should
disturb the serenity of the occasion, which all intended should be joyous.

Mr. Carlisle met her at the door on her return, and assisted her to
alight. Then he took her hand in both his, and his eyes spoke volumes, as
he said:

“Let me look at you, child, and see how you bear your honors. You are more
of a heroine than I thought; for even at this distance we have heard the
bells and have seen the flags. What an important little body you are! No
one thought it worth while to ring me into my majority.”

“It is because you did not come into the world under the same auspices,”
replied Assunta.

“Auspice Maria—that is the secret, then.” And Mr. Carlisle lowered his
voice as he added: “Consider me a Mariolater from this time, my devotion
deriving an ever‐increasing fervor from the doctrine of the Assumption.
Well, you are free, and I suppose I am expected to congratulate you. How
do you enjoy the sensation of liberty?”

“I do not think that I am yet enough accustomed to the use of my wings to
feel the difference between what I was yesterday and what I am to‐day. But
in one point I am unchanged. I have an excellent appetite for my
breakfast.”

Assunta was determined to ward off all approach to sentiment.

“And here is Clara, wondering, no doubt, if I have been left behind in
Sienna.”

Mrs. Grey came out into the garden, looking very lovely in her white
morning dress, and followed by Mr. Sinclair.

“Severn, you are the most selfish man I ever saw,” exclaimed the impetuous
little lady. “Do you flatter yourself that you have the monopoly of
Assunta, and that no one else is privileged to wish her _cento di questi
giorni_, as Giovanni says?—though I am sure I should not like to live a
hundred years. My beauty would be gone by that time.” And she looked
archly at her lover standing beside her.

“I fancy that even relentless time would ‘write no wrinkles on thine
antique brow,’ reluctant to spoil anything so fair,” said Mr. Sinclair in
his most gallant tone; then extending his hand to Assunta, he continued:

“Miss Howard, allow me to congratulate you, and to wish that your life may
be as cloudless as is this wonderful sky. The day is like
yourself—exquisitely beautiful.”

The color mounted into Assunta’s cheeks, but it was with displeasure at
such uncalled‐for flattery. Mr. Carlisle turned away, and walked into the
house; while his sister, with that amiability which often atoned for her
want of tact, exclaimed:

“Bravo! George, you have said quite enough for us both; so I will only
ditto your speech, and add to it my birthday kiss. Now, dear, let us go to
breakfast. Severn is already impatient.”

The table had been placed in a large hall running the whole length of the
house; and as the three were about to enter, Assunta paused on the
threshold, in astonishment and delight at the magical transformation. The
walls were literally garlanded with flowers, and fresh greens were
festooned from the ceiling, while in the centre of the breakfast‐table was
a basket of the rarest exotics. Not only Sienna, but Florence, had been
commissioned to furnish its choicest flowers for the occasion. Assunta’s
eyes filled with tears, and for a moment she could not speak. Mr.
Carlisle, perceiving her emotion, offered her his arm, and led her towards
a side‐table, saying:

“And here are our trifling birthday gifts, which you must not despise
because they fall so far short of expressing all that we feel for you.”

There was a beautifully‐framed proof engraving of Titian’s masterpiece,
the Assumption, from Mr. Carlisle. Clara had chosen as her gift a set of
pearls, “because they looked so like the darling,” she said. Mr.
Sinclair’s offering was a bouquet of rare and exquisite flowers. He had
all the penetration of an experienced man of the world, and understood
well that Miss Howard would prefer not to accept from him anything less
perishable. Assunta put her hand in Clara’s, as she said:

“I never can thank you, it is all so beautiful.” And then she paused,
until Clara exclaimed:

“Why, Assunta love, what a solemn birthday face! To be sure, the flight of
time is a serious thing. I begin to feel it myself, and shall very soon
dispense with birthdays altogether—such disagreeable reminders as they
are.”

“What is it, _petite_?” asked Mr. Carlisle. “You know that to‐day you have
only to command us, and we will prove your most obedient subjects.”

“Oh! it was nothing of any consequence; only a thought that you would
consider very foolish crossed my mind. I am sure my solemnity was quite
unintentional.”

“Well, a penny for that thought, twice told.”

Assunta, perceiving that Mr. Sinclair was out of hearing, explained:

“All this for my poor worthless self and nothing for Her whom God has
delighted to honor. I think I was feeling a little jealous for my dear
Mother. I did not want my feast to be better than hers.”

“Is that all?” said Mr. Carlisle. “To hear is to obey.” And without
another word he quickly removed from the table everything but the picture,
and, taking flowers and candles from the mantel‐piece, he improvised a
really artistic shrine. Giovanni, who was serving breakfast, lighted the
candles, and surveyed the effect with satisfaction.

“Thank you,” said Assunta, and she would not even remember that the love
was wanting which would give value to the offering. “I shall hardly dare
think a wish to‐day, the consequence is so magical.”

“And now, Severn,” said his sister, “if you have finished your popery, you
had better call Assunta’s attention to my ever‐increasing appetite.
Giovanni, too, will not like to have his efforts to honor the occasion
slighted by a want of appreciation.”

Mr. Carlisle offered the young girl his arm, and led her to the table,
saying:

“This is my first attempt at Mariolatry. Quite a success, is it not?”

“If it were only an outward sign of inward grace,” said Clara, laughing,
“exterior piety would be quite becoming to you, Severn. You really have an
artistic taste. But you are too absent‐minded to‐day! Can you not see that
we are starving?”

Assunta was so accustomed to hear sacred things spoken of lightly, and
often irreverently, that she had learned to make a little solitude in her
heart, into which she could retire from the strife, or even the
thoughtlessness, of tongues, and many a short act of reparation was there
performed for those who were unconscious of offence.

“I wonder,” said Mrs. Grey, as after breakfast the party were standing on
the _loggia_—“I wonder if Giovanni has succeeded in finding a good balcony
for the races to‐morrow. I would not miss seeing them for the world. I
dote on horses.”

“I very much doubt,” replied her brother, “if the horses will excite the
least admiration, judging from the specimens Sienna has thus far produced.
But the races will be interesting, because they are entirely unique. I
believe that Giovanni has been very successful in securing a balcony, and
he intends to have it surpass all others in decoration; so I hope that the
ladies will do their part, not to disgrace his efforts. He will expect the
jewels to be set in a manner worthy of the casket which contains them.”

“Never fear, Severn! Do you think a lady ever failed to look her best on
such an occasion? An open balcony and a crowd—surely, she needs no other
occasion for vanity.”

George Sinclair removed his cigar to remark carelessly:

“And so the admiration of _one_ is, after all, insufficient to satisfy
you?”

“No, it is not, you dear, lazy, old fellow, and you know it. It is only
because I like your taste to be appreciated that I want others to admire
me. I do not think there is a more delicious sensation than to feel that
you are pretty to begin with, and then dressed so as to show every point
to the best advantage, and to know that every eye is fixed upon you. One
can be so innocently unconscious of it all the time.”

“Clara, I am ashamed of you,” exclaimed her brother. “You are a perfect
mirror of your sex; only, unfortunately, it is the weaknesses that you
reflect to the life, and none of the virtues.”

“Hush, impertinence!” replied Clara, laughing merrily. “One cannot always
be a well awfully deep and reflecting only the stars. Come, George, what
will be most becoming to me for to‐morrow?”

If it had been a few months after marriage, instead of before, this
devoted lover would probably have replied, “A fool’s cap and bells, for
all I care!” As it was, he concealed his inward irritation, and no one
would have doubted his sincerity as he said: “You cannot fail to be
charming in anything; and I will not choose or suggest, because I would
like to enjoy the pleasure of a surprise.”

Mr. Sinclair was sometimes fascinated by Clara’s piquancy and brightness;
but she did not suit all moods, and to‐day Assunta’s quiet dignity and the
antagonism that Mr. Carlisle always excited more or less, produced an
interior disturbance of which a wife would surely have received the full
benefit. It is strange that an entirely worldly man will often, from a
selfish motive, show a power of self‐control which Christians find it
difficult to practise, even for the love of God. Alas! that the devil
should receive many a sacrifice, many an offering of suffering and
heroism, which, the intention being changed, would produce a saint.

Mrs. Grey had not penetration enough to see below the surface, and she was
entirely satisfied with her lover, whom she considered the best and
handsomest man in the world, not even excepting her brother. She could
rush fearlessly against a mood which would have kept a more appreciative
nature at a distance; and here, perhaps, she had an advantage.

She was now about to answer Mr. Sinclair’s very gratifying speech when an
interruption came in the shape of Giovanni with a note for herself, which
she read hastily, and then said: “Severn, it is from Lady Gertrude. They
were passing through Sienna, and have remained over a day expressly to see
your humble servant. They wish me to dine with them this evening,
accompanied by my _preux chevalier_—her own expression, George. But I do
not know about leaving Assunta alone on her birthday, even for Lady
Gertrude.”

“Oh! I hope you will not disappoint your friends on my account,” said
Assunta. “I have already had my celebration this morning, and it is quite
proper that I should devote this evening to reflections upon my coming
responsibilities.”

“Besides,” said Mr. Carlisle, “I beg to inform you that Assunta will not
be left alone. I flatter myself that I count for one, at least; and I will
endeavor to act as your substitute, Clara, in most effectually preventing
those contemplated reflections. Responsibility and golden hair are an
association of ideas quite incongruous, in my opinion.”

“I see,” said Clara, “that the balance is in Lady Gertrude’s favor. What
do you say, _caro_?”

“If you mean me,” said George Sinclair in a slightly unamiable tone, “I am
always at your service.”

“You bear!” replied the irrepressible Clara, “I will not allow you to go
if you are cross. Well, Giovanni, come to my room in ten minutes for the
answer; and remember to order the carriage for half‐past five.”

“Truly,” said Mr. Carlisle, turning to Assunta after his sister had left
the _loggia_, “I think I never saw so sunshiny a person as Clara. It is
always high noon with her.”

While Assunta assented cordially, Mr. Sinclair said to himself:

“Too much sunshine makes an unpleasant glare, and noon is always the most
disagreeable part of the day. I confess to liking a little of the shadow
of repose.”

He was careful, however, to keep his thoughts to himself. If the lover
could feel imperfections so keenly, it argued but poorly for the blindness
of love on the part of the husband. And yet this blindness, false and
unworthy as it is, seems to be the only chance of peace for worldly
husbands and wives, the only protection against the evil tendencies of
uncontrolled human nature. All Clara’s sunshine might fail to make even a
silver lining to the cloud rising in the distant future.

The sun shone brightly enough, however, when Mrs. Grey and Mr. Sinclair
took their seats in the barouche to drive into Sienna; and the lady, who
so much delighted in the delicious sensation of undisguised admiration,
must have been more than satisfied this afternoon. Many eyes followed the
handsome pair, as they passed rapidly towards the hotel. Clara knew that
she was looking uncommonly well, and she was very proud of her companion’s
distinguished air and manner; so, altogether, she enjoyed quite a little
triumph.

Assunta and Mr. Carlisle dined alone; and, as they rose from the table
just at sunset, Mr. Carlisle proposed a walk down into the vineyards.

“It will soil that pretty white dress of yours, I know; but the air is so
refreshing, and I want you to occupy for a while the new rustic seat I
have had placed near the brook, in that lovely spot we discovered the
other day. Take a shawl with you, _petite_, for it will be cooler as soon
as the sun sets.”

They strolled along slowly down through the narrow paths which separated
the vines heavy with the fast‐ripening fruit, pausing now and then, as
some new beauty in the distant view or in their immediate surroundings
excited their attention. At last, at the bottom of the valley, close
beside a brook, and beneath a clump of trees, they came upon one of those
fairy spots where nature seems to have arranged herself expressly to
attract an artist’s eye.

“Giovanni is truly invaluable,” said Mr. Carlisle. “I had only to give him
a suggestion, and see how well he has carried out my ideas. This is the
very luxury of comfort.” And seating himself, he lighted a cigar, advised
Assunta to put on her shawl, and was evidently prepared for a pleasant
hour.

As they sat there, almost in silence, the Angelus sounded from a distant
convent tower; and, as if in answer to its summons, Assunta began to sing
in a sweet, low voice Schubert’s Ave Maria. Mr. Carlisle did not say a
word until it was finished; then he begged for just one more, and, knowing
how much he liked the simple Scotch songs, she sang “Robin Adair.”

“Assunta, your voice grows sweeter every day. It is perfect rest to me to
hear you sing.” Then, after a pause, he threw away his cigar, and turned
towards her a very earnest face.

“_Petite_, listen to me patiently a moment. I am a very proud man, as you
know, and one who is not apt to sue, even where he greatly desires. It
seems”—and the peculiar smile broke over his face—“that you have exercised
some magic power, and with a touch of your finger have thrown down the
barrier of pride against which an army might beat in vain. My child, you
know what I am going to say, because I have not changed since that
moonlight night in the Colosseum, except, indeed, that the feeling I then
expressed has strengthened and deepened every day. I made you a promise
that night. I confess that it has been poorly enough redeemed; still, you
must judge me by my self‐conquests rather than by my failures. But to‐day
releases me: and having ceased to be your guardian, I cannot give you up.
I need not repeat to you what I have already said. You know that you are
dearer to me than the life you have saved. I only ask, as before, the
right to devote that life to you. May I?”

“I had hoped, Mr. Carlisle, that you would consider my former answer as
final,” said Assunta; but, though her words were cold, her voice trembled.
“I, too, am unchanged since that night you speak of. I am compelled to be
so.”

“Assunta, you are such a child; do you, then, think it nothing to have won
the love of a man who has reached middle life and has never loved before?”

“Mr. Carlisle,” said the young girl sadly, “if I thought it nothing, I
should not feel the pain it costs me to repeat to you, that it cannot be.
I am so unworthy of your love; you must not think I do not value it. Your
friendship has been more to me than I dare tell you, lest you should
misunderstand me.”

“Your heart pleads for me, child.”

“Then I must not listen to it; for the voice of God in my soul pleads more
loudly.”

“Assunta,” said Mr. Carlisle, “I think you did not understand me
before—you do not understand me now. Do you suppose I should interfere in
your religion? No more than I have ever done. You do not know me, child.”

“I think I know you better than you know yourself, presumptuous as this
sounds,” said Assunta, forcing a smile. “I am sure that, were I to marry
you, you would not be satisfied to hold a place in my heart second even to
God. But,” she added, as the old expression of bitterness crossed her
guardian’s face, “all this is useless. Let me put a question to you, and
answer me candidly. Suppose I had made a promise to you, who love me—made
it, we will grant, out of love for you—and afterwards, yielding to my own
weakness, I should break that promise. Would you feel that I had done
rightly—that I was to be trusted?”

“Certainly not, child. You ask strange questions.”

“Well, I have, out of love for our dear Lord, made him a promise which I
believed his love required of me. He is a jealous Lover, Mr. Carlisle. I
dare to say this reverently. Suppose, for the sake of a human
affection—for your sake—I should fail to keep my promise; would you not
have reason to doubt my fidelity to you, when I could be unfaithful to my
God?”

“My child, I do not comprehend such reasoning. You either do not, cannot
love me, or else you have suffered religious fanaticism to get the better
of your judgment. I hoped that the plea of love would be sufficient to win
my cause; but it is not all. Look your future fairly in the face, Assunta.
What are you going to do? You are young; I need not add, beautiful.
Surely, you understand that without me you are unprotected. Have you any
plans, or have you already become so independent that you prefer not to
make me your confidant? My pride is gone indeed when I put my suit in
another form. I ask only your hand. Let me have the right to protect you
in the world you know so little. I will wait to win your heart.”

“Mr. Carlisle,” interrupted Assunta with more emotion than he had ever
seen in her before, “you are cruel in your persistence. You wilfully
misunderstand me. It seems to give you pleasure to make this trial as hard
for me as possible. I have told you before that I can never marry you; let
that be enough.” And bursting into tears, she rose hastily from her seat.

Her guardian was so taken by surprise that for an instant he sat
motionless; then he followed the excited girl, and joined her before she
had proceeded far along the vineyard path.

“Take my arm, _petite_,” he said gently, and they walked some distance in
silence. At last Assunta said with regained composure:

“Mr. Carlisle, you asked me about my plans, and you have a right to know.
I have thought much of the future, as you may believe. My desire is to
return to Baltimore with Clara after her marriage, and pass the winter
with Mary Percival. Further than this I need not look.”

There was no immediate answer. After a pause Mr. Carlisle said:

“You are your own mistress now. I shall of course place no obstacle in the
way of your carrying out any wish or design which will conduce to your
welfare. As for myself, the time may come when I shall cease to regret
that I am in no wise necessary to your happiness. Meanwhile, it shall be
as you say. Good heavens! to think that a mere girl should have the power
to move me so,” he went on, as if speaking to himself.

And apparently his thoughts were so full of Assunta that he forgot her
actual presence, for they reached the house in silence, and then Mr.
Carlisle proceeded at once to his own room; and so ended the birthday.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

The Sienna races are a thoroughly unique spectacle—almost childish, like
many features of the Roman Carnival, to the over‐cultivated and
consequently over‐fastidious taste of this age. They take one back to the
days when men were more simple, when hearts did not grow old and faith was
strong. These childlike traits produced a race of men who were but
“children of a larger growth,” and, like children, amused with even a
small amount of pomp and show, heroes as they were. And a strange contrast
were the races of that 16th of August to the usual occupations of the
Siennese. Mr. Carlisle’s carriage passed beneath innumerable flags and
between gayly‐tapestried windows, as it drove to the amphitheatre‐shaped
piazza, the centre of which was already filled, while every seat placed
against the houses which bounded the square was occupied. The bright
colors worn by the peasant women, with their large Tuscan hats and the
more subdued dress of the men, produced an effect at once very peculiar
and very picturesque. A little cheer from the bystanders greeted Mr.
Carlisle’s party, as they appeared upon the balcony; for no other
decorations in all that vast piazza were so fine as those in which
Giovanni had shown so much skill, and surely no other ladies were as
beautiful. There was no appearance of heartache or disappointment on any
of the four faces which now looked out upon the crowd. We all, sooner or
later, learn to wear a mask before the world, and the interior life of
each one of us is often a sealed book to our nearest friends.

“Clara,” said Assunta, as they seated themselves after their survey, “you
seem to know more about the races than the rest of us. Please to enlighten
my ignorance.”

“I heard about them at the hotel last night,” replied Mrs. Grey; “so you
will find me very learned. Sienna is divided into seventeen wards; but
only ten take part in the race, and these are decided by lot. The victor
receives a prize and a sort of diminutive triumph, while the losers may
think themselves lucky if they only get a scolding from their respective
wards. The oracle has spoken, and further than this she is not informed.”

“The rest we shall now see for ourselves,” said Mr. Sinclair, “for I hear
the music which I suppose accompanies the procession.” And, as he spoke,
the band entered the piazza from a side street. Then followed, in turn,
the representatives of the different wards, each representation consisting
of two flags—the colors of the ward—a number of pages, the race‐horse led
by an esquire, and the man who was afterwards to ride the racer, on
horseback as a knight. The flag‐bearers, as well as all in each division,
wore exactly the colors of the flag of the ward, in costumes of the olden
time; and, as these flags were of entirely different combinations of
colors, and most of them very brilliant, the procession would have been
very effective without its peculiar charm. The flag‐bearers were men of
grace and skill, and from the moment of entering the square the flags were
in continual motion—waved above their heads, flung into the air, passed
under their arms and legs, and all without once touching the ground. It
was a very poetical combination of color and motion, and Mrs. Grey
impulsively clapped her hands with delight—a performance which her
dignified lover evidently looked upon as childish. After this part of the
procession came a large chariot drawn by four horses, with postilions, and
bearing the ten different flags tastefully arranged. This was the model of
the old Siennese battle‐car, which bore the standard, and was in
consequence the scene of the thickest of the fight. Upon it, in time of
battle, stood a priest, invoking by his prayers protection and success.
There also was the trumpeter, in readiness to give signals. A truly
mediæval picture was this chariot, with associations which carried one
back hundreds of years into the past. A band of music closed the
procession, which, after passing around the piazza, entered the court‐yard
of the Palazzo Pubblico. Here the knights exchanged their helmets and
plumes for jockey‐caps, and mounted their racers. As they emerged from
beneath the archway, and proceeded slowly towards the starting‐place,
across which a rope was drawn, Mr. Carlisle exclaimed, with a laugh in
which there was more sarcasm than merriment:

“Are you a judge of horses, Clara? If so, you, who yesterday announced
your jockey proclivities, must be greatly disappointed; for truly a set of
sorrier‐looking steeds I never beheld. The prize ought to be given to the
one that comes in last; for, where all are so slow, there would really be
no little exercise of skill in moving more slowly than a coach‐horse going
up‐hill, and yet moving at all.”

“I think, Severn,” replied his sister, “that your temper was not improved
by the fever. It is very disagreeable in you to inform me that the horses
are not Arabian chargers, for I never should have been the wiser.”

“Most men are disagreeable,” he retorted.

“George, you hear that, and do not resent it?” said Mrs. Grey indignantly.

“I leave that for you to do when you can, from experience of the contrary,
deny the charge. But the horses are starting on their three times round.”
And Mr. Sinclair leaned over the balcony with an air of interest.

“Why do the men carry those short sticks in their hands?” asked Assunta.

“I believe,” said Mr. Sinclair—for Mr. Carlisle became strangely
inattentive—“that the riders are allowed by rule to do all the damage they
can with the sticks, which are short, so as to limit somewhat their power;
for their aim is to knock each other off the horses.”

“The barbarians!” exclaimed Clara. “Oh! look, see how many are falling
back on the third round. It rests with the two now. I bet on the sorrel.”

“And he has won, Clara,” said Assunta.

The whole piazza was now in motion. Shouts greeted the victor, and the
defeated retired into obscurity.

“The modern Olympics are finished,” said Mr. Carlisle. “Shall we go?”

As they drove towards home in the red glow of the setting sun, Mr.
Carlisle said abruptly:

“Clara, when did you tell me that you and Sinclair intend to make each
other miserable?”

“I will not answer such a question, Severn. You are a perfect dog in the
manger. You will not marry yourself or let any one else.”

“If you wish to know,” said Mr. Sinclair, “when your sister intends to
make me the happiest of men, she has permitted me to hope that the end of
September will be the term of my most impatient waiting.”

“Then,” continued Mr. Carlisle in the same abrupt tone, “we had better be
on our way to Paris. We might start day after to‐morrow, I think.”

Mrs. Grey gave a little scream.

“Severn, you must be out of your mind. I thought you wished never to leave
Sienna.”

“I am weary to death of it; but that is not all. I have business matters
to arrange, and the preparation of your _trousseau_ will no doubt occupy
weeks.”

“But it will be so warm in Paris,” persisted Mrs. Grey.

“Do people whose hearts are filled with love and their minds with coming
matrimony think of weather, then? I thought such sublunary interests were
left to those whose hearts were still unthawed. However, there are fans
and ices enough in Paris to cool you off. I will write to‐night to engage
rooms.” And then Mr. Carlisle relapsed into silence and abstraction.

Assunta understood well enough the cause of this change in the plans; but
she was powerless to act, and could only submit. It, indeed, made little
difference to her.

“George,” said Clara to her lover, as they were strolling down the avenue
in the moonlight, “can you imagine what is the matter with Severn? I never
saw him in such a mood.”

“Disappointed in love, I should judge from appearances,” he replied
indifferently.

“Nonsense! He does not know the meaning of the word,” was the not very
intelligent reply of the lady.

To Be Continued.




Swinburne And De Vere.


The dramas _Bothwell_(94) and _Alexander the Great_,(95) which have so
recently come into the world side by side to challenge the attention of
that portion of it that speaks, or is supposed to speak, the language of
Shakespeare, offer all the contrasts that might be expected from their
subjects, as well as from the known thought, tone, and tendency of their
respective authors. One writer has taken for his chief character a great
Christian woman whose story, look at it as we may, is at least of the
saddest that was ever told; the other has chosen for his subject the
wonder of pagan history, the exemplar of pagan greatness, whose short
career is the condensation of all earthly glory and triumph.

It will be at once manifest that to a modern writer, as far as the
materials for the construction of an historical drama go, the life of
Mary, Queen of Scots, is beyond measure richer than that of Alexander. Her
story is religiously and politically one of the day. She is still on
trial, no longer before the narrow circles of York and Fotheringay, but
before Christendom. The question of her innocence or guilt, and the
consequent justice or injustice of her sentence, is debated as fiercely
to‐day as when alone she faced the sleuth‐hounds of Elizabeth in defence
of her honor and her life.

The final judgment of Christendom may be said already to be a foregone
conclusion in her favor, so fast is the long‐withheld evidence of her
innocence accumulating. But her life‐blood stains a nation and a religion,
or what called itself such, and the verdict that declares her “not guilty”
lays a terrible and indelible blot on them. Hence every nook and cranny of
history is searched, every historical cobweb disentangled, with an
eagerness and minuteness so thorough and complete that the reader is
better acquainted often with the history of Mary Stuart than with that of
the century in which he lives.

For a dramatist a most important point is thus at once secured. His
audience is interested in advance; and there is no further care for him
than to make a judicious use of the wealth of material at his disposal.

And surely to one with a soul in his body never did a more fitting subject
for a tragedy offer itself than Mary, Queen of Scots. The only difficulty
would seem to be a right selection from a great abundance. The scenes and
characters, the very speeches often, are ready made. Time, place,
circumstance, are ripe with interest. The march of events is terribly
rapid. The scene is ever shifting, and with it the fortunes of the queen.
All the passions are there at strife. Plot and counterplot, tragedy within
tragedy, love and hate, jealousy and wrath, hope and fear, the basest
betrayal and the loftiest devotion, surge and make war around this one
woman, and are borne along with her in a frenzied whirl to the terrible
end, when the curtain drops silently on that last dread scene that stands,
as it will for ever stand, in startling relief, far out from the dim
background of history.

The name of Alexander the Great calls up no such interest as this. His
life would seem the least likely of subjects for a modern dramatist. Great
captains, such as the first Napoleon, may look to him as at once their
model and their envy; but happily such great men are few and far between.
Alexander might indeed have formed an admirable theme for one of the
lesser lights of the English Augustan era to celebrate in those sonorous
heroics whose drowsy hum might serve at need as an admirable soporific.
But he and those who lived and moved about him are out of our world; and
whether he conquered ten empires or fifty, whether he defeated Darius or
Darius him, whether he sighed for more or fewer worlds to conquer, is now
all one to us. The sands of the desert have buried or wiped out his empire
ages ago; the sands of time have settled down on his memory and half
obliterated it; and the mighty Alexander serves to‐day for little more
than to point a moral.

On the other hand, every scene and incident in which Mary, Queen of Scots,
figured is intense with dramatic force. She entered on her reign at what
might be called the dawn of modern history—a lurid dawn presaging the
storm that was to come and is not yet over. The Reformation was convulsing
Europe. It had just entered Scotland before her, and the raven that
croaked its fatal entrance was John Knox. In the person of this girl were
centred the hopes of the Catholic party for Scotland and England. Mingled
with the strife of creeds around her was the conflict of the great
Scottish families, whose miserable contentions rent and wrecked the
kingdom. Any chieftain who chose and thought himself strong enough drew
the sword when and for what purpose pleased him. More than half of
them—those of any note, at least—were in Elizabeth’s pay. Treason
constituted much of the political life of those days, while under and over
and among the fierce strife of political parties rang and resounded the
clangor and wrangle of the delirious sects that had just apostatized from
Rome. Such was the period when the helm of the most distracted state in
distracted Christendom was set in the hand of a gentle girl, who stood
there alone to guide it over unknown seas. All the tempest gathered
together its fury and broke over her head. This is the figure chosen by
the author of _Bothwell_ for the centre of his tragedy. It was a time and
a scene and a tragedy worthy the philosophic mind of a Shakespeare and the
terrible power of an Æschylus. Mr. Swinburne’s work scarcely gives
evidence of the combination of these qualities.

A subject of this kind, when attempted at all, suggests painful
reflections if failure, emphatic failure, is the result. A goose essaying
an eagle’s flight would scarcely present a more absurd figure. Mr.
Swinburne has fallen immeasurably below the level of a subject whose level
is greatness. Not because he has chosen to paint Mary, Queen of Scots, as
a fiend, is this judgment passed on his work. Milton has proved that Satan
can be converted by genius into the most powerful dramatic villain that
ever trod the stage. Lady Macbeth may thrill us with horror, but she never
causes us to yawn. The author of _Bothwell_ was at liberty, by the license
allowed to poets, to make his heroine wicked enough even to satisfy his
fastidious taste, and still have given us a drama that of its own force
and brilliancy and coherence would have extorted the admiration of the
unfortunate queen’s most ardent defenders. But even her heartiest haters
could not resist the tendency to nod over the cumbrous wickedness, the
very heavy villany, of _Bothwell_, which is simply a dilution of Froude
with a tincture of Swinburne, well watered and administered in the largest
possible doses, or, in plain English, a few scenes of the history of the
period stitched loosely together and set to measured lines of blank verse.

Five hundred and thirty‐two pages, with thirty lines to the page, in five
acts and sixty scenes, make a tragedy indeed. Such is _Bothwell_. Yet,
notwithstanding its alarming proportions, it only extends from the death
of Rizzio to the battle of Langside, thus omitting the scene that of all
others is the most thrilling and effective—Mary’s execution. This may have
been done with a purpose; for even malevolence falters there. Such an end,
preceded by her long captivity, so patiently borne, were she even as
wicked as Mr. Swinburne would make her, might almost expiate any crime, as
it sanctifies her innocence.

The entire first act, entitled “David Rizzio,” is absorbed by the murder
of the character after which it is named. As far as its necessary
connection with the drama goes, it might have been entirely and very
profitably omitted. It serves, indeed, to introduce many of the
characters, but to no special purpose that might not have been
accomplished in any of the other acts. The author forgets that he is not
writing history, but a drama. We do not want the minutiæ, everything that
everybody said at any time, in any place, and under any circumstances
while Mary, Queen of Scots, was living, which Mr. Swinburne seems to think
he was bound to give us, and in blank verse too, in _Bothwell_. We want
the situations, the great facts. What led up to them may be told or hinted
at in a few lines. Mr. Swinburne does not seem to have realized this, and,
as a consequence, his drama is crowded with scenes, incidents, and
personages that not only hinder, but are utterly irrelevant to, the main
action of the piece, if indeed the piece can be truly said to possess any
main action. Thus it takes the entire first act, consisting of five scenes
and _eighty‐nine_ pages, to kill Rizzio. At last he is happily despatched,
to the relief, it must be said, of the reader, who, already wearied, finds
the second act entirely devoted to a similar sanguinary operation,
performed on Darnley this time. With a nice sense, notwithstanding his
pronounced communistic sympathies, of what is due even to second‐hand
royalty of the Darnley order, Mr. Swinburne, regardless of the liberal
allowance of space allotted to the stabbing of Rizzio, feels it incumbent
on him to devote one hundred and forty‐seven pages and twenty‐one scenes
to the blowing up of Mary’s husband. Thus, although two hundred and forty
pages in all are given over mainly to the killing of these two characters,
the tragedy can be scarcely said to have begun, there being still three
dreary acts to face.

The question naturally suggests itself here, What in the name of common
sense, if not of tragedy, has Mr. Swinburne been doing with his space?
Perhaps we have reason to congratulate ourselves after all that he did not
pursue his unhappy victim into England, and insist upon murdering her
also; for it is impossible, in the contemplation of such an event, to form
even a wild conception of when and where Mr. Swinburne’s tragedy was
likely to terminate. The truth is, he is no dramatist at all; he is a
writer of speeches, good, bad, or indifferent, as may be, but no more.
Livy or Sallust have almost as just a title to be styled dramatists as Mr.
Swinburne; Homer far more so. Speeches form perhaps the least, certainly
the easiest, portion of a drama; and the speeches in _Bothwell_ are more
or less ready made. Mr. Swinburne cannot grasp a situation; he can only
write _about_ it. He cannot picture it to us in a few telling lines. He
cannot hint a future; he must foretell it in full, or wait until it comes.
He cannot content himself with leaving well alone. The Earl of Leicester’s
historic “nod” that meant so much is of course a very amusing caricature;
but the point of a caricature lies in the kernel of truth which it covers.
Perhaps the most necessary of dramatic faculties is the capability of
saying much in a little; and that faculty Mr. Swinburne does not possess
in the slightest degree. If anything, his special tendency lies in an
opposite direction; he says remarkably little in a very great deal.
Instead of mastering his material, he has become hopelessly embarrassed by
it, and, like the miser in the story, perishes from want in the midst of
the treasures piled up around him. His characters, instead of being moved
at his will, move him at theirs. When one, no matter of how great or how
little importance, opens his or her mouth, not even Mr. Swinburne himself
can say when it will close. Speeches pages in length are thrown into
anybody’s mouth on the slightest provocation, and all pitched more or less
in the same key. If Mary curses—for Mr. Swinburne is more liberal than
discreet in his distribution of strong language—she is not content with
one good, round, blasphemous oath once in a while, but must indulge in
half a dozen or so offhand. If Knox argues or preaches, he does so at as
great length almost as when in the flesh. One of his speeches fills
thirteen pages without a break. If the inevitable “first, second, and
third citizen” enter—who, for the manner of their speeches or the matter
of them, might with equal propriety be dubbed “first citizen” or “fifty‐
second citizen,” or anything else—they talk and talk and talk until they
talk themselves off, as they would beyond all doubt talk an audience out
of their seats. Almost two‐thirds of the play is to the reader simply
wearisome jabber, whose sense, like Gratiano’s “infinite deal of nothing,”
is as “two grains of wheat hid in two bushels of chaff.”

The drama is so interminable that we can only call attention to the chief
character, which is not Bothwell, as the title would seem to imply, but
Mary, whose alleged amours with Bothwell form the groundwork of the piece.
As this article does not pretend to enter into an historical
investigation, this is not the place to advance reasons for disagreeing
with Mr. Swinburne’s estimate of Mary. One or two words, however, may be
permitted.

The story that forms the foundation of this play has been torn to shreds
by writers of every shade of opinion. Its truth, based mainly on the
“casket letters,” was never accepted even at the English court. Elizabeth
herself was compelled to acquit her cousin of all such scandalous charges.
Yet on this Mr. Swinburne, with the chivalry of a poet and the honesty of
a man who must have read history, builds his nauseous drama. Again, Mary
was, by all concession, a lady. High and royal spirit she had indeed, of
which in some notable instances she gave ample proof; but she has never
been accused of indulging in language unworthy the royal woman she was, or
savoring in any sense of coarseness. She was also a consistent and
practical Catholic, who knew her religion and how to hold it, even against
that fierce Calvinistic wolf, John Knox, to whom it were a happiness had
his insulted sovereign only meted out the measure he persistently
advocated for all Catholics. But she was too gentle‐natured to adopt means
of enforcing silence and obedience more congenial to the spirit of her
English cousin, who had a very summary manner of dealing with theological
difficulties. This much being premised, let us now look at the Mary of Mr.
Swinburne.

Here we have her in the very first scene of the first act. Rizzio is
pleading with her the recall of Murray:


    QUEEN. “What name is his who shall so strengthen me?”

    RIZZIO. “Your father gave him half a brother’s name.”

    QUEEN. “I have no brother; a bloodless traitor he is,

    Who was my father’s bastard‐born. By heaven!
    I had rather have his head loose at my foot
    Than his tongue’s counsel rounded in mine ear.”


This is only her fourth speech in the play. It does not seem to have
impressed Rizzio sufficiently; for, turning a page, we find her still
railing at the subject of her wrath in this vigorous style:


                ... “By my hand,
    Too little and light to hold up his dead head,
    It was my hope to dip it in his life
    Made me ride iron‐mailed and soldieress.”


With occasional spurts of this nature the queen enlivens her somewhat
tedious colloquy of thirteen pages with Rizzio concerning Murray. She is
candid enough to say in one place of her half‐brother, whom the Mary of
history really believed in too long and too blindly for her own happiness:


    “I am gay of heart, light as a spring south wind,
    To feed my soul with his foretasted death....”


And again:


    “Oh! I feel dancing motions in my feet
    And laughter moving merrily at my lips,
    Only to think him dead, or hearsed, or hanged—That
    were the better. I could dance down his life.
    Sing my steps through, treading on his dead neck,
    For love of his dead body and cast‐out soul.”


Verily, a real Highland fling! And lest there should be any possible doubt
as to the meaning of “cast‐out soul,” this gentle lady pursues it to its
place, and gloats over its eternal torments in this Christian fashion:


    “He shall talk of me to the worm of hell,
    Prate in death’s ear and with a speechless tongue
    Of my dead doings in days gone out....”


It is surely punishment enough to be condemned to carry on a conversation
of any kind with the worm of hell and in the ear of death; but to compel
even a cast‐out soul to perform this unpleasant duty “with a _speechless_
tongue” is punishment that passes ordinary comprehension. Doubtless,
however, matters are or will be altered for Mr. Swinburne’s special
convenience in the lower regions. Abandoning the wretched Murray to his
destiny, we look for other revelations of Mary’s character, although
something of her mettle may be gathered from the passages already given,
which have been taken almost at random from the first twenty‐eight pages
of the five hundred and thirty‐two. They are by no means the liveliest
specimens to be found.

It would display a lamentable lack of knowledge of nature supposed to be
human to imagine for a moment that the woman—if the expression is
allowable—revealed in these passages is likely to be at all squeamish or
foolishly coy about the profession of what Mr. Swinburne would probably
call her love for Bothwell. The insignificant facts that her own husband,
Darnley, and Bothwell’s wife, Jane Gordon, were still living, would
naturally weigh lightly as feathers in the balance against her desire.
Most of the scenes between the queen and Bothwell might be shortly
described as “linked foulness long drawn out.” Were they even word for
word true, it would still be a wonder and a shame to honest manhood that
they could be dwelt upon and gloated over by any writer at all. Horace
boasted of belonging to the “Epicurean herd.” Were he living now, he
would, we honestly believe, feel conscientious scruples at admitting Mr.
Swinburne into the company. Only such passages are quoted here as are
presentable and necessary to endorse our judgment of this drama.

Without even an attempt at disguise, Mary and Bothwell discuss the best
means of getting rid of Darnley. As a wife, expecting soon to be a mother,
and as a Christian woman, it is only natural that she should urge on the
not unwilling Bothwell in this style:


              “_Would I were God!_
    Time should be quicker to lend help and hand
    To men that wait on him. . . . Were I a man,
    I had been by this a free man.”


In the course of the second act she falls sick, as she believes, to death.
She makes her dying confession to the Bishop of Ross, who, it is to be
presumed, knew his religion. That being the case, it was somewhat rash in
Mr. Swinburne to put into his mouth a gross error. He assures the dying
queen that


    “The man that keeps faith sealed upon his soul
    Shall through the blood‐shedding of Christ be clean.
    And in this time of cursing and flawed faith
    Have you kept faith unflawed.
    Have no fear, therefore, but your sins of life

    Shall fall from off you as a vesture changed.
    And leave your soul for whiteness as a child’s.”


Of course there is a sense in which this may be taken as correct. The man
that really keeps his “faith sealed upon his soul” and “unflawed,” acts up
to his faith and lives its life. But this is not what Mr. Swinburne means.
In several passages he is at pains to show that it is not. His meaning
simply is that because Mary held to the profession of the Catholic faith
the bishop assured her that her sins would be remitted. That faith alone
was sufficient for salvation was the heresy of Luther. We do not know
whether those useful little compendiums of Christian doctrine commonly
known as catechisms were much in vogue at the time. Had they been, Mary
would have found in hers the following question and answer, which would
have shamed the Bishop of Ross: “Will faith alone save us?” “No; it will
not without good works.”

It must be remembered, however, that Mr. Swinburne, and not the bishop, is
the real father confessor to his own penitent, and a very indulgent one he
makes. The queen says:


    “I would have absolution ere I die,
    But of what sins I have not strength to say
    Nor hardly to remember.”


After all that has gone before, that reads remarkably like a wilful lie,
as Mr. Swinburne’s bishop might have hinted, particularly as she has
memory enough left to enumerate her virtues, which conclude with this:


    “I have held mine own faith fast, and with my lips
    Have borne him [God] witness if my heart were whole.”


Whereupon the worthy bishop takes occasion to repeat his blunder. Glossing
beautifully over her sins in a graceful sentence or two, the queen
proceeds to “remit all faults against her done,” and ends in this edifying
strain:


            “I will not take death’s hand
    With any soil of hate or wrath or wrong
    About me, but, being friends with this past world,
    Pass from it in the general peace of love.”


Just at this happy moment, by what would doubtless be considered “a stroke
of genius,” Murray is made to enter and announce the arrival of Darnley,
the unfortunate individual whose crime it is to persist in being Mary’s
lawful husband when she is in love with one who, by her own command, was
somebody else’s lawful husband. As may be supposed from what we know of
her already, the contrite queen greets the announcement as contrite queens
in similar situations are wont to do, thus:


    “By heaven! I had rather death had leave than he.
    What comes he for? To vex me quick or dead
    With his lewd eyes and sodden, sidelong face,
    That I may die with loathing of him?
    By God, as God shall look upon my soul,
    I will not see him.”


After this there is clearly nothing left for the bishop to do but
administer the last sacraments and bid the Christian soul depart in peace.
Luckily, however, at this critical juncture, and by another “stroke of
genius,” the well‐known tramp of Bothwell’s heel falls on the ear of the
dying queen, who immediately feels better, and bids her attendants “bring
him in.”

One more passage, and we have done with Mr. Swinburne’s Mary. Darnley is
not yet murdered; Bothwell is not yet divorced from Jane Gordon; he who
became James I. of England is about to be born; the queen has in the
preceding scene made the “confession” noticed above; the time, therefore,
was ripe for her to make the following declaration to Bothwell:


    “I purge me now and perfect my desire,
    Which is to be no more your lover—no,
    But even yourself, yea, more than body and soul,
    One and not twain, one utter life, one fire,
    One will, one doom, one deed, one spirit, _one God:_
    _For we twain grown and molten each in each,_
    _Surely shall be as God is, and no man_.”


Were there such a thing as love in _delirium tremens_, surely this would
be an instance; only that Mary is perfectly cool and collected in making
so plain and definite a statement. And Bothwell is just the kind of man to
understand and appreciate the pleasant prospect held out for them both. He
responds cheerily, hopefully, and prayerfully withal:


    “God speed us, then, till we grow up to God!”


The reader has probably seen enough of Mr. Swinburne’s Mary Stuart. It
will be clear to any impartial mind that beheading was far too easy a fate
for such a character.

In one thing at least has the author succeeded. He set out to paint a
monster, and a monster indeed he has painted in Mary. The question for the
reader to determine is whether his very full‐armed Minerva be an emanation
from the brain of this modern Jove or one who was a real, living woman. A
woman ravenous for blood, lost to all shame, hating even her unborn
offspring, blasphemous as Satan, cruel and pitiless as hell, brawling as a
drunkard, full of oaths and coarse expressions as a trooper—if this be a
true picture of Mary, Queen of Scots, of the woman who in her day drew, as
she still continues to draw, the hearts of all true men and honest women
to her side, then has the author done his work well and literature a
service. But if she be the opposite of all this—a woman cruelly murdered
and systematically wronged, at mention of whose name the heart of that
chivalry which is never dead, and will never die while Christian manhood
lives, leaps up—one is at a loss to father the writer’s monster on any
other than himself. Viewed in this light, it can only be looked upon as
the product of an imagination diseased, an intellect debauched, and a mind
distorted—the work of a man whose moral nature has gone astray, and to
whom consequently all that is true, pure, womanly, manly, godly, has lost
its significance and value.

From the Christian heroine to the pagan hero we turn with a feeling of
relief. The very title of Mr. de Vere’s drama challenges criticism. To
write about Alexander the Great is one thing; to make Alexander speak for
himself is another. The world, fashionable as it is to abuse its taste, is
discriminating in the conferring of titles that are universal. Local
magnates of greater or less magnitude are common enough; but men whom all
civilized nations in all ages have agreed to crown with _greatness_ are
very few and very far between. From the number of these the son of Philip
of Macedon probably stands out pre‐eminent In his brief career he
accomplished more than any human conqueror ever accomplished, and he
succeeded in leaving more after him. So complete and marvellous was his
success, and so gigantic his projects, while his means were
proportionately limited, that, beyond all possibility of doubt, the man,
young as he was, must have been a marvellous genius. Being so, he must not
only have done great deeds, but thought great thoughts. He must have been
fitted in every way to be a leader of men. This, perhaps the most
marvellous character in human history, is the one of all others whom Mr.
de Vere, with a courage which, if not justified by the result, can only be
looked upon as either rashness or folly, has undertaken to set living and
real before us, speaking the speech, thinking the thoughts, scheming the
schemes, dreaming the dreams of Alexander. Greatness thus becomes one of
the necessary standards by which we must judge Mr. de Vere’s work. If his
chief character is not great in thought and word, as we know him to have
been in deed, he is not Alexander, and this work can only be regarded as a
more pretentious failure than the other. If he is great in thought and
speech, where are the elements of his greatness to be found? In the brain
of the author, in the conception of the poet—nowhere else. For in this
case the speeches are not, as they were in the other, ready made and to
hand. The record of Alexander’s deeds we have; but Alexander we must
imagine for ourselves. What manner of man, then, is this that Mr. de Vere
has given us? is the first and most natural question to be asked.

Friend and foe alike are busy about him. At the opening of the play
Parmenio, the testy but honest‐hearted veteran of Philip, before Alexander
has yet made his appearance, in words where the admiration of the soldier
and the irritability and jealousy of old age are admirably blended, says:


            “A realm his father owed me,
    And knew it well. The son is reverent too,
    But with a difference, sir. In Philip’s time
    My voice was Delphic on the battle‐field.
    This young man taps the springs of my experience,
    As though with water to allay his wine
    Of keener inspirations. ‘Speak thy thought,
    Parmenio!’ Ere my words are half‐way out
    He nods approval or he smiles dissent.
    Still, there is like him none! I marvell’d oft
    To see him breast that tempest from the north,
    Drowning revolt in the Danubian wave.
    The foe in sight, instant he knew their numbers;
    If distant, guess’d their whereabout—how lay
    The intermediate tract—if fordable
    The streams—the vales accessible to horse:
    ’Twas like the craft of beasts remote from man.”


Antisthenes, the rhetorician, describes the man of action as a rhetorician
might:


    “This king is valued past his worth:
    He nothing says that’s sage, like Ptolemy,
    Or keen‐edged, like Craterus. This I grant him:
    _Sagacity supreme in observation_;
    He sees with eye inspired. Seeing with him
    Is Act and Thought, not sense.”


Arsinoë, the daughter of Darius, thinks that “he neither loves nor hates.”
He is royal‐faced, “albeit too eager‐eyed.” And Hephestion, the strong
friend on whom alone of all men Alexander leans, tells her of him:


    “He loves not many, and himself the least:
    _His purposes to him are wife and child_.”


“Free him from that conceit,” says Parmenio later on, “that he’s a god,”


              “The man of men were he:
    None like him we have had since Marathon.”

    PHILOTAS. “I grant his greatness were his god‐ship sane,
    But note his brow: ’tis Thought’s least earthly temple
    Then mark, beneath, that round, not human eye,
    Still glowing like a panther’s! In his body
    No passion dwells; _but all his mind is passion,_
    _Wild, intellectual appetite, and instinct_
    _That works without a law_.”

    PARMENIO. “But half you know him.
    There is a zigzag lightning in his brain
    That flies in random flashes, yet not errs.
    Chances his victories seem; but link those chances,
    And under them a science you shall find,
    Though unauthentic, contraband, illicit,
    Yes, contumelious oft to laws of war.
    Fortune, that as a mistress smiles on others,
    Serves him as duty‐bound; her blood is he,
    Born in the purple of her royalties.”


And so they go on describing him, each in his own way; for, with
felicitous art, the presence of Alexander is made to permeate the drama,
yet so unobtrusively and unconsciously to all seeming that the mind of the
reader, though held fast on the chief character throughout, never wearies
of him. The extracts given, culled from here and there, point all in one
direction. They are consistent, however they may vary in expression, about
the man they describe. He is not like other men; he towers above them; he
stands alone. But even this only tells us what men say of him. It may mean
no more than any young‐lady novelist’s description of her hero, whose
biting sarcasm and brilliant wit are gifts that it was thought were buried
with Sheridan. All which we are willing to concede, only that by some
untoward accident the brilliant wit and biting sarcasm never appear on the
surface. How does Alexander speak for himself?

In literature, as in life, very much depends on the impression a man makes
on his introduction. Alexander’s introduction is happy and suggestive. He
meets us first at Troy when setting out on his expedition. Around him rise
the temples of the memorable dead who died in the Ten Years’ War. He is in
search of the fane of Achilles, his ancestor, as he claims. Aphrodite and
Helen have no attractions for him, upon whose mind “the wise Stagirite”
had impressed the high code of pagan morals, that the passions were “a
yoke which Action’s strenuous sons should scorn to bear.” He stands on
ground where heroes fought and strove for ten long years together, and the
question comes at once to his earnest mind,


    “That ten years’ war, what fruit thereof remains?
    What empire lives, its witness and its crown?
    What shall we say? That those were common men
    Made large by mists of Time? Or shall we rather
    Conclude them real, and our age a fraud?”


His friend Hephestion is reminded by the fanes around, not of the
greatness, but of the littleness, of man and of the common ashes to which
we come at last. In what, had he the ear to hear it, had been for his
leader a solemn warning, he cries out:


    “Alas! how small an urn
    Suffices for the earth‐o’erstriding dust
    Which one time shook the world!”


But Alexander cannot contemplate the end of men and things in this calm
fashion. To him, as to Achilles, death is “malign and intercepting.” It
bears no thought of peace or rest. He describes it as “that frustrate,
stagnant, ineffectual bourn where substance melts to shadow.” Far away in
“the dimness of the dolorous realm” he sees, though sad, “the
unvanquishable youth” of Achilles surviving and lamenting—


    “Despite the embalm’d, purpureal airs and gleam
    Immeasurable of amaranthine meads,
    The keen, reviving, strenuous airs of earth,
    And blasts from battle‐fields”—


that is the very breath of his nostrils—earth, life, action, with a
purpose in it, and the keen intoxication of occasional “blasts from
battle‐fields.”

But he is not a mere genius errant, a Don Quixote of conquerors, wasting
himself on windmills and flocks of sheep. He has a clear, resolute purpose
before his mind, to which he shapes all things. It is to make the world
one empire, which Grecian intellect should rule. The Governor of Sardis,
when the Granicus is won, he bids:


    “Tell those realms
    Betwixt the Euxine and Pamphylian Seas,
    That Grecian galaxy of Lesser Asia,
    That Argive choir in eastern exile sad,
    That Doric garland on base Persia’s brow,
    We came not here to crush them, but exalt;
    This hand shall lift them to their first estate,
    And lodge them mid the skyey heights of Greece.”


Such is his plan; and whatever crosses him must break before or bend to
that. Kings, empires, mighty cities, religion, customs and traditions,
commerce, all must yield before his indomitable will. Nothing is sacred to
Alexander, save what is sacred to Alexander’s plan. All things were
fashioned to his purpose, and existed only to be made subservient to him.
He gazes from the sea‐shore on Tyre of the ships, with its wealth, its
energies, its possibilities, and the little it has done with them, and
bursts forth:


    “Wings without body! such—no more—is commerce
    Which rests not upon empire! Commerce, ruling,
    Disperses man’s chief energies, _but, ruled_
    _By spirit heroic_, increase yields of thoughts
    That give to greatness wider basis. Tyre!
    How soon thy golden feathers forth shall fly
    Upon the storm of War!”


Lacking the “spirit heroic,” Tyre’s opportunities and life have hitherto
been thrown away, as were thrown away the letters that Phœnicia gave,
useless to the inventors. He goes on:


    “Men stumble thus on glories not for them,
    The rightful appanage of the capable.
    The empire I shall found shall tread the earth,
    Yet over it go flying. From its vans
    The twin‐born beams of Grecian Song and Science
    Shall send perpetual dawn.”


Mr. de Vere’s verse is tempting to quote; but we must hasten on. Some idea
of his Alexander may be gathered from the passages given; but, as we said,
he permeates the book, and we must leave it to the reader himself to trace
the slow growth and development of this singularly‐rounded yet most
difficult conception. We do not believe that the author in this instance
has fallen below the level of his subject, high and remote as that level
was. A strong, resolute, far‐seeing character, possessed with the very
passion of empire, speaks to us in every line of _Alexander_. Many of his
sayings have almost the wisdom and the brevity of proverbs. “Time takes
still the conqueror’s side,” he tells Hephestion; and when that great‐
souled character puts the deep and solemn question, “_Is there forgiveness
for conquerors?_”—his answer is:


    “Aye; but for half‐conquerors, none.”


Here is his policy told in a line:


    “Strong hand makes empire; hand that heals retains it.”


When, in a light moment, he asks his generals, were gods their slaves,
what fortunes would they choose, and all cry out, “A kingdom!” he says
aside:


              “Note this, Hephestion:
    Imagination is economist,
    And vastest ends move less the appetite
    Than small things near and easier of access.”


Here is a truth for conquerors to ponder. In the height of his conquest he
is convinced that


    “The vanquish’d must connive, or victory’s self
    Its own grave digs in the end.”


All the littleness of greatness, all those surroundings that to small
minds stamp, if they do not constitute, greatness, are for him emptiness.


    “To breathe applauses is to breathe that air
    By breath of men defiled: I stand, and stood,
    On the mountain‐tops, breathing the breath of gods.”


There is another aspect to his character at which we must glance. We have
called attention at the beginning to his jealous hatred of death. Life and
death are to him constant enigmas, to which he sees no solution. The only,
or at least the great, obstacle that he sees in the way of accomplishing
his dream and passion of empire is death. No human foe he fears; but the
fates. Time, he passionately says, is no friend of his. He has to build
his empire in few years. He is running a constant race with time, and
something seems to whisper to him ever that his years are few. In this,
too, lies an humbling fact. He, like others, is human and subject to
death. This inward struggle and rebellion against his humanity is
constantly going on. The thought, What am I? What do I? Who am I? Whence
come I? Where go I?—all these things for ever trouble him. He would be a
god; but he finds his loftiest aspirations bounded by a wall of flesh, and
beyond that—a blank.

With keen dramatic instinct and happy thought the author gives him the
opportunity of answering for himself these questionings. He visits the
temple at Jerusalem, and converses with the high‐priest. The truth is
unfolded to him, and the true God made known. He hesitates, and finally
rejects the truth. It clashes with his purpose.


    “O’er all the earth my empire shall be just,
    Godlike my rule,”


he promises the high‐priest; whose answer is the solemn rebuke:


              “Young man, beware! God’s prophet
    Awards thee Persia’s crown, but not the world’s:
    He who wears that should be the Prince of Peace.
    Thy portion lies in bounds. Limit and Term
    Govern the world.”


This revelation tells on his character throughout the rest of the play. He
has no longer that blind confidence in himself, though his mind like a
vise holds to its resolution of founding the empire he was warned he could
not found. His iron will and indomitable energy overcome all obstacles;
but time is creeping on, and he feels it. To unite Persian and Greek
together, in order to win the Persian, he must be proclaimed a god; and a
god he is proclaimed. But the emptiness and mockery of the title are shown
with intense force in the workings of the king’s mind up to this madness.
He strives to argue himself up to godhead only by arguing godhead down to
him:


                “A race of gods hath fallen:
    Then Zeus in turn may fall. I find for gods
    No thrones secure; _to man’s advance no limit_;
    No certain truth amid contending rites;
    No base for faith.”


He remembers the warning about limit and term, only to say scornfully,


                    “That’s for others:
    To grasp a world for me is feasible;
    To keep a half‐world, not.”


He turns further and further away from faith of any kind; his creed
resembles that of more modern conquerors:


            “The man that empire founds
    Must measure all things by the needs of empire.”


And the final outcome of his thoughts is this:


                  “This only know we—
    We walk upon a world not knowable,
    Save in those things which knowledge least deserve,
    Yet capable, not less, of task heroic.
    My trust is in my work: on that I fling me,
    Trampling all questionings down.”


And yet the next moment he cries out:


                        “I sometimes think
    That I am less a person than a power.
    Some engine in the right hand of the gods,
    Some fateful wheel that, round in darkness rolling,
    Knows this—its work, but not that work’s far scope.
    Hephestion, what is life? My life, since boyhood,
    Hath been an agony of means to ends;
    An ultimate end I find not. For that cause,
    On‐reeling in the oppression of a void,
    At times I welcome what I once scarce brook’d—
    _The opprobrium of blank sleep_.”


There are many scenes of strong dramatic power in this drama—the death of
Darius, the quarrel with Parmenio, the rebellion of the Greeks, the last
scene with Philotas, and others; but the power and intensity deepen at the
close, when death at last creeps into the veins of the conqueror. He has
lost Hephestion earlier in the drama, and this loss rends his heart. There
is much truth in his singular, almost selfish love for his great‐souled
friend, who stood to Alexander as a wife would stand to another man. But
he to whom “his purposes were wife and child” could not lean on a woman.
It must be a man, strong, brave, keen‐eyed as himself, but calmer, larger
hearted, humbler, greater souled. Such was Hephestion, and his strong yet
sweet character is not only admirably drawn, but affords an excellent foil
throughout to the eager, impetuous, fiery nature and fiery words of the
king.

Omens thicken around him, and the end comes at Babylon. The fever that
burns at his heart seizes on his body while sailing on the Lake of
Pallacopas. As the royal barge passes, a strain rises up from the waters:


    “We sate beside the Babylonian river:
      Within the conqueror’s bound, weeping we sate:
    We hung our harps upon the trees that quiver
      Above the rushing waters desolate.

    “If I forget thee, Salem, in thy sadness,
      May this right hand forget the harper’s art!
    If I forget thee, Salem, in my gladness,
      My tongue dry up and wither, like my heart!”


It is a relic of the Babylonian captivity. The song forces from Alexander
the sad confession, significant to all conquerors:


                  “The ages pass, like winds;
    The old wrong remains, rooted like tombs, and moves not:
    All may be done through Time; yet Time does naught.
    Let kings look well to that.”


The end is on him. Though “maimed, and tamed, and shamed,” he is resolute
still, but impotent, and the empire lacks completion, he confesses, while


                  “The years, the months,
    The hours, like ravening wolves that hunt a stag,
    Come up upon my haunches.”


Fighting time to the last, he succumbs; but he will not even die as other
men. In his half‐delirium he tells Ptolemy:


    “I have a secret—one for thee alone:
    ’Twas not the mists from that morass disastrous
    Nor death of him that died, nor adverse gods,
    Nor the Fates themselves; ’twas something mightier yet,
    And secreter in the great night, that slew me.”


And thus, surrounded by his warriors and his generals, with success within
his grasp, but that grasp nerveless, his last moments troubled with awful
visions and ill dreams, resentful to the last against what slew him, in
doubt and in fear, in youth and glory and empire, in the fatality of
success, staring with strained eyes into the dread void beyond that no ray
of faith illumines, he whose nod was life or death to nations, Alexander,
_the god_, passes away and dies—of a little slow fever that has entered
and claimed for its own the clay of which he was made.

Mr. de Vere has written at once a magnificent poem and a powerful drama.
We have devoted our attention in both instances to the chief characters,
and thus many scenes and personages in _Alexander the Great_ on which in
reading we have dwelt with much pleasure and admiration must pass
unnoticed. The author, if we may say so, has surprised us by the strength
and finish of this work. The action of the piece is rapid; the characters,
small and great, rounded and full; the scenes most varied and dramatically
set. The clew to the play we take to be that old whisper which first
allured our parents from their allegiance, and tempts forever the race of
man: _Ye shall be as gods_. The whisper runs through the piece from the
first line to the last, and lends to it a purpose and a plan of its own.
The dramatist has taken the man who in human history came the nearest to
exemplifying its truth to prove its utter and miserable falsehood, and to
read with a new force the old and eternal command that alone can order the
life of man wisely and well: “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God, and him
only shalt thou serve.”

When he died, Alexander was nearly thirty‐three. With him really, though
remnants lingered after him, his scheme and his empire passed away; and
when to‐day we look for what is left of the world’s conqueror, of
Alexander the god, we must search in musty tomes and grope in desert
sands. Nothing is left of him, save some words and histories; and even
were they lost also, and his very memory blotted out with them, the world
to‐day would in reality be little or none the loser.

Some centuries later there died Another at the age of thirty‐three. He
came into life silently; he went out of life ignominiously. He led no
army; he had no following of any note; he was the son of a carpenter, and
born of a despised race. He was born, he lived, he died, in poverty,
sorrow, and suffering, a social outcast even from his own people. The last
three years of his life he spent in preaching in and about Jerusalem. His
doctrines were strange and startling. They were utterly subversive of all
human glory and greatness. Like Alexander, he proclaimed himself divine,
and claimed to be the Son of God. Like Alexander, he too died, but a death
of ignominy. Before his name had spread far beyond Jerusalem, men rose up,
Jew and Gentile, king and priest, church and state, together hanged him on
a tree, nailed him there, tortured and slew him, and when he was dead
sealed up the tomb in which he was buried. And there, humanly speaking,
was an end to him and his.

To the world what had he left? A memory—nothing more. Men said that he had
wrought wonders, that virtues flowed out of him, that his hands rained
mercies, that the blind saw, the lame walked, the lepers were cleansed,
the very dead rose again. Idle rumors! like that other of his bursting the
tomb and rising again, walking in the flesh and ascending into the heaven
from which he said he had come. And this was “the Expected of the
nations,” “the Prince of Peace,” who was to accomplish what the high‐
priest warned Alexander was not for him, with all his power, to
accomplish—to unite all the nations under one yoke. A likely prospect with
the material he had left!

He left behind him no empire, no record, not a line of writing. He left a
few words, a few maxims, a few rules of life, a few prayers, a few
promises, a few men who timidly believed in him, a few commands. The
world, its belief and non‐belief alike, its customs, maxims, tendencies,
he condemned as wrong. He commanded it to remodel itself according to the
few rules he had left—rules singularly comprehensive, simple, and clear:
to believe in him, to obey him as the son of God and God, to believe and
obey those, and those only, whom he sent forth in his name, armed with the
powers he gave them, fighting with the weapon of the cross. And what is
the result? Who is the conqueror of the world now? Jesus Christ, in whose
name every knee shall bow, or Alexander the Great? Here is a mystery
surely that men should ponder. What shall explain the victory over the
world, over sin, and over death, of Him whom they nailed to the tree
nineteen centuries ago? Nothing but the words of Peter—“Thou art Christ,
the Son of the living God.” Thou art he that was to come, and we look for
no other. “And he was clothed with a garment sprinkled with blood: and his
name is called _The Word of God_. And he hath on his garment and on his
thigh written King of kings and Lord of lords.”




Requies Mea.


Keep me, sweet love! Thy keeping is my rest.
  Not safer feels the eaglet from beneath
The wings that roof the inaccessible nest,
Than I when thou art with me, dearest, best,
  Whose love my life is, yea, my very breath!
  Thy Son to Egypt fled to prove our faith.
Not Herod’s men had snatched him from thy breast,
  Or changed his thronèd slumber into death.
How wonderful thy keeping, mighty Queen!
  So close, so tender; and as if thine eyes
Had only me to watch, thine arm to screen;
  And this inconstant heart were such a prize!
  And thou the while, in beatific skies,
    Art reigning imperturbably serene!




Ontologism And Psychologism.


Our readers sometimes complain that the philosophical articles of THE
CATHOLIC WORLD are too hard to be understood. Yet some of these very
readers make a great effort to read these articles, and ask questions
about metaphysical subjects—among others, about the very topic of the
present article—showing a great desire to gain some knowledge about them.
We are going to try to make this article intelligible to these readers,
even to those who are yet quite young persons, in whose laudable efforts
to improve their minds and acquire knowledge we are greatly interested.

We shall begin, therefore, by explaining some terms which need to be well
understood before they can be used in a satisfactory manner, and
especially the two which make up the title of this article. Ontology is
the name given to one branch of metaphysics, which is also called general
metaphysics, in distinction from the two other principal branches of that
science—to wit, logic and special metaphysics. It is derived from two
Greek words—that is, the first two syllables from a word which means
being, and the last two from one which means reasoning. It is therefore a
reasoning about being, or the scientific exposition of the object of the
idea of real being, of metaphysical truth, good and evil, beauty,
substance, accident, quantity, causality, the finite and the infinite, the
contingent and the necessary, etc. Psychology is also a Greek derivative
signifying a scientific exposition of the rational soul of man, its powers
and operations, which is a sub‐division of special metaphysics. Therefore
every philosopher must be an ontologist and a psychologist, in the proper
sense of those terms. Yet, there is a difference between ontology and
ontologism, psychology and psychologism. Ontologism and psychologism are
names denoting opposite philosophical systems which diverge in opposite
directions from the scholastic philosophy, or that philosophy commonly
taught in the Catholic schools after the method and principles of the
Angelic Doctor, S. Thomas Aquinas. Of the authority which this philosophy
possesses in the church we cannot now treat at length. We will, however,
cite here the latest utterance of the Sovereign Pontiff which has come to
our knowledge, as a sample of a great number of similar official
expressions of approbation from the Holy See. In a letter to Dr.
Travaligni, founder of the Philosophico‐Medical Society of S. Thomas
Aquinas, dated July 23, 1874, Pius IX. says: “With still greater pleasure
we perceive that, faithful to your purpose, you have determined to admit
only such members to your society as hold and will defend the doctrines
propounded by the sacred councils and this Holy See, and in particular the
principles of the Angelic Doctor concerning the union of the intellective
soul with the human body, and concerning substantial form and primary
matter (_materia prima_).” We shall take for granted at present that in
all its essential parts, as well as in those specified in the above
quotation, the philosophy of S. Thomas has the highest sanction and
authority in the church which any system of philosophy can have, and that
it is the only true and sound philosophy. The system of ontologism differs
from it by proposing a totally different ontology, which is made the basis
of an essentially different philosophy. The advocates of that system call
themselves ontologists, as claiming to be the only philosophers who
understand rightly real being and the relation of intelligence to it as
the object of its intuition and knowledge. They are also called by that
name by their antagonists for the sake of convenience and courtesy, as
those who believe in God, but not in revelation, are called theists,
although neither party has an exclusive right to the appellation given to
it by usage. Psychologism is a system which makes the basis and starting‐
point of philosophy to lie exclusively in the individual soul and its
modifications, like Des Cartes, whose first principle is, “I think,
therefore I am.” The opponents of the scholastic philosophy who pretend to
be ontologists give it the nickname of psychologism, because they either
misunderstand or misinterpret its ontological and psychological doctrine.
The scholastic philosophy is also frequently called Aristotelian, because
S. Thomas derived a great part of his metaphysics from the great
philosopher of Greece; and Peripatetic, which was the name given to the
school of Aristotle, because the teachers and pupils used to walk up and
down during their lectures and discussions. Those who diverge from the
philosophy of S. Thomas in the same direction with the ontologists are
also frequently called Platonists, because they follow, or are supposed to
follow, Plato, in regard to certain opinions differing from those
maintained by Aristotle.

The philosophical disputes which have been lately carried on with so much
vehemence about questions of ontology are by no means of recent origin.
They have been waged both within and without the limits of the Catholic
Church. Des Cartes, the great modern master of psychologism, always
professed to be a loyal son of the church, and had many disciples among
Catholics. Malebranche, the author of modern ontologism, was a devout
priest of the French Oratory; and Cardinal Gerdil, who began as an earnest
advocate of the same doctrine, but gradually approached toward the
scholastic philosophy in his maturer years, was really the second man to
the Pope for a long time in authority and influence, as well as a most
illustrious model of virtue and learning. More recently, the principal
advocates of ontologism have been very devoted Catholics. The Louvain
professors, Hugonin, Branchereau; for anything we know to the contrary,
Fabre, and many others, have been most zealous and devoted Catholics. Only
Gioberti, who was, however, the prince among them all, and one of the most
gifted men of the century, among the well‐known leaders of that school,
was a disloyal Catholic. We have heard on very good authority that
Gioberti continued to receive the sacraments up to the time of his death,
and was buried with Catholic rites. Nevertheless, as a number of priests
were still in the external communion of the church at the time Gioberti
was living in Paris, who were really heretics and have since apostatized,
this fact alone does not count for much as a proof that he died in the
Catholic faith. All his works were long before on the Index; he was at
least suspended, if not _ipso facto_ excommunicated, as a contumacious
rebel against the Pope. Dr. Brownson calls him “that Italian priest of
marvellous genius, and, we were about to write, Satanic power.” And again
he says: “Gioberti died, we believe, excommunicated, and his last book,
published before his death, contains a scurrilous attack on Pius IX., and
bears not a trace of the Catholic believer, far less of the Catholic
priest.”(96) For a long time the Church did not directly interfere with
the philosophical discussions which went on among her children in regard
to ontology. Neither Des Cartes(97) nor Malebranche was condemned, nor
were any specific propositions in the works of Gioberti censured. The Holy
See has never been in the habit of using its supreme magisterial authority
in deciding scientific controversies considered merely as scientific.
Science is left to itself, to make its own way and fight its own battles,
unless the interests of the faith become involved with those of science.
When these interests demand the interference of the supreme authority, it
utters its disciplinary edicts or its doctrinal decisions, as in its
wisdom it deems opportune and necessary. For a considerable period of time
philosophy was left in the enjoyment of the largest liberty, so long as
the doctrines of the church were respected and maintained. But when
professed Catholics, especially in Germany, began to frame systems of
philosophy manifestly dangerous to sound theology and subversive of it,
the Holy See began to exercise a more special vigilance over the teaching
of philosophy in Catholic schools. Gregory XVI. and Pius IX. have
condemned a number of works, of systems, or of distinct propositions in
which philosophical errors were contained, because these were directly or
indirectly subversive of the Catholic faith. Among other errors condemned,
ontologism holds a prominent position. After various means more mild and
indirect of correcting the evils which the teaching of this system
threatened to produce had failed, the Holy See pronounced (Sept. 18, 1861)
its condemnation of seven propositions embracing the fundamental tenets
common to the so‐called ontologists, and some particular tenets advanced
by individual professors or writers of the same school. The professors of
the Catholic University of Louvain were required to make a formal act of
submission to this decision of Rome, which they did in the most exemplary
manner.

The Abbé Hugonin, when nominated to an episcopal see in France, was also
required to make a formal renunciation of ontologism, which he had taught
in his writings, as a condition of receiving the confirmation of the pope,
and complied without hesitation. The Abbé Branchereau, a distinguished
French Sulpitian and professor of philosophy, voluntarily submitted a
statement of the doctrine contained in his _Prelections_ to the
examination and judgment of the Holy See, and, when the judgment
condemning his system was made known to him, promptly submitted and
suppressed his work. In fact, there has been everywhere a most ready and
edifying submission given to the judgment of Rome on a system which was
rapidly spreading and gaining ground, and toward which a great number of
the finest minds among Catholic scholars felt the strongest attraction.
The reason of this may be found in the fact that those who had embraced
this system or were inclined toward it were generally good Catholics,
holding sound theological principles, and imbued with the love of truth
and the love of the church, loyal to conscience, and well grounded in
Christian humility and obedience. Consequently, ontologism, as a system,
prevailing among Catholics and in Catholic schools, is dead, and rapidly
passing into oblivion—a great gain for science, as well as for religion,
since it removes a great obstacle in the way of the revival of the genuine
and sound philosophy which alone contains the real and solid wisdom of the
Grecian sages, the fathers of the church, and the gigantic masters of the
mediæval schools, combined, harmonized, and reduced to method.

It is time now to explain in what the essence of ontologism consists. In
the words of M. Fabre, a professor at the Sorbonne, “Ontologism is a
system in which, after having proved the objective reality of general
ideas, we establish that these ideas are not forms or modifications of our
soul; that they are not anything created; that they are necessary,
unchangeable, eternal, absolute objects; that they are concentrated in the
being to which this name belongs in its simple signification (_l’être
simplement dit_), and that this infinite Being is the first idea
apprehended by our mind, the first intelligible, the light in which we see
all the eternal, universal, and absolute truths. Ontologists say, then,
that these eternal truths cannot have any reality outside of the eternal
essence, whence they conclude that they do not subsist except as united to
the divine substance, and consequently that it can only be in this
substance that we see them.”(98)

We will now give the first two, the fourth, and the fifth of the
propositions condemned at Rome, and which, with the other three, were
taken from the prelections of a professor in a French seminary, never
published, but extensively circulated in lithograph or MSS., and which,
the reader will see, express the identical doctrine summarized so
concisely and ably by M. Fabre:

I. The immediate cognition of God, at least habitual, is essential to the
human intellect, so that without this it cannot know anything, since it is
the intellectual light itself.

II. That being which we intellectively perceive in all things, and without
which we perceive nothing intellectively (_quod in omnibus et sine quo
nihil intelligimus_), is the divine being.

IV. The congenital knowledge of God as simply being (_ens simpliciter_)
involves every other cognition in an eminent manner, so that by it we have
implicit knowledge of every being, under whatever respect it is knowable.

V. All other ideas are only modifications of the idea in which God is
intellectively perceived (_intelligitur_) as simply being (_ens
simpliciter_).

Similar propositions to these are found in the fifteen submitted by M.
Branchereau to the judgment of the Holy See, viz.:

1. In the act of thought two things are to be essentially
distinguished—the subject thinking and the object thought.

2. Again, the object thought is distinguished into two things—that which
is being simply, and that which is being in a certain respect.

3. By that which is being simply we understand real being, concrete and
infinitely perfect; ... in a word, that which is being simply is God.

12. From the first instant of existence the mind enjoys ideal perception,
not indeed reflexively, but directly.

13. Among the intelligible truths, which we apprehend ideally, God
occupies the first place, the intellective perception of whom, although
essentially distinct from the intuition of the beatified, is terminated,
not at a representative image, but at God himself.

The reader will now, we trust, understand without difficulty what is the
fundamental idea of ontologism—namely, that God is the _immediate object_
of the intellect, the ideal object which faces it from its creation, is
present to it as its light and its luminous, intelligible term of vision,
in which all ideal, necessary, self‐evident, eternal ideas, verities,
realities, are concentrated, beheld, made luminous; lighting up all
objects whatsoever which exist and are perceived by sense and intellect,
so that the things that are made are clearly seen by the invisible things
of God, even his eternal power and Godhead; as Malebranche expressed it,
“in Deo,” and Gioberti, “in Deo et per Deum”—in God, and by or through
him, as clouds in a luminiferous ether. For an explanation of the
scholastic doctrine of the origin of universal ideas we refer the reader
to a former article on Dr. Stöckl’s Philosophy. In brief, it is the
reverse of the one just delineated, viz., the universal and transcendental
ideas are derived by abstraction from created things, and the knowledge of
God is obtained by a discursive act of reasoning, by which we ascend from
the knowledge of creatures to the knowledge of the Creator, whose
invisible essence and attributes are understood by the things that are
made. That is, God is known by a mediate and not an immediate
apprehension, resulting in an intellectual judgment that he is. The mind
terminates at a representative and inadequate image of God, and not at God
himself or that which is God, real, concrete, necessary, infinite being,
which is the remote and reflected object of the intellect.

We are now prepared to answer the question, What is the harm and danger of
ontologism on account of which it has been condemned? It has not been
condemned as heretical, for it does not formally, directly, and explicitly
contradict any doctrine of faith. The Holy See has simply decided that it
cannot be safely taught—that is, that it cannot be taught with a safe
conscience, without danger to the faith, and consequently without grievous
sin. It must therefore contain in it an error which cannot be extensively
held and taught in Catholic schools without a serious danger of indirectly
subverting Catholic faith and doctrine, especially in the minds of the
young and inconsiderate. While this danger was only remote or not yet
apparent, the error might be tolerated, and left to be opposed and refuted
by argument. Moreover, it might be held and advocated in good faith and
without sin by intelligent and pious men, who are liable to error when
left to their own reasonings about abstruse matters in theology and
philosophy. But when the danger was apparent and proximate, it was
necessary to appeal to the supreme authority of the Roman Church, that the
whole matter might be thoroughly examined and adjudicated; and, the
judgment being once rendered, the cause is finished for all good
Catholics. Thenceforth all that remains to be done is to study the import
of the decision, and to search into the reasons by which the condemned
errors may be proved false by philosophical and theological arguments, and
the opposite truths brought out into a clearer light for the advancement
of sound and solid science and the protection of the faith.

That part of Catholic doctrine which was endangered and indirectly
subverted by ontologism is the one which relates to the distinction
between nature and grace, the rational knowledge of God attainable by man
in this life, and the immediate intuition of God enjoyed by the blessed in
heaven. Ontologism destroys the real distinction between the natural and
the supernatural orders, between the abstractive vision of God by reason
and faith, and the intuitive vision of God without any medium, and face to
face. It is true that ontologists have never taught that man has, or can
have, a clear vision of the divine essence, like that of the blessed, by
his unaided natural powers. This is a heresy condemned by the General
Council of Vienne. Moreover, it would be too absurd for any sane person to
maintain that such a vision is congenital and possessed by all men from
the first instant of creation. Nor would any one who maintains that the
idea of God is impressed on the soul at its creation be so extravagant as
to assert that the clear and distinct conception of God which can be
obtained by reason and faith is present to the minds of all men from their
birth. Ontologists are careful to state that there is a difference between
the immediate cognition of God in this life and that of the life to come.
And all who maintain any kind of ideal cognition which is congenital or
innate, understand by this something which exists unconsciously in the
soul until its powers are developed. The object is there, facing the
intellect, but the intellect has its eyes closed, and cannot perceive it.
When it perceives it, it is first obscurely, then clearly, then more or
less distinctly. Its congenital cognition is an unconscious, undeveloped
act. But all the principles of conscious, developed cognition are in that
act, and are only evolved by the operation of the senses and the
intellectual faculties. The error condemned is the assertion that this
cognition has God in his intelligibility as real and necessary being as
its _immediate_ object. And though it is not formally a heresy, since it
does not assert that the immediate cognition of God is identical with the
beatific vision, or deny the necessity of the light of glory to make the
soul capable of the beatific vision, it is erroneous, inasmuch as it
removes that which really makes the essential difference of the vision of
the blessed, as distinct from the natural cognition of any created
intelligence. This difference is defined by Benedict XIV., in the Const.
_Benedictus Deus_, to be that the blessed see God “without the mediation
of anything created which presents itself as the object seen”—_nulla
mediante creaturâ in ratione objecti visi se habente_. Every other
cognition of God must therefore have some created object of intellectual
vision as an intermediary between the intellect and God—that is, must be
mediate and not immediate cognition. An immediate cognition, however
obscure and imperfect, must therefore be essentially the same with the
clear, beatific intuition of the essence of God, and capable of being
expanded, extended, developed, increased, made more penetrating or
powerful, without being essentially changed, until it equals or surpasses
the intuition of the highest angel in heaven. The light of faith or the
light of glory can be therefore only aids to the improvement of the human
intellect in its own natural capacity and activity—as if one should see
the stars more plainly by a telescope, and afterwards receive a more
perfect body with a visual organ superior to any telescope that was ever
made.

A more elaborate similitude will make the difference of immediate and
mediate cognition of God more plain. Let us suppose a barbarian lying
asleep on the shore of his lonely island in the Pacific, while a large
ship, the first which has ever approached it, has just come within the
most distant range of vision. There is an object, then on his horizon,
which he has the power to see, but does not perceive until he awakes. He
perceives it at first as a very small and dimly‐seen object—as
_something_, he knows not what. It may be a cloud, a bird, a wave
sparkling in the sun, a canoe. It is a large man‐of‐war which is the real
object perceived, but he does not know that it is a ship, or know its
contents, or even know what a ship is. This is an obscure perception. By‐
and‐by he can see that it is not a cloud, or bird, or canoe, but a large,
moving structure, whose principal parts are visible to him. This is a
clear perception. When it has anchored, he has been taken on board, has
seen its crew and armament, its cabins and hold, and has learned what is
its purpose and the utility of its principal parts, he has a distinct
conception. After he has learned the language of the sailors, and has been
instructed to a greater or less extent, he acquires a more adequate and
perfect knowledge, like that which the sailors themselves possess; he
joins the crew, and becomes an expert seaman, and finds himself to have
become much superior in knowledge and happiness to what he was before the
ship came to his island.

Let us also suppose that a bottle is washed ashore at another island, and
picked up by a native. When he opens it, he finds in it a drawing
representing a large ship, and a paper containing particular information
about the ship and its crew. This bottle had been thrown overboard after
the ship had sprung a leak in mid‐ocean, and was about to founder. After
the bottle has been found by the native, Europeans arrive at the island,
by whom the papers are examined, and their contents explained to the
native, who learns also from the explanation of the drawing to understand
what the ship is, its use, construction, parts, etc. He thus gains
substantially the same knowledge of that ship and its crew with that which
the other native gained about the other ship, though in a different way,
without ever seeing the ship itself, but only an image of it. One has
immediate, the other mediate cognition. One sees the object in itself, the
other sees it in something else. In the first case the native saw
something which was a ship, but while it was distant it was not visible as
a ship, only as an object. Afterwards it was visible in its outward shape
and appearance as a ship, in clear, unmistakable contrast with every
different object, but not distinctly understood or closely inspected, or
made the principal object of the occupation, the attachment, the
enjoyment, of the native—in a word, the home and centre of his chief
earthly good. When he first saw something in the distance, he really saw
the ship, and in that vision was virtually contained all that he
afterwards discovered in respect to it; whereas, the other native never
saw the other ship, and never could see it by means of drawings or verbal
descriptions, although he could learn that it was a ship, and what ship it
was, where it sailed from, who sailed it, and when and where it foundered.

The above comparison is not perfect, since every comparison must limp at
least a little; but we think it is sufficient as an illustration of the
process by which the human intellect attains to the knowledge of God and
the beatific vision of God, according to ontologism as differing from the
doctrine of sound Catholic theology. According to ontologism, God presents
himself to the intellect, when he creates it, as its immediate Object,
objective Idea, or intelligible Term. So soon as it is capable of
apprehending eternal verities, it apprehends that which is God, although
not yet knowing explicitly that what it apprehends is God—that is, the
one, living, most perfect Being who is the creator and sovereign lord of
all things. By another step it acquires a clear conception of God, and
makes the judgment that God is, and that he is eternal, infinite,
omniscient, omnipotent. This judgment is an evolution from that cognition
which existed at the beginning as a habit into an explicit act, as the
explicit act of faith is deduced from the habit of faith given to the
infant by baptism. That God is, is known by what he is—that is, by his
essence, which is seen in the eternal verities or divine ideas as they are
in reality, not distinguishable from the divine substance. Faith gives an
obscure perception of the interior mysteries of the divine substance which
are beyond the ken of the intellect unaided by revelation, or, in other
words, are superintelligible verities; and the light of glory increases
the power of intellectual vision so that it sees clearly and distinctly
the interior essence of God, which completes the beatification of the
soul.

In this place we may cite the third of the seven condemned propositions,
which expresses the afore‐mentioned theory, as taken in connection with
the fifth. This third proposition is: “Universals, objectively considered,
_a parte rei_, are not really distinguishable from God”; and the fifth:
“All other ideas are only modifications of the idea in which God is
intellectively perceived as simply being—_tamquam ens simpliciter
intelligitur_.” Universals are general ideas, each one of which is capable
of being predicated of a multitude of subjects. The logical universals are
five—genus, species, differentia, attribute, accident. The ten categories
of Aristotle include all the supreme genera, though some maintain that a
better division may be made. The transcendental ideas are those which
transcend all generic classification, because they may be predicated of
every genus and all its inferiors. They are the ideas of being, unity, the
good, the true, the beautiful. They belong, therefore, to the universals,
although predicated in analogous and not identical senses of the diverse
genera and their inferior subjects. Take the supreme genus substance, as
an instance, and follow it down to man—substance, corporeal substance,
organized substance, animal, rational animal, _i.e._, man. His proximate
genus is animal, his differentia rationality, which constitute the species
man. The concrete reality of the universals, substance, etc., terminating
in the species which is rational animal is found only in individual men.
The direct universals, genus, species, differentia, exist, _a parte rei_,
in each individual of the human species. Each man is a substance,
corporeal, organized, animal, rational, and these universals can be
predicated of him as their subject. The transcendental predicates, also,
are connected with individual men as their subject. Individual men have
being, unity, verity, goodness, beauty. But these may be predicated in
senses which are only analogous to each other of the composite essence, of
its distinct parts, soul and body, of the attributes or essential
qualities of man, and of the accidents of individual men. For instance,
the human essence is essentially good; the soul and body are good each in
its own order; rationality is good; learning, valor, amiability, moral
virtue, sanctity, are good; but there is analogy only, not identity, in
these various kinds of good. The same is true of being. It is absurd,
therefore, to speak, as Plato does, of a universal good, true, beautiful,
or to speak of any universal idea, such as being, or a modification of
being, as having any objective reality as a universal, except as a concept
of the mind with a foundation in that which is or may be an actually
existing thing. They are metaphysical essences, with their generic,
specific, qualifying, and transcendental predicates. All the categories or
supreme genera together make up what is called the nature of things,
considered metaphysically; considered in their physical being in the sum
of all concrete existences, they make up universal nature. The
metaphysical essences are necessary, immutable, eternal, and potentially
infinite. They are the eternal verities, the necessary truths, which copy
the divine ideas upon nature or the universe, where God has impressed
them, and are abstracted from the works of the Creator by the intellect of
man. They are distinguishable from God, therefore they are not in the
essence of God, or the divine ideas subsisting in the divine substance,
and are not there seen by the intellect. This was long ago proved by
philosophers and theologians. It is now declared by authority that it is
unsafe thus to identify them with God, and thereby make him the immediate
object of the intellect. The reason why it is unsafe is that it destroys
the differentia which makes our rational cognition of God specifically
distinct from the intuitive cognition of the blessed. There are also other
dangers to faith and sound theology involved in the doctrines or
tendencies of ontologism, which we have not space to notice.

Neither the absurdity nor the heterodoxy of ontologism is avoided by the
system of Gioberti. The objection of Giobertians to pure ontologism, that
it furnishes no dialectic principle uniting natural theology with other
branches of special metaphysics and with ontology, is, indeed, well taken.
But this only shows that pure ontologism is absurd and incoherent. It does
not remove the absurdity of that which is common to pure ontologism and
the ontologism of Gioberti. Neither does it remove its heterodoxy. Saying
that we have immediate cognition of something which is not God does not
make it more orthodox to say that we have immediate cognition of God.
Moreover, Gioberti’s doctrine, as taught by himself, and understood by his
European disciples and admirers, as well as by his acutest and most
orthodox opponents, is far more heterodox than that of any other
ontologist who is also a Catholic. Evidence has been furnished which has
never been rebutted that Gioberti was a pantheist even before he published
his _Introduction to Philosophy_. In a letter to Mazzini, written before
that date, but only afterwards published from a motive of pique against
him, he says explicitly that he is a pantheist after the manner of
Giordano Bruno, though a Christian pantheist. What does this mean, unless
it means that he had conceived a plan of combining pantheistic philosophy
with the Catholic dogmas, as a part of his grand scheme of reconciling
paganism with Christianity, and the European revolution with the Papacy?
On this supposition he must either have acted the part of a deliberate
liar and hypocrite—a baseness of which we believe him to have been
incapable—or he must have intended, and in a subtile manner insinuated
pantheism in the guise of his famous ideal formula, _Ens creat
existentias_. In this case whatever may bear a pantheistic interpretation
or seem to point to a pantheistic conclusion must be pantheistically
interpreted, so far as the sense of the author is concerned. It is not
strange, however, that many have understood him in a sense not directly
heretical, or even, perhaps, quite compatible with Catholic faith. For his
works are filled with passages which, taken in a Catholic sense, are gems
of the purest and most precious sort. If the formula _Being creates
existences_ be taken in the orthodox sense, as equivalent to _God creates
the world_, it is obviously a directly contrary proposition to any one
expressing pantheism. To make it bear a pantheistic sense, definitions of
being, create, and existences must be sub‐introduced which vitiate its
orthodox meaning. But, leaving aside this question, we have already proved
that a Catholic must hold that the human intellect cannot have an
immediate cognition of the first extreme of the formula, viz., that real
and necessary Being which is God. Without this he cannot have an immediate
cognition of the creative act, as the act of God, or of created things in
their ideas, considered as the divine ideas themselves in the divine mind,
and really identical with the divine essence. It is certain that the Holy
See did not intend to condemn pantheism in the decree respecting the seven
propositions, for it would never have affixed such a mild censure if it
had so intended. Ontologism, whether couched in Gioberti’s formula or not,
is condemned in that sense which is not pantheistic, and under every
formula which includes an affirmation of the immediate cognition of God by
the human intellect, as defined by M. Fabre in the passage quoted at the
beginning of this article.

Before concluding we are obliged reluctantly to add a few words about a
personal controversy with Dr. Brownson, with whom we always regret to have
a difference respecting any matter which belongs to Catholic doctrine. We
desire to explain, therefore, that we made no statement to the effect that
the ontologism condemned by the Holy See had ever been formally and
explicitly taught in philosophical articles, whether written by himself or
any one else, in this magazine. Moreover, in the passage where his name is
mentioned there is no direct statement that “_his own_ ontologism” falls
under ecclesiastical censure. The utmost implied or asserted is that some
educated men might think that some of his statements are “unsound,”
philosophically or theologically, and demand a certain benignity of
interpretation in order to escape the censure which a professed theologian
would justly incur if he made such statements in a book written for
school‐boys or young pupils. Dr. Brownson’s own defence of his doctrine,
as based on his definition of intuition: “Intuition is the act of the
object, not of the subject,” was cited as the precise distinction between
his own doctrine and the one condemned, upon which the question of the
theological soundness of his peculiar ontologism turns. We called it “a
newly‐invented distinction between ideal intuition and perception or
cognition,” and qualified the definition above quoted as an “assumption,”
which we think is quite correct. It is new in Catholic philosophy, and has
not been proved. We think, therefore, that the phraseology of Dr. Brownson
makes his doctrine liable to an interpretation, even by educated men,
which makes it similar to that of the condemned ontologism. That it is
sound and safe we are not prepared to say. Neither do we say positively
that it is not. If it is, we think Dr. Brownson can place it in a clearer
light than he has yet done, and we shall heartily rejoice to see him
distinctly enunciate and vindicate his fundamental doctrine, whether it
does or does not accord with that which is held by the disciples of S.
Thomas. Of his loyal intention to conform his doctrine to the decisions of
the supreme authority in the church there can be no doubt. That he has so
far succeeded in doing so, at least by an exact and explicit expression of
it, we cannot help doubting. We cannot see that the distinction between
ideal intuition and cognition, so far as we apprehend it, suffices.

We understand him to define ideal intuition as an act of God presenting
himself to the intellect as its object, and to call the act of the
intellect apprehending this ideal object empirical intuition. We
understand him also to identify the immediate object on which the active
intellect exercises its discursive operations with real, necessary
being—_i.e._ God—although it does not make the judgment that eternal
verities are real being, and that real being is God, immediately, but by
means of reflection and reasoning. Now, we cannot see any essential
difference between this doctrine and that of M. Branchereau and other
ontologists. We do not think it possible to escape the ecclesiastical
censure on the doctrine of the immediate cognition of God, unless
something is placed, _ratione objecti visi_, between God and the
intellect, making the cognition mediate. Moreover, we consider that the
term cognition in the Roman decree covers intuition and simple
apprehension, even in their confused state, as well as distinct
conceptions and judgments. Dr. Brownson’s peculiar terminology and
informal method of arguing make it, however, more difficult to understand
his real doctrine and compare it with that of standard authors than if it
were expressed in the usual style and method.

Dr. Brownson has also further charged the author of _Problems of the Age_
with having actually taught in the opening chapters of that essay, as
first published in this magazine, the very ontologism condemned in the
seven propositions. That there are ambiguous expressions and passages
which taken apart from the whole tenor of the argument are liable to such
an interpretation, we do not deny. But in reality, it was the doctrine of
Gerdil which was intended, and expressed with sufficient distinctness for
a careful and critical reader. This doctrine is expressed by the
illustrious cardinal in these words: “God, who contains eminently the
ideas of all things, impresses their intellectual similitudes in us by his
action, which constitute the immediate object of our perceptions.” Upon
which Liberatore remarks: “In these words Gerdil did not modify the
ontologism which he professed in his youth, but retracted it. And indeed,
how can even the shadow of ontologism be said to remain, when the
immediate object of our perceptions is no longer said to be God, or ideas
existing in God, but only their similitudes, which are impressed by the
divine action upon our minds.”(99) A few quotations from the _Problems of
the Age_ will prove the truth of our assertion that it proposed a theory
similar to the theory of Gerdil.

“It is evident that we have no direct intellectual vision or beholding of
God. The soul is separated from him by an infinite and impassable
abyss.”(100) “God affirms himself originally to the reason by the creative
act, which is first _apprehended by the reason_(101)_through the medium of
the sensible_.... Thus we know God by creation, and creation comes into
the most immediate contact with us on its sensible side.”(102) “The
knowledge of God is limited to that which he expresses by the similitude
of himself exhibited in the creation.”(103) “It is of the essence of a
created spirit that its active intuition or intellective vision is limited
to finite objects as its immediate terminus, commensurate to its finite,
visual power. _It sees God only mediately_, as his being and attributes
are reflected and imaged in finite things, and therefore its highest
contemplation of God is _merely abstractive_.”(104)

More passages might be quoted, but these may suffice. The form of
expression is frequently Giobertian, especially in the early chapters. But
the author understood Gioberti in an orthodox sense. In our opinion Dr.
Brownson, as well as ourselves, failed to a very great extent to
understand his artfully‐expressed meaning. We used language similar to
that of ontologism, but the sense in which we asserted the intuition of
God was that of an infused idea of necessary and eternal truths; having
their foundation and _eminent_, but not _entitative_ existence in God, as
Father Kleutgen teaches; by virtue of which the mind can rise by
discursive reasoning through the creation to an explicit conception of
_what_ God is, and make the judgment _that_ he is. All that introductory
part of his work which treats of ontology was, however, suppressed by the
author when the _Problems of the Age_ was published in book‐form,
precisely on account of the tincture of ideas and phraselogy, which too
nearly resembled those of ontologists, and were too obscure and ambiguous.

We do not suppose that the ideology of those Catholic philosophers whom we
may call Platonisers, for want of a more specific term, has been
condemned; or the Peripatetic ideology enjoined as the only one which can
safely be taught in the schools; by any positive precept of the Holy See.
Nevertheless, we think the former ideology, in all its various shapes, has
received a back‐handed blow, by the condemnation of ontologism, which must
prove fatal to it. We see no logical alternative for those who reject
psychologism, except between ontologism and the ideology of S. Thomas. The
objective term of intellective conceptions must be, if it has real
existence, either in God, in created things outside the mind, or in the
mind itself. If it is the latter, a vague idealism which carries
philosophy into an abstract world, separated by a chasm from the real,
seems unavoidable. There is no real, concrete being, except in God and
that which God has created. Unless the universals are mere conceptions or
ideas, and unless ideas are, not that _by which_ the intellect perceives,
but that _which_ it perceives—and this is psychologism—they must have
their entitative existence in the essence of God, and be indistinguishable
from it; or they must have it in created objects. The former cannot be
safely held and taught. Therefore we must take the latter side of the
alternative, or fall into psychologism. There is no solid rational basis,
except that of scholastic philosophy, on which we can stand. The master in
this school is the Angelic Doctor. Our interpretation, or that of any
greater disciple of S. Thomas, has no authority, except that which is
intrinsic to the evidence it furnishes that it is really his doctrine. The
evidence is clear enough, however, to any competent person who examines
it, that we have stated his doctrine correctly, and that all the
criticisms upon the ideology we vindicate fall upon S. Thomas, and not
upon us. Any one who will read the great works of Kleutgen and Liberatore
can see this proved in the amplest manner from the writings of S. Thomas
and in his own distinct statements. And any person of ordinary common
sense will conclude that a man of the acute intelligence,
conscientiousness, and patient application which characterize Father
Liberatore, in a lifelong study of the clearest and most lucid author who
ever wrote, cannot have failed to understand his philosophical system.
Liberatore avowedly confines himself to an exposition of the philosophy of
S. Thomas pure and simple. And in his great work, _Della Conoscenza
Intellettuale_, he has given the most ample and lucid exposition of that
particular part of it, with a solid refutation of the other principal
theories. Kleutgen is more original, and not less erudite, though perhaps
not equal to Liberatore in the thorough mastery of the writings of the
Angelic Doctor; and he has given a most extensive and complete exposition
of scholastic philosophy, accompanied by an exhaustive appreciation of
modern systems, in his _Philosophie der Vorzeit_. It is very well for
those who can do so to study S. Thomas for themselves, though even they
cannot neglect his commentators. But it is idle to recommend this study to
the generality of students in philosophy and theology, as a substitute for
the study of the minor approved authors. Dogmatic and moral theology and
philosophy are real sciences, as they are taught in the Catholic schools,
and they can be and must be learned from text‐books and the oral
instruction of professors. The presumption is in favor of the books and
teachers approved by ecclesiastical authority, that they teach sound
doctrine. There cannot be anything more injurious to the interests of
ecclesiastical or secular education than to depreciate and undermine their
legitimate authority, and thus awaken distrust in the minds of those who
must receive their instruction from them, or else undertake the task of
instructing themselves. Such an undertaking usually results in a failure
which may have disastrous consequences. The greater number follow self‐
chosen and dangerous guides. The few of superior intelligence and activity
of mind; who throw off respect for all authority except that which they
recognize as absolutely infallible, or submit to through the worship which
they pay to genius and to ideas which have captivated their intellect and
imagination; are apt to indulge the futile and dangerous dream of
remodelling philosophy and theology. Such have been the leaders of
dissension, of heresy, and of apostasy. De Lamennais, St. Cyran, Gioberti,
and Döllinger are examples. They began to deviate by breaking away from
the common and present sense of the great body of authors in actual use
and living teachers of theology. Every one knows where they ended. Similar
tendencies and proclivities can be effectually suppressed only by a sound
theology and a sound philosophy, together with that spirit called the
_piety of faith_, which goes much beyond a mere submission to absolute and
categorical decrees in regard to faith and morals. In conclusion, we
venture very earnestly to advise all converts who have finished a liberal
education before entering the church, not to study theology without also
going through a careful course of philosophy, beginning with text‐books
such as those of Father Hill and Liberatore.




Reminiscences Of A Tile‐Field.


Once upon a time there lived a king and a queen in a grand old group of
Gothic towers that was called the Louvre. Nowadays we should call their
house a palace, but in those good old times kings built houses to fight in
as well as to live in, and their abodes had to do duty at once as palace,
fortress, and prison. At the time we speak of this mass of straggling
roofs and gables resembled a citadel mounting guard over Paris from the
western side, as the Bastile did from the east; but when Francis I. came
on the scene, he denounced the barbaric‐looking stronghold as a place too
like a dungeon for a king to live in, though it did well enough for a
hunting‐lodge. It was too venerable to be thrown down, and too stern in
its original character to bend to any architectural modifications, so he
decided to leave it as it was, and build a palace after his own fancy by
the side it. He began, accordingly, the florid Italian edifice which now
forms the western side of the old Louvre. He did not live to see the work
completed; but it was continued by his son, who died soon after it was
finished, and left his widow, Catherine de Médicis, in enjoyment of it.
But the wily queen, looking to the future, saw that her son would one of
these days be reigning in the Louvre, and that it might not suit her to
remain his guest; so she set about building a palace for herself, where in
due time she might plot and scheme, distil poisons, and light civil wars
unmolested by the king’s presence or the prying eyes of his court. West of
the Louvre, and in the then open country, was a tile‐field, which, from
the fact of _tuiles_ being manufactured there, was called _Les Tuileries_.
The Médicean sorceress touched the tiles with her wand, and up rose under
that magic stroke the stately palace which was to be the centre of so many
high and wonderful destinies, and which continued to bear through all
changes and vicissitudes its first homely title of Les Tuileries. One life
could not suffice for the completion of such a monument, however, and
Catherine left it to her three king sons, successively to finish. But
already in her own time the tile‐field was baptized in blood. From one of
its Gothic windows the mother pulled the trigger in the trembling hand of
the son which gave the signal for the massacre of S. Bartholomew. Thus in
its very cradle did the Tuileries sign itself Haceldama, a field where
blood should flow, where princes should sell and be sold, where a king
should wrestle with the powers of darkness, and be dragged forth in
ignominy to death. The two palaces, hitherto distinct and separate, were
united by Charles IX., who erected the long gallery by the river’s side.
It was not entirely finished when he died, leaving his brothers to make it
ready for Henry IV., who is represented as traversing the gallery, leaning
on De Guise, the day before Ravaillac’s dagger cut short the Béarnais’
career.

The idea of turning it into a museum was first suggested by Louis XVI.,
who reverted to the plan frequently, but was compelled by financial
difficulties to leave the glory of its execution to Bonaparte. Those who
have seen the beautiful old palace recently, before its partial
destruction, would hardly recognize it as the same which fifteen years ago
was choked up to its very windows by the rubbish of the encroaching town;
the space now cleared away between the two palaces, the Louvre proper and
the Tuileries, was filled with mean houses, for the most part shops. Even
the façade of the Tuileries was cumbered and disfigured by a variety of
shabby buildings, barracks, stables, and domestic offices, these latter
being necessary for the convenience of its inmates—since royalty must
dine—the original plan of the palace having made no provision for those
vulgar essentials for the carrying on of daily life. It was an unsafe
abode for royalty when safety needed to be thought of and the hearts of
the people had ceased to be the king’s best stronghold; but when the
Médicis reared the noble, picturesque old pile, they were troubled with no
such considerations. The ghosts of constitutionalism and _sans‐culottism_
were slumbering quietly unsuspected in the womb of the future, and no
provision was made for slaying or defying them. For nearly a century the
Tuileries had been uninhabited, when, on the wrathful day of the 6th of
October, the mob surged from Paris to Versailles, and dragged Louis Seize
and Marie Antoinette from their beds, and installed them within its empty,
neglected walls.

“Buildings, like builders, have their destiny.” Ever since the memorable
morning when insurrection reared its hydra‐head under the windows of the
Queen of France, and battered in the chamber door with clubs and tricolor‐
bedizened pikes, and sent her flying in terrified _déshabillé_ through
secret corridors and trap‐tapestries into the king’s room for safety; ever
since “rascality looked in the king’s face, and did not die,” but seized
royalty by the beard, and led it, amidst hootings of triumph, to lodge
where the people willed, the grand château of Versailles has stood vacant
of kings and queens, its polished floors reflecting the dead monarchs on
the walls, a great hush filling its broad galleries, grass growing in its
courts, the silence of the past brooding everywhere. Noisy demagogues may
scream and howl in the theatre where the Grand Monarch applauded the
verses of Corneille and Racine, and their nimble heels may tread down some
of the grass between the paving‐stones of the Cour du Roi, but they are
but jackdaws chattering in the deserted temple. Versailles has lived its
day, and outlived its generation.

Neglected and uncomfortable as the Tuileries was, the royal family had no
choice but to go there. The Louvre was partly dilapidated and quite
unfurnished, while the sister palace, though so long uninhabited, was
still furnished, and needed comparatively little to make it, even in this
sudden emergency, a suitable domestic residence. The discomforts of the
first few days were great, but the royal captives were absorbed in graver
cares, and bestowed no idle regrets on such small matters as personal
accommodation. Louis was satisfied with his truckle‐bed, hurriedly
provided by the nation in the tapestried room. “Where will your majesty
please to sleep?” inquired an obsequious municipal, entering the presence;
and majesty, with head bowed over his knees, answers, without deigning to
look around and choose, “I am well enough here; let each lodge as he may.”
So the truckle‐bed is got ready. Strange days followed this strange
beginning. Paris for a week was drunk with joy. The mob had got the king
in their possession. Loyal subjects looked on, not knowing whether to weep
or to rejoice. The Orleanist faction chuckled boldly over the degradation
of the crown, and over the fact that the persons of the king and, above
all, of the queen were safe in a gilded prison.

The queen was far too wise and keen‐eyed to be deceived by the pale
glimmer of popularity which, during the early days of their abode in
Paris, shone upon them. Louis took pleasure in the scanty _vivats_ that
greeted him when he sauntered out for a walk on the terrace—his only place
of exercise now—and within doors amused himself with carpentry and lock‐
making. The Dauphin played at soldiering, dressed in military uniform, and
gave the word of command to his men, a regiment of warriors from five to
eight years old. Marie Antoinette had her library brought from Versailles,
and sought refuge from thought in reading. Mme. Elizabeth, meanwhile,
watches the signs of the coming storm, prays, loves, and hopes.

The Assembly had followed the king to Paris, and installed itself in the
Salle de Manège, formerly the riding‐school of the Tuileries, and situated
within sight of the palace on the north terrace. This proximity, whether
accidental or designed, was a source of danger and humiliation to the
king. The members could see the royal prison‐house from the windows of the
Manège, and the prospect served to point many an insolent period in the
tribune. Mirabeau used it with fine effect. “I see,” he cried, “the window
whence a king of France, under the influence of execrable advisers, fired
the shot which gave the signal of the massacre of S. Bartholomew!”

But the Assembly did not content itself with pointing the arrows of its
rhetoric at the doomed Louis; it sought to give him more practical proofs
of disrespect. The riding‐school being situated on the Terrace des
Feuillants, the members declared that this terrace belonged to them, and
not to the king; it was therefore thrown open as a public thoroughfare,
the palace being thus exposed to the coming and going of the populace, who
availed themselves of the opportunity of flaunting their disloyalty under
the very windows of the sovereign. There was no longer any barrier on the
north side, and, the external posts being all sentinelled by National
Guards, the royal family had no control over either the courts or the
gardens. This scandalous violation of his privacy roused even Louis to
utter a mild protest to the Assembly, but it was met by one of the
Girondists retorting that “the people lodged Louis in the Tuileries, but
it nowise followed that they gave up to him the exclusive use of the
gardens.” The unhappy king had no resource henceforth but in dignified
patience, fed by the hope of escaping to the freedom and seclusion of St.
Cloud at Easter. We know how, just as he had entered his carriage to start
for that suburban castle, it was surrounded by the mob, and he himself
only rescued from personal violence by Lafayette and his troop, who were,
however, unable to effect his release. Louis re‐entered the Tuileries
crushed and humbled, but inwardly resolved on some desperate attempt to
escape from the insupportable bondage of his position. The abortive
attempt to leave the Tuileries, even for his usual summer residence,
roused a bitter feeling of suspicion against him, and more especially
against the queen, which was soon manifested by the increasing insolence
of the mob. They dared no longer show themselves in public, and even their
afternoon walk on the terrace by the river’s side became impossible. They
tried to avoid the humiliation and annoyance it provoked by rising at
daybreak, and taking an hour’s exercise in the early dawn; but this soon
became known, and had also to be abandoned. At last the queen complained
that she “could not even open her windows on these hot summer evenings
without being subjected to the grossest invectives and threats.”

When things came to this point, the king was forced to lend an ear to the
proposals which had up to this time met with a dogged and somewhat
contemptuous refusal. There was but one way of remedying the miseries of
their position, and that was by flight. It was no longer a question of
flying from humiliation, but from absolute and imminent danger. The most
sanguine or the most obtuse observer could not but see that things were
hastening to a fearful crisis, which, terminate how it may, must work ruin
to the royal family.

Many schemes were arranged, but for one reason or another they fell
through. Finally, it was settled that the sovereign should escape with his
wife and children and sister to Montmédy. This was the utmost that could
be wrung from Louis, even in this extremity. No arguments could induce him
to consent to leave France, or even to cross the frontier with the purpose
of re‐entering France the next day, though by so doing he would have
shortened the journey and lessened its dangers. If even then he had
consented to fly speedily, separately, instead of losing the precious days
and weeks in preparations that only awoke suspicion and proved hindrances
instead of helps! But in the race of destiny, who wins? Not he who flies,
but he who waits. Louis waited too long, or not long enough; fled too
late, if he should have fled at all.

The story of the flight to Varennes has been written by historians of all
shades and camps, but it is generally tainted with such vehement
partisanship that the simple, underlying facts become obscured, almost
obliterated, by hysterical reproaches of this one and that; whereas the
cause of the failure of that memorable expedition is to be sought rather
in the attitude of the entire population, the atmosphere of the times, or,
let us say at once, the mysterious leadings of the First Great Cause which
overrules human events, even while it leaves the human instruments free to
decide the issue. It is easy for one historian(105) to lay the blame on
Marie Antoinette, who “could not travel without new clothes,” showing us
how “Dame Campan whisks assiduous to this mantua‐maker and to that; and
there is clipping of frocks and gowns, upper clothes and under, great and
small—such clipping and sewing as might be dispensed with. Moreover,
majesty cannot go a step anywhere without her _nécessaire_, dear
_nécessaire_, of inlaid ivory and rosewood, cunningly devised, which holds
perfumes, toilet implements, infinite small, queenlike furniture necessary
to terrestrial life.” Poor Marie Antoinette! her grand, queenlike soul was
lifted far above such silly “terrestrial life” by this time, and it is not
likely that, when such tremendous stakes were impending, her care dwelt
with new clothes or perfume bottles—so misleading does prejudice make the
clearest mind, the most intentionally sincere witness. The plain truth is
that the difficulty of the new clothes existed, but from a very different
motive from that suggested by Mr. Carlyle. It was necessary that the queen
and the royal children should be disguised, and for this purpose new
clothes were essential, and it required all the ingenuity of Mme. De
Tourzel, and Mme. Campan, and every one connected with the affair to get
them made so as to fit the royal fugitives, and then conveyed into the
palace without exciting the keen lynx‐eyes that were fixed on every
incomer and outgoer passing through the queen’s apartments. As to the
_nécessaire_ over which the Scotch philosopher breaks the vials of his
scorn so loftily, it was wanted. Some box was wanted to hold the money,
jewels, and certain indispensable papers that were to be taken on the
journey, and the queen suggested that her dressing‐case should be used,
adding at the same time that she was loath to leave it behind her, as it
was almost the first present she had received from her husband—no great
subject for philosophical sneers, as far as we can see. Nor did either
_nécessaire_ or new clothes—though the obtaining and smuggling in of the
latter caused much delay—give rise to any of the accidents which worked
the failure of the scheme.

Then there was the new berlin to be provided—a lamentable mistake, but not
one that deserves Mr. Carlyle’s withering sarcasms any more than the
_nécessaire_. “Miserable new berlin!” he cries. “Why could not royalty go
in an old berlin similar to that of other men? Flying for life, one does
not stickle about one’s vehicle.” It was not for the newness or dignity of
the vehicle that the queen stickled, but for its capability of carrying
“all her treasures with her.” She positively refused to fly at all, unless
it could be so contrived that she was not separated for an hour of the way
from her husband, her children, and her beloved sister‐in‐law, the
Princess Elizabeth. She insisted, moreover, that the few faithful friends
who were to share her flight should be with them also, and not exposed to
solitary risks in a separate conveyance. This was characteristic enough of
the queen’s loyal heart towards those she loved, but it was unlike her
practical sense and intelligence. M. de Fersen, who was taken into
confidence from the first, declared that no travelling‐coach was to be
found large enough to answer these requirements, and that one must be
built on purpose. It so happened that the previous year he had ordered a
berlin, of just such form and dimensions as was now wanted, for a friend
of his in Russia; he therefore went to the coach‐maker, and desired him
with all possible speed to build another on the same model for a certain
Baronne de Korff, a cousin of his, who was about to return to St.
Petersburg with her family and suite. The berlin was built, and, to baffle
suspicion more effectually, was driven through some of the most public
streets in Paris, in order to try it. The result was most satisfactory,
and M. de Fersen talked aloud to his friends of the perfect coach he had
ordered and partly designed for his cousin, Mme. de Korff.

The journey was fixed for the 19th of June. Everything was ready, every
precaution had been taken, every possible obstacle anticipated. The
Marquis de Bouillé, almost the only general whose devotion the king could
trust to the death, was in command of the army of the Meuse, and Montmédy,
a small but well‐fortified town, was situated in the midst of it. Here the
royal family were sure of a safe and loyal asylum. The minor military
arrangements were entrusted to M. de Goguelat, an officer of engineers,
who was on Bouillé’s staff, and personally devoted to the king and queen.
The Duc de Choiseul, under De Goguelat’s orders, was to furnish local
detachments from his regiment of Royal Dragoons along the road, and to
precede the royal departure by a few hours, so as to ensure all being in
order at the various stations. M. de Goguelat made two experimental
journeys to Montmédy himself, to ascertain the exact hour of arrival at
each place. Unluckily, he forgot to calculate the difference between a
light post‐chaise and a heavily‐built, heavily‐laden “new berlin.” Relays
of horses were provided at each stage, and a detachment of cavalry from De
Bouillé’s army was to be there also, and, after a short interval, to
follow the new berlin, picking up each detachment successively, and thus
swelling the force at every stage. The utmost secrecy was observed with
all except the leaders of the expedition; the pretext alleged to the
troops for all this marching being that a treasure was on its way to the
north for payment of the army. All was waiting, when, at the last moment,
owing to some difficulty about getting Mme. de Tourzel into the berlin,
the king sent a counter‐order for the departure, saying it must take
place, not on the 19th, but on the 20th. It was a woful delay. But at
last, on the night of the 20th, behold the travellers under way. Mme.
Royale’s _Mémoires_ give us the most authentic account of the mode of
starting: “At half‐past ten, on the 20th of June, 1791, my brother was
wakened up by my mother. Mme. de Tourzel brought him down to my mother’s
apartment, where I also came. There we found one of the _gardes‐du‐corps_,
M. de Malden, who was to assist our departure. My mother came in and out
several times to see us. They dressed my brother as a little girl. He
looked beautiful, but he was so sleepy that he could not stand, and did
not know what we were all about. I asked him what he thought we were going
to do. He answered: ‘I suppose to act a play, since we have all got these
odd dresses.’ At half‐past ten we were ready. My mother herself conducted
us to the carriage in the middle of the court, which was exposing herself
to great risk.”

The _rôles_ were distributed as follows: Mme. de Tourzel, governess of the
children of France, was Baronne de Korff; Mme. Royale and the Dauphin, her
daughters. The queen was their governess, Mme. Rocher. The Princess
Elizabeth was _dame‐de‐compagnie_, under the name of Rosalie. The king was
Durand, the _valet‐de‐chambre_. The officers of the disbanded _gardes‐du‐
corps_ went as couriers and servants. This was a grievous mistake amidst
so many others. These gentlemen were totally inexperienced in their
assumed characters, and, by their personal appearance and ignorance of the
duties they undertook, proved a fatal addition to the party. The
preparations were altogether too cumbrous and elaborate, but it is
difficult to accuse any special portion of them as superfluous in a time
when the public spirit was strained to such a pitch of suspicion and
hatred; though prudence might have hinted that this heavy paraphernalia
was far more calculated to awake the jealous mistrust of the people than
to baffle or allay it.

All being now ready, the fugitives furtively left the Tuileries, and
proceeded to enter the hackney‐coach that stood in wait for them outside
the palace. “Mme. de Tourzel, my brother, and I got into the coach first,”
says Mme. Royale. “M. de Fersen was coachman. To deceive any one who might
follow us we drove about several streets. At last we returned to the Petit
Carrousel, which is close to the Tuileries. My brother was fast asleep in
the bottom of the carriage.”

And now another traveller steals softly out of the palace, her face
shrouded by a gypsy‐hat. As she steps on the pavement a carriage, escorted
by torch‐bearers, dashes past. An unaccountable impulse moves her to touch
the wheel with the end of her parasol. The occupant of the carriage is
Lafayette, on his way to the king’s _couchée_. He is late, having been
delayed by urgent matters. They tell him the king has already retired for
the night. Meantime the lady in the gypsy‐hat, leaning on M. de Malden,
one of the amateur couriers, loses her way in the dark street, and keeps
the occupants and driver of the hackney‐coach half an hour waiting in an
agony of suspense. At last, after crossing and recrossing the river, they
make their way to the coach, and start. Another presently follows them. So
they jog on through the dark night to the spot where the new berlin is
waiting; but, lo! they arrive, and no berlin is there. The king himself
alights, and prowls about in search of it. M. de Fersen at last finds it,
overturns the hackney‐coach into a ditch, mounts the berlin, and drives on
to Bondy. There the travellers find a relay waiting in a wood. The
chivalrous Swede stands bareheaded in the dewy dawn‐light, and bows his
loyal farewell to the king and Marie Antoinette. They press hands in
silent thanks, and the chevalier goes his way—to Stockholm, where that
same day, nineteen years hence, he will meet a more brutal end than that
which awaits the royal pair he has befriended—beaten to death with sticks
by a savage mob, who, on the impulse of the moment, accuse him of having
been accessory to the death of Prince Charles Augustus. But now he
breathes with a glad sense of victory and security, and stands with
bright, moistened eye watching the huge berlin lurching on its way, the
only thing that broke the stillness of the wood, sleeping yet under the
fading stars.

All went smoothly as far as Châlons‐sur‐Marne, about a hundred miles
beyond Bondy, and here the programme as arranged by the queen and De
Fersen ceased, to be taken up by the Duc de Choiseul and M. de Bouillé’s
detachments. The berlin rumbled on through Châlons at four in the
afternoon, and reached the next stage, Pont de Somme‐Velle at six, where
M. de Goguelat’s escort was to meet it. But no escort was to be seen. M.
de Choiseul had been there at the appointed time, but owing to the slow
pace of the berlin and the time lost in the early stages—one accident to a
wheel causing two hours’ delay—they were four hours behind time, and M. de
Choiseul, taking for granted something had occurred to change the plan
altogether, drew off his dragoons, without leaving even a _vedette_ to say
where he was going. Everywhere these unlucky troops turned out a hindrance
and a danger. The soldiers accepted without _arrière pensée_ the plausible
story of their being on duty to protect the transport of pay for the army
of the Meuse; but the municipal authorities looked on them with suspicion,
and, long before the idea of the real cause of their presence got wind,
the soldiers were eyed askance in the towns they passed through. At this
very place, Somme‐Velle, one detachment caused a panic. It so fell out, by
one of those disastrous coincidences which pursued the berlin on its
adventurous way, that some few days before there had been an affray
amongst the peasants of a neighboring estate, they having refused to pay
certain rates, in consequence of which the tax‐gatherers had threatened to
enforce payment by bringing down the troops. When therefore the population
beheld De Choiseul and his cavalry they fancied they had been summoned for
the above purpose, and a spirit of angry defiance was roused against them.
The municipality sent the _gendarmerie_ to parley with the troops and
compel them to withdraw; but they failed in this overture, and words began
to run dangerously high on all sides. Meanwhile De Choiseul was straining
eyes and ears for the approach of the berlin, in mortal dread of seeing it
arrive in the midst of the popular excitement. When, however, four hours
passed, and there was no sign of it, he said to an officer, loud enough to
be heard by those near, “I will draw off my men; the treasure I expected
must have already passed.”

The accounts of this particular hitch in the itinerary of the flight are
so conflicting—some envenomed by bitter reproach, others equally hot with
recrimination from the accused—that it is difficult to see who really was
in fault. The time lost in the first instance appears to be the main cause
of all the mishaps. Goguelat is blamed for not having taken better
measures for ensuring the relays being found at once at every stage; but
he throws the blame on De Choiseul, under whose orders he was, and who was
at any rate guilty of strange thoughtlessness in drawing off from the
point of rendezvous without leaving word where he could be found.

Little time, however, was lost at Somme‐Velle when the berlin at last
arrived there. It changed horses at once, and away to Sainte‐Ménéhould,
which it reached at half‐past seven. But here the incapacity of the _soi‐
disant_ couriers caused fresh delay and danger. M. de Valory, one of them,
not knowing where the post‐house was, went about inquiring for it,
exciting curiosity and some suspicion by his manner and uncourier‐like
appearance. He was still looking for it when a special escort of troops
rode up—a circumstance which was very unfortunate, as the angry feeling
excited in the neighboring village by De Choiseul’s huzzars the day before
had not yet subsided. The captain of the detachment, the Marquis
d’Andoins, sees the berlin, and tries to telegraph by glances to Goguelat
which way lies the post‐house; but Goguelat cannot read the signals, and
goes up to him and asks in words, keeping up the sham of his yellow livery
by touching his hat respectfully to the aristocrat officer. The king,
impatient and nervous, puts his head out of the carriage‐window, and calls
to Valory for explanations; the marquis advances and tenders them
respectfully, but with seeming indifference, as to ordinary travellers
asking information on their way. Unlucky Louis! Imprudent M. d’Andoins!
Patriots’ eyes are sharp, and there are hundreds of them fixed on your two
faces now. These sharp eyes are suggesting some vague memory, a likeness
to some forgotten and yet dimly‐remembered features. Whose can they be?
And the lady with the gypsy‐hat who bends forward to thank the gracious
gentleman, bowing in silence, but with a grace of majesty unmistakable, a
something in her air and carriage that startles even these heavy‐souled
provincials into wondering “who can she be?” The lady falls back in an
instant, and is hidden from further gaze; but that fat _valet‐de‐chambre_
keeps his head protruded for several minutes. The post‐house is found at
last, and the horses are coming. The postmaster and his son are busy at
their service. The son has lately been to Paris, and has seen that head
somewhere. He whispers suspicion to his father, old Drouet, one of Condé’s
dragoons in by‐gone days, and the two come closer, and steal a long,
sharp, look. Yes, it is the same as the head on the coins and the
assignats; there is no mistaking it. What is Drouet to do? He is a staunch
patriot; is he to connive at the king’s treachery to the nation, and let
him fly to the foreigner unimpeded? Never was the ready wit of patriotism
more severely tested. No need now to wonder at all this marching and
countermarching, this flying of pickets to and fro, this moving of troops
along the road to the frontier. Treasure to be transported! Ay, truly, a
greater treasure than gold or silver. But what was to be done? How was it
to be stopped? There were the soldiers and chivalrous aristocrat officers,
ready to cut all the patriot postmasters in France to pieces, and then be
cut to pieces themselves, rather than let a hair of one of those royal
heads be touched. A word, and the village would be in a blaze; but only so
long as it would take those glittering swords to quench the flame in
patriot blood. Drouet is a prudent man. He holds his tongue until the new
berlin is fairly on its way, with the village gaping after it, the
military escort lounging about yet a little longer in careless
indifference. M. de Damas was in command of the troops. Presently, after
the appointed interval, he orders them to move on in the wake of the
berlin. But short as the time was, it had sufficed to stir up the town to
terrified and resolute opposition. The people had flocked into the streets
in angry excitement, and would not suffer the cavalry to advance. M. de
Damas at first took a high tone of command, but it was of no use; his
weapon broke in his hand. The troops turned round on him and joined the
mob, and after a desperate struggle he was obliged to escape for his life,
unconscious, even at this crisis, of the danger that threatened his
master. Drouet, meanwhile, was flying after his prey to Clermont, the next
stage to St. Ménéhould, and which by a fatal chance he never reached; if
he had, the final catastrophe would, in human probability, have been
averted. On the road there he met his own postilions coming back, and they
informed him that the berlin had not gone on to Verdon—the next stage
beyond Clermont; that they had overheard the courier on the seat say to
the fresh postilions, “A Varennes!” Drouet, who knew every stone of the
roads, saw at once what a chance this gave him. He turned off the main
road, and started by a short cut across the country to Varennes. Varennes
was a small town, a village rather, where there was no post‐house, but
where M. de Bouillé had a relay waiting for the travellers, who, having
arrived before Drouet, and without any suspicion that he was pursuing
them, might have congratulated themselves on being at last safe over the
Rubicon. Yet it was here that danger was to overtake and overwhelm them.
In this secluded little dell, near midnight, when every one was asleep,
hushed by the lullaby of the river hurrying on its way beneath the silent
stars, no prying eyes to peer at them, no patriots to take offence or
fright, with fresh horses waiting in the quiet wood, and young De Bouillé,
the general’s loyal son, to superintend the relays, with a guard of sixty
staunch huzzars lodged in an old convent of the upper town, at hand in
case of now seemingly impossible accident—it was here that the thunderbolt
fell, and, as the king expressed it, “the earth opened to swallow him.”
Valory, the clumsy courier in the gaudy gold livery, has been blamed for
it all; but let us remember at least that a man who has ridden one hundred
and fifty miles without breathing‐space in twenty‐three hours is entitled
to mercy if, at the end of the ride, his mind wanders and his thoughts
become confused. It was past eleven when he reached Varennes, and went
looking about for the relays, where he had been told he should find them,
at the entrance of the faubourg; but no relays were to be seen. He pushed
on through the faubourg to the town, which had gone to bed, and could find
no sign of the missing horses. After wandering about for nearly an hour,
he hears a sound of rumbling of wheels coming along the Paris road. Can it
be the berlin? And where, oh! where are the fresh horses? He hurries back
in the direction of the sound, and finds the fugitives at the entrance of
the suburb, looking about for the relays. There was nothing for it but to
wake up the village and make enquiries. The king and queen themselves got
out, and went, with the couriers, knocking at doors, and calling to the
inhabitants to know if they had seen horses waiting in the neighborhood.
Drouet, meantime, was not asleep; he was up with his game now, and flashed
past the berlin, like a man riding, not for life, but against life for
death, just as the king alighted. He shouted something as he passed, but
Louis did not hear it. It was an order to the postilions not to stir from
the spot. The relays all this time were ready waiting not at the entrance
of the suburb on the Paris side, as had been specified to the king in M.
de Goguelat’s programme, but at the entrance of the faubourg _beyond_ the
town—a safer and to all appearances more advantageous position, as the
change of horses would be sure to attract less notice out of the town than
within it. The grievous mistake on De Goguelat’s part was in not having
told the courier the exact place where the relays were to be found. But
where were the officers commanding the sixty huzzars all this time? Fast
asleep, it is said, though it is almost impossible to believe it. Certain
it is that they and their huzzars, as well as the detachment of dragoons
which, under command of M. Rohrig, was told off to keep watch over “the
treasure,” kept out of the way while all this commotion was going on, and
never appeared until the entire village was on foot, lights gleaming in
every window, and the streets filled with the inhabitants, lately snoring
in their beds. Drouet had managed his mission with a coolness and
cleverness worthy of a nobler cause. He made no row, but went quietly to
the houses of some half‐dozen good patriots, told them what was abroad,
and directed them how to act. Their first move was to hurry off to the
bridge, and throw up a loose barricade which would prevent the berlin
passing; they then flew to the other end of the town, and overturned some
carts that happened to be close by, and thus barricaded the exit by the
road. They were but “eight patriots of good‐will,” Drouet proudly asserts,
in these momentous preliminaries, so sagaciously and quickly executed.

The mob were by this time thoroughly roused. They surrounded the carriage,
and forced the travellers to alight. Mme. Royale thus describes the scene:
“After a great deal of trouble the postilions were persuaded that the
horses were waiting at the castle (at the other side of the town and
river), and they proceeded that way, but slowly. When we got into the
village, we heard alarming shouts of Stop! stop! The postilions were
seized, and in a moment the carriage was surrounded by a great crowd, some
with arms and some with lights. They asked who we were; we answered, ‘Mme.
de Korff and her family.’ They thrust lights into the carriage, close to
my father’s face, and insisted upon our alighting. We answered that we
would not; that we were common travellers, and had a right to go on. They
repeated their orders to alight on pain of being put to death, and at that
moment all their guns were levelled. We then alighted, and, in crossing
the street, six mounted dragoons passed us, but unfortunately they had no
officer with them; if there had been, six resolute men would have
intimidated them all, and might have saved the king. There were sixty
close at hand, but the two officers who commanded them were asleep; and
when at last the noise of the riot awoke them, they coolly rode away to
tell the Marquis de Bouillé that the king had been stopped, and all was
over; while M. Rohrig, who commanded the treasure escort, rode off
likewise, leaving his men under a disaffected non‐commissioned officer.”
M. de Raigecourt, in his account of this eventful “Night of Spurs,” tells
us how he and his brother officer, De Bouillé, “at half‐past eleven
returned to their bed‐rooms,” after strolling about the town, in hopes of
seeing the travellers arrive. “We extinguished our lights,” he says, “but
opened our windows and kept a profound silence. About twelve we heard many
persons passing and repassing, but without tumult; some even stopped under
our windows, but we could not distinguish what they were saying.” They
remained quietly in their rooms, “wondering what was the matter,” until
about half‐past twelve, when they were enlightened by signals which even
their unsuspicious minds could not mistake. The tocsin was rung, the drum
beat to arms, the tumult became very great. _Terror_ seemed to prevail. I
believe that at that moment ten, or even fewer, determined men would have
routed that scared populace. A general cry informed us that the king was
in Varennes, betrayed and a prisoner. Instead of now, at least, hastening
to call out their men (who, we said, were lodged above the town in an old
abbey), the two officers “took for granted that the huzzars had laid down
their arms, as otherwise they would have come to the rescue and liberated
the king,” and so they simply rode away to report the lamentable issue to
De Bouillé. It was about a quarter to one when they left Varennes.

At this juncture M. de Damas, who had escaped with a few faithful men from
the fray at Clermont, reached Varennes—not with the idea of succoring the
travellers, but of rejoining them. He believed that the uproar which so
suddenly exploded at Clermont had been merely against the troops, and that
the royal fugitives were now in security, past all further dangers or
hindrances. His consternation was therefore great when, on approaching the
village of Varennes, he beheld a barricade across the high‐road, held by a
band of peasants, who made an attempt to stop him. M. de Damas, however,
leaped the barricade, and dashed past them into the town. But the
chivalrous soldier was no war‐god descending on fire‐wings to save the
royal prisoners. He saw the huzzars walking about the streets, and in
answer to his question, “What were they doing?” they replied, “Nothing; we
have no orders.” Those who should have given the orders had fled. M. de
Choiseul was there with his drawn sword at the head of forty men; and
there was a detachment just arrived from another direction under M.
Deslons. There was therefore, even at this point of the disaster, no lack
of armed force to clear the way, if there had been but one vigorous will
to use it. But everybody seemed too bewildered to act. No one had the
courage or the presence of mind to take the initiative. As to Louis
himself, he was like one paralyzed; not with personal cowardice—that
odious charge his subsequent conduct amply disproved—but with a sort of
dazed, mental stupor. When Deslons went the length of asking him for
orders, he replied, “I am a prisoner, and have no orders to give!” Deslons
might have taken the hint, and acted without orders; but the two officers
present were his superiors, and he lacked the genius or the desperation to
seize the opportunity at the cost of a breach of military discipline. Even
the queen’s imperial spirit seems to have abandoned her in this critical
extremity, and she sat passive and dumb in Sausse the grocer’s bed‐room,
clasping her children to her heart, and taking with silent, humble thanks
the sympathy of Mme. Sausse, who forgets the queen in her pity for the
mother, and stands over the group weeping womanly, unavailing tears. Tears
even of “warlike men” cannot help now, for the soldiers have fraternized
with the mob, as their wont is in France; and even if Louis could be
electrified by the shock of despair to arise and assert himself,
remembering that he is a king, it is too late.

The journey so wisely planned, so deeply thought over, dreaded, and at
last attempted, had come to an end, and stopped at the first stage along
the road whose goal was the scaffold. The return to Paris resembled the
capture of a runaway malefactor. Every species of insult was poured out on
the unhappy victims of the popular fury. The brave men who stood by them
in their hour of humiliation, MM. de Choiseul, de Damas, and de Goguelat,
were disarmed and sent to prison; the three _gardes‐du‐corps_, who
faithfully but clumsily played their part as servants to the last, were
bound with ropes on the front seat of the berlin, and hooted at in their
glaring yellow liveries by the mob; the National Guard of Varennes claimed
the glory of escorting the fugitives back to the capital, and the National
Guard of all the towns the berlin had passed through on its ill‐starred
journey fell in with the _cortége_ one after another, swelling it to ten
thousand strong as it advanced. As these men were on foot, the journey
homewards lasted four days. When the king arrived at Sainte‐Ménéhould, M.
de Dampierre came out to salute him, and paid for the loyal act by being
massacred on the spot. A little further on the prisoners were met by
Barnave, Petion, and Latour‐Maubourg, members of the Assembly sent by
Lafayette to conduct them back to Paris. Barnave and Petion entered the
berlin, Mme. de Tourzel leaving to make room for them, and following in
another carriage. From this strange meeting grew the quasi‐friendship of
Barnave and the queen, which led to his honorable though futile efforts to
save her and all of them. At first the proud Austrian lady sat in sullen
silence, turned to stone, deaf to Petion’s coarse sneers, as he sat
opposite in ill‐suppressed jocularity of triumph; but Barnave’s
interference to save a priest from being butchered, like loyal Dampierre,
for saluting the king, moved her to speech, and soon to confidence in the
young representative of the nation. Barnave was surprised beyond measure
to discover in Marie Antoinette’s conversation such clear and strong
intelligence, and so thorough a comprehension of the existing state of
things. He was captivated by her grace, as well as impressed by the
serenity and courage that stamped her whole demeanor throughout that
terrible journey; while his prejudices received nearly an equal blow in
the person of the king. There was no approaching Louis XVI. without being
convinced of his single‐minded honesty and good sense.

In this sorry guise did the new berlin re‐enter Paris. It had departed on
Monday night, and behold it returning on Saturday towards sundown, a huge,
jolting, captured whale whom no miracle will compel to disgorge its prey.
In order to prolong the people’s jubilee and the king’s shame, it was
brought a league out of its direct way, so as to make an entry down the
Champs Elysées, and bear its occupants back to their gilded prison with
due pomp and emphasis by the front gate of the Tuileries gardens. So with
serried ranks of bayonets pointed at it on every side, it reappears in
Paris, and jogs on to deposit its burden on the old Médicean tile‐field,
an ignominious procession, royalty degraded and fettered, a spectacle of
joy to the king‐hating citizens. The royal family enter the Tuileries, now
a prison in the most cruel and literal sense. The queen and Mme. Elizabeth
are henceforth watched, even in their chambers—so watched that, as it is
recorded, the queen being one night unable to sleep, the National Guard on
duty at her open door offered to come in and converse with her majesty
awhile, conversation being sometimes conducive to sleep.

Even at this distance, when we read the history of the flight to Varennes,
it has the exciting effect of a fresh tale. We hold our breath, and fancy
that still at the last some deliverer will arrive just as all is lost;
some accident will prevent Drouet from reaching the scene in time; the
fugitives will clear the bridge, and the mob be prevented by the soldiers
from pursuing them. Never, even in the history of those most unfortunate
of princes, the Stuarts, was there a series of mishaps, blunders, and
accidents such as make up the chapter of the flight to Varennes. It is
idle to conjecture what would have happened if it had ended differently.
If, when the berlin was first surrounded and the travellers ordered to
alight, Louis had proudly defied the insolent command, and bade the
soldiers fire, how quickly the “pale paralysis” of baffled rage would have
seized Drouet and his eight patriots of good‐will; how the froth of
ruffianism they had evoked would have melted away before that imperial
word, and slunk out of sight, while the monarch fared on his way along the
high‐road, the troops sweeping back all possible pursuers, and landing the
destinies of France safe beyond the reach of regicidal hands! All this was
so much more likely to be than that which was! The reason why it was not
is so mysterious! Enough that it was not; that the bloody deed of January
the 20th was to consummate the outrages and sufferings of the Night of
Spurs; and that the fate of France was not shaped to a different issue, as
we, in our short‐sighted philosophy, fancy might so easily have been done.




The Ingenious Device.


“Doth no man condemn thee? And she answered, No man, Lord.”

“Woman! thou’rt over‐confident and sure
To answer thus the Infinitely Pure!
How knowest thou that He does not condemn,
And will not cast at thee th’ avenging stone?”
“The pure are merciful. His stratagem
Has left me to be judged by such alone.”




The Rigi.


The Golden Lion of Weggis can scarcely be said to resemble its now famed
namesake of Granpère. It shows neither coach‐house, stable, farmyard, nor
bustling village life around it, and yet there is the one point of a
certain homeliness in common which suggests that it too may have seen many
a simple romance acted out beneath its roof, and have had its share in
many a life’s heart‐story. It is difficult to imagine sentiment of any
kind in connection with the monster hotels, or rather caravansaries, of
modern Switzerland. But this is a true inn, in the olden acceptation of
the word; modest and sedate enough to feel elated at the arrival of new
guests, who are welcomed by the landlord himself, and instinctively made
to understand that he will personally see to their comfort and proper
attendance. At first sight it appears to be overshadowed by a new and
larger neighbor; but the Golden Lion does not care, for he enjoys the
advantage of mature age and well‐established fame, and justly prides
himself on his old customers, whose constancy is a good tribute to his
honesty and civility. Some who knew him in the quieter times of Rigi
history still come and spend two or three days here when going to, or
returning from, the mountain, and it was one of these faithful friends who
had recommended us to choose it in preference to the larger establishment
of more modern date. Truly, no spot seems more suitable for a romance.
Situated on the lake, surrounded by the most lovely views of land and
water, removed from the rush and bustle which somewhat jar on the
sentimental traveller at Vitznau, and even at Gersau, still with the
pleasant splash of the steamers as they halt alongside the shady pier,
only making just sufficient noise to remind him that, though not of the
world, he can still be in it whenever, or fly whithersoever, his fancy may
impel him. Yes; every steamer, backwards and forwards, stops at Weggis,
though generally merely to drop a stray traveller—a man with alpenstock
and knapsack, or two ladies with their waterproofs neatly strapped across
their shoulders, thereby betraying their recent arrival from “fatherland
beyond the Rhine.” And every one walks leisurely and with consequent
dignity on shore, as though life and plenty of time to enjoy it in were
still at their command. No feverish train is in the background; indeed, it
cannot be even seen on the mountain sky‐line from Weggis, so that
strangers may pause and dine at ease up‐stairs in the clean, airy _table‐
d’hôte_ room of the Golden Lion, sip their coffee on its wide balcony
facing the Uri‐Rothstock and Rigi‐Nasen, or lunch _à la carte_ in the
leafy arbor of the garden, which is more trim and inviting than its
counterpart at Granpère.

It was overpoweringly hot when we landed from the _Helvetia_, the sun
bearing down with that full force which so often follows a heavy shower;
and the leafy arbor in question irresistibly attracted us by its deep
shade and cool, refreshing shelter. Here we resolved to dine, in order to
strengthen the “inner being” and let the noonday hours of heat glide by
before attempting the ascent to Kaltbad, which promised to be a matter of
two and a half hours at the least. The landlord was loud in praise of his
horses and men—“well known before that Vitznau railway existed,” he said
in a tone rather contemptuous of such an upstart. “The price of each only
six francs to Kaltbad, fixed according to the tariff.” And here an
ejaculation in praise of this tariff system, penetrating even to the heart
of the mountain, may perhaps be allowed to us. None but those who have
benefited by it can understand the advantage of being able thus to
calculate beforehand the expense of every excursion, nor the unspeakable
comfort it brings when, on reaching the hotel at night, tired and sleepy,
you know that the guide cannot cheat you, and he feels you cannot cheat
him. No one thing contributes more to ensure peace or conduces to happy
wanderings. Nor does any man more surely “deserve well of his country”
than that Swiss, whoever he may have been, who first proposed this
arrangement; and after him we must be grateful to those authorities who
have so well carried it out. The dinner was the next matter for
consultation between Mr. C—— and mine host, which ultimately ended in the
latter promising to do his best, and to have it ready in three‐quarters of
an hour or thereabouts.

Besides the arbor, the Golden Lion boasts of a tea‐house and a swimming or
bath house projecting into the lake, and also many a well‐placed seat
inviting to a most enjoyable _dolce far niente_ close by the pellucid
waters, without sound to disturb poetic musings; bright coloring and full
foliage forming a framework to the exquisite landscape which extends
beyond. Nothing could be more romantic, rural, or tranquillizing to soul
and body; but before long, prompted by my “natural female curiosity,” as
Mr. C—— ungallantly styled it, I proposed a saunter through the village.
“There is nothing whatever to see,” he retorted. Still, with much good‐
nature, he immediately offered to accompany his wife and me in our
rambles. It certainly was true in the ordinary sense of the term. There
was nothing very remarkable to behold; still, the Swiss villages are
always pleasant to look at, especially in these forest cantons, and of
this class Weggis is an excellent specimen. It has probably seen its
palmiest days, and is at present thrust aside by the hitherto despised
sister, Vitznau, now in the spring‐tide of her charms, who seems to toss
her head at her elderly and _passée_ rival with the conceit of young life
and energy. Yet there no signs of decay. Far from it. It has a steady,
old‐fashioned _commune_ life of its own, quite independent of the tourist
element, which only comes in—very opportunely, no doubt—to help it on its
way. As at Gersau and many of these places, the population is much smaller
than appearances warrant, owing chiefly to the substantial size of the
houses and the straggling, independent manner in which they are placed.
Sometimes a dwelling stands endwise or sidewise to the road, just as the
whim of the ancestral great‐great‐grand‐father who built it centuries ago
dictated. The walls are now mantled with vines, bright blue eyes peep
through casements embosomed in leaves, gardens of glowing sun‐flowers and
fig‐trees laden with fruit surround the cottages, while here and there a
noble Spanish chestnut throws its deep shade on all around. The street‐
road was almost deserted as we passed along, on account of the strong sun;
but many buxom, pleasant‐faced matrons sat working at their doors, while
chubby children played beneath the trees hard by. Though innocent of
manufactories, and far more rural in its general aspect and atmosphere
than Gersau, the whole place breathes of prosperity and comfort. It gives
the impression, too, of greater space; for it is not shut in on all sides,
and the open slopes extend much further back before they reach the
precipitous mountain‐side.

And in accordance with this character is the church, which stands on a
slight eminence at the end of the village. The cemetery too, though large
and thoroughly well cared for, is more simple, and has none of those
pretty monuments that lend such poetry and beauty to the Camenzind‐Küttel
resting‐place. But, if not, it possesses a very handsome stone crucifix in
one angle—evidently a recent erection, and of which Weggis may well be
proud—with the following inscriptions on the base: “Praise be to Jesus
Christ in all eternity”; on the front facing the entrance: “See, is there
any sorrow like unto my sorrow?” and “In the cross is salvation and
benediction” on either side; whilst on the back, close to the Mortuary
Chapel, the words run thus: “Gentle Jesus, grant eternal rest to all
departed souls.” The children’s quarter, too, was remarkable for its fresh
flowers and superabundance of white ribbon; but not until quite near did
we notice a poor disconsolate mother decorating the grave of her child—her
little _engel_, or angel, as they are so often styled on the tiny
headstones or crosses. _She_ did not mind the sun, nor our presence
either, but went on with her work, while large tears rolled unchecked down
her cheeks. And this part is in a striking spot, right under the northern
angle of the Rigi, the straight rocks of which rise perpendicularly from a
green slope of pasture‐land behind the village church, covered with large
boulders and _débris_ that seem to corroborate all the stories of land‐
slips and stone‐rolling so common in this region. Standing here, it was
easy to understand the most noted of these events—the mud‐slide of 1795,
which threatened Weggis with destruction. Thirty‐one houses and eighty
acres of land were buried beneath the creeping mass. It occurred, like the
fall of the Rossberg, after a peculiarly rainy season. Though the story
says that the slide was preceded by ominous symptoms, the earth so much
resembles rich garden‐mould, and looks so loose and friable, that,
recollecting yesterday’s rain, it made me quite nervous to look at it. Had
I stayed gazing upwards much longer, I felt that I would certainly have
fancied it was beginning to move downwards. “What an idea!” exclaimed Mr.
C——, laughing—“the effect of nerves and sun combined! The church‐door is
open, and the sanctuary lamp burning; so it would be much wiser and better
for you to enter in!” Saying which, he preceded me into the sacred
building.

Large, clean, and simple, as a rural church should be, it had three
distinguishing points: first, an altar dedicated to S. Justus, one of the
patron saints of Weggis, who was an archbishop of Lyons in the first
centuries of its Christianity, thus affording, as in the case of S.
Leodegar, another proof of the early ecclesiastical connection between
Switzerland and the Frank Empire. Next, a large processional banner placed
near the altar, and composed simply of the national standard—the beautiful
white cross on the red ground—whose position in this spot it puzzled us to
explain. Lastly, the model of a boat suspended from the ceiling, with two
sailors rowing, whilst a bishop in full canonicals stood erect in the
stern, in the act of giving them his benediction. It looked like an _ex‐
voto_, but our communicative landlord later informed us that it was the
emblem of the Guild of S. Nicholas, “patron of all who navigate upon the
lake.” Every Weggis man who has anything to do with the water belongs to
the confraternity. Before steamers existed they numbered many hundreds,
and, though of late the village occupations have been turned into other
channels, the numbers are still numerous enough; for boats and smaller
craft are even now much used on the lake. The confraternity is still full
of life and vigor. The Feast of S. Nicholas is religiously kept in the
village. The members of the Guild often assemble, but on that day they go
in a body to church, accompanied by their wives and families, to offer
thanks for the past and implore protection for the coming year.

Who shall describe our charming little dinner in the deep‐shaded arbor,
with the glowing sun‐color lighting up the mountains, seen through its
leaf‐framed openings? Such a clean _Kellnerinn_ waited upon us, and the
_Gastherr_ himself all smiles and conversation! The beautiful trout too,
“fresh from the Muotta‐Thal, just brought by the steamer from Brunnen.”
The Muotta valley!

“But what’s in a name?” said Mrs. C——.

“A great deal more than we acknowledge,” I answered.

This one struck again the chord of Schwytz and the “Urschweiz” in our
minds, but perhaps much more that of Soovorof and the hard fighting on the
surrounding crags of the Muotta between his Russians and the French. Mr.
C—— knew the locality, and waxed eloquent on the subject, until
interrupted by an army of—wasps! attracted by some delicious cream with
which our landlord wound up the dinner. It became a regular battle, and a
doubtful one at first, waged in self‐defence. “Never had there been such a
year for wasps,” said our host, slaying a couple so dexterously with his
napkin that it betrayed considerable practice in the art. “But it had
altogether been a prosperous season”—two more knocked down by Mrs. C——.
“So no one had a right to complain”—three or four more timidly but
effectually killed by Mrs. C—— and myself. “The villagers had made a great
deal of money by their fruit and flowers carried up the mountain by their
children,” he continued; until at last, counting our victims by tens and
twenties during this running dialogue, we were left in peaceful possession
of the scene, and ready to hear wonderful reports of Weggis prosperity.
The Golden Lion evidently would have been pleased to keep us longer, but
the horses were waiting and the afternoon advancing; so, despite the
attractions—minus the wasps—we were obliged to depart.

Our path led at first up behind the hotel, through lanes, and meadows
enamelled with wild flowers, and dotted here and there with picturesque
cottages under magnificent chestnuts and walnut‐trees. The whole of this
portion is on the site of the former land‐slip, now the richest and most
highly‐cultivated district of the mountain. On every side the views were
enchanting; Mount Pilatus standing forth in all his grandeur just
opposite, displaying folds and tracts of pasture‐ground we had not
attributed to his rugged form. Lost in admiration, we rode on in
comparative silence, until we halted, to refresh the men and horses, at a
_café_ under a splendid tree, and soon after reached a chapel sheltered by
a rock, called in our hand‐book the Heiligenkreuz, or Church of the Holy
Cross. “The beginning of the Stations to Kaltbad,” said my guide, a dark‐
eyed, refined‐looking man, who had spoken but little hitherto. “Stations
to the _Wallfahrtort_, or place of pilgrimage at Kaltbad,” he repeated,
noticing my perplexed countenance. “Kaltbad is a _Gnadenort_, or ‘place of
grace,’ to us, madam,” he continued, “although you perhaps only know it as
a _Curort_.” And such was the sober truth. I had never heard it spoken of
as anything but a huge hotel with salubrious air. So now I entered into
conversation with my guide, and found that he constantly made the
Stations, in common with all the Weggis population, up this rugged ascent,
until they reach the church at Kaltbad. “Would I not go to see the
church?” he asked. “It was indeed a _Gnadenort_. But the feast of the year
I could not see, for it takes place in the middle of May, just before the
flocks are sent up to the summer pastures. Then there is a procession up
the mountain, with the banner we had noticed in the parish church—the
white cross on the red ground.”

So here was the explanation of its place of honor inside the sanctuary—one
more reason why the Weggis folks should hold it dear and we strangers
regard it with reverence. Nay more: should we not love and cherish a flag
which not only symbolizes, but is practically used by, a modern free
people in connection with their highest and noblest feelings? “In this
procession, headed by the priest,” my informant continued, “we, the
people, make the Stations with hymns and prayers as we go up, and, after
first visiting the Kaltbad church, all ends by the priest blessing the
pastures on all sides before the cattle are permitted to be brought up to
them for the summer season.” The higher we ascended, the steeper became
the road under a straight face of rock, and we could readily fancy how
picturesque, even from an artist’s point of view, such a procession must
be, headed by the red flag, winding its way up this rugged mountain‐road;
but, combined with the spirit and faith which animate it, it is impossible
to conceive anything more beautiful.

This peasant was a native of Weggis, and soon grew communicative. “Oh!
yes, he had often been to Einsiedeln; every one in that country had many,
many times made the pilgrimage there.” And in fervent language he
described the place to me. He had also been to Tell’s Chapel often, but
not yet to Tell’s Platform. That was the great object of his ambition,
what he most wished to accomplish, with a visit to Sachslen to see “Bruder
Klaus,” as so many of his neighbors had done; but another year should not
pass without his carrying out his intentions. Amidst conversation of this
kind we climbed up the straight wall of rock, which seemed to have no
issue, until suddenly we reached a curious group called the Felsenthor,
composed of large fragments fallen from above exactly in the semblance of
a “rocky gate,” as the name implies, and whence the view is magnificent.

The afternoon was lovely. At each turn one snowy peak after another had
been coming into view. The air, though warm, was fresher and brisker than
at Weggis, while the vegetation had sensibly changed from the luxuriant
chestnuts to the pines and fir‐trees of the Alpine heights. Nothing could
be more poetic and tranquil than our half‐hour’s repose at this beautiful
point, noticing the approach of sunset‐tints on the mountain‐wall just
opposite which overhangs Vitznau; watching the pretty steamers looking
like dragon‐flies hovering over the lake two thousand feet below; and then
reflecting on the faith and piety of our humble attendants, which shed a
vivifying atmosphere over the whole scene. Our minds were still full of
these thoughts as we set forth again for our last ascent to Kaltbad, about
three‐quarters of an hour distant, through a pretty dell of fallen rocks
and fresh verdure. We had quite forgotten the existence of the railway or
its feverish life, when all at once a turn in the road gave a rude shock
to our peaceful meditations. There were the trains laboring up a barren,
steep hill beside us—one that would be too steep for any horse without
three or four zigzag turns and windings. Three separate trains were coming
up at certain distances in succession, the engines puffing and snorting,
panting and laboring, in the effort to push the one carriage before each,
as though the struggle were too much for their fast‐failing strength. It
made one tremble to watch them, and it seemed impossible to comprehend how
the passengers looked so quiet and unconcerned. How Mrs. C—— and I
congratulated ourselves on having kept old‐fashioned ways and despised
“progress,” at least for once in our travels! And when I also thought of
the varied charms of our ride, and all that I had seen of the population
and their ways, I felt that no one who rushes through a country at high‐
pressure railway speed can ever hope to understand its people half as well
as those who come into closer contact with them.

Before we had time to recover from the impressions of the railway, Kaltbad
itself appeared in sight, high above our heads, like a green‐jalousied
monster of some German watering‐place lifted bodily up from the depths
below. Anything more unpoetic than its first view is not to be found;
though it must at once be admitted that first impressions are not to be
trusted in this particular case. It was a cruel shock, however, to our
visions of pious pilgrimages and processions; a return to the prose of
life we had never contemplated at four thousand four hundred and thirty‐
nine feet above the level of the sea.

Our young friends were anxiously awaiting us on the long terrace in front
of the hotel with such sensational accounts of their railway journey as
might well have obliterated all remembrance of the _Wallfahrtort_, or
“place of pilgrimage,” but for the parting reminder of my guide, that “the
church was behind the house, and he hoped I would be sure to see it.” But
the C——s’ only thought now was of the sunset about to take place, and they
hurried us off, without a moment’s delay, to a beautiful spot, called the
Käuzli, ten minutes’ distance from the hotel. Certainly no view could be
more glorious! Before us spread half the northern portion of
Switzerland—Mount Pilatus right opposite, Lucerne at our feet, Sempach,
the great lake, just beyond, bathed in a flood of crimson, as though in
harmony with its memories, and bringing back to our minds at one glance
Arnold von Winkelried and all the grand history related to us so recently
by Herr H——. The seven great peaks of the Oberland, including the
Wetterhorn, Monk, and Eiger, towered above the clouds to our right, while
the summits on the south, half facing the sunset, were lit up by the same
kaleidoscopic coloring that we had witnessed on the first evening of our
arrival at Lucerne. Spell‐bound by this fairy‐like scene, we lingered here
till nearly dark, and it seemingly became too late to seek out the little
church. But young C—— had discovered it that afternoon, and led me by an
intricate back pathway to its very door. Even at that late hour it was
open, the lamp burning before the altar, and many figures could be
distinguished devoutly praying in the twilight. These, as I afterwards
learned, were servants of the hotel—the laundresses, bath‐women, and
porters, who came to pay their visit to the Blessed Sacrament before
retiring to rest after their busy day’s work. Mass was celebrated every
morning at half‐past seven o’clock, they said. My own devotions over, I
was again led back to the hotel, where the brilliantly‐lighted rooms and
crowd of fashionably‐dressed ladies—although the material comforts are by
no means to be despised—were still in harsh discord with our ideas of
mountain life.

Next morning, as if we had been in the plain, the church‐bell tolled at
the stated hour, and found us ready to sally forth in answer to its call.
In the hotel all was bustle and clatter; but what wonder? Three hundred
guests and upwards have, on an average, to be provided for daily during
the season. In the middle of July four hundred and twenty were at one time
under this roof, but, happily for us, the numbers had now sensibly
decreased. No church, however, was visible, and it was only on inquiry
that I found a pathway in the rear of the house leading behind two rocks—a
true _Felsenthor_, or “rocky gate,” they made—hiding away their little
treasure. Once past them, there stood the church, with the sun shining on
its roof, small and simple, but perfect in all its proportions, nestling
amongst the encircling crags and overhanging trees, from amidst which,
opposite the door, trickled a stream of the clearest water. Mass had just
commenced at the centre altar, over which stood a statue of the Blessed
Virgin and Child, surrounded by a garland of flowers, and two bouquets
were laid, evidently as a pious offering, on the two side altars, which
were also adorned by excellent paintings. A handsome silver lamp hung in
the sanctuary, and there was a confessional, besides benches capable of
accommodating a couple of hundred people, all neatly painted and very
clean. To‐day the congregation was small, for the servants could not be
spared, we were told, at that hour from their work, and there were few
Catholic visitors in the house; but we noticed that the clerk rang the
church‐bell at the Gospel and the Elevation, so that the shepherds and
others scattered about on the mountain might join their intention with the
priest at the altar. Nothing could exceed the quiet of the spot. It might
have been miles away from the noisy world hard by, no sound audible but
the trickling of the stream outside, heard through the open door, and
enhancing the deep tranquillity of the scene. A most perfect haven of rest
it made for weary souls or pious pilgrims, and a worthy aim, with the
constant presence of the Blessed Sacrament, for any procession toiling up
the precipitous mountain‐side. When Mass was over, we lingered awhile,
and, looking round, a large, illuminated tablet caught our attention. What
was our delight to find it gave the whole history of the place in the
following words:

“KALTBAD ON THE RIGI.


    “Amongst the venerated spots which the goodness of God seems to
    have especially chosen for the distribution of rich spiritual and
    temporal gifts, Kaltbad on the Rigi has for centuries enjoyed a
    well‐founded reputation. The natural operation of the remarkably
    cold water has in itself given life and health to thousands. But
    far more effect has been produced by trustful prayers, joined with
    the contrite and devout reception of the holy sacraments, and
    aided by the powerful intercession of the pure Virgin‐Mother of
    God and of other saints. Remarkable and often perfectly miraculous
    cures of countless Christians, in the most different circumstances
    of body and soul, have here taken place, which have partly been
    recorded in writing, and partly live on in grateful remembrance.

    “In former times this place was called the ‘Schwesterborn,’ or
    ‘Spring of the Sisters’; for the legend relates that in the reign
    of the Emperor Albert of Austria—in the beginning of the XIVth
    century—three pious sisters retired to this wilderness in order to
    escape from powerful governors, or _Vogts_, and here led holy and
    saintly lives. The first miraculous cure on record is that of a
    devout _Landsassen_ of Weggis, named Balthasar Tolen, in the year
    1540. From year to year the reputation of this spring increased.
    In the year 1585, on the 20th of May, the first small chapel was
    consecrated in honor of God, of the holy Archangel Michael and the
    other angels, and of the holy shepherd Wendelin, by Balthasar,
    Bishop of Ascalon. It proved, however, insufficient for the number
    of Alpine inhabitants and pilgrims. Even after those belonging to
    the canton Schwytz built themselves a chapel, a hundred years
    later, at Mary in the Snow, or ‘Maria zum Schnee,’ the want of a
    larger church was still felt. The present one, with three altars,
    the middle one of which possesses the image of the ever Blessed
    Mother of God, and the two side ones the pictures of the holy
    martyr S. Lawrence and the father of the church, S. Jerome, was
    built in the year 1779, and considerably renovated in the year
    1861, when the two new side altars and their paintings by Theodore
    von Deschwanden were added.

    “On the 20th of July, 1782, His Holiness Pius VI. granted a
    plenary indulgence to all the faithful, on any day whatsoever, on
    the condition that after approaching the holy sacraments of
    Confession and Communion, with contrite and worthy dispositions,
    they here devoutly pray for the union of all Christian princes,
    the extirpation of heresy, and the increase of the Holy Catholic
    Church—an indulgence which can be applied to the souls in
    purgatory.

    “In order to afford the opportunity of assisting at divine service
    on Sundays and holidays to the shepherds as well as to the
    pilgrims, and also of approaching the holy sacraments, a special
    priest is here appointed during the whole summer season.”


So here again, even here, the Austrians and imperial _Vogts_ were at the
root of all things—in this instance, however, and unconsciously, the
source of good to many poor sufferers; for numberless _ex‐votos_ filling
the end of the little church eloquently told that it had proved to them a
true “place of grace,” as my guide of yesterday had so beautifully called
it. And the little stream outside was the real “Kaltbad,” whose wonder‐
working effects had first given the place its name. Quaint and rude were
all the paintings, but full of life and feeling, mostly from the
neighborhood—from Weggis, Vitznau, and Gersau. Yes, there was a man in a
boat in danger on the lake, just as we had seen from the Gersau hotel two
evenings ago; but this one is praying fervently with clasped hands, and we
longed to know if those who were saved the other day had done likewise.

Then here is a family of boys and girls kneeling in rows, the father and
mother behind, all with their pink, and blue, and green rosaries twined
round their hands, in the selfsame manner that the Gersau children had
theirs during Mass! Above, a child of two years old, kneeling beside its
mother, has a rosary hanging on its arm; quaint little things in caps like
those of their elders, or infants tied on pillows with quantities of red
bows. Red was so much the prevailing color that it seemed as if it must
have some reference to their beloved national flag. And then there were
small waxen hearts, and ears, and a wooden hand with a fearful gash, the
offering, no doubt, of a grateful wood‐cutter. Some of these are upwards
of a hundred or a hundred and fifty years old, with inscriptions in the
native dialect, full of pathos and local color. But most striking of all
is a large painting of the very wall of rock up which we had climbed from
Weggis yesterday, bearing the following simple‐worded inscription:

“Be it known to all, that by the breaking up of the dangerous Rigirocks on
the Weggis mountain some of the inhabitants were threatened with the
complete destruction of all their possessions. In this extremity and
distress they turned to heaven, and, with firm confidence in the gracious
Mother of all the angels, they here sought and found help; for instantly
the loosening of the rocks ceased, and all became quiet again. Therefore,
as a perpetual memorial of praise and thanksgiving to God and the Mother
of Mercy, they have consecrated and hung up this tablet, _anno_ 1753.”

This was clearly forty‐two years before the fatal mud‐slide which
destroyed so much, and it would be most interesting to know whether the
later victims turned hitherward for succor; but of this no record exists
in the church. In the above painting the Blessed Mother, holding the
divine Infant in her arms, is represented standing in the centre of the
rock‐wall, with S. Michael on one side and S. Lawrence on the other, just
as if they had been visible. Had we only beheld this tablet before, with
what different eyes should we have looked at this face of rock yesterday
from the cemetery below, as also during our ascent! And what proof such a
picture and inscription give of the strong faith of the Weggis population
in the unseen world under whose blessed protection they live in peace and
confidence! Whilst we tarried, peasant after peasant came in. One, an old
woman, took out her rosary, and told her beads leisurely; another, younger
and busier, laid down her basket, prayed for a few minutes with
recollection, and then went on to her work; but what most struck us was a
little girl of about twelve, who also had her basket, full of fruit and
flowers, and had been there before we arrived for Mass. She waited until
we left, and then evidently thought that we had finally departed.
Unexpectedly, however, I returned to look at the tablet again, and I
beheld the little maiden in the act of dropping some money into the poor
box, blushing modestly when her eyes caught mine. I asked, and found that
she was a Weggis child—one of the number that climb the mountain like
antelopes up to this hotel daily to sell their “fresh figs,” “peaches,”
and “flowers”—for they offer them in good English—the majority of whom
first pay their visit to the Blessed Sacrament in this church, and leave
some little offering for themselves or their parents. She was a blue‐eyed,
intelligent girl—one who had made her first communion two years
previously, and approached the Holy Sacrament _manchmal_—many times, she
said, during the course of the year.

As time went on, experience taught us that the children of the Rigi are
one of its most distinctive characteristics. Intelligent, bright‐
countenanced, and yet modest, they are the most attractive race of
juveniles to be met with in Switzerland, and, as yet, are unspoiled by
contact with the stranger crowd. They form the most remarkable contrast to
those of the Bernese Oberland, where the grandeur of Grindelwald and other
spots is so much marred by the swarms of sickly beggar‐children that there
flock round one from all quarters. Here, on the contrary, they are brimful
of health and intelligence, and never once during all our wanderings in
the forest cantons did a beggar, old or young, ever cross our path. So
much for the popular fallacy, or rather calumny, which says that
prosperity, comfort, and thrift are alone to be found in the Protestant
cantons, and that beggary, want, and uncleanliness mark the entrance into
the Catholic districts. Like many such sayings, it does not bear
investigation; but when even the most just‐minded start on their travels
with prejudiced minds, it is astonishing how readily they accept the
opinions of men whose want of observation they despise at home. Above all,
should the question be anything concerning Catholicity, their wilful
blindness surpasses all belief. Some exceptions to this rule there
certainly are, increasing, too, each year, like the celebrated Dr. Arnold,
for instance, who frankly admitted that he had found nothing in
Switzerland to justify such a verdict being passed on its Catholic
population, and was generous enough to acknowledge this.

Nor are the children who cover the Rigi, selling fruit and flowers, idlers
in any way. The law requires their attendance at school up to the age of
eight all the year round, but from eight to twelve only during the winter
months. This arrangement has been made in order that they may accompany
their parents to the upland _châlets_, or, as often happens, mind the
cattle alone on the higher pastures. A most interesting class they are,
and one must ardently pray that nothing may ever change or modernize them,
according to the present ideas of so‐called “civilization”!

For several days we took up our abode at Kaltbad, and never had cause for
one moment’s regret. The hotel is in itself a marvel of material comfort
and luxury at such an altitude; the air brisk, invigorating, and yet
balmy, and the views simply lovely. Who can forget the terrace facing the
Uri‐Rothstock, Tittlis, and many another peak and pass, and overhanging
Vitznau, whence we could even distinguish my favorite red standard
floating over its hotel, as the steamers came and went to Lucerne or
Fluelen, and the light smoke of the engines told that the trains were
creeping up towards us? Sometimes, it is true, the lake and all below were
hidden by the clouds that settled in thick masses over the water or
floated beneath us in light, vapory forms, while the heights and summits
opposite shone, like Kaltbad, in brilliant sunlight; making us more fully
realize the great elevation we were inhabiting in such tranquillity.

Then, the mornings spent in the “Wilderness,” which is represented
_nowadays_ by fir‐trees, descendants of those the three sisters knew, but
at present embedded in velvety turf on the hillside, with seats and tables
carefully placed at the best points of view! And the dear little church to
turn into at all times and hours, with the lamp ever burning, and never
quite empty! The afternoons we devoted to longer excursions, ascents and
descents in all directions. That to the _Kulm_, or Summit, was made by
rail, despite its terrors and perils. The young people insisted on our
making the experiment, but they could not succeed in persuading us elders
to return, except on foot! The Kaltbad world seems to go through the
ordeal unconcernedly; but nervous and uncomfortable work it must always
be, no matter how custom may familiarize them with it. One spot especially
is most alarming, where the precipice seems to go straight down from the
railroad to the plain many thousand feet below. As a matter of course, the
sunset at the _Kulm_ is the great _event_ on the Rigi—one, however, which
altogether depends upon the weather. We were most fortunate in catching a
clear atmosphere, and consequently distinct horizon. Then, sleeping at the
large hotel at the top, we included the famed sunrise in the same
excursion. Oh! for the pen of poet to describe either of these sights
properly. They are among those grand scenes which nature holds so
completely in her own keeping that no rush of commonplace humanity can
ever lower or vulgarize them. Crowds from all countries were present, yet
we saw nothing save the glorious panorama before us—the sun sinking
grandly behind the Jura Mountains in the west, or rising majestically from
behind the Sentis far away in Appenzell, after having first heralded his
approach by coloring with the light touch of “rosy‐fingered morn” the
Finster‐Aarhorn, Wetterhorn, Monk, and Jungfrau, as they stand in gradual
succession, facing the east, in the Bernese Oberland.

Here, too, were all the scenes of that famous Swiss history which we had
been studying within the last few days—the town of Schwytz in the
Urschweiz, bright and cheerful on its fresh, green meadows; Lomerz, where
Stauffacher commenced the great revolution; the small lake of Egeri, the
site of the battle of Morgarten; Kappel, on this side of the Zurich line
of hills—the Albis—with its monument to Zwingle, who was killed here in
battle against the Schwytzers; Königsfelden, further north, the scene of
Albrecht’s murder, and, later, the site of the sanguinary Agnes’ convent;
Küssnacht at our feet, with Tell’s Chapel close by, the object of my
guide’s pilgrimages, and where the fatal arrow is said to have entered
Gessler’s heart; the Lake of Sempach, and Lucerne towards the
northwest—every spot, in short, hallowed by some memory sacred to Swiss
patriotism or piety.

A circumference of three hundred miles is said to be included in this
panorama, dotted here and there with thirteen lakes, distinguishable in
clear weather. But it needs a mountaineer’s eye to detect this number,
for, though they certainly do exist, as proved by the map, even the
youthful sight of George C—— and his sister failed to count more than
eleven. The other two had “to be taken on trust,” on the word of the
guides, who declared that particular gleams of sunlight rested on distant
waters. But it is not the number of lakes or the extent of view which
gives such renown to this favorite spot. It is the grand poetry of its
nature, the interest of its associations, and that great, indescribable
influence which the poet addresses as


    “Spirit of Beauty, that dost consecrate
    With thine own hues all thou dost shine upon.”


Amongst the pleasantest of many pleasant memories, that of Sunday at
Kaltbad stands forth pre‐eminent. The weather was brilliant, and high and
low appeared in corresponding costume. It cannot be said that in the hotel
proper the day was altogether sanctified or edifying; for, except the
Catholics, the English Protestants, and a rare few others, the foreigners
show little outward sign of remembering the day. Indeed, one lady
ingenuously confessed her surprise that we should be so careful about
attending church, considering that _she_ never thought of it whilst
“taking the waters,” as she liked to fancy she was doing at Kaltbad. “Who
did?” she asked; and certainly it looked as if the majority were of her
way of thinking. Not the peasants, however, and let us hope that their
example may yet influence the strangers. Alas! alas! how one trembles,
lest the reverse may be the result of this inroad of “civilized”
multitudes to their midst! But so far no harm seems to have come of the
contact. As the hour for Mass drew near, men and women were to be seen
coming from various points, and when we reached the church it was so full
that a large overflow of the congregation had taken up their position in
the little porch outside. It seemed as though the history of the past
century would repeat itself over again; that a new church would become
necessary, and another new tablet be put up, telling future generations
that the present one had “proved insufficient for the number of Alpine
inhabitants and pilgrims.” No sight could be prettier, considering the
locality, the bright sun, and all these people in their Sunday dress. In
the latter particular, however, one peculiarity had a singular effect,
namely, that on the Rigi “full dress” for the men seems to consist in the
absence of their outer coats, and the Sunday distinction is shown only by
the snow‐white linen of their shirt‐sleeves and collars. All had their
alpenstocks and their prayer‐books, which they read devoutly during the
whole time. Anna and I also remained outside, as there was no room within;
but we heard every word distinctly, and could see the altar through the
open door and windows. The service began by an oblation of the Mass and
the Acts of Faith, Hope, and Charity in German, in the very manner and
words used in so many other countries, but notably in all the churches of
Ireland. This was followed by a good sermon, in which the preacher chiefly
urged the necessity of “keeping holy the Sabbath day,” of living in peace
and concord, but likewise of holding fast to the principles of religion,
“like their forefathers of old,” of whose virtues and steadfastness he
spoke in glowing language. It was the first sermon we had had an
opportunity of listening to in these parts, and it was very curious to
hear, even in a small out‐of‐the‐way place of this kind, such allusions
thus brought in as a matter of course, and so thoroughly in accordance
with Herr H——’s predictions. At its termination we were surprised to see
half a dozen of the hotel guests rise and leave; but these, we later
learnt, were Lutherans, who, having no chaplain of their own, find no
difficulty in coming to the preliminary part of the Catholic service,
though they consider it their duty to leave before Mass commences. It was
a curious instance of liberalism, and of the little essential antagonism
German Protestants entertain towards the Catholic Church. At the end of
Mass a prayer was said in German in honor of the Five Sacred Wounds,
joined in by all, after which the congregation dispersed, some to the
front of the hotel, and others in various directions. On these days alone
a few picturesque costumes appear, but they are generally from other
parts, as the Rigi boasts of nothing special of this kind. To‐day two
women in bright bodices covered by silver buttons and crosses, and with
silvered head‐dresses, enlivened the group of women—relations of the clerk
coming, they said, to visit this spot from Bürglen, a long distance on the
other side of the lake, and beyond Sachslen, the sanctuary of “Bruder
Klaus.”

Not wishing to disturb our Anglican friends, who were singing hymns and
performing their service in one of the drawing‐rooms of the house, Anna
and I sauntered past the “Wilderness,” until we reached the Käuzli. The
atmosphere was most clear, and the landscape so enchanting that a rest
here seemed a fitting and heavenly portion of our morning worship. Weggis
lay below; its church and the children’s corner, where I had stood lately
gazing upwards in this direction, were at our feet, and Lucerne, with its
girdle of battlemented walls at the upper end of the lake, further north,
its houses and boats distinctly visible in the transparent atmosphere. The
peasants could be seen here and there returning to their gray‐roofed
_châlets_, but, save the tinkling bells of the light‐limbed cattle
browsing in our neighborhood, no sound broke the perfect stillness of the
scene. All at once the peal of Lucerne Cathedral came booming to us across
the waters! It was eleven o’clock, which in those cantons is the Angelus
hour, and in a moment the deep‐toned bell of Weggis sent its sound up to
our very resting‐place. Then swiftly the echo was caught up by the
churches of all the numberless pretty villages that here cover the land,
until the whole country seemed to sound as with but one note. A more
thrilling instance of faith and practice it were impossible to imagine,
and, looking down at such a moment at this fruitful, prosperous district,
one felt as if our Lord had already heard its prayers, and in his mercy
blessed it.

Our afternoon walk was this day directed to the other Rigi sanctuary,
“Maria zum Schnee,” or Mary of the Snow, the same mentioned in the Kaltbad
tablet, and which, from Wordsworth’s beautiful poem, has obtained a more
world‐wide name than its pretty neighbor; though in the locality itself no
difference in celebrity is admitted between the two. The only striking
distinction is that whilst Kaltbad has but the one simple appellation,
“Mary of the Snow” rejoices in a _pet_ name, by which it is more generally
known on the Rigi, where Klösterli, or “the little convent,” is its
familiar and every‐day title. It lies deep in a southern fold of the
mountain, unseen from Kaltbad, but only a couple of miles distant; so that
it is a favorite walk with those visitors whose strength is unequal to the
longer excursions. This year the charms of the mountain‐road have been
sadly interfered with by the blasting of rocks necessary to the making of
the railway branch to the Scheideck, and another line up from Arth to the
Staffel, besides the building of an additional hotel, all which modern
material improvements make one look forward with trepidation to their
future effect on the old inhabitants. In a few years more these heights
will be one vast mountain‐city—a new phase of life, which may have its own
poetic side, it is true, and bring health and advantage to humanity in
general, but which, during two or three months of the year, so completely
changes the old character of the beautiful mountain that its friends of
twenty and thirty years’ standing say they can no longer recognize its
former simplicity. Hence our musings were somewhat melancholy, as we
wandered on above the new railway‐line, until, from a bend in the hill, we
unexpectedly came in sight of a completely new scene, the curious _Mythen_
rocks rising above Schwytz, in the distance, and Klösterli itself lying
peacefully below us, as if sheltered from all harm in a dell beneath the
_Kulm!_ It seemed a spot exactly made for snow, and one could almost fancy
it buried at times under the soft embrace of some snow‐white drift.
Whether the name first came from this circumstance of its position, or
from its connection with the Basilica of Santa Maria Maggiore at Rome, we
had no opportunity of ascertaining; but, whatever the cause, the name and
connection seemed most appropriate. Certain it is that the painting which
is the chief ornament of S. Maria zum Schnee is a copy of the one at the
great basilica, and, moreover, that the church at Klösterli has been, as
is fitting, affiliated to the one in Rome. The festival is kept on the
same day, the 5th of August, and the Rigi church was consecrated by a
Papal Nuncio in 1700, and endowed since then with many privileges by Pope
Clement XII., so that the link in interest and connection has never been
wanting. Mr. C—— knew all the particulars, and as we descended the steep
pathway to Klösterli he recalled to us the beautiful tradition about the
foundation of Santa Maria Maggiore. He reminded us how a Roman senator and
his wife having been converted to Christianity, the latter had a dream
which made her believe they ought to build a church in honor of the
Blessed Virgin. Her husband, however, dismissed the idea as a fancy of her
brain, until, having had the same dream for three successive nights, his
wife on the last occasion understood that she ought to choose the site
which should be covered with snow on the following morning. Her husband,
still unwilling, accompanied her in the search, when, not far from the
house, they found the top of the Esquiline Mount completely covered with a
fine crust of snow! This occurred on the 5th of August, and, bringing
conviction to the husband’s mind, he at once consented to give up his
fortune for the purpose, and built on the spot the Basilica, which now
covers the extent of ground marked out by the fall of snow. Another
version states that it was the result of a vision which the pope, S.
Liberius, and John, the patrician, had on the same night, and which was
confirmed the following morning, the 5th of August, by a miraculous fall
of snow, which extended over the space the church was to occupy. Certain
it is that the fall of snow occurred, on this very spot too, and that the
recollection of this wonderful origin is still kept alive in Rome. On the
Feast of Santa Maria ad Nives, on the 5th of the hot month of August, a
shower of white leaves is made to fall on the congregation attending High
Mass at the great Basilica. What affiliation, therefore, could be more
fitting for a mountain chapel? With renewed interest we hurried to the
spot. The village consists entirely of a few inns, the convent—where live
the Capuchin fathers who have care of the church—and of the church itself,
much larger than that at Kaltbad, and which forms the centre of the whole
place. The old character is maintained up to the present time, these inns
being still most homely—very different from the luxurious abodes elsewhere
on the mountain—and the convent in reality an hospice for pilgrims, which
at once gives the impression of a higher aim than mere pleasure‐seeking.
The Capuchin fathers, who glide about with serious mien in their brown
habits, add to the solemnity, further increased by the depth of the valley
“making sunset,” as the sailors say, to the place long before it happens
on the surrounding heights. It has nothing cheerful or peculiarly
attractive to the general public, so one might hope that it would escape
the contagion of a worldly spirit. This year the gloom has been added to
by a dreadful accident connected with the unwelcome railway, and one heard
of little else on the spot. A young lady who was sitting with her father
outside the Sonne Hotel, writing at one of the small tables, was suddenly
struck by a large stone, thrown by the blasting of a rock close by, and
died in less than half an hour. She was to have gone away from Klösterli
on the previous day with the rest of her family, but had remained a while
longer merely to take care of him. His grief, consequently, was
overwhelming. It was a melancholy inauguration of the “iron road,” and for
the moment made a deep impression on all concerned. But it is much to be
dreaded that it will not be a lasting one. The father, to whom we spoke,
shook his head gravely, as he pointed to the railway works, expressing his
fears that from a place of pilgrimage they would soon convert his dearly‐
loved Klösterli into a simple _Curort_, or, in modern parlance, a
_Sanatorium_. He complained of its baneful influence already; for, though
the peasants are thoroughly good and pious, the immense influx of tourists
gives them little time for devotions during the summer season, especially
in the month of August, when the church festival occurs. They, the monks,
belong to the large Capuchin convent at Arth, from which two or three have
been sent here at the special request of the commune, ever since the
foundation, to take care of this church and attend to the wants of the
pilgrims. But the numbers of the latter are diminishing from the above
causes, and hospitality has this year been chiefly bestowed on invalid
priests, who here seek change of air for weeks at a time. The procession
similar to that from Weggis, which used to come up from Arth for the 5th
of August, making the Stations on the way, did not take place this time.
Nor had the people leisure, either, for their old games, which followed
the church services as a matter of course. Sad and melancholy, he seemed
fearful of this inroad of materialism and the many temptations to which
the poorer classes may be exposed. The tranquillity of the spot will
doubtless be ruined by the puffing engine and obtrusive railway, and we
could not but rejoice doubly that the “haven of rest” at Kaltbad lies
safely hidden away behind its rocks out of reach of such disturbance. But
so many have been the prayers answered and hearts cured within the last
two centuries by the intercession of holy “Mary of the Snow” that it is
hard to believe so favored a sanctuary, though this may perhaps be a
moment of transition, will be altogether swept away or lose its holy
influence on so essentially pious a population. The church is crowded with
_ex‐votos_, many of them the same seen by Wordsworth in 1820, when he sang
in the following strain of


    “Our Lady Of The Snow.

    “Meek Virgin Mother, more benign
    Than fairest star upon the height
    Of thy own mountain set to keep
    Lone vigils thro’ the hours of sleep,
    What eye can look upon thy shrine
    Untroubled at the sight?

    “These crowded offerings, as they hang
    In sign of misery relieved,
    Even these, without intent of theirs,
    Report of comfortless despairs,
    Of many a deep and cureless pang
    And confidence deceived.

    “To thee, in this aërial cleft.
    As to a common centre, tend
    All sufferings that no longer rest
    On mortal succor, all distrest
    That pine of human hope bereft,
    Nor wish for earthly friend.

    “And hence, O Virgin Mother mild!
    Though plenteous flowers around thee blow,
    Not only from the dreary strife
    Of winter, but the storms of life,
    Thee have thy votaries aptly styled
    Our Lady of the Snow.

    “Even for the man who stops not here,
    But down the irriguous valley hies,
    Thy very name, O Lady! flings,
    O’er blooming fields and gushing springs,
    A holy shadow soft and dear
    Of chastening sympathies!

    “Nor falls that intermingling shade
    To summer gladsomeness unkind;
    It chastens only to requite
    With gleams of fresher, purer light;
    While o’er the flower‐enamelled glade
    More sweetly breathes the wind.

    “But on!—a tempting downward way,
    A verdant path, before us lies;
    Clear shines the glorious sun above;
    Then give free course to joy and love,
    Deeming the evil of the day
    Sufficient for the wise.”


In our walk hither along the brow of the hill we had talked to some
pretty, bright‐eyed children running about to call in their father’s
cattle, asking their names and other questions; but, returning the same
way, all our thoughts and attention were given to the distant sound of
avalanches, which the C——s declared came to us across the mountain‐tops
from the region of the great Oberland range. Anything more sublime it were
difficult to conceive in the fading light and soft hues of the sunset
twilight. We had quite forgotten the children, but they had been thinking
of us, and, passing on by their _châlet_, little Aloysius (a fair‐haired
boy of three years old) was seen skipping down the green slope with a
paper in his hand. It was a mysterious proceeding, especially when he came
and eagerly presented it to me. But my surprise was greater on reading it
to find that it consisted of prayers printed at Einsiedeln: the first
teaching how to offer up one’s intention with the Masses that are being
said all over the world; another to be said when present during the
offertory of the Mass; and a third, when unable to attend in person, for
daily recital at home in union with the priest at the altar. The little
fellow evidently prized it, as taught by his mother, and it was fortunate
that I was able to promise him it should hold a place amongst my
treasures, and that I would say the beautiful prayers daily, which I have
never failed to do. But he could not altogether know how much happiness
his act caused me, chasing away the gloomy fears of the Capuchin father,
and giving bright hope that a true spirit of piety will grow up with the
rising generation.




Church Song.


    “And when they had said an hymn, they went forth to the Mount of
                Olives.”—S. MARK xiv. 26.
    “Hymnum cecinit, ut et nos similiter faciamus.”—S. CHRYSOSTOM.



The Disciple.


    A world I’d give to hear thee sing
          That song!
          Too long
    Is life until it bring
    The breaking of the bonds that cling
      About this deadly flesh.
      Sweet Lord, refresh
    My weary, longing soul;
    And this sad banishment condole
    With one faint echo of that strain
    Of melody divine, which must remain
    Yet murmuring through space
      Of all creation’s bound;
        And so controls
        The harmony that rolls
    In floods of majesty and grace
    Throughout thy dwelling‐place,
        From tuneful lyres
        Of angel choirs,
    From ceaseless rapturous songs
    Of shining saintly throngs,
      That every sound
    Heaven hears doth merely seem
    Made to accompany thy theme.
    Wondrous Singer, O my Lord and King!
    Tell me, who taught thee how to sing
        So sweet a strain?



The Master.


    I heard my Mother’s voice one morn,
    Whilst yet in womb unborn,
    Chanting the canticle of praise
    She still in heaven doth raise;
    And when a boy, oft at her knee,
    She did the tuneful mystery
      Unfold to me.
        Wouldst hear me sing?
        ’Tis no hard thing.
    Go, hearken to the singing of my Bride
    With whom my Presence ever doth abide;
    Who is a Mother unto thee,
    Like as the Virgin, full of grace, to me.
    Her voice, in melody her own,
    If thou wilt mark its heavenly tone,
        Hath cunning art
        To make thy heart
        Hear mine again.




A Discussion With An Infidel.



XVIII. Personal Continuance.


_Reader_. The next question you treat, doctor, regards the immortality of
the human soul, or, as you call it, “personal continuance.” In your
opinion the spirit and the body, the soul and the brain, are so intimately
and inseparably connected that a soul without a body, as “force without
matter,” can never exist. I remember having already answered some of the
grounds of this opinion; but as you make “personal continuance” the
subject of a special chapter, I presume that it is in this chapter that
you have condensed the strength and substance of all your arguments. How
do you, then, establish your position?

_Büchner_. “A spirit without a body is as unimaginable as electricity or
magnetism without metallic or other substances” (p. 196).

_Reader_. Unimaginable! Of course, a spiritual substance is not the object
of imagination. Perhaps you mean that it is unthinkable, inconceivable, or
unintelligible; which I deny.

_Büchner_. “Unprejudiced philosophy is compelled to reject the idea of an
individual immortality and of a personal continuance after death. With the
decay and dissolution of its material substratum, through which alone it
has acquired a conscious existence and become a person, and upon which it
was dependent, the spirit must cease to exist” (_ibid_.)

_Reader_. Beware of fallacies, doctor. You have not yet proved that the
human soul needs a material substratum. Again, you merely assume that it
is _through the body_ that the soul has acquired a conscious existence,
whilst the fact is that the soul _through itself_ is conscious of its own
existence in the body. Moreover, the soul does not become a person through
the body it informs, but, on the contrary, confers on the body the
privilege of being a part of the person. Lastly, the spirit is not
dependent upon the body, except for the sensitive operations; and you
cannot assume that the soul depends upon the body for its own being. Hence
your conclusion is yet unproved.

_Büchner._ “All the knowledge which this spirit has acquired relates to
earthly things; it has become conscious of itself in, with, and by these
things; it has become a person by its being opposed against earthly,
limited individualities. How can we imagine it to be possible that, torn
away from these necessary conditions, this being should continue to exist
with self‐consciousness and as the same person? It is not reflection, but
obstinacy, not science, but faith, which supports the idea of a personal
continuance” (pp. 196, 197).

_Reader._ I am rather amused than embarrassed at your identifying
reflection with science and obstinacy with faith, as I know that you are
absolutely incapable of accounting for such a nonsensical ranting. It is
not true that “all the knowledge acquired by our soul relates to earthly
things.” We have already discussed this point, and shown that our
knowledge of earthly things is only the alphabet of human knowledge. Nor
is it true that our soul “has become conscious of itself by such things.”
Consciousness is, even objectively, an immanent act, and the soul cannot
be conscious of its own self, except by looking upon itself. No one can
say _I perceive_ without a knowledge of the _I_; and therefore the soul
knows its own self independently of the perception of other earthly
things. But, as there are philosophers who account for self‐consciousness
by the primitive accidental sensations experienced by the child, I will
suppose with you that our soul becomes conscious of its own existence by
means of such sensations. Does it follow from this that the union with the
body is “a necessary condition” for the existence of the soul? Such a
conclusion would be absurd. For it latently assumes that the soul must
lose its consciousness of self by losing the instrument of its first
sensation. Now, to assume this is at least as absurd as to assume that by
losing any of your senses you lose all the knowledge already acquired
through them, or that by going out of Germany you cease to know everything
that is German.

But your greatest mistake regards the notion of personality. The spirit,
you say, “has become a person by its being opposed against earthly,
limited individualities.” What does this mean? First of all, the spirit
_does not become_ a person, but is itself the source of human personality.
Secondly, to be a person, there is no need of other earthly, limited
individualities, against which the spirit should be opposed. Any
intelligent being, left to itself, with the free disposal of its own self,
is a person. _Persona_, says Boethius, _est rationalis naturæ individua
substantia_; and this celebrated definition, adopted by all the
metaphysicians of the old school, is far from becoming obsolete. It would
seem, then, that you speak of personality without knowing in what it
consists. To prove that the soul cannot enjoy personal continuance in a
state of separation, you should prove that the soul separated from the
body _is not an intelligent being having a free use of its faculties_.
Whatever else you may prove, if you do not prove this, will amount to
nothing.

_Büchner._ “Physiology,” says Vogt, “decides definitely and categorically
against individual immortality, as against any special existence of the
soul” (p. 197).

_Reader._ Tell the physiologists to keep to their own business. The
question of the immortality of the soul is not one of those which can be
solved from the knowledge of our organs and their functions. All the
physiologist can do is to show the existence in the organs of a principle
which animates them, and which at death ceases to show its presence. What
becomes of it the physiologist, as such, has no means of deciding. Hence
your Vogt is supremely rash in affirming that “physiology decides
definitely and categorically against individual immortality.”

_Büchner._ “Experience and daily observation teach us that the spirit
perishes with its material substratum” (_ibid._).

_Reader._ Indeed? Let us hear how experience and daily observation teach
what you assert. It is extremely curious that mankind should be ignorant
of a fact which falls under daily observation.

_Büchner._ “There never has been, and never will be, a real apparition
which could make us believe or assume that the soul of a deceased
individual continues to exist; it is dead, never to return” (p. 198).

_Reader._ Allow me to remark, doctor, that you change the question. You
had to show that experience and daily observation teach that the spirit
perishes with the body. To say that there are no apparitions is not to
adduce experience and daily observation, but to argue from non‐experience
and non‐observation. Not to see a thing is not an argument against its
existence, especially if that thing be not the object of sight; and
therefore to infer the non‐existence of souls from their non‐apparition is
a logical blunder. But, secondly, is it true that “there never has been,
and never will be, a real apparition”?

_Büchner._ “That the soul of a deceased person,” says Burmeister, “does
not reappear after death, is not contested by rational people. Spirits and
ghosts are only seen by diseased or superstitious individuals” (_ibid._).

_Reader._ I do not say that souls, as a rule, reappear, or that we must
believe all the tales of old women about apparitions. Yet it is a fact
that Samuel’s ghost appeared to Saul and spoke to him; and it is a fact
that the witch of Endor, whom Saul had consulted, was already famous for
her power of conjuring up spirits, as it appears from the Bible, where we
are informed that there were many other persons in the kingdom of Israel
possessing a similar power, whom Saul himself had ordered to be slain. If
you happen to meet with Martinus Del Rio’s _Magic Disquisitions_, you will
learn that in all centuries there have been apparitions from the spiritual
world. Devils have often appeared, saints have appeared, and, to make the
reality of the apparitions incontrovertible, have left visible signs of
their presence, or done things which no mortal man has power to do. I need
not descend to particulars; yet I may remind you of the great recent
apparition of Lourdes, and of the numberless miracles by which it was
accompanied and followed, in the eyes of all classes of persons, including
infidels and Freemasons, who left no means untried to discredit the facts,
but they only succeeded in enhancing the value of the evidence on which
such facts had been previously admitted. Come, now, and tell us that all
the witnesses of such public facts are “diseased or superstitious
individuals”!

It is therefore proved, by experience and observation, that there are
apparitions, and that the human soul remains in existence after its
separation from the body. But, although this proof suffices to convince
all reasonable persons, philosophers furnish us with other excellent
proofs of the immortality of the soul. Are you able to show that all such
proofs are inconclusive?

_Büchner._ “There is something suspicious in the great zeal and the waste
arguments with which this question has at all times been defended, which
yet, for obvious reasons, has rarely experienced serious scientific
attacks. This zeal appears to show that the advocates of this theory are
rather anxious about their own conscience, since plain reason and daily
experience are but little in favor of an assumption which can only be
supported on theoretical grounds. It may also appear singular that at all
times those individuals were the most zealous for a personal continuance
after death whose souls were scarcely worthy of such a careful
preservation” (p. 198).

_Reader._ This is vile language, doctor. Our zeal in defending the
immortality of the soul arises from the moral importance of the point at
issue; and there is nothing “suspicious” about it. Our “waste of
arguments” is not yet certified; whereas your waste of words is already
fully demonstrated. The immortality of the soul “has _rarely_ experienced
serious scientific attacks,” or rather, it has _never_ experienced them,
because real science does not attack truth, and therefore all attacks
against the soul’s immortality have been, are, and will always be
unscientific in the highest degree. “Plain reason,” without the least need
of “daily experience,” convinces every thoughtful man that a truth based
on good “theoretical grounds” cannot be rejected as a gratuitous
“assumption,” especially when it is also supported by undeniable facts.
Your closing utterance deserves no answer. Every sensible man will qualify
it as downright insolence. Meanwhile, where are your proofs?

_Büchner._ “Attempts were made to deduce from the immortality of matter
the immortality of the soul” (_ibid._).

_Reader._ This is simply ridiculous. Who ever admitted the immortality of
matter?

_Büchner._ “There being, it was said, no absolute annihilation, it is
neither possible nor imaginable that the human soul, once existing, should
be annihilated; which would be opposed to reason” (p. 199).

_Reader._ Natural reason does not show the impossibility of annihilation;
and therefore it was impossible for philosophers to argue as you affirm
that they did. But, since you think that annihilation is quite impossible,
how can you evade the argument?

_Büchner._ “There is no analogy between the indestructibility of matter
and that of spirit. Whilst the visible and tangible matter sensually
exhibits its indestructibility, the same cannot be asserted of spirit or
soul, which is not matter, but merely an ideal product of a particular
combination of force‐endowed materials” (_ibid._).

_Reader._ You merely rehash the old blunder already refuted in one of our
past conversations. If the soul were nothing but a product of material
combinations, it would certainly perish when those combinations are
destroyed, and there would be no need of annihilation to make it vanish.
But if the soul is an active principle, as you must admit, it cannot be a
result of material combinations, and consequently it is a special
substance, and cannot perish except by annihilation, just in the same
manner as matter also cannot perish but by annihilation. Your ground for
denying the analogy between the destructibility of matter and that of the
spirit is therefore a false supposition. It is plain that there is not
only analogy, but absolute parity, and that, if matter were really
indestructible, the indestructibility of the soul would thereby be
sufficiently established. But we do not avail ourselves of such argument;
for we know that matter is destructible. You say that “the visible and
tangible matter sensually exhibits its indestructibility”; but a little
reflection would have sufficed to convince you that the possible and the
impossible are not objects of sensible perception, but of intellectual
intuition. Then you say that the soul is an “_ideal_ product of a
particular combination of force‐endowed materials”; which is the veriest
nonsense. For, were it true that a particular combination of materials
produces the soul, such a product would be _real_, not _ideal_. Thus you
have succeeded in condensing no less than three blunders into a few lines.
But let this pass. Have you anything to add in connection with this
pretended argument?

_Büchner._ “Experience teaches that the personal soul was, in spite of its
pretended indestructibility, annihilated; _i.e._, it was non‐existing
during an eternity. Were the spirit indestructible, like matter, it must
not only, like it, last for ever, but have ever existed. But where was the
soul before the body to which it belongs was formed? It was not; it gave
not the least sign of an existence; and to assume an existence is an
arbitrary hypothesis” (pp. 199, 200).

_Reader._ You grow eloquent, doctor, but without cause. We all admit that
the soul did not exist before the body was formed. And, pray, how could
the soul be annihilated if it did not exist? Are you doomed to utter
nothing but blunders?

_Büchner._ “It is in the very nature of things that all that arises should
necessarily perish” (p. 200).

_Reader._ By no means.

_Büchner._ “In the eternal cycle of matter and force nothing is
destructible; but this only applies to the whole, while its parts undergo
a constant change of birth and decay;” (_ibid._).

_Reader._ Try to be reasonable, dear doctor, and lay aside “the eternal
cycle,” which has no existence but in your imagination. You promised to
argue from experience and observation. Keep your promise.

_Büchner._ “I will. There is a state which might enable us to produce a
direct and empirical argument in favor of the annihilation of the
individual soul—the state of sleep. In consequence of corporeal changes,
the function of the organ of thought is suspended, and the soul, in a
certain sense, annihilated. The spiritual function is gone, and the body
exists or vegetates without consciousness in a state similar to that of
the animals in which Flourens had removed the hemispheres. On awakening,
the soul is exactly in the state it was before sleep. The interval of time
had no existence for the soul, which was spiritually dead. This peculiar
condition is so striking that sleep and death have been termed brothers”
(p. 200).

_Reader._ This “direct and empirical argument” may be turned against you.
For sleep is not real death; and the animal, when asleep, continues to be
animated. If, therefore, the soul remains in the body, even when the
organs are in a condition which excludes the possibility of their
concurrence to the work of the soul, does it not follow that the soul
enjoys an existence independent of the organs? It is true that, while the
organs are in such a condition, the soul cannot utilize them for any
special work; but it does not follow that “the soul is, in a certain
sense, annihilated,” nor that “the spiritual function is gone.” You
yourself admit that, “on awakening, the soul is exactly in the state it
was before sleep.” I do not care to examine whether the state of the soul
is _exactly_ the same; I rather incline to say that it is much better;
but, waiving this, it is still necessary to concede that the soul cannot
keep its state without preserving its existence, attributes, and
faculties, and a direct consciousness of its own being, which can be
recollected after sleep, when it has been accompanied, as in dreams, by a
certain degree of reflection.

_Büchner._ I expected, sir, that you would appeal to dreams; for “the
phenomena of dreaming have been used as arguments against the supposed
annihilation of the soul during sleep, by their proving that the soul is
also active in that state. This objection is founded upon error, it being
well known that dreaming does not constitute the state properly called
sleep, but that it is merely a transition between sleeping and waking” (p.
201).

_Reader._ I have not appealed to dreams. I simply mentioned the fact that
in certain dreams, where a certain degree of reflection accompanies the
acts of the soul, we have the possibility of remembering that we were
conscious of our own being. Take away all dreams; you will not thereby
lessen the certainty of our direct consciousness of our own being; you
will only suppress an experimental subsidiary proof, of which we are in no
special need. Moreover, remark, doctor, that “against the _supposed_
annihilation of the soul during sleep” we are by no means bound to bring
arguments. It is necessary only to say _Nego assumptum_, and it will be
your duty to prove your supposition. I observe, in the third place, that
you cannot consistently maintain that dreaming is a state intermediate
between sleeping and waking. For, as you affirm that the soul exists in
the latter state, and does not exist in the former, you are constrained to
affirm that in the middle state the soul cannot be said to exist, and
cannot be said not to exist, but partakes of existence and non‐existence
at the same time. Now, though you are so thoroughly accustomed to
blundering, I am confident that you cannot but shrink from the idea of a
non‐existent existence. And thus your definition of dreaming destroys your
supposed annihilation of the soul during sleep.

_Büchner._ “Certain morbid conditions are still more calculated to prove
the annihilation of our spirit. There are affections of the brain, _e.g._,
concussions, lesions, etc., which so much influence its functions that
consciousness is suspended. Such perfectly unconscious states may continue
for months together. On recovery, it is found that the patients have no
recollection whatever of the period which has passed, but connect their
mental life with the period when consciousness ceased. This whole time was
for them a deep sleep, sleep or a mental death; they in a sense died, and
were born again. Should death take place during that period, it is
perfectly immaterial to the individual, who, considered as a spiritual
being, was already dead at the moment when consciousness left him. Those
who believe in a personal immortality might find it somewhat difficult, or
rather impossible, to explain these processes, or to give some clue as to
the whereabouts of the soul during these periods” (p. 202).

_Reader._ It is neither impossible nor difficult to ascertain where the
soul is during such periods; for it is in the body all the while. Only the
actual conditions of its existence in the body preclude, by their
abnormity, the exercise of some faculties. The soul is, in such cases,
like the organist, who is unable to elicit the wonted sounds from the
organ so long as the pipes are not properly supplied with wind. The
patients you allude to are not corpses; and although you affirm that “they
_in a sense_ died and were born again,” it is evident that they did not
die at all, but only lost the proximate power of performing certain
operations. The soul and the body, so long as they are together, must work
together. Even the purely intellectual operations, in which the body has
no part, are always naturally associated with the imaginative operations,
in which the body has a considerable part; and when these latter, through
the abnormal condition of the brain, are suspended, the former also are
suspended, so far at least as there is question of reflex acts. And this
fully accounts for the phenomena accompanying certain morbid states,
without resorting to your pretended annihilation of the spirit.
Accordingly, if you wish to argue against personal continuance, you must
draw your objections from some other source.

_Büchner._ “The annihilation of a personal soul has been protested against
upon moral grounds. It was, in the first place, asserted that the idea of
an eternal annihilation is so revolting to the innermost feeling of man
that it must be untrue. Although an appeal to feelings is not a scientific
method of proceeding, it must certainly be admitted that the thought of an
_eternal life_ is more terrifying than the idea of eternal annihilation.
The latter is by no means repugnant to a philosophical thinker.
Annihilation, non‐existence, is perfect rest, painlessness, freedom from
all tormenting impressions, and therefore not to be feared” (pp. 204,
205).

_Reader._ This way of reasoning, doctor, is most extraordinary. First, you
assume that the moral grounds on which our knowledge of the immortality of
the soul is based consist of mere feelings. This is false. Secondly, you
do not consider that there are rational tendencies which, whether you call
them feelings or not, ought to be taken into account in a philosophic
discussion, as they are of such a character that their fulfilment cannot
be a matter of doubt. Thirdly, you exhibit _eternal life_ as a synonym of
_perpetual torments_; for you suppose that the idea of eternal life is
terrific, and that, to be free “from all tormenting impressions,”
annihilation is necessary. Thus you conceive that after this life there
can be nothing but the torments of hell. This is most certainly true with
regard to unrepenting Freemasons; they have nothing else to expect, not
even annihilation; and it would truly be better for them if they were
annihilated or _had never been born_, as we know from the Gospel. But why
should you take for granted that there is no heaven? It is plain that your
argument in favor of annihilation is nothing but a miserable sophism.
Lastly, I wish to remark, though it is of little importance to the
question of immortality, that annihilation, or non‐existence, is _not_
perfect rest, as you imagine. For who is it that rests? Can you have the
subject after its annihilation, or the rest without the subject? You see,
I hope, that your logic here, too, is at fault.

_Büchner._ “Philosophers, perceiving the loose ground upon which they
stand in regard to this question, have, in their endeavors to reconcile
philosophy and faith, tried to help themselves by very singular
expedients” (p. 205).

_Reader._ Loose ground and singular expedients indeed! Who will believe
you?

_Büchner._ “The desire of our nature,” says Carrière, “to solve so many
problems requires immortality, and the many sorrows of this earth would be
such a shocking dissonance in the world if it were not to find its
solution in a higher harmony, namely, in the purification and development
of personal individuality. This and other considerations render
immortality, from our point of view, a subjective certainty—a conviction
of the heart” (p. 206).

_Reader._ Do you consider these words as a very singular expedient to
reconcile philosophy and faith? What can you object to the thought they
express?

_Büchner._ “Every one may, certainly, have _convictions of the heart_, but
to mix them up with philosophical questions is unscientific. Either
something accords with reason and experience—it is then true; or it does
not accord—then it is untrue, and can find no place in philosophical
systems” (_ibid._).

_Reader._ I see your trick, doctor. There are two kinds of convictions of
the heart. Some of these convictions are accidental, transitory, not
universal, and not invincible; others universal, permanent, and
unchangeable. The first kind originates in accidental affections of
particular persons in particular circumstances; and this kind of
convictions should not be mixed up with philosophical questions. But the
second kind owes nothing to accidental circumstances, and shows in its
universality and invincibility its universal and unconquerable cause,
which cannot be other than our rational nature; and this kind of
convictions must be taken into account in the philosophical questions
concerning our rational soul; for it is from the nature of the effects
that we discover the nature of the causes. Now, “the conviction” which
Carrière mentions belongs to this second kind; for it is common to all
rational beings, and cannot be shaken off even by those who, like you, try
to convince themselves of a future annihilation. We therefore can and must
take into account such a conviction when we examine philosophically the
nature of the soul.

Accordingly, it is absurd, on your part, to pretend that an appeal to such
a conviction is “unscientific.” Nothing is more unscientific than to lay
aside the effects while one wishes to investigate the causes.

As to your aphorism, “either something accords with reason and
experience—it is then true; or it does not accord—then it is untrue,” I do
not think that it can help you much. A thoughtless reader may indeed be
dazzled by its fine glittering, and candidly believe that you are a most
resolute champion and acute investigator of truth; but he who reflects on
your reckless disregard of logic, tergiversation, and intellectual
perversity will only wonder at your audacity in appealing to a principle
which you trample upon in every page of your production. Yes, sir; what
accords with reason and experience is true; but how can this be a plea for
denying immortality?

_Büchner._ “It may be that it would be very fine if in heaven, as in the
last act of a heart‐stirring drama, everything would resolve in a touching
harmony or in general joy; but science has nothing to do with what _may
be_, but with what _is_, and is accordingly compelled to infer from
experience the finiteness of human existence. Indeed, a perfect solution
of the enigmas of the universe, as Carrière desires, must be considered as
impossible for the human mind. The moment we arrive at this point we are
creators and capable of shaping matter according to pleasure. Such a
knowledge would be equivalent to dissolution—annihilation—and there exists
no being which can possess it. Where there is no striving there can be no
life; perfect truth would be a sentence of death for him who has acquired
it, and he must perish in apathy and inactivity” (p. 206).

_Reader._ It is of no use, doctor, to heap up assertions of this kind.
They are all groundless. When you say that science has nothing to do with
what may be, but with what is, you latently assume that between what may
be and what is there must be opposition; whereas it is plain that nothing
is but what could be. And again, when you mention _science_, what do you
mean? Physics, chemistry, astronomy, geology, and the like have certainly
nothing to do with the immortality of the soul; but philosophy has
something to do with it, and philosophy, the highest of sciences, decides
that the human soul not only _may be_, but _must be_, immortal. In the
third place, it is ludicrous to affirm that “experience shows the
finiteness of human existence”; for our experience is limited to human
life upon earth, whereas our discussion refers to after‐life. In the
fourth place, you pretend that a full knowledge of truth is impossible to
the human mind, for the wonderful reason that we would then be “creators
and capable of shaping matter according to pleasure.” In this you commit
two blunders; for, first, the knowledge of natural truths does not
necessarily entail a physical power of shaping matter according to
pleasure; and, secondly, were our souls to acquire such a power, we would
not yet be creators, as creation is infinitely above the shaping of
matter. You are never at a loss to find false reasons when needed to give
plausibility to false assertions. Thus you invent the prodigious nonsense
that a perfect knowledge of natural things “would be equivalent to
annihilation,” and to support this strange notion you argue that “where
there is no striving there can be no life,” as if a human soul, when in
full possession of truth, could not find in its contemplation a sufficient
exercise of intellectual life. Yet it is clear that striving for a good
must end in a peaceful enjoyment of the same good; or else all our
striving would be purposeless. On the other hand, if “perfect truth were a
sentence of death for him who has acquired it,” would it not follow that
the more we know, the less we live? But to conclude. How can you
conciliate these two things: “The moment we possess full knowledge we are
creators,” and “the moment we possess full knowledge we are annihilated”?
or these two things: “We become capable of shaping matter according to
pleasure,” and “we perish in apathy and inactivity”? Answer, old fox?

_Büchner._ “It may be that we are surrounded by many riddles” (p. 206).
“In doubtful questions we must apply human knowledge, and examine whether
we can arrive at any solution by experience, reason, and the aid of
natural sciences. . . . Some believe they can give scientific reasons for
the doctrine of individual immortality. Thus Mr. Drossbach discovered that
every body contains a limited number of _monads_ capable of self‐
consciousness . . .” (p. 208).

_Reader._ There is no need of discussing such absurdities. We know, that
monads are not self‐conscious.

_Büchner._ In fact, “Drossbach’s monads are too intangible to concern
ourselves about them. We may, however, take this opportunity of alluding
to the unconquerable difficulties which must arise from the eternal
congregation of innumerable swarms of souls which belonged to men who, in
their sojourn upon earth, have acquired so extremely different a degree of
development” (_ibid._).

_Reader._ What unconquerable difficulties do you apprehend?

_Büchner._ “Eternal life is said to be a perfectioning, a further
development, of earthly life, from which it would follow that every soul
should have arrived at a certain degree of culture, which is to be
perfected. Let us think, now, of the souls of those who died in earliest
childhood, of savage nations, of the lower classes of our populations! Is
this defective development or education to be remedied beyond? ‘I am weary
of sitting on school‐benches,’ says Danton. And what is to be done with
the souls of animals?” (pp. 208, 209).

_Reader._ Indeed, doctor, the ignorance of the unbeliever is astounding!
Our children and the lower classes of our populations are not half as
ignorant as you are. They would tell you that the light of the beatific
vision dispels with equal facility all degrees of darkness which may
remain in our souls in consequence of imperfect education, without any
need of your “school‐benches” or other imaginary devices. They would tell
you also “what is to be done with the souls of animals,” on which you most
stupidly confer “the same rights” as are possessed by the human soul. If
beasts have the same rights as men, it is a crime to kill them; or, if
this is no crime, it must be as lawful to kill and devour men! Are you
ready to accept this doctrine?

_Büchner._ “There is no essential and natural distinction between man and
animal, and the human and animal soul are fundamentally the same” (p.
209).

_Reader._ Do you understand what you say? What do you mean by
“fundamentally”?

_Büchner._ I mean that the animal soul is only distinguished from the
human soul “in quantity, not in quality” (_ibid._).

_Reader._ Then you yourself must have the qualities of an ass, and there
will be no difference between you and the ass, except in this: that the
asinine qualities are greater in you than in the ass. Your efforts to
prove that beasts are endowed with intellect, reason, and freedom are very
amusing, but lack a foundation. It would be idle to examine minutely your
chapter on the souls of brutes; it will suffice to state that your
reasoning in that chapter is based on a perpetual confusion of the
sensitive with the intellectual faculties. Sense and intellect do not
differ in quantity, but in quality. No sensation can be so intensified as
to become an intellectual concept or a universal notion. Hence no
intellect can arise from any amount of sensibility. Brutes feel; but,
although their sensitive operations bear a certain analogy to the higher
operations of the intellectual soul, nothing gives you the right to assume
that brutes can reason. So long as you do not show that asses understand
the rules and the principles of logic, it is useless to speak of the
intellect of beasts. Their cognitions and affections are altogether
sensitive; reasoning, morality, and freedom transcend their nature as much
as your living person transcends your inanimate portrait in the
frontispiece of your book.

But reverting to the immortality of the human soul, I wish you to
understand that in the course of your argumentation you have never touched
the substantial points of the question. You not only have not refuted, but
not even mentioned, our philosophical proofs of immortality. You have been
prating, not reasoning. To crown your evil work a couple of historical
blunders were needed, and you did not hesitate to commit them. The first
consists in asserting that “the chief religious sects of the Jews knew
nothing of personal continuance,” while it is well known that the chief
religious sect of the Jews was that of the Pharisees, who held not only
the immortality of the soul, but also the resurrection of the body. The
second consists in asserting that “among the enlightened of all nations
and times the dogma of the immortality of the soul has had ever but few
partisans” (p. 213), while the very reverse is the truth.

_Büchner._ “Mirabeau said on his death‐bed, ‘I shall now enter into
nothingness,’ and the celebrated Danton, being interrogated before the
revolutionary tribunal as to his residence, said, ‘My residence will soon
be in nothingness!’ Frederick the Great, one of the greatest geniuses
Germany has produced, candidly confessed his disbelief in the immortality
of the soul” (p. 213).

_Reader._ You might as well cite Moleschott, Feuerbach, yourself, and a
score or two of modern thinkers, all _enlightened_ by Masonic light,
_celebrated_ by Masonic pens and tongues, and _great geniuses_ of
revolution. But neither you nor your friends are “among the enlightened of
all nations and times.” Before you can aspire to this glory you must study
your logic, and, I dare say, the Christian doctrine too.

_Büchner._ If the soul survives the body, “we cannot explain the fear of
death, despite all the consolations religion affords” (p. 214).

_Reader._ You cannot; but we can.

_Büchner._ Men would not fear death, “if death were not considered as
putting an end to all the pleasures of the world” (_ibid._)

_Reader._ I too, doctor, acknowledge that death puts an end to all the
pleasures of this world; but this does not show that our soul will not
survive in another world. We fear death for many reasons, and especially
because we are sinners, and are afraid of the punishment that a just Judge
shall inflict on our wickedness. We would scarcely fear death, if we knew
that our soul were to be annihilated. And therefore our fear of death is a
proof that the belief in the immortality of the soul is more universal
than you imagine.

_Büchner._ “Pomponatius, an Italian philosopher of the XVIth century,
says: ‘In assuming the continuance of the individual we must first show
how the soul can live without requiring the body as the subject and object
of its activity. We are incapable of thought without intuitions; but these
depend upon the body and its organs. Thought in itself is eternal and
immaterial; but human thought is connected with the senses, and
perceptions succeed each other. Our soul is, therefore, mortal, as neither
consciousness nor recollection remains’ ” (p. 214). Can you answer this
argument?

_Reader._ Very easily. That the soul can live without the body is proved
by all psychologists from its spirituality—that is, from its being a
substance performing operations in which the body can have no part
whatever. Such operations are those which regard objects ranging above the
reach of the senses altogether; which, therefore, cannot proceed from an
organic faculty, nor from any combination of organic parts. Now, if the
soul performs operations in which the organs have no part, it is evident
that the soul has an existence independent of the organs, and can live
without them. Accordingly, the body is _not_ the “subject and object” of
the activity of the soul.

That “we are incapable of thought without intuitions” is true, in the same
sense as it is true that we are incapable of digesting without eating. But
would you admit that therefore no digestion is possible when you have
ceased eating? Or would you maintain that I cannot think to‐day of the
object I have seen yesterday? Certainly not. Yet it is evident that I have
to‐day no sensible intuition of that object. That thought in itself is
“eternal” is a phrase without meaning. Thought is never in itself; it is
always in the thinking subject. That “human thought is connected with the
senses” in the present life is true, not, however, because of any
intrinsic dependence of the intellect on the senses, but only because our
present mode of thinking implies both the intellectual and the sensible
representation. The consequence, “our soul is therefore mortal,” is
evidently false, as well as the reason added, that “neither consciousness
nor recollection remains.” Pomponatius was a bad philosopher, but still a
philosopher. His objection is vain, but still deserves an answer. His
reasoning is sophistical, but there is still some meaning in the sophism
itself. Not so with you. After three centuries of _progress_ you have not
been able to find a single objection really worth answering, either in a
scientific or in a philosophical point of view.

Pomponatius brings in another argument against immortality by saying that
virtue is much purer when it is “practised for itself without hope of
reward.” You quote these words (p. 214), but without gaining much
advantage from them. You might have argued that “as the hope of reward
makes virtue less pure, it would be against reason to suppose that God can
offer us a reward, the hope of which must thus blast our virtue.” In your
next edition of _Force and Matter_ you may develop this new argument, if
you wish. Your future adversaries, however, will refute it, as I fancy,
with the greatest facility, by observing, first, that the hope of a reward
may accompany the practice of virtue without interfering with its purity;
for we can love virtue _for itself_ without renouncing the reward of
virtue. Do you not expect your fees from your patients as a compensation
for your services? And yet I presume that you would take it as an insult
if any one pretended that you practise medicine for the love of money. It
might be observed, secondly, that as sin deserves punishment, so virtue
deserves reward; hence a wise and just Providence, which we must recognize
as an attribute of Divinity, cannot leave the virtuous without a reward,
nor the sinner without a punishment. And, since it is plain that neither
the reward nor the punishment is adequately meted out in this world, it
remains that it should be given in the next. I shall not enter into any
development of this argument, which is the most intelligible among those
usually made use of by philosophers to prove the immortality of the human
soul. It suffices for me to have shown the utter falsity of your reasons
against this philosophical and theological truth.



XIX. Free‐Will.


_Reader._ Do you admit free‐will?

_Büchner._ “A free‐will,” says Moleschott, “an act of the will which
should be independent of the sum of influences which determine man at
every moment and set limits to the most powerful, does not exist” (p.
239).

_Reader._ Do you adopt this view?

_Büchner._ Of course. “Man is a product of nature in body and mind. Hence
not only what he is, but also what he does, wills, feels, and thinks,
depends upon the same natural necessity as the whole structure of the
world” (_ibid._)

_Reader._ Then free‐will, according to you, would be a mere dream;
political and religious freedom would be delusions; _free_‐thinkers could
never exist; and, what may perhaps strike you most of all, _Free_‐masons
would be actual impossibilities.

_Büchner._ “The connection of nature is so essential and necessary that
free‐will, if it exists, can only have a very limited range” (_ibid._)

_Reader._ What! Do you mean that free‐will can exist, if “what man does,
wills, feels, and thinks depends upon the same natural necessity as the
whole structure of the world”? Can you reconcile necessity and freedom?

_Büchner._ “Human liberty, of which all boast,” says Spinoza, “consists
solely in this, that man is conscious of his will, and unconscious of the
causes by which it is determined” (_ibid._)

_Reader._ This answer does not show that liberty and necessity can be
reconciled. It would rather show, if it were true, that there is no
liberty; for if the human will is determined by any cause distinct from
itself, its volition cannot be free. Accordingly, your assertion that
“free‐will, _if it exist_, can only have a very limited range,” is
inconsistent with your principle of natural, essential, and universal
necessity, and should be changed into this: “Free‐will cannot exist, even
within the most limited range.” If you admit the principle, you must not
be afraid of admitting the consequence; or if you shrink from the
consequence, it is your duty to abandon the principle from which it
descends.

_Büchner._ “The view I have expressed is no longer theoretical, but
sufficiently established by facts, owing to that interesting new science,
statistics, which exhibits fixed laws in a mass of phenomena that until
now were considered to be arbitrary and accidental. The data for this
truth are frequently lost in investigating individual phenomena, but,
taken collectively, they exhibit a strict order inexorably ruling man and
humanity. It may without exaggeration be stated that at present most
physicians and practical psychologists incline to the view in relation to
free‐will that human actions are, in the last instance, dependent upon a
fixed necessity, so that in every individual case free choice has only an
extremely limited, if any, sphere of action” (p. 240).

_Reader._ “Limited, if any”! It is strange that you hesitate to say which
of the two you mean to advocate. Why do you not say clearly, either that
free‐will has a certain sphere of action, or that it has no existence at
all? Instead of explaining your opinion on this point, you try to obscure
the question. Individual free‐will is to be ascertained by the statistics
of the individual, not by that of the collection.

When a crowd moves towards a determinate spot, individuals are carried on
to the same spot, be they willing or unwilling, by the irresistible wave
that presses onward. So also when any collection of men, from a nation to
a family, lives under the same laws, experiences the same wants, enjoys
the same rights, and holds the same practical principles, the general
movement of the mass carries in the same direction every individual member
of the collection, by creating such conditions all around him as will
morally compel his following the general movement. But this is only
_moral_ necessity, against which man can rebel in the same manner as he
can rebel against the divine or the human law; whereas our question
regards the existence or non‐existence of a _physical_ necessity,
physically binding the human will, and determining every one of its
actions. Hence, even were it true that “a strict order inexorably rules
humanity”—that is, the collection of human beings—it would not follow that
the individual will is inexorably ruled by a physical necessity.

_Büchner._ “The conduct and actions of every individual are dependent upon
the character, manners, and modes of thought of the nation to which he
belongs. These, again, are, to a certain extent, the necessary product of
external circumstances under which they live and have grown up. Galton
says: ‘The difference of the moral and physical character of the various
tribes of South Africa depends on the form, the soil, and the vegetation
of the parts they inhabit.’ ... ‘It is about two hundred and thirty
years,’ says Desor, ‘since the first colonists, in every respect true
Englishmen, came to New England. In this short time they have undergone
considerable changes. A peculiar American type has been developed,
chiefly, it appears, by the influence of the climate. An American is
distinguished by his long neck, his spare figure, and by something
irritable and feverish in his character.... It has been observed that,
during the prevalence of easterly winds, the irritability of the Americans
is considerably increased. The rapidity of the American state development,
which surprises us, may thus, to a considerable extent, be ascribed to the
climate.’ As in America, so have the English given rise to a new type in
Australia, especially in New South Wales....” (pp. 241, 242).

_Reader._ Has all this anything to do with the question of free‐will?

_Büchner._ Certainly. “If the nations are thus in the aggregate, in regard
to character and history, dependent upon external circumstances, the
individual is no less the product of external and internal natural
actions, not merely in relation to his physical and moral nature, but in
his actions. These actions depend necessarily, in the first instance, upon
his intellectual individuality. But what is this intellectual
individuality, which determines man, and prescribes to him, in every
individual case, his mode of action with such force that there remains for
him but a minute space for free choice? What else is it but the necessary
product of congenital physical and mental dispositions in connection with
education, example, rank, property, sex, nationality, climate, soil, and
other circumstances? Man is subject to the same laws as plants and
animals” (pp. 242, 243).

_Reader._ I do not see any ground for this conclusion. Our “intellectual
individuality” is, I surmise, our individual soul, or our individual
intellect. Now, our intellect may speculatively prescribe, in individual
cases, some mode of action, but even then it lets our will free to obey
the prescription. Moreover, it is not true that our intellect prescribes,
in every individual case, a determinate mode of action. How often do we
not hesitate, even after long intellectual examination, what line of
action we should adopt! How often do we not entertain distressing doubts,
and have no means of emerging from our state of perplexity! It is
therefore false that our “intellectual individuality” prescribes to us, in
every individual case, our mode of action. Hence your other assertion,
that the same intellectual individuality urges us “with such a force that
there remains for us but a minute space for free choice,” needs no further
discussion, as being contrary to constant experience and observation. It
is curious that a man who professes, as you do, to argue from nothing but
facts, should coolly assume as true what is contradicted by universal
experience; but you have already accustomed us to such proceedings. What
strikes me is that your blunder cannot here be excused by the plea of
ignorance, as you cannot be ignorant of your own mode of action; whence
your reader must infer that your direct intention in writing is to cheat
him to the best of your power.

As to education, example, rank, climate, soil, and other circumstances, I
admit that they are calculated to favor the development of particular
mental and physical dispositions; but I deny, first, that such
dispositions are the “intellectual individuality,” and, secondly, that the
existence of such dispositions is incompatible with the exercise of free‐
will. Of course, we experience a greater attraction towards those things
which we are accustomed to look upon as more conducive to our well‐being,
and towards those actions of which we may have acquired the habit; but
this attraction is an invitation, not a compulsion, and we can freely do
or choose the contrary, and are responsible for our choice.

_Büchner._ “Natural dispositions, developed by education, example, etc.,
are so powerful in human nature that neither deliberation nor religion can
effectually neutralize them, and it is constantly observed that man rather
follows his inclinations. How frequently does it occur that a man, knowing
his intellectual character and the error of his ways, is yet unable to
struggle successfully against his inclinations!” (p. 244.)

_Reader._ I do not deny the power of natural or acquired dispositions, and
I admit that men usually follow their inclinations; but this is not the
question. The question is, “Do men follow their inclinations freely or
necessarily?” The assertion that “neither deliberation nor religion can
effectually neutralize” such inclinations is ambiguous. If you mean that,
in spite of all deliberation, we continue to feel those inclinations, the
thing is obviously true, but proves nothing against free‐will; if, on the
contrary, you mean that, after deliberation, we cannot act against such
inclinations, the assertion is evidently false; for we very often do
things most repugnant to our habitual inclinations.

That a man, knowing the error of his ways, “is unable to struggle
successfully against his inclinations,” is a wicked and scandalous
proposition. As long as he remains in possession of his reason, man is
able to struggle successfully, not only against his own inclinations, but
also against his predominant passions. The struggle may indeed be hard,
for it is a struggle; but its success is in the hands of man. How could
criminals be struck by the sword of justice, if, when committing crime,
they had been unable to check the temptation? Your doctrine would, if
adopted, soon put an end to the existence of civil society, and transform
mankind into a herd of brutes. If we cannot successfully struggle against
our bad inclinations, then theft, murder, adultery, drunkenness, and all
kinds of vice and iniquity are lawful, or at least justifiable, and
nothing but tyranny can undertake to suppress them or to inflict
punishment for them. Is it necessary to prove that a theory which leads to
such results is a libel against humanity?

_Büchner._ “The most dreadful crimes have, independently of the will of
the agent, been committed under the influence of abnormal corporeal
conditions. It was reserved for modern science closely to examine such
cases, and to establish disease as the cause of crimes which formerly were
considered as the result of deliberate choice” (p. 245).

_Reader._ Modern science pretends, of course, to have established a great
many things. But how can you explain the fact that, when “the most
dreadful crimes” are committed by common criminals, science still
considers and condemns them as a result of deliberate choice, whilst, if
such crimes are committed by members of secret societies, science
attributes them to abnormal corporeal conditions? Can we trust a science
which so nicely discriminates between the Freemason and the Christian? Yet
even your modern science, not to become ridiculous, is obliged, in order
to absolve criminals, to put forward a plea of _temporary insanity_, thus
acknowledging that a man who enjoys the use of his reason is always
responsible, as a free agent, for his actions. Hence, even according to
your modern science, our actions, so long as we are not struck with
insanity, are the result of our deliberate choice. It is only when you
lose your brain that you are “under the influence of those abnormal
corporeal conditions” which prevent all deliberate choice.

_Büchner._ Yet man’s freedom “must, in theory and practice, be restricted
within the narrowest compass. Man is free, but his hands are bound; he
cannot cross the limit placed by nature. For what is called free‐will,
says Cotta, is nothing but the result of the strongest motives” (pp. 245,
246).

_Reader._ It is difficult, doctor, to hold a discussion with you. Your
views are contradictory, and your argumentation consists of assertions or
quotations for which no good reason is, or can be, adduced. If man is
free, his hands are _not_ bound; and although he cannot cross the limits
of nature by which he is surrounded, he has yet a great latitude for the
exercise of freedom within said limits. We are not free to attain the end
without using the means, to live on air, to fly to the moon, to add an
inch to our stature; but these are limits of physical power, not limits of
free volition. Our will is moved by objects through the intellect; and no
object which is apprehended as unnecessary to our intellectual nature can
necessitate the will. To admit that what is presented to the will as
unnecessary can produce necessity, is to admit an effect greater than its
cause. Hence the range of free‐will is as wide as creation itself; for no
created object can be considered by the intellect as necessary to our
rational nature. One object alone may be so considered—that is, God, whose
possession alone is sufficient, and therefore necessary, to fill the
cravings of our heart. Thus man’s freedom is not to be restricted “within
the narrowest compass,” as you pretend, but is to be stretched to the very
limits of creation.

But “what is called free‐will,” you say, “is nothing but the result of the
strongest motives.” I answer that the stronger the motive is, the intenser
is the movement of the will, since the effect must be proportionate to its
cause. But the movement of the will is not a reflex act; it is merely an
indispensable condition for it, and its existence does not necessarily
entail the existence of the rational volition. The first movements of our
appetitive faculty are not formally free; for they are not originated by
the will, but by the objects. It is only when we reflect upon ourselves
and our movements that we become capable of rationally approving or
reprobating that towards which or against which we feel moved; and
consequently it is only after such a reflection that our will makes its
choice. Now, it is impossible that the rational soul, reflecting upon
itself and its first movements towards a finite good, should consider its
possession as a necessity of its own nature; for all good that is finite
is deficient, and if the rational soul considered finite good as necessary
to its happiness, it would in fact consider its deficiency also as
necessary to its happiness; which cannot be. Hence, whatever the strength
of the motives by which we are impelled, no movement excited by finite
good interferes with the freedom of the volition.

And now, is it true that our choice always answers to the strongest
motives? This question may be understood in two ways, according as the
motives are considered objectively or subjectively. The motives which are
the strongest objectively may become the weakest subjectively, and _vice
versa_. It is with our will moved by different motives as with the lever
loaded with different weights. The heavier weight absolutely prevails over
the lighter; but if the arms of the lever be suitably determined, the
lighter will prevail over the heavier. Thus the lightest motives may
prevail over the strongest ones, when our soul adapts itself to them, by
shifting, so to say, its own fulcrum, and thus altering the momenta of the
opposite forces. The motives which prevail are therefore the strongest in
this sense only: that the will has made them such; and, properly speaking,
we should not even say that they are the strongest, but only that they are
the most enhanced by the will.

These explanations may be new to you, but they are the result of
experience and observation. I abstain from developing them further, as it
is no part of my duty to vindicate them by positive arguments. No truth is
so universally and unavoidably recognized as the existence of free‐will. A
man of common sense must be satisfied of this truth by simply reflecting
upon his own acts. Criminals may pretend that they have not the power to
avoid crime; but doctors should not countenance such a pretension contrary
to evidence. To excuse crime on such a miserable plea is to encourage the
triumph of villany and the overthrow of human society.

_Büchner._ Indeed, it has been said that “the partisans of this doctrine
denied the discernment of crime, and that they desired the acquittal of
every criminal, by which the state and society would be thrown into a
state of anarchy.... What is true is that the partisans of these modern
ideas hold different opinions as regards crime, and would banish that
cowardly and irreconcilable hatred which the state and society have
hitherto cherished with so much hypocrisy as regards the ‘malefactor’ ”
(p. 247).

_Reader._ To denounce the state and society as hypocritical is scarcely a
good method of exculpating yourself. Yet your denunciation is false, so
far at least as regards Christian states and Christian society; for as
regards anti‐Christian societies connected with Freemasonry, and states
fallen under their degrading influence and tyranny, I fully admit that
they cannot, without hypocrisy, hate malefactors. Those who plunder whole
nations, who corrupt public education, who persecute religion, who sow
everywhere the seeds of atheism, materialism, and utilitarianism, have no
right to hate malefactors. As to those who teach that “neither
deliberation nor religion can effectually neutralize the dispositions of
man,” and that “man, knowing the error of his ways, is yet unable to
struggle successfully against his inclinations,” what right have they to
speak of crime or of malefactors? Can there be crime and malefactors
without free‐will? You see, doctor, that your materialistic doctrines do
away with all morality, and that a society imbued with them cannot be
moral. Hence it is bad taste in you to declaim against modern society, as
you do (p. 247), on account of vices which are nothing but the result of
materialism. “We are astonished,” you say, “that our society is so
ticklish as regards certain truths taught by science—a society whose
social virtue is nothing but hypocrisy covered by a veil of morality. Just
cast a glance at this society, and tell us whether it acts from virtuous,
divine, or even moral motives! Is it not, in fact, a _bellum omnium contra
omnes_? Does it not resemble a race‐course, where every one does all he
can to outrun or even to destroy the other?... Every one does what he
believes he can do without incurring punishment. He cheats and abuses
others as much as possible, being convinced that they would do the same to
him. Any one who acts differently is treated as an idiot. Is it not the
most refined egotism which is the spring of this social mechanism? And
distinguished authors who best know human society, do they not constantly
depict in their narrations the cowardice, disloyalty, and hypocrisy of
this European society? A society which permits human beings to die of
starvation on the steps of houses filled with victuals; a society whose
force is directed to oppress the weak by the strong, has no right to
complain that the natural sciences subvert the foundations of its
morality.” These last words should be slightly modified; for the truth is
that such a society is the victim of your modern theories, which you
dignify with the name of _natural sciences_, and which have already
subverted the foundations of social morality. The society you describe in
this passage is not the old Christian society formed on the doctrine of
the Gospel, but the materialistic society formed on modern thought. The
moral distemper of modern society is the most irrefragable condemnation of
all your doctrines. By its fruits we know the tree.



Conclusion.


We ask the indulgence of our readers for having led them through so many
disgusting details of pestilential philosophy. Without such details it was
impossible to give a clear idea of the futility and perversity which
characterize the teaching of one of the greatest luminaries of modern
infidelity. We have shown that Dr. Büchner’s _Force and Matter_, in spite
of all its pretensions, is, in a philosophical point of view, a complete
failure. We have omitted many of the author’s passages, which we thought
too profane to be inserted in these pages, and which, as consisting of
vain declamation, arrogance, and assumption, had no need of refutation. As
to our mode of dealing with our adversary, we have been pained to hear
that some consider it harsh. We beg to say that a man who employs his
talents to war against his Creator has no right to expect much regard from
any of God’s creatures. Men of this type are frequently treated with too
much forbearance, owing to the false idea that every literary character
should be treated as a gentleman. Blasphemers are not gentlemen, nor
should they be dealt with as gentlemen. They should be made to feel the
disgrace which attaches to their moral degradation. Such was the practice
in the good old times; and we may justify it by the example of One who did
not hesitate, in his infinite wisdom, publicly to rebuke the Scribes and
Pharisees in terms not at all complimentary, and certainly much stronger
than those which we have used in censuring the author of _Force and
Matter_.




The Ice‐Wigwam Of Minnehaha.


The winter of 1855‐56, memorable for its excessive and prolonged cold,
while it brought suffering to many a household throughout the land, and is
recalled by that fact almost solely, is fixed in my memory by its
verification of an old Indian legend of the ice‐wigwam of Minnehaha.
Longfellow has made this name familiar to the English‐speaking world, and
beyond. A little waterfall, whose silvery voice is for ever singing a
love‐song to the mighty Father of Waters, and into whose bosom it hastens
to cast itself, bears the name and personates the Indian maiden.

On the right bank of the Mississippi, between the Falls of St. Anthony and
the mouth of the Minnesota, is a broad, level prairie, starting from the
high bluffs of the Mississippi, and running far out in the direction of
sundown. In the month of June this prairie is profusely decked with bright
flowers, forming a carpet which the looms of the world will never rival.
Stretching far into the west is a tortuous ribbon of rich, dark green,
marking the path of a stream which stealthily glides beneath the shadows
of the long grass. As it nears the eastern border of the prairie, this
stream becomes more bold. Its expanded surface glistens in the noon‐day
sun. Here it passes slowly under a rustic bridge, upon an almost seamless
bed of rock. Then its motion quickens, as if in haste to reach the ledge
which overhangs the broad valley of the Mississippi, when, with one bound,
it plunges into its basin sixty feet below. This is Minnehaha, the little
hoiden who throws herself upon the outstretched arm of the great Father of
Waters with a merry laugh that wins the heart of every comer. Beautiful
child of the plain! How many have sought you in your flower‐decked home,
and loved you! Hoiden you may be; but coquette, never. Your life is freely
given to be absorbed in the life of him you seek.

But Minnehaha is at times the ward of another—an old man whose white locks
are so often the sport of the winds, whose very presence makes the limbs
of mortals tremble, and their teeth chatter at his approach. Yet he is
wondrous kind to his beautiful ward—touchingly kind is the Ice‐King of the
North. When the blasts from his realms, freighted with the chill of death,
scourge the lands over which they pass, and a silence awe‐inspiring and
complete falls on all; when the flowers are being buried beneath the snow,
and the mighty river bound with ice, then it is the ice‐king exhausts his
powers to build for Minnehaha a palace worthy of her. The summer through
(and spring and autumn scarce are known where Minnehaha dwells) the maid
has worn about her, as a veil, a cloud of mist and spray. O wondrous
architect! Of mist and spray you build a palace even Angelo might not
conceive in wildest dreams, were marbles, opals, pearls, all gems and
stones and precious metals, cut and fashioned ready to his hand! Thy
breath, O ice‐king! fashions mist and spray into grand temples, palaces,
more chaste and cold than any stuff Italian quarries yield! Behold the
ice‐king build! He breathes upon the mist, and on all sides strong‐based
foundations fix about the space he would enclose. The walls on these rise
up, as mist and spray are gathered there and set with his chill breath.
Height on height they rise, until the arch is sprung; and then the dome is
gathered in to meet the solid rock above, and all the outer work is done.
Within, the decorations form as do the stalactites within the caves. Then
these are covered with the diamond frost, such as December’s shrubs and
trees so oft put on to greet the rising sun. And Minnehaha, so the legend
says, sings here the winter through. This is the masterpiece of the great
ice‐king. Solomon in all his glory possessed no temple to compare with
this, nor Queen of Sheba ever saw its counterpart.

A party of four started from St. Paul in the latter part of March, 1856,
to visit this wonder of the North. For many years the winters had not been
protracted enough to permit the planting of a Maypole upon the ice of Lake
Pepin, nor had eye seen the ice‐wigwam of Minnehaha. Marquette, Hennepin,
Lesueur, and the early Catholic missionaries had carried with them their
love for the month of Mary into that cold region, and settlers and
Christian Indians made the opening day of this month one of joyful
festivity. To plant a May‐pole upon the ice of Lake Pepin (which is always
the last point on the Upper Mississippi where the ice breaks up, as no
current helps to cut or break it) was quite an event. The May‐pole, decked
with garlands of green and dotted with the many‐colored crocuses that
spring up and bloom at the very edge of the melting snow, and long before
the drifts and packs have disappeared, if planted on the ice, permitted
dancing on its smooth surface, and pleasanter footing than the loose,
moistened soil. May‐day can seldom be pleasantly celebrated in that region
out‐of‐doors, except upon the ice. Ice on Lake Pepin, then, is to the
young folk of that latitude as important an event as a bright, sunny day
in latitudes below.

During the month of March, 1856, a bright, warm sun melted the snows to
such an extent as to cover the level prairies with several inches of
water, confined within banks of melting snow. Wheels were taking the place
of runners. Our party drove over the undulating prairie to St. Anthony,
crossed the Mississippi by the first suspension bridge which spanned its
waters just above the Falls of St. Anthony, and from Minneapolis, on the
west bank, moved out into the dead level which extends south and west
toward the Minnesota River. A splashing drive of four miles brought us to
the bridge above the Falls of Minnehaha, from which we could see on our
left a cone of dirty ice, disfigured here and there with sticks and stones
and clods of earth; its base far down within an ice‐lined gorge, its top
close pressed upon an overhanging ledge. Was _this_ the wonder we had come
to see? A wonder, then, we came. But we did not turn back at this
unsightly scene. There was a charm about this legend of Minnehaha’s ice‐
wigwam that surely did not have its source in the charmless thing before
us. Nor could we believe the imagination of the red man capable of drawing
so poetic an inspiration from so prosaic a source. We therefore set to
work to discover the hidden things, if such there were. With large stones
we broke away the ice about the top of the cone, hoping to peer through
the opening by which the water of the stream entered. We failed in this,
but let in the western sun through the opening we had made. Then we
descended to the bottom of the gorge, over ice and snow, to seek a new
point of observation. Here, to the east, lay the broad, snow‐covered
valley of the Mississippi; before us, at the west, rose the cone of ice
full sixty feet in height, its wrinkled surface all discolored and
defaced, inspiring naught of poetry, stifling imagination. Moving
northward around the ungainly mass, and part way up the north side of the
gorge, we reached a terrace which led behind the cone and underneath the
overhanging ledge. We enter from the north (by broad steps of ice, each
rising three or four inches above the other) a hall twelve by twenty feet,
floored, columned, curtained, arched, and walled with ice. At somewhat
regular intervals elliptical columns of ice rose from floor to spring of
arch. Between these columns curtains hung, with convolutes and folds and
borders, filling all the space—and all of ice. Above us was the ledge of
rock overhanging the basin of the fall, behind us the bluff, and under our
feet the terrace of earth midway the cone; and all was paved and curtained
and ceiled with ice. Before us stood the upper half of the cone, meeting
the ledge above.

While giving play to admiration of the architectural beauties of the
place, our ears were greeted with a sound muffled or distant, as of
falling water. Whence could this come? Could there be life or motion
within that frozen mass? In the chill of that drear winter was not the
laughing voice of Minnehaha hushed?

The sun was dropping down the western sky, and a shadow lengthened in the
gorge below. The broken edges of the ice which overhung the quiet stream
gave back the borrowed rays of sunlight more brilliant than they came.

One of the party had, slung to his side, the customary long‐knife of those
days. With it in hand he started in search of the creature whose voice
lured him on, not, as the siren, to destruction, but to a scene of beauty,
brilliance, glory, with which the fabled cave of Stalacta was but as
shadow. Between him and the voice he sought a wall of ice imposed. The
knife at once was called to play its part. Between two columns this wall
was cut away, a window opened, through which we saw the glories of the
wigwam. Our eyes were dazzled and our senses mazed. The curtain rent
exposed to view the inner surface of a dome high‐arched and perfect in its
curves. From base, through all its height, it was hung with myriad
stalactites of ice, which seemed to point us to the laughing voice still
rippling on the waters far below. These stalactites were covered thick
with richest frost‐work; and from ten thousand upon thousand points the
glinting light fell off in floods. Near to the centre of the upper dome
the waters of the stream pour in in one broad sheet. An instant only is
such form preserved. The sheet of water breaks, and countless globes, from
raindrops to a sphere the hand would scarcely grasp with ease, come down,
and break still more in passing through the air, until within the basin
all is mist and spray. These globes at first arrange themselves in systems
not unlike the planetariums of the schools, where sun and planets, with
their satellites, are shown the youths, to aid such minds as seek to learn
the grander works of God in space. These systems, as they fall, are
countless; and by common impulse, which means law, the smaller range
themselves about a greater central orb. And so they pass through space, to
fall upon the bosom of the pool in mist. Is there no emblem here of life
and God?

And as we look, behold! the walls and dome are striped and slashed with
silver and with gold; then barred; and then again are panelled with this
silver sheen and gold. The gold and silver interchange positions, fade,
return, as the Northern Lights dissolve or chase each other here and
there. The mystery of this party‐colored scene was soon resolved. The ice
we broke away with stones had let the sun shine through the opening, and
the waters, flowing in, disputed passage with the light. There is an ebb
and flow in running water so like to pulse‐beats that it may not seem
strange to those who stop to think, that ruder men have worshipped streams
as gods. This ebb and flow upon the ledge so changed the depth of water
there that the sunlight, as it struggled through these different depths
(for ever changing), cast the light in silver or in gold upon the walls
and dome.

And now the sun bows down still more, and shines still more within the
dome; its rays are kissed by countless water‐drops, and changed by that
caress from white to all the colors of the bow or prism. But, strange, no
bow is formed; but in its stead a circle of the varied hues is poised
within the midst of all this splendor, as though the sun and flood had
come to crown the Indian maid, and vie with the ice‐king in doing fullest
homage to his ward.

Such is the legend realized. The time, the accidents, and every impediment
we overcame seemed but steps so prearranged that we might see complete the
efforts of the cold, the light, the water, all combined to create The
Beautiful. It was the meeting of extremes in harmony for common end,
instead of conflict. Here was a grand display of powers without jealousy.
The cold took irresistible possession of the water, mist, and spray, and
reared a work that art can scarcely copy. But all was cold and chaste and
white. The light possessed itself of the water also, but with a touch so
delicate and warm that color mantled the coldest, chastest, whitest ice.

Do you, dear reader, imagine this a fancy sketch? Be undeceived. Three of
the “four” still verify its truth. The fourth has fallen upon the
outstretched arm of the great Father of mankind. It is in tribute to his
memory that I write; for never soul more chaste, or heart more warm, or
life more full of love for all the beautiful, made up a man.




A Russian Sister Of Charity.


By The Rev. C. Tondini, Barnabite

On the fifth of August died in Paris Sister Nathalie Narishkin, a Russian
by birth, and descended from the same family from which sprang the mother
of Peter the Great. Born on the 1/13th of May, 1820, Sister Nathalie
Narishkin abjured the Greek Church August the 15th, 1844. This first step
had cost her a fearful struggle—that struggle of heart for which Jesus
Christ prepared us when he said, “I came to set a man at variance against
his father, _and a daughter against her mother_” (S. Matt. x. 35). We mean
that endurance which is perhaps the hardest of martyrdoms, at least when
God requires it of a soul whose love of him is combated by an unusual
tenderness of affection towards the authors of her being. Such was
Nathalie Narishkin.

But as any sacrifice we offer to God enables us, by strengthening our
will, to make fresh sacrifices for his love, she had not yet attained the
age of twenty‐eight when she resolved to follow more closely the footsteps
of our Lord, and in March, 1848, she entered the novitiate of the Sisters
of Charity in Paris. A few years afterwards she was named superioress of
the convent in the Rue St. Guillaume, where she died.

Foreigners who visit Catholic countries often imagine themselves
acquainted with Catholicity when they have hastily glanced through the
streets of our capitals, visited the museums, the public buildings, and
theatres, and inspected the Catholics in the churches at some mid‐day or
one o’clock Mass on Sundays. Hence it follows that in reality they have
nothing to relate concerning the influence of the Catholic faith in the
sanctification of souls. What would have been their edification, and
perhaps surprise, had they visited that convent of the Rue St. Guillaume,
and had the good‐fortune to converse with Sister Nathalie! No one who
approached her could help feeling that he was in presence of a soul in
continual union with God, and in whom self‐abnegation and the profoundest
humility had grown, as it were, into a second nature. With these
qualities, which at once struck the beholders, she combined the most
refined gentleness of manners and language—a gentleness which, let us
remark, was in her the same when soliciting from the Emperor Alexander
II., at the Elysée, in 1867, permission to enter Russia for the purpose of
nursing the sick attacked with cholera, as when answering the meanest
beggar asking at her hands a morsel of bread. “Every one who had to deal
with Sister Narishkin departed satisfied”—this is the general testimony of
all who ever had occasion to speak with her.

It is needless to add that, with regard to charity—that virtue which is
the special vocation of the daughters of S. Vincent de Paul, and the
surest token of true Christianity, as pointed out by Christ himself—Sister
Nathalie was second to no one; and this was made manifest on the day of
her funeral by the multitude of poor who accompanied her remains to the
cemetery, and the tears they shed on their way to the grave. What is the
pomp of the sepulture of kings and the great ones of the nations when
compared to this tribute to the memory of a Catholic Sister?

Father Gagarin, S.J., himself a Russian convert, though scarcely recovered
from an illness, and in spite of his age and physical sufferings—which did
not permit him to walk without difficulty, and leaning on a stick—would
not fail to follow the funeral on foot. The body was deposited in the
Cemetery of Mont Parnasse—in that same cemetery where for fifteen years
past have reposed the remains of that other Russian convert and Barnabite
father, Schouvaloff, who, speaking of those among his countrymen who had
become Catholics, said: “Fear not, little flock; we are the first‐fruits
of that union which every Christian should desire, and which we know will
take place. Fear not; our sufferings and our prayers will find grace
before God. _Russia will be Catholic._”




New Publications.


    THE ILLUSTRATED CATHOLIC FAMILY ALMANAC FOR THE UNITED STATES, FOR
    THE YEAR OF OUR LORD 1875. Calculated for Different Parallels of
    Latitude, and Adapted for Use throughout the Country. New York:
    The Catholic Publication Society.


This annual is already known in almost every Catholic home in the land.
Its cheapness places it within the reach of all, whilst its literary and
artistic excellence renders it acceptable even to the most fastidious. The
issue for 1875 even surpasses its predecessors in the variety of subjects
treated and in the beauty of its illustrations.

Publications of this kind undoubtedly do very much to awaken a truly
Catholic interest in the contemporary history of the church, and therefore
tend to enlarge the views and widen the sympathies of our people. The
life‐current of the universal church is borne through the whole earth, and
whatever anywhere concerns her welfare is of importance to Catholics
everywhere.

The opening sketch in the _Almanac_ for the year which even now “waiteth
at the door” carries us to Rome, in a biographical notice of Cardinal
Barnabo, whose name will long be held in grateful remembrance in the
United States.

There are also sketches of the lives of the late Archbishop Kenrick,
Archbishop Blanc of New Orleans, Bishop Whelan. Bishop McFarland—brief,
but sufficiently comprehensive to give one an insight into the character
and labors of these apostolic men. Col. Meline and Dr. Huntington, who
strove so faithfully and so successfully, as men of letters, to defend and
adorn Catholic truth, receive due tribute, and are held up as examples for
those of our Catholic young men to whom God has given talent and
opportunity of education.

Cardinal Mezzofanti, the greatest of linguists; Cardinal Allen, who was
the first president, and we may say founder, of the Douay College, which,
during the darkest period of the history of the Catholic Church in
England, gave so many noble confessors of the faith to Great Britain;
Archbishop Ledochowski, who is to‐day suffering for Christ in the dungeons
of Ostrowo, all pass before us in the pages of the _Catholic Almanac_ for
1875.

Then we have sketches of John O’Donovan, the famous Irish antiquarian; of
Father Gahan, the great Irish preacher; of Father Clavigero, the historian
of Mexico and California, and of Joan of Arc, whose name may yet be
inscribed by the church among those of her saints. The miscellaneous
matter with which the present issue of the _Catholic Almanac_ is filled
has been chosen with admirable tact and with a special view to the wants
of our own people.

If the standard of excellence which this publication has now reached be
maintained, it cannot fail to command a steadily increasing patronage, and
to become in yet wider circles an instrument for good.


    NOTES ON THE SECOND PLENARY COUNCIL OF BALTIMORE. By Rev. S.
    Smith, D.D., formerly Professor of Sacred Scripture, Canon Law,
    and Ecclesiastical History at Seton Hall Seminary. New York: P.
    O’Shea. 1874.


The author of these _Notes_ makes his observations on a considerable
number of very practical questions, some of which are of the greatest
moment and of no small difficulty, with great modesty and moderation of
language. Evidently, he seeks to promote piety, discipline, and the well‐
being of the church in an orderly manner, and with due respect to
authority and established usage. _The Decrees of the Second Plenary
Council of Baltimore_ is intended as a text‐book of instruction for the
clergy and seminarists on what we may call “pastoral theology”—that is, on
the whole range of subjects relating to the conduct, preaching, and
administration of those who are invested to a lesser or greater degree
with the pastoral office. The author makes the Acts of the Council
therefore the basis of his _Notes_, or familiar disquisitions on practical
topics of canon law, giving also a general exposition of certain
fundamental canonical principles and laws, chiefly derived from the
standard authors Soglia and Tarquini. Some valuable documents are also
contained in the appendix. Such a work as this is evidently one that, if
it can be made complete, and also carry with it sufficient intrinsic and
extrinsic authority to give its statements and opinions due weight, will
be one of great utility. Due respect to the author, who has given us the
results of careful and conscientious labor, as well as the great
importance of the topics he discusses, demand that we should not attempt
to express a judgment upon his work or the opinions contained in it
without a minute and detailed examination and discussion of every point,
supported by reasons and authorities. We are not prepared to do this at
present. We may say, however, that, in our opinion, a work of this kind
cannot easily be brought to completion by a first and single effort. It
is, in many respects, _tentative_ in its character. As such, we regard it
as a promising effort, creditable to its author, and in many ways likely
to prove a serviceable manual for the clergy and those who are engaged in
teaching canon law in seminaries.


    THE MISTRESS OF THE MANSE. By J. G. Holland. New York: Scribner,
    Armstrong & Co. 1874.


We never pardon the reviewer who praises a novel by telling us its plot.
Therefore we shall not spoil the pleasure of the reader by revealing the
story of this poem. We will only say that the heroine is the wife of a
“country parson,” and that their conjugal life is beautifully drawn. A
Catholic will not find anything to move his righteous indignation, as he
did in the author’s _Marble Prophecy_ though here and there he will come
upon something which


    “In the light of deeper eyes
    Is matter for a flying smile.”


For instance, a poet who can write such Tennysonian verse does not blush
to place in the same “evangelical” library “Augustine” and “Ansel” (we
suppose he means S. Anselm) by the side of


    “Great Luther, with his great disputes,
    And Calvin with his finished scheme.” (!)


After the flood of light which even Protestant research has poured on the
characters of Luther and Calvin, how can a poet (of all men) dare to hold
them up to admiration?


    MARIA MONK’S DAUGHTER. An Autobiography. By Mrs. L. St. John
    Eckel. New York: Published for the Author by the United States
    Publishing Co.., 13 University Place. 1874.


The writer of this notice well remembers reading, when a boy of fifteen,
the _Awful Disclosures of Maria Monk_, and _Six Months in a Convent_, by
Rebecca Reed. With great satisfaction he recalls the fact that his own
father, who was a Presbyterian minister of Connecticut, together with a
very large number of other most respectable Protestants, condemned and
repudiated the calumnies of Maria Monk from the first moment of their
publication. The effect of these books and of the exposure so honorably
made by Col. Stone on our own young mind, and undoubtedly upon the minds
of thousands besides, to open our eyes to the falsehood and dishonesty of
the gross misrepresentations of the Catholic religion and its professors
which have been rife among Protestants, and are still prevalent among the
less enlightened of them, both gentle and simple. Afterwards the task
devolved upon us to prepare a set of documents concerning Rebecca Reed and
Maria Monk which Bishop England had collected, for publication in the
edition of his works issued by his successor in the see of Charleston.
While we were correcting the last proofs of the printer at Philadelphia,
the _Times_ of that morning furnished us the last item of news respecting
the unfortunate Maria Monk, which came to the knowledge of the public
before the publication of the volume under notice, viz., that she had died
in a cell on Blackwell’s Island. After the lapse of twenty‐five years, we
find before us the autobiography of a daughter of Maria Monk, who seeks to
expiate her mother’s crime, and to make reparation for the wrong done to
the clergy and religious of the Catholic Church by her pretended
disclosures made in the fictitious character of an escaped nun. The
unhappy young woman herself, though we believe she was the daughter of an
English officer at Montreal, seems to have had a very unkind mother, and,
for some reason to us unknown, to have been brought up without education,
and early turned adrift without any protection. Having fallen into a
condition of desperate misery, she resorted to the expedient of inventing
her _Awful Disclosures_ in order to get money and escape from present
wretchedness. The men—far more malicious and base in their villainy than
this poor forlorn girl, so much sinned against and so fearfully punished
for her own sins that we pity more than we blame her—who prepared the vile
book of _Awful Disclosures_, and published it under the name of HOWE AND
BATES, cheated her out of her share of the profits. We are glad to see
their infamy once more exposed, and the honor of the Catholic religion
avenged. Although the most honorable class of Protestants are exempt from
complicity with this and similar gross libels on Catholics and caricatures
of all they hold dear and sacred, nevertheless their cause and name are
disgraced by the fact that they are so frequently and generally implicated
in a mode of warfare on the Catholic Church which is dishonorable. The
statements which are continually made current among them respecting
Catholics and their religion, and which are so generally believed, do no
credit to their intelligence or fairness. We remember hearing the
Archbishop of Westminster remark that the most ridiculous fables about the
Catholic religion are accepted as truth among the aristocratic residents
of the West End of London. The coarse and angry assaults of the English
press upon the Marquis of Ripon, on account of his conversion, show, what
Dr. Newman has so humorously and graphically described, the extent and
obstinacy of vulgar prejudice and hostility in England. There is less
here, and it is diminishing; yet there is enough to make Mrs. Eckel’s
audacious spring into the arena of combat against it well timed as well as
chivalrous.

We do not intend a criticism on her book, but merely, as an act of justice
to one who has braved the criticism of the world, to aid herself and her
book to meet this criticism fairly, without prejudice from any false
impressions which may be taken from its title. We therefore mention the
fact, which may not be known to those who have not read the book or any
correct account of its contents, that Maria Monk, according to the
probable evidence furnished in the book, and which does not seem to have
anything opposed to it, was really married to a man who was a gentleman by
birth and of respectable connections, although reduced by his youthful
follies to a condition which was always precarious and sometimes very
destitute. Mrs. Eckel is the offspring of this marriage. After a childhood
of hardship, she was adopted into a respectable family related to her
father, Mr. St. John, and made the most strenuous efforts to acquire the
education and good manners which are suitable for a lady. She married a
gentleman of respectable position and of very superior intellectual gifts
and culture, Mr. Eckel, who afterwards fell into distressed circumstances,
and died in a very tragical manner. Mrs. Eckel separated herself from him
some time before this occurred, and very shortly before the birth of her
daughter, as it seems to us for very good reasons which exonerate her from
all blame for the misery into which her husband fell when he lost the
support of her sustaining arm. The remarkable history of her subsequent
career in Paris must be sought for in the pages of the autobiography. The
circles in which she moved while there were the highest, and many of her
intimate friends were persons of not only exalted rank, but of the most
exemplary piety, and of universal fame among Catholics. Of her own accord,
without either compulsion or advice, she did what she was not bound in
conscience to do—abandoned her brilliant position in the world, made known
the secret of her origin, and has now thrown open the history of her life
to the inspection of the world. That history must plead for itself and for
the author before impartial and judicious readers. In our opinion it is
substantially true. We believe the author has written it from a good
motive, and that she is sincere in her statements. Divested of all the
adventitious glitter of the successful woman of the world, she presents
herself for precisely what she is in herself, and, as we think, is far
more worthy of honor and respect now than ever before, or than the most
brilliant marriage in France could have made her.

Everybody who can read this book will do so, as a matter of course, even
if they have no other motive than they would have in reading one of
Thackeray’s romances. It is a romance in real life, and an instance of the
truth of the old adage, “Truth is stranger than fiction.” Such fictitious
works as _Lothair_ and the _Schönberg‐Cotta Family_ have served as a
polemical weapon against the Catholic Church, and we do not see why a
romantic but true history, of much greater literary merit than the whole
class of that sort of trash, should not answer a good purpose on the other
side. If the readers of the book find in it many things open to criticism,
and jarring upon a delicate and cultivated Catholic sense of propriety and
reverence, they should remember that the author lacks the advantage of
long and careful Catholic discipline, is still comparatively young, and a
novice in everything that relates to the spiritual and religious life. She
does not profess to give the history of her life as a model to be
imitated, or to instruct others as one competent to teach on spiritual
matters, but to write her confessions for the encouragement of other
wayward and wandering souls, and to speak out freely what she thinks as
she goes along, with very little regard to censure or fear of it.

There seems a Nemesis in the publication of such a book which should give
a salutary lesson to those who dare to throw dirt on the spotless robe of
the Catholic Church. We have often thought that this Nemesis is frequently
apparent of late in the punishments which have come from divine or human
justice on notorious corrupters of public and private morals. Dreadful as
are the actual corruptions and the corrupt tendencies in the bosom of our
political and social state, we hope this is a sign that God has not
abandoned us. It is hardly necessary to say that this is not a book
suitable for very young people.





THE CATHOLIC WORLD. VOL. XX., NO. 118.—JANUARY, 1875.




The Persecution Of The Church In The German Empire.


Concluded.

In the spring of 1870, whilst the discussion concerning the opportuneness
of defining the infallibility of the Pope was attracting the attention of
every one, and when the distant mutterings of the Franco‐Prussian war were
not yet audible, the leading organs of the Party of Progress in Berlin
sought to weigh the probable results of a definition, by the Vatican
Council, of the much‐talked‐of dogma. In case the Pope should be declared
infallible, the _Volkszeitung_, of Berlin, affirmed that many would favor
the interference of the government to prevent all further intercourse
between the bishops of Prussia and the Roman Pontiff, which would result
in the creation of a national church wholly independent of Rome.

But this organ of the Party of Progress openly avowed that there was not
the slightest probability that the state could, by any means at its
command, succeed in separating the Catholic Church in Prussia from
communion with the See of Peter; nor was there, it confessed with perfect
candor, a single bishop in Germany who would desire such a separation.

And yet, as we have shown in a former article, the task which the German
Empire has set itself is precisely the one which is here pronounced
impossible; and we propose now to continue the history of the tyrannical
enactments and harsh measures by which the worshippers of the God‐State
hope to destroy the faith of thirteen millions of Catholics. The project
of the Falk laws was brought before the Landtag on the 9th of January,
1873, and on the 30th of the same month the Catholic episcopate of the
kingdom of Prussia entered a solemn protest against this iniquitous
attempt to violate the most sacred rights of conscience and religion.

In the name of the natural law, of the historical and lawfully‐acquired
rights of the church in Germany, of the treaties concluded by the crown of
Prussia with the Holy See, and, in fine, in the name of the express
recognition of these rights by the Constitution, they protest against the
violation of the inalienable right of the Catholic Church to exist in the
integrity of its doctrine, its constitution, and its discipline.

It is of the duty and right of each bishop, they declare, to teach the
Catholic doctrine and administer the sacraments within his own diocese; it
is also of his duty and right to educate, commission, and appoint the
priests who are his co‐operators and representatives in the sacred
ministry; and it is of his duty and right to exhort and encourage them in
the fulfilment of their charge, and, when they obstinately refuse to obey
the doctrine and laws of the church, to depose them from office, and to
forbid them the exercise of all ecclesiastical functions; all of which
rights are violated by the proposed laws. As to the Royal Court for
Ecclesiastical Affairs, they affirm that they can never recognize its
competency, and that they can see in it only an attempt to reduce the
divinely‐constituted church to a non‐Catholic and national institution.

The Memorial concludes with the following noble and solemn words:

“Concord between church and state is the safeguard of the spiritual and
the temporal power; the indispensable condition of the welfare of all
human society. The bishops, the priests, the Catholic people, are not the
enemies of the state; they are not intolerant, unjust, rancorous towards
those of a different faith. They ask nothing so much as to live in peace
with all men; but they demand that they themselves be permitted to live
according to their faith, of the divinity and truth of which they are most
thoroughly convinced. They require that the integrity of religion and
their church and the liberty of their conscience be left inviolate, and
they are resolved to defend their lawful freedom, and even the smallest
right of the church, with all energy and without fear.

“From our inmost souls, in the interest of the state as much as of the
church, we conjure and implore the authorities to abandon the disastrous
policy which they have taken up, and to give back to the Catholic Church,
and to the millions of the faithful of that church who are in Prussia and
in the Empire, peace, religious liberty, and security in the possession of
their rights, and not to impose upon us laws obedience to which is
incompatible, for every bishop and for every priest and for all Catholics,
with the fulfilment of duty—laws, consequently, which violate conscience,
are morally impossible, and which, if carried into execution by force,
will bring untold misery upon our faithful Catholic people and our German
fatherland.”

The organs of the government declared that the Memorial was an
_ultimatum_, “a declaration of war”; that “it was impossible to keep the
peace with these bishops; and that they should be reduced as soon as
possible to a state in which they could do no harm.” Accordingly, the
discussion of the Falk laws was hurried up, and they were adopted in May
by a majority of two‐thirds.

In the meantime, the government continued to follow up its harsh measures
against the religious orders, going so far as to close the churches of
royal patronage in Poland, in order to prevent their consecration to the
Sacred Heart of Jesus. It even forbade the children of the schools to
assist at the devotions of the Sacred Heart. The Catholic casinos were
closed; the Congregations of the Blessed Virgin, the Society of the Holy
Childhood, and other religious associations were suppressed. The Catholic
soldiers of the Prussian army had already been outraged by having their
church in Cologne turned over to the Old Catholics.

By the beginning of 1873 nearly all the Jesuits had withdrawn from the
territory of the German Empire, and taken refuge in France, England,
Austria, Belgium, Brazil, the Indies, and the United States. Those who
still remained were interned, and, deprived of all means of subsistence,
placed under the supervision of the police. The government next proceeded
to take steps to suppress those religious orders which it considered as
_affiliated_ to the Jesuits. A mission which the Redemptorists were giving
at Wehlen, near Treves, was broken up by the police. Another mission which
they were about to open at Oberjosbach (Nassau) was interdicted; whilst
almost at the same time several Redemptorists were decorated “for services
rendered to the fatherland during the war.” A community of Lazarists at
Kulm was dissolved, and houses of the Ladies of the Sacred Heart, of the
Sisters of Notre Dame, of the Sisters of Charity, and of the Sisters of S.
Charles were closed.

Von Gerlach, the President of the Court of Appeals of Magdeburg, himself a
Protestant, has informed us, in a pamphlet which he published about this
time, of the effect of these persecutions upon the Catholics of Germany.

“As for the Catholic Church,” he wrote, “persecutions strengthen her. In
fact, her moral power is increased under pressure. The Catholic Church is
to‐day more zealous, more compact, more united, more confident of herself,
more energetic, and better organized, than she was at the commencement of
1871. The Roman Catholics have good reason to be thankful that their
church has gained in faith, in the spirit of sacrifice and prayer, in
devoutness in worship, and in all Christian virtues.

“It is even evident that the interior force of the religious orders,
especially that of the Jesuits, has been proportionately augmented. Around
these proscribed men gather all those who love them to protect and help
them.”

The courageous conduct of the German bishops in taking a firm and decided
stand against the persecutors of the church met with the almost unanimous
approval of both priests and people. Dr. Döllinger and his sect were
forgotten. If there had ever been any life in the impossible thing, it
went out in the first breath of the storm that was breaking over the
church. All the cathedral chapters gave in their adhesion to their
respective bishops, and their example was followed by the pastors,
rectors, and vicars of the eleven Prussian dioceses. They repelled with
horror, to use the words of the clergy of Fulda, the attempt to separate
the members from the head, and to give to the priesthood tutors in the
person of a state official. Even the twenty‐nine deacons of the Seminary
of Gnesen entered their protest, recalling in their address to Archbishop
Ledochowski the beautiful words of S. Laurence to Pope Sixtus as he was
led to martyrdom: _Quo sine filio, pater?_

The Catholic nobility, in their meeting at Münster in January, 1873,
openly proclaimed their fidelity to the church and their firm resolve to
defend her rights and liberties; and the Catholic people began to organize
throughout the Empire.

“The Association of the Catholic Germans,” which now counts its members by
hundreds of thousands, was formed, with the motto, _Neither rebel nor
apostate_. Its _Wanderversammlungen_ (migratory reunions) spring up
everywhere, and become the centre of Catholic life. This association is
based upon the constitutional law, its acts are public, the means it
employs are lawful, and the end it aims at is distinctly formulated in its
statutes.

In this manner the Catholics of Germany prepared themselves, not to commit
acts of violence or to transgress the law, but to offer a passive
resistance to tyranny and oppression, to uphold liberty of conscience
against state omnipotence, and to suffer every evil rather than betray
their souls’ faith.

The Imperial government, on the other hand, showed no intention of
withdrawing its arbitrary measures, but through its organs openly declared
that “the execution of the clerical laws would form a clergy as submissive
and tractable as the Prussian army”; whilst Herr Falk proclaimed in the
Reichstag “that the government was resolved to make use of every means
which the law placed within its power; and if the present laws were not
sufficient, others would be framed to ensure their execution.”

The ukase, signed by Bismarck on the 20th of May, 1873, suppressed the
convents of the Redemptorists, of the Fathers of the Holy Ghost, of the
Lazarists, and of the Ladies of the Sacred Heart; and the members of these
orders were commanded to abandon their houses before the end of the
following November. The Ladies of the Sacred Heart were accused of
desiring to acquire “universal spiritual dominion.”

The bishops were called on to submit for the approval of the government,
in accordance with the tenor of the May laws, the plan of studies and the
disciplinary rules of their diocesan seminaries; which, of course, they
declined to do, whilst foreseeing that their action would bring about the
closing of these institutions. Herr Falk, the Minister of Worship, ordered
an examination into the revenues of the different parishes, without even
asking the co‐operation of the bishops; and the civil authorities were
warned of their duty to notify the government of any changes which should
be made in the body of the clergy. The police received orders to
interfere, at certain points, with Catholic pilgrimages, which, in other
instances, were positively interdicted.

The annual allowance of twelve hundred thalers to Mgr. Ledochowski,
Archbishop of Posen, was withdrawn, his seminary was closed, and all
teachers were forbidden to ask his permission to give religious
instruction. In November, 1873, the archbishop’s furniture was seized;
even his paintings were carried off. The people, gathering in crowds,
shouted after the officials: “Thief! thief!” On the 23d of the same month
Mgr. Ledochowski was condemned to pay a fine of five thousand four hundred
thalers, or, in default, to an imprisonment of two years, for having made
nine appointments to ecclesiastical offices contrary to the laws of May.

Before the end of December, the fines imposed upon the archbishop reached
twenty‐one thousand thalers. In January, 1874, he was cited before a
delegate judge of the Royal Court for Ecclesiastical Affairs, but refused
to appear, since he could not, in conscience, recognize the competency of
a civil tribunal to pass sentence on the manner in which he had exercised
his pastoral functions. He moreover averred that, in case the threat to
drag him into court should be carried out, it was his firm resolve to say
nothing.

Several priests of the Diocese of Posen had already been incarcerated for
failure to pay the fines of the government, and on the 3d of last
February, at five o’clock in the morning, the archbishop was himself
arrested and carried off to prison in Ostrowo, a town of about seven
thousand inhabitants, chiefly Protestants and Jews.

The bishops of Prussia at once drew up a letter to the clergy and the
Catholic people of their dioceses, in which they declared that “the only
crime of Archbishop Ledochowski was that of having chosen to suffer
everything rather than betray the liberty of the church of God and deny
Catholic truth, sealed by the precious blood of the Saviour.”

The canons of the Chapter of Posen were ordered by the government to elect
a capitular‐vicar; and as they declined to give their approval to the
cruel and unjust imprisonment of their archbishop, a state official was
appointed to take charge of the affairs of the diocese.

Both the priests and people of Prussian Poland remain firm, and give noble
examples of steadfastness in the faith.

The history of the persecution in one diocese is, with a few unimportant
differences, that of all. More than a year ago, the annual allowance of
three thousand four hundred and seventy thalers made to the Theological
Seminary of Cologne was withdrawn. Archbishop Melchers and his vicar‐
general were cited before a civil tribunal for the excommunication of two
apostates. The Lazarists were driven from the preparatory seminaries of
Neuss and Münstereifel.

On the 22d of November, 1873, the archbishop was condemned to pay a fine
of twenty‐five hundred thalers for five appointments made in violation of
the May laws; and almost every week thereafter new fines were imposed,
until finally his furniture was seized on the 3d of last February, and in
a very short time the venerable prelate was incarcerated, not even his
lawyer being allowed to visit him. His prison‐cell was thought to be too
comfortable, and he was soon changed to one under the very roof of the
jail. A great number of pastors and vicars of his diocese were deprived of
their positions, and some of them imprisoned.

On the 20th of November, 1873, the priests of twenty‐eight towns and
villages of the Diocese of Treves were interdicted by the government, and
the bishop fined thirty‐six hundred thalers. The Theological Seminary was
closed, “not to be reopened until the bishop and rector should accept in
good faith the laws of May, 1873.” Any seminarians who might be found
there on the 12th of January, 1874, were to be forcibly ejected.

The 15th of this same month the professors were forbidden to instruct the
students of theology, under penalty of a fine of fifteen thalers or five
days’ imprisonment for each offence; and this prohibition is to remain in
vigor until the bishop accepts the Falk laws. On the 21st of January, an
inventory of the furniture of the episcopal palace was taken. The goods
were sold at public auction on the 6th of February; in a few days, Bishop
Eberhard was thrown into prison; and before the end of last August sixty
of his priests were confessing the faith in the dungeons of Treves and
Coblentz.

The old Dominican convent in Treves had been converted into a prison, and
it is there that the bishop and some thirty of his priests were
incarcerated. The prison discipline is rigid and harsh in the extreme.
These confessors of Christ are forced out of their beds at five o’clock in
the morning, and from this until they retire at nine in the evening they
must either walk to and fro in their cells, or sit upon stools, since
chairs are not allowed. If during the day they wish to lie down for a
moment, an official at once informs them that this is not permitted; if
they lean against the wall, the table, or the bed, they again receive the
same warning. A jailer accompanies them whenever necessity forces them to
leave their cells. All letters to and from the prison are read by the
officials, and, in case the slightest pretext can be found, are destroyed.
None save those who have voluntarily given themselves up, and who, after a
first imprisonment, have not received an ovation from the people, are
allowed to say Mass. The bishop is permitted to celebrate the Holy
Sacrifice, but no one is suffered to be present except the server and the
indispensable government official.

The food seems scarcely sufficient to sustain life. Three times in the
week, each of the prisoners receives a small piece of meat, and this is
the only change ever made in the bill of fare which we have just given.
What we have called “porridge” is known at Treves under the name of
_Schlicht_, and is a kind of flour‐paste. When we reflect that there are
in Germany to‐day not less than a thousand priests who are suffering this
slow and cruel martyrdom, we shall be able to realize that the present
pagan persecution may in all truth be compared to those which, in the
first ages of Christianity, gave to the church her legions of martyrs and
confessors. It is not necessary that we should enter into a detailed
account of the persecution in the other dioceses of Germany. The same
scenes are everywhere enacted—fines, citations, seizure of effects,
interdicts, and imprisonments, on the part of the government; whilst the
Catholics, standing in unshaken fidelity to God and conscience, suffer in
patience every outrage that their enemies can inflict, rather than betray
the sacred cause of the religion of Christ. The May laws of 1873 did not
prove sufficiently harsh or tyrannical to satisfy the Prussian infidels;
and they were consequently supplemented by clauses which passed both
houses of the Reichstag last May. In virtue of these amendments, the state
can decree the sequestration of the goods of an ecclesiastical post not
occupied in the manner prescribed by the Falk laws. In this case, these
goods are to be administered by a royal commissary.

The Royal Court for Ecclesiastical Affairs receives the power to depose
bishops; and, this deposition being once pronounced, they are forbidden to
exercise any ecclesiastical functions in their respective dioceses, which
by this very fact are placed under interdict. When the bishop is deposed
by the Royal Court, the cathedral chapter is summoned to proceed to elect
his successor; and in case it fails to comply with this injunction within
ten days, all goods belonging to the episcopal see, as well as those of
the chapter of the diocese, and of the parishes, are sequestrated and
administered by the government.

This miserable legislation gives to the state the entire spiritual power,
and ignores alike the rights of God and those of the free Christian
conscience. Still, it is only the legitimate and logical expression of the
views and aims of the modern heathendom which is organizing throughout
Europe for the destruction of the religion of Christ.

The May laws of 1873 required the bishops to convert all the incumbents
having charge of churches into permanent and irremovable parish priests;
in consequence of which the position of twelve hundred and forty‐one
incumbents in the Rhine Province became illegal on the 11th of last May. A
general interdict was therefore expected, and even a process to compel the
bishop to comply with this clause was looked for; but Herr Falk seems to
have been frightened by his own legislation, since already, on the 8th of
May, he announced in the Reichstag that only those priests whom “the
government considered dangerous” would be notified of the proceedings
taken against the bishops, and that no others would be held to come under
the operation of the law. In this manner the Prussian Minister of Worship
avoided the odium of a general interdict, whilst by a slower process he
hopes eventually to bring about this result. The moment the incumbent of a
church receives official notification that his bishop has been put under
restraint, he is by the very fact forbidden to perform any ecclesiastical
function, and his post is considered vacant. The _Landrath_ then declares
this _vacancy_, and invites the parishioners to prepare for the election
of a successor to their former pastor.

That this election may take place, it suffices that ten men, who are of
age and in the full possession of their civil rights, put in an
appearance, that the person chosen by them and approved of by the civil
authority may be recognized as the lawful incumbent.

The evident aim of this law is to create a schism in every parish in the
German Empire, which, by fomenting divisions amongst the Catholics, would
greatly aid the government in its efforts to destroy the church. But this
is only one of innumerable instances in which the persecutors have been
wholly mistaken.

They counted first upon the weakness of the Catholic bishops; confidently
expecting that one or the other of them would place himself at the head of
the Old Catholics, and thus, whilst causing great scandal in the church,
give to that still‐born sect at least a semblance of respectability. But
not one of the German prelates wavered. They go to prison, like the
apostles, rejoicing that they are found worthy to suffer for Christ, and
declare that they are willing to shed their blood for the holy cause.
Their enemies are not more ready to inflict than they to bear everything
for the love of Jesus. Then, there was no doubt in the minds of the
Prussian infidels that large numbers of the clergy would take advantage of
the bribes offered by government to apostates to throw off the authority
of the bishops, and to constitute themselves into a schismatical body. On
the contrary, the persecution has only drawn tighter the bonds which unite
the priests with their chief pastors. In all Germany there have not been
found more than thirty rationalistic professors and suspended priests who
were willing to take sides with Döllinger in his rebellion; and the
juridically‐proven immorality of Bishop Reinkens will no doubt give us a
true insight into the characters of most of the men who have elected him
their ecclesiastical superior.

When the persecutors found that both bishops and priests were immovable in
their devotion to the church, they appealed to the Catholic people, and,
by the laws of last May, placed it in their power to create a schism, by
giving them the right to elect their own pastors, with the promise that
government would turn the churches over to them. But this attempt to show
that the bishops and priests of Germany have not the sympathy and
confidence of the laity has met with signal rebuke.

The elections for the Prussian Landtag in November, 1873, and those for
the Reichstag in January last, had not merely a political significance;
their bearing upon the present and future welfare of the church in the
German Empire is of the greatest importance. Opportunity was given to the
Catholic people to make a public confession of faith; to declare, in words
which could not be misunderstood, whether or not they were resolved to
stand firm in the struggle into which their leaders had been forced.

In the November elections, in spite of every effort of the government, the
Catholics increased their representatives in the Landtag from fifty‐two to
eighty‐nine; whilst in the Reichstag their members have grown from sixty‐
three to considerably more than one hundred.

The entire Rhenish Province elected Catholics. Cologne, Düsseldorf,
Treves, Coblentz, Aix‐la‐Chapelle, Crefeld, Bonn, Neuss, Düren, Essen,
Malmedy, Mülheim, all the cities of the Lower Rhine, made their vote an
act of faith. Windthorst, the leader of the Catholic party, was elected at
Meppen (Hanover) over Falk, the author of the May laws, by a majority of
nearly fifteen thousand. The entire vote for Falk was only three hundred
and forty‐seven.

The result of the elections undoubtedly startled the government, and
possibly shook Bismarck’s confidence in the power of persecution to
destroy Catholic faith; but the struggle had grown too fierce to allow him
to think of withdrawing.

On the contrary, the firmness of the Catholic people incited the
persecutors to still harsher measures; but nothing that they have done or
can do will succeed in breaking the combined passive opposition of the
clergy and the laity.

In the Vatican Council, the most determined resistance to the definition
of the infallibility of the Pope was made by the German bishops, who felt
no hesitation in openly declaring with what anxiety they regarded the
probable effects of such a definition upon the Catholics of their own
country. Divisions, apostasies, schisms, seemed imminent; and it is not
easy now to determine what might have been the result had not God’s
providence interfered.

In the first place, at the very moment when the definition was made, the
terrible conflict between France and Prussia broke forth, and raged so
fiercely that the loud earth was struck dumb, and men held their breath
till it should be ended. In the meantime, the angry feelings aroused by
the discussions in the Vatican Council had, in great measure, been calmed,
and it was possible to take a fairer and more dispassionate view of the
whole subject.

Then the attempt of the government to destroy the Catholic Church in
Germany, by tearing it away from its allegiance to the Pope, and debasing
it to a mere function of the state, roused those who might have been
disposed to waver, and brought about a universal reawakening of faith. It
is the fate of the enemies of God’s people to bless when they mean to
curse. In fact, when Catholics begin to suffer, they begin to triumph; and
hence even those who hate us have of nothing so great horror as of making
martyrs and confessors. They know the history of martyrdom—that in the
whole earth and in all ages it means victory.

The church, which sprang from the conflict of the God‐Man with death, like
him, in her greatest humiliation shows forth her highest power.

Her march through the world and through the ages is not along pleasant
roads and through peaceful prospects, or, if so, only at times and rarely.
If she move in pomp amid the acclamations of peoples, her triumphal
procession ends in sorrow. The bark of Peter must be storm‐tossed; and
when the angry waves would swallow it, the divine voice speaks the magic
word, and the quiet deep bears it up on her peaceful bosom.

The road wherein the progress of the church is most secure is the blood‐
stained way of the cross. When she is all bruised, and there is no
comeliness left in her; when her eyes are red with weeping, and the world,
beholding her agony, mocks and jeers and laughs her to scorn, then is she
strongest; for her strength comes from humility, from suffering, from the
cross. When she is humbled, God exalts her; when he permits her enemies to
entomb her in ignominy, he is near at hand to crown her with the immortal
glory of a new life. The word of Christ is: “You shall live in the world
in the midst of persecutions; but take heart: I have conquered the world.”

Within the memory of those who are still young, it was the fashion with
our enemies to proclaim that the church was decrepit, that she was dying,
that of her own weight she would fall to pieces in the new society that
was growing up around her: to‐day we hear that she is everywhere waxing
too strong, and men appeal against her to tyranny and to brute force.

The most powerful and the most thoroughly organized of the modern nations,
the great _Cultur‐Staat_ of the age, has confessed that it is unable to
check the growth of the church by legitimate means, and it has therefore
had recourse to the most arbitrary legislation and to the harshest
measures of compulsion and violence. This, of course, is the most explicit
avowal of its own impotence. We find also that the two nations which have
manifested the most supercilious indifference to the Catholic Church, as
being something which did not and could not concern them, now applaud this
Prussian tyranny, in spite of the pretence of the love of freedom and fair
play. The sympathy of the English press, and to a great extent of the
American press, in this struggle, is with the absolute and liberty‐
destroying government of Prussia. The favorite motto of “civil and
religious liberty all the world over” has been wholly lost sight of, and
Englishmen and Americans give moral aid to a state which wantonly tramples
upon both.

This, too, was a cherished watch‐word: The church is the friend of
absolutism, the enemy of freedom.

But to‐day we behold the Catholic Church, single‐handed, fighting again
the same battles of liberty which she fought and won in the early
centuries of Christianity. Now, as then, she opposes absolutism in the
state; denies, as she then denied, that Cæsar can lawfully lay claim to
“the things of God”; and protests, in the name of the outraged dignity of
human nature, that there is a freedom which transcends the sphere of all
earthly authority. Her children, when nothing else remains to be done,
utter the divine words: _Non possumus_—we cannot; we must obey God rather
than men.

Referring to this struggle, Bismarck has said, in a memorable speech, that
“it is the ancient contest for power, which is as old as the human race
itself—the contest for power between king and priest.” This is necessarily
the view which he takes, since he believes in nothing but force. But the
dualism here is not in the combatants alone; it is in the objects for
which they contend.

It is indeed the ancient contest between good and evil, between the spirit
and the flesh, between the Christ and the rulers of this world, which
makes life a warfare and the earth a battle‐field, and which must continue
until the end. Never has it been fiercer than in our day, and the battle
is yet hardly begun. But very few indeed understand, as yet, the nature of
the struggle, or are at all aware of the real principles and interests
which are at stake. Few men can see further than an hour or beyond the
little circle that bounds their private interests; but each day it is
becoming more evident that men must take sides; that not to be for Christ
is to be against him.

Twice in the last eighteen hundred years the church has been the ark of
the nations: she destroyed paganism; she converted and civilized
barbarism. Some historian will tell, in another age, how, when Christian
society, grown luxurious and corrupt, without God and without future hope,
was sinking back into the flesh‐worship and the death of ancient paganism,
she, gathering around her the remnant of her children, and fearlessly
facing the storm and the wrath of those who had ceased to know her, kept
her own pure and undefiled till the dawn of the brighter day, to become
the leaven of the social state that is to be.




Christmas‐Tide.


’Twas the hallowed Christmas even—
  Christmas of the olden time,
Earth in snowy robes lay sleeping,
  But there came a ringing chime
      From the forest
Deck’d with glittering frozen rime.

Bright the golden stars were gleaming
  Through the cloudless frosty air,
Like the tapers softly beaming
  Round some holy shrine of pray’r,
      And the night wind
Chants an anthem faint and rare.

Cheer’ly shone the Yule‐log, glowing
  In an old baronial hall,
Ghost‐like shadows rose and faded
  On the ancient panelled wall:
      O’er my spirit
Mournful fancies seemed to fall.

Happy hearts were gathered round me—
  Laughing childhood, free from stain;
Maidens, in their girlish beauty;
  Manhood’s gaze, undimm’d by pain;
      And the aged,
Who might never meet again.

Gathered on that Christmas even
  In the old ancestral home,
Breathing words of hope and kindness,
  ’Neath that lofty arching dome,
      Ere they parted
Through life’s thorny paths to roam.

Two beside the hearthstone lingered—
  Aged sire, and lady fair;
He of life’s long journey weary;
  But her softly waving hair
      Graced a forehead
Yet unmarked by trace of care.

Spake then out that youthful mother
  With her babe upon her knee
To the grandsire old and hoary,
  Like a leafless forest tree:
      “Tell me, father,
What thought Christmas brings to thee.”

Silently he gazed upon her,
  On her brow so pure and white,
On her dark eyes, softly beaming
  With affection’s holy light;
      But a shadow
Lay upon his soul like night.

“Daughter, in life’s joyous morning
  Christmas comes with merry cheer,
Fancy tints a glowing pathway
  Bright’ning with each coming year:
      On the picture
Falleth not a shade of fear.

“Childhood smileth in its gladness,
  Archeth Hope her rainbow bright—
Ah! he strives to grasp the vision;
  Fades it from his eager sight:
      Soon around him
Closes Disappointment’s night.

“In the noontide, manhood kneeleth
  Low before Ambition’s shrine,
Praying: ’Goddess, hear thy vot’ry,
  I no altar seek but thine’:
      Fame’s wan fingers
Withered chaplets for him twine.

“But when fall the length’ning shadows,
  When life’s even stealeth on,
Memory opes her golden casket,
  Counts her jewels one by one—
      Earth’s dream fadeth;
Her bright smile remains alone.

“One by one my loved departed
  To the far‐off spirit‐land—
One by one they crossed my threshold,
  Till, the last of that bright band,
      Sad and weary,
By a stranger hearth I stand.

“As the wand’rer homeward speeding
  Marks the Southern Cross decline,
I am looking ever backward
  To the stars that faintly shine;
      But one beameth
With a radiance all divine.

“Star of Bethlehem! ere the sunlight
  Of another Christmas blest
Rises in the glowing Orient,
  Light, oh! light me to my rest!
      I would slumber
Calmly in earth’s quiet breast.”

Slowly, slowly crept a Shadow
  Through that silent, dark’ning room—
Softly loosed the cord of silver,
Led that soul from Sorrow’s gloom
      To the valleys
Where the flowers immortal bloom.




The Veil Withdrawn.


Translated By Permission, From The French Of Madame Craven, Author Of “A
Sister’s Story,” “Fleurange,” Etc.



XXX.


The portrait of Gilbert I have drawn is not incorrect. He was as noble as
I have represented him, and it is certain that, in speaking to me as he
did that day, he was very far from the thought of laying a snare for me,
or even for himself. Whether he was absolutely sincere or not I cannot
say, but probably as much so as I, at least during the few first days
after this conversation. Thanks to the method of reasoning I have given
above, and which I thought original, it seemed to me that this frequent
intercourse with a man unusually superior to any one I had ever known, and
who, very far from addressing me any silly flattery, almost invariably
appealed to all that was highest in my nature, and, without alluding to
the cause of my troubles, knew how to divert my mind completely from
them—it seemed to me, I say, that this intimacy, this sort of imaginary
relationship which I had accepted, was not only lawful, but beneficial,
and I regarded it even as a just compensation for so many cruel
deceptions. In a word, I had lost, through the frivolity of my recent
life, that clearness of spiritual vision which is maintained by vigilance
alone, and I was a long time without suspecting that this idle frivolity,
with all the exuberant gayety that accompanied it, was a thousand times
less dangerous than the long conversations, to which the perfect harmony
of a kindred mind, and the contact with a soul so noble that it seemed to
ennoble mine, lent such a charm, and gave to my life a new interest which
I had never experienced before.

There was no apparent, or even real, difference in our interviews from
what they were before, and any one might have heard every word he
addressed me. And yet I felt that he by no means talked to me as he did to
others, and I, on my side, conversed with him as I did with no one else.
We were seldom alone together, it is true, but every evening, either in
the drawing‐room or on the terrace, he found an opportunity of conversing
with me a few moments without witnesses. He did not conceal from me that
he regarded these as the most precious moments of the evening; and as to
this I scarcely differed from him. Occasionally, something inexpressible
in his voice, his looks, and even in his silence, made me tremble, as if I
felt the warning of some approaching danger. But as he never deviated a
single word from the _rôle_ he had taken, my torpid conscience was not
aroused! Lorenzo was still absent, though the time fixed for his return
had long gone by; and when I was expecting him the second time, I received
a letter announcing a further delay, caused, as he said, by “a
circumstance that was unforeseen and independent of his will.”

A flush of anger rose to my face while reading this letter, though I felt
and acknowledged that the prolongation of his absence did not cause me the
same chagrin it once would. I did not ask why. I took pleasure in
recalling with a kind of complacency the aggravating wrongs I had
repeatedly endured, and it seemed to me he had less right than ever to
deny a heart he had so cruelly wounded any consolation whatever that
remained.

The day this second letter arrived we were on the point of starting for
Mt. Vesuvius, where, for a week, crowds of people had been going out of
curiosity, as is the case at every new eruption. It was nearly night
before we set out. My aunt and her two daughters were of the party,
besides Gilbert, Mario, and Lando, as well as two foreigners who, from the
time of the Carnival, had assiduously haunted the steps of my two cousins.
One was a young Baron von Brunnenberg, an excellent dancer and a great
lover of music; the other an Englishman, no less young, of fine figure and
herculean proportions, whose name was Harry Leslie.

There was a certain embarrassment at our departure among the members of
the party, caused by the simultaneous desire of several of them to avoid
the _calèche_ in which Donna Clelia had at once installed herself. I
observed this hesitation, which was far from flattering to my poor aunt,
and hastened to take a seat beside her. The young baron, who escorted her,
then concluded to follow my example, and I made a sign to Lando to take
the vacant place. He obeyed me less eagerly than usual. Stella, my two
cousins, and the young Englishman took possession of the other carriage,
which assumed the lead, followed with an envious eye by the baron as well
as Lando, who, I remarked, seemed in a less serene frame of mind than
usual. Gilbert and Mario came after in a _carozzella_, which formed our
rear‐guard.

At first everything went on pleasantly. My aunt was very fond of pleasure
excursions, and she regarded this as one, particularly as we were all to
take supper together at my house on our return. The conversation did not
slacken an instant as far as Resina, where we arrived at nightfall. There
we left the main road to take that which led directly to Mt. Vesuvius.

A new crater had this time been formed below the well‐known cone from
which the fire and smoke generally issued. It was like a large, gaping
wound on the side of the mountain, which sent forth torrents of fire,
ashes, and red‐hot stones.

Consequently, instead of being obliged to climb to the summit in order to
witness the eruption, we were able to drive so near the stream of lava
that we only had to walk a short distance to see the terrible opening,
which was approached more or less closely, according to the degree of
boldness or curiosity with which each one was endowed.

But the spectacle presented an imposing appearance long before we saw it
close at hand, and I was in the height of admiration when I heard a murmur
beside me: “O Gesù, Gesù!... O Madonna santa!...” Turning around, I beheld
my aunt, pale with fright, kissing the cross of the rosary she held in her
hand.

Donna Clelia, as we are perfectly aware, knew how to brave danger when she
found an occasion worthy of the trouble. We had a proof of this on the
memorable day of the combat on the Toledo. But, as it has perhaps also
been perceived, she was rather indifferent to the picturesque.
Consequently, there was nothing at this moment to stimulate her courage,
and I was alarmed at the condition in which I saw her.

“O Ginevrina mia!...” said she at last in a trembling voice, “_non mi
fido!_ No, I have not the courage to go any further.... Madonna!...”

This last appeal was caused by a stream of fire brighter than any of the
preceding ones, and accompanied by a loud detonation.

“But merciful Lord! What folly!” she continued. “What caprice! What
madness! How can you wish to rush into such a lake of fire while you are
still alive!... Oh! no, not yet; no, never! _O mamma mia!
misericordia!_...”

Each new stream of fire produced a more lively exclamation of terror. All
at once she leaned her head on my shoulder, exclaiming:

“Ginevrina!... I feel I am going to have a _papariello_!”(106)

At this we stopped the carriage. It was evidently dangerous to take her
any further. But what should we do?... Must we give up our excursion, and
retrace our steps? We were not inclined to do this. Besides, the other
carriage was some distance in advance, and could not be recalled. In this
dilemma we were rejoined by the _carozzella_. Gilbert and Mario leaped
from their carriage to ascertain what had happened to us.

“What is it, Zia Clelia?” said Mario, approaching the carriage, and
perceiving my aunt in the attitude I have just mentioned. She raised her
head.

“O Mario! _figlio mio!_ It is because I cannot endure this storm of fire.
It is the end of the world—the day of judgment!... How it oppresses me!...
How it stifles me!... O my God! and the _povere ragazze, dove sono?_... O
holy Virgin, lead us all back safe and sound to Naples, and I promise you
that for nine days....”

She finished her vow mentally, for Mario at once decided on the only thing
that could be done, and devoted himself to the task. He would take her
back to Resina in the carriage, and there await our return.

The exchange was soon effected. My aunt did not require any insisting,
after we promised to bring her daughters back without allowing them to
incur any danger. In the twinkling of an eye she was placed beside Mario
in the _carozzella_ with her back to Mt. Vesuvius, while Gilbert took her
place beside me, and we pursued our way as fast as possible, in order to
make up for the time we had lost.

We soon arrived at the place where we were obliged to leave the carriage.
Gilbert aided me in descending, and then gave me his arm, while Lando and
the baron went in search of the other members of the party, who only had
Mr. Leslie to protect them. They were soon out of sight, and Gilbert
remained alone with me.

I will not repeat here what every one has seen or read concerning the
eruptions of Mt. Vesuvius. I will merely say to those who have not had the
experience, that this extraordinary spectacle, assuredly the most
wonderful and at the same time the most terrific in the whole world of
nature, causes a singular fascination which induces the spectator to
approach continually nearer and nearer the fiery crater. It seems
impossible to turn away his eyes. He keeps on, therefore, without looking
to the right or left, without seeing where he is walking, stumbling at
every step over heaps of lava scarcely cold, regardless of the rough path
with its sharp, burning stones, the effect of which is afterwards seen on
his garments and shoes, though he does not think of it while exposed to
the danger, more apparent, perhaps, than real, but which indubitably
exists, however, as is proved by the numerous accidents that occur at
every new eruption.

Leaning on Gilbert’s arm, I was too firmly supported to stumble, and was
able to ascend to the top of a ridge of lava formed by preceding
eruptions; and there, protected by an immense block on the very edge of
the flaming abyss, I contemplated the awful, imposing spectacle! Gilbert
did not utter a word, and I attributed his silence to the impression which
likewise rendered me dumb in the presence of this terrific convulsion of
nature. The burning lava, issuing, as I have said, from a crater on the
side of the mountain, did not spring up to fall back again on the summit,
as usual, but it advanced like a large river of fire over the heaped‐up
masses of cold, black lava, giving them the most singular, fantastic
forms. It was like a city, not on fire, but of fire! It seemed as if one
could see houses, towers, and palaces; and in the midst of these imaginary
edifices moved the fiery stream! For lava does not flow. However steep the
descent, it stops and goes no further as soon as the crater ceases to emit
it. But it had not yet stopped. On the contrary, it pursued its slow,
pitiless course, consuming vineyards, swallowing up houses, and burning
the trees and bushes in its way.

It was a sight difficult to endure for a long time, and yet I could not
turn my eyes away from so mysterious and terrible a spectacle.

“O my God!” I murmured, “this is truly _la città dolente!_ We have before
our eyes an exact representation of the last day of the world!...”

Gilbert made no reply. He was overcome by I know not what emotion more
powerful than mine, and, looking at his face by the red light of the fire,
I was alarmed at the change in his features and their unusual expression.

“Would that that day had arrived for me!” said he at length. “Would that
this were really the last day of my life! Yes, I would like to be
swallowed up in that flame! I would like to die here on the spot where I
am—beside you—worthy of you....”

In spite of the terrific scene before me, in spite of the noise of the
explosions and the sullen sound of the lava, the tone in which he spoke
was distinctly audible, and made my heart beat with mingled emotion and
fear.

“I am afraid you are becoming dizzy, Monsieur de Kergy,” said I in a
trembling voice; “take care. Its effect, they say, is to draw one into the
abyss.”

“Yes, Donna Ginevra,” replied he in the same strange tone, “you are right.
I am dizzy. I am approaching the verge of an abyss, I know. I have rashly
exposed myself to the danger. I have presumed too much on my strength.”

The look he fastened on me, as he uttered these words, gave them a meaning
I could not mistake. It was no longer Gilbert who spoke—it was not he to
whom I had accorded the rights of a safe and faithful friend. The veil
with which I had wilfully blinded my eyes suddenly fell off, and the
emotion I was seized with, the material flames that surrounded me, and the
certain peril into which another step would have plunged me, gave an exact
idea of the danger to which I had foolishly exposed my honor and my soul!

I covered my face a moment with my hands, but spoke as soon as I dared.

“Monsieur de Kergy,” said I in a supplicating tone, “cease to look at the
fire around us. Lift up your eyes, and see how calm and beautiful the
night is above this terrible _inferno_.”

In fact, a bright moonlight was diffused over this terrific scene, and the
contrast between the earth and sky could not have been more striking.

Gilbert’s eyes followed mine, and remained for some time fastened on those
peaceful starry worlds, which seemed as far remote from the agitation of
our hearts as they were above this frightful convulsion of nature. I felt
in my soul the need of powerful assistance, and murmured in a low tone: “O
my God, have mercy on me!” with a fervor that for a long time I had not
felt in my prayers.

After a long silence, Gilbert said to me in a low, agitated tone:

“Will you pardon me, madame? Will you trust in me to take you away from
this place?”

“Yes, I trust you. But let us make haste to leave so dangerous a spot. Do
you not hear the frightful explosions? Do you not see the red‐hot stones
that are flying over our heads?...” And as I spoke a cloud of thick smoke
added obscurity to all the other horrors of the place.

“Do not be alarmed,” said Gilbert in a tone once more calm and decided.
“We must certainly hurry away, but there is no danger yet, unless from
fear. Give me your hand.”

But I hesitated when he endeavored to take it, and made an involuntary
movement, as if going to descend without his assistance.

“In the name of heaven,” said he rapidly, trembling with agitation and
terror, “do not refuse my assistance in the danger we are in. You cannot
do without it. You _must_ give me your hand, madame.”

His agitated voice became almost imperious. I gave him my hand, and even
complied when he told me to rest the other firmly against his shoulder.

“Now,” said he, “descend carefully. You need not be afraid. I will support
you. In spite of this whirlwind of fire and smoke, I can clearly
distinguish my way.”

He made no further observations, as we slowly descended; and as soon as we
were in a place of safety, I left him, and leaned against a tree at some
distance, trying to get breath. Besides the violent agitation of my heart,
the suffocating air that surrounded us gave me a feeling of giddiness and
faintness that was almost overpowering.



XXXI.


The stream of fire and smoke that obliged us to leave the place where we
were standing had a like effect on all who were in the vicinity of the
fiery current. We were therefore soon joined by Teresina and Lando,
Mariuccia and the baron. But I felt extremely anxious at seeing nothing of
Stella and young Leslie, who had left the others to go further below, in
order to get a better view of the lava in its course to the plain. The
fear lest some accident had happened to them began to chill the blood in
my veins, but I was soon reassured by seeing them at last reappear with
blackened faces and torn garments, while Stella was bareheaded, and her
hair streaming in disorder.

“Good heavens! what has happened to you?”

“Nothing, nothing,” said Stella, out of breath. “We will tell you
everything by‐and‐by.”

Here Mr. Leslie interposed, declaring that the Countess Stella was “the
bravest woman he had ever met—a heroine, and an angel of goodness.”

“You are entirely mistaken,” said Stella, drawing up the hood of her
cloak. “But I have lost my bonnet, and nearly destroyed my shoes also, I
fear. Let us start immediately. We will relate everything afterwards.”

As she was there safe and sound, it was really much better to put off any
further particulars till another time, and return to Naples as quickly as
possible. We started, therefore, without any delay, only stopping at
Resina long enough to take my aunt, who, having devoted the whole time of
our absence to a siesta, was completely rested, and had quite recovered
from her terror. Mario was less good‐humored; but when, a little after
midnight, we all assembled at last around the supper‐table that awaited
our return, every one seemed satisfied with the excursion we had made. I
alone felt I had brought back a heart more agitated than at our departure.

Stella still refused to answer our questions, pretending to be too hungry
to think of giving the account we were all so eager to hear; but Mr.
Leslie was only too glad to assume the task, and at once proceeded to
satisfy our curiosity.

“We were,” said he, “watching the lava, as it advanced with a dull sound
resembling the distant report of grape‐shot, when all at once we heard a
succession of heart‐rending groans a few steps off. At our approach we
found a man lying on the ground. I endeavored to raise him. Impossible: he
had broken his leg. Countess Stella questioned him, and the story he
related was a sad one. Like so many of the other poor creatures, he had
deferred leaving his house till the last moment. His wife was ill in bed,
with a little boy of five or six years old beside her. He kept hoping the
lava would stop before it could reach his dwelling—they all hope that! He
went out two or three times an hour to see how far it had progressed, and
finally saw all hope was vain. The lava kept on its course, regardless of
any one. He had barely more than half an hour to save his wife and child,
and then carry away what he could. He rushed towards the house; but in the
haste with which he endeavored to make up for lost time, he had fallen
from one of those black rocks you are so familiar with, on the spot where
we found him, unable to rise. It was necessary to hasten; the lava was
continually advancing. In less than a quarter of an hour it would reach
his hut, and his wife and child were there!... I could not understand what
he said,” continued the young Englishman with an expression of benevolence
and courage which added to the effect of his narrative, “but while I was
gazing at the devouring current that was advancing towards a house I
supposed empty, I suddenly saw the countess dart forward without any
explanation. I understood it at once, and followed her. Outrunning her, I
was the first to arrive at the house, and had already taken the woman and
mattress in my arms when the countess joined me. ‘Take the child!’ I
cried. He was screaming, the poor thing; for, in taking up his mother, I
had, without intending it, thrown him on the floor. He was a boy of about
six years of age, and heavy to carry, I assure you. But kindness and
courage gave strength. The countess picked him up as if he were a feather,
and we hurried out of the house. The heat of the fire was already
intolerable, and the earth under our feet heaved at every step. I thought
a dozen times we had sacrificed our own lives in trying to save theirs.
But no, thank God! we all succeeded—woman, child, and ourselves, with the
mattress—in reaching the poor wounded man, whose cries of terror now gave
place to those of joy. He had reason—the poor creature!—for we were hardly
in safety before we heard a horrid sound, this time like the noise of
cannon—it was the shock of the burning lava against the house we had just
escaped from. What a sight! Good God!... But since it must have happened,
I am not sorry I was there! The fiery stream first passed around the
house, then rose, as if to wrap its red flame around it, and finally swept
over the roof; and when everything was engulfed, it quietly continued its
course. The poor people wept; but, after all, they were thankful to be
alive, and kissed the hands of the Countess Stella, calling her an angel
sent by the Madonna and a thousand other things of that kind. It was now
time to call for assistance, and by the aid of two or three peasants we
transported them all into a habitation, where they were received for the
night. To‐morrow I shall go and carry them some assistance. And now,
Madame la Duchesse, you know how the Countess Stella lost her bonnet, and
why we were so late.”

The effect produced by this account cannot be described. Gilbert eagerly
raised his head, and I saw his eyes glisten as he listened. As for me, my
heart leaped with a kind of transport, while my dear, noble Stella made
fruitless efforts to stop the acclamations her courage drew even from
those who were the least accessible to enthusiasm.

“What an absurdity!” exclaimed she as soon as she could make herself
heard. “Who of you would not have done the same thing? Stop, I beg of you,
or rather, listen to me. Let us all join in buying these poor people a
cottage to replace the one they have lost.”

This proposition was of course acceded to with ardor and unanimity. My
Aunt Clelia instantly plunged into the depths of her pocket, and had
already opened her well‐stocked _porte‐monnaie_ when Lando rose and
exclaimed:

“Stop, Donna Clelia; put your gold back in your pocket—for the moment. I
have an idea. Let us do as they do in Paris.”

“Oh! bravo!” exclaimed my two cousins in a breath.

“Yes,” said Teresina with enthusiasm, “as at Paris, I beg of you. But
what? how? say!”

“Listen, all,” said Lando—“listen to my programme. It contains a _rôle_
for us all. First, Donna Ginevra’s is the easiest, but most indispensable.
She must lend us one of her drawing‐rooms where a small but select number
can assemble. This _réunion_ shall take place to‐morrow, ... no, the day
after to‐morrow, when—pay special attention now, Monsieur le Comte de
Kergy.”

Gilbert, hearing his name, looked up with surprise, while Lando stopped to
say very swiftly in Italian to his neighbor, “You know he is celebrated
for his eloquence,” then continued: “And then, the Comte de Kergy, here
present, shall, at the opening of the meeting, make a brief discourse, in
order to explain the object of the contribution we shall afterwards expect
of each one. He will relate the account we have just heard, and add all he
pleases about the excursion we have made together and the various
incidents that have taken place. We shall depend on his omitting nothing
that occurred. _Poi_, Donna Teresina and Donna Mariuccia will sing a duet,
accompanied by the Baron von Brunnenberg; and if you wish for a general
chorus, here we are, Mario, Leslie, and myself, ready to lend our
assistance. _Finalmente_, we come to the most important; the Countess
Stella will recite some poetry of her own choice, and you who have heard
her know what is in reserve for those who are to hear her for the first
time. After that is the moment to present your contributions, and you
shall give me the result. _Che ne dite!_”

I could not have declined, even if I had had any serious objections
against this proposition, which was unanimously received with even more
enthusiasm than the first. Stella, though really endowed with the talent
Lando was desirous of profiting by, seemed annoyed. Gilbert’s face
darkened, and he resumed the gloomy, preoccupied expression he had for an
instant shaken off; but to protest or refuse was as impossible for them as
well as me, and before separating, at two o’clock in the morning, the
meeting was decided upon and appointed for the next day but one.

When I found myself alone, it was impossible to think of sleep,
notwithstanding the advanced hour of the night. My chamber was at one end
of the house, and opened on the lateral terrace opposite that of the
drawing‐room. I opened my window, and took a seat outside. There, in the
imposing silence of that beautiful night, I sought calmness and the power
of reflection. The uncommon courage Stella had just given a proof of
produced a salutary effect on me. Her example reacted somewhat against a
fatal enervation that was gradually diminishing my moral strength. I
admired courage, and my soul, however enfeebled it might be, responded at
this moment to her noble, generous impulse. With my eyes fastened on the
flame that now lit up the whole horizon with its sinister gleam, I thought
the sight ought to inspire Stella with a lofty emotion such as follows the
accomplishment of an heroic deed; whereas I—it was with a shudder I
thought of the contrast it suggested!... I tried to avoid dwelling on what
had taken place. I wished to believe it was my imagination alone that
disturbed and alarmed me; that nothing was changed; but I could not
succeed, and at last I was forced to consider what I should do—what was
the course prescribed by the new light to which I could no longer close my
eyes? But as soon as this question was clearly placed before me, I
experienced the most violent repugnance to solve it.

Gilbert’s sweet, beneficent friendship alone had enabled me to endure the
destruction of my happiness. Could I admit the necessity of renouncing it?
What had he ever done till to‐day to give me reason to regret my
confidence in him? For an instant, it is true, and only for an instant, he
had not seemed like himself, and my heart beat, in spite of myself, as I
recalled his look and the accent of his voice; but did I not attach too
much importance to words which, after all, were vague and incoherent?
Should I not take time to reflect? Such were the questions I asked myself,
in order to impose silence on my reason and the actual voice of my
conscience. I succeeded so far as to defer the reply I was unwilling to
listen to, and put off my decision, whatever it might be, till the
following day.

It was late when I awoke, for I did not go to sleep till daylight; and I
had not yet left my chamber when the following letter was brought me. It
was dated the same day at three o’clock in the morning:

“MADAME: A few hours ago I addressed you in a moment of delirium. What I
said I know not. But what I do know is that you understood me, and, in
order to regain your confidence and make you forget what I uttered, I
should be obliged to declare what is false, and this I cannot do. No, I
will not be false to myself, were I, by speaking the truth, to forfeit a
happiness I ought to have courage enough to deny myself, and which I
shall, at least, renounce if you require it.

“I only ask you not to condemn me without a hearing. For once allow me to
speak plainly, though it be of myself; which is repugnant to me, as you
may have perceived. But it is necessary to do this in order to throw light
on the decision you will afterwards have to make.

“I believe I have a high idea of the use a man should make of his life, as
well as a profound conviction he will have to render an account of the way
he spends it. In a word, I adhere, thank God, to the faith of my mother,
and desire to live as much as possible in accordance with this faith, and
as it becomes an honest man and a Christian to live.

“To this end, I have given my activity every possible scope—long,
fatiguing journeys, hard study, active concurrence in a multitude of
enterprises that seemed to have an useful object. I have entered eagerly
into everything that could absorb my mind and time, not so much out of
disinterested zeal for doing good, as from a calculation that is
allowable, I think; for it is founded on a distrust of myself, resulting
from an exact knowledge of the shoals on which I might easily be wrecked.

“I dreamed of a happiness, common enough in many countries, but rare in
ours—that of knowing, loving, and choosing the one I would make my own;
but this is a difficult thing in France, and I had a strong repugnance to
any other way of deciding my lot. I persistently refused to consent to any
of those so‐called chance encounters one is constantly drawn into by
officious friends without number in Paris, who are always ready to take
possession of any one who has the misfortune to be considered a _bon
parti_.

“In avoiding these encounters I was spared other temptations still more
dangerous, and I met with nothing to disturb my peace of mind till the day
I saw you the first time, madame. I had no conversation with you on that
occasion, but I observed you, I heard your voice, and listened to some of
your remarks. I noticed your indifference to the homage that surrounded
you, and the evident absence of vanity which your beauty rendered so
strange, and I became afraid of you. Yes, I felt I must avoid you, and I
did so resolutely. One day, however, you were, without my being aware of
it, in the audience I addressed, and Diana afterwards presented me to you.
The opinion of every one else immediately became indifferent to me. I only
cared to know what you thought of my discourse, and to ascertain if there
was any mental sympathy between us. I thought I discovered some in the few
words we exchanged, and my resolution to avoid you only became the more
fixed. I even resisted my mother’s entreaties to join some of the
excursions she made with you. Consequently, I only met you once, as you
are aware, madame, and that was at home, where I could not avoid the
happiness of being beside you.

“I perceived you were sad that evening, in spite of your charming smile
and gayety of manner, which were no less dangerous to me than your tears.
I saw it, and was terribly agitated. And when at last the time came to bid
you farewell, I could not summon the resolution, but said instead ‘_au
revoir_.’

“Nevertheless, I allowed long months to pass. I waited till time had
somewhat effaced the vividness of my recent impressions, so I should no
longer fear to meet you, and then I made an excuse to stop at Naples a few
days on my way to Egypt. The day I arrived here, though I detest balls, I
could not avoid attending that given by the French ambassador, and there I
saw you once more!

“Shall I acknowledge it? When I saw you in all the splendor of your
dazzling beauty, enhanced by your dress, and surrounded by adorers, I felt
a momentary relief. I congratulated myself on having braved the danger of
seeing you again. It seemed to me at that moment the image I had so
cherished in my heart was effaced, and I was no longer in any danger.
Alas! the next day you were no longer the same. I found you as you once
were, but I had not the courage to fly from you. My stay was to be short,
and I yielded to the happiness allotted me, persuading myself the habit of
seeing you daily might diminish the effect of your influence.

“At length, madame, in good faith, as I thought, I ventured one day to ask
you to regard me as a friend, and promised to be worthy of the favor. I
firmly believed I promised you nothing beyond my strength. A single
instant was sufficient to reveal to me, even more clearly than to you, the
extent of my illusion. You see I make no attempt to conceal anything from
you now. I no longer try to deceive you. But in spite of all I have said,
I implore you not to bid me depart. In asking this I feel sure of never
offending you again. I cannot hope for the return of your confidence. I no
longer claim to be regarded as a friend. I even promise to speak to you
henceforth but seldom. But I beseech you not to deprive me of the
happiness of seeing you! Do not punish me so severely! Do not yet command
me to _go_. That word would be an order I should at once obey, or rather a
sentence I should submit to without a murmur; but there is no criminal who
has not the right to petition for mercy, and that mercy I now implore at
your feet.

“_Gilbert._”



XXXII.


My mother, in portraying the lineaments of my youthful soul, once spoke of
a precious jewel hidden in its depths. She doubtless referred to the
inclination for what is right and the lively horror of evil she discovered
there. But does not this jewel exist with more or less purity and
brilliancy in the depths of every human soul, requiring only a perverted
will to crush it utterly, or a feeble, undecided will to tarnish its
lustre and diminish its value? My life, though not very culpable in
appearance, was now drawing me in its soft current into that state of
sluggishness, inaction, and weakness which is a dissolvent of this
supernatural jewel without any equal in the natural world.

Lorenzo, notwithstanding his jealous vigilance during the earlier period
of our married life, did not hesitate to take me to all the theatres, and
at Paris he placed in my hands some of the most celebrated romances of the
day. This somewhat disturbed the equilibrium of my mind, and produced a
certain agitation of soul, which is the natural consequence of an
unhealthy interest in works to which genius and talent have the cruelty to
lend their irresistible power. When we reflect on the value of these
divine gifts, the source from which they emanate, and their power of
diffusing light and awakening the mental faculties, we cannot help
thinking how cruel it is to employ them in kindling everywhere a fire so
destructive to the human soul—the only real, irrevocable death.

But, in spite of the inevitable effect spoken of above, the strong disgust
and repugnance they speedily produced in my mind prevented their poisonous
emanations from affecting me seriously. Now, after being so long exposed
to influences doubtless less deleterious than those, but by no means
strengthening, a more subtle snare was laid for me.... The letter I held
in my hand was not an effusion that should instantly have aroused my
conscience, which, though torpid, was not hardened; no, its language was
such that I read and reread it, and allowed the sentiments it expressed to
penetrate my very heart. And yet, what was the substance of this letter;
what was its real signification? However noble and superior to other men
Gilbert might appear in my eyes, of what avail was this nobleness, this
superiority, this purity of his soul even, when he began to tread the
lower path of common mortals with the vain thought that he could maintain
a straight course better than others; ... that he could make me so
decidedly explicit a declaration, and promise me an inviolable respect,
which he immediately deviated from the first time he had the
opportunity?...

But this truth did not at that time appear in the light in which I saw it
at a later day, and a terrible struggle took place in my heart. Illusion
was no longer possible. I could no longer say I had a sure, faithful
friend whose attachment was allowable, and yet I could not decide to give
it up. I tried to persuade myself, with all those arguments that present
themselves as soon as one is ready to listen to them, that this sacrifice
was unnecessary. In the bottom of my soul, however, another voice made
itself heard, repeating more strongly the warning of the night before—a
sweet, divine voice, scarcely audible in the midst of all this agitation,
and, when heard, was not listened to!

That was the day I usually went to see Livia, but it was quite late before
I remembered it. My first thought was to omit going for once, but as I had
always been punctual at these interviews, in spite of every obstacle, and
Saturday was the only day I could be received, after some minutes’
hesitation I surmounted the temptation to remain at home.

During the whole period of frivolous gayety that marked the first months
of my life at Naples, far from wishing to avoid seeing Livia, I took
pleasure, on the contrary, in asking her advice, which I was by no means
as afraid of, even in Carnival time, as my Aunt Clelia. I was something
like a place besieged and almost surrounded by the enemy, but still not
wholly inaccessible to the friendly power disposed to deliver it. As I
have said elsewhere, Livia’s voice always took a correct pitch,
unmistakable to the ear, and I loved to listen to it, even when mine was
too weak to sound the same note with like power and clearness.

But from the day of Lorenzo’s departure, so doubly fatal, instead of the
careless gayety I usually went to the convent to acknowledge and correct,
I was filled with a sadness and anxiety Livia was not slow to perceive,
and, instead of gently shaking her head, as she smiled at my account of
the somewhat too gay a life into which I had been led by Lorenzo, she now
fastened a grave, anxious look on me, to which I replied by pouring out
all the bitterness of my fresh grievances without any restraint. After
this explanation, which sufficiently accounted for the change she had
remarked, I spoke no more of myself, and never once mentioned Gilbert’s
name. I was angry with myself for this reserve. I longed to overcome it,
and tell her, as I had often told myself, that in Gilbert heaven had sent
me a friend whose influence was delightful, salutary, elevated, pure, and
so on. These words came to my lips, but I could not utter them before her.

Once (it was the Saturday before) there was a new change in the expression
of my face—a change which reflected, I suppose, the insecure and dangerous
happiness to which I had unscrupulously yielded. Seeing me appear with a
smiling air and a calm, untroubled face, she at first seemed pleased, but,
after observing me for some time, said:

“Has Lorenzo returned?”

“No.”

She looked thoughtful.

“Do you know when he will return?”

“I do not know,” said I bitterly; “and, in fact, I begin never to expect
him, and almost not to wish him to return.”

I saw a slight movement of her clasped hands like a shudder. She raised
her large eyes, and, looking me in the face, said:

“Take care.”

Her look and words greatly troubled me, and I did not recover from the
impression till it was time for Gilbert to arrive in the evening, when his
presence made me forget it. I thought of this to‐day, and perhaps the
remembrance added to the repugnance I felt to go to the convent. Perhaps
it also caused the unusual emotion I experienced when I found myself once
more in the parlor—the very parlor that filled me with so much terror the
first time I entered it, but which I afterwards forgot, so different were
the impressions that followed.

But whatever the joy, the trouble, the agitation, or, as to‐day, the
anguish, with which I came, a few minutes sufficed to put me in harmony
with the inexpressible tranquillity that reigned around me. The pulsations
of my heart diminished, and I experienced the effect a pure, vivifying air
produces on one who has just come from a heavy, feverish atmosphere. The
bare walls, the wooden seats, the extreme simplicity and austerity on
every side, inspired me with a kind of attraction that would have
surprised those who daily saw me in my sumptuous home, surrounded by all
that wealth and the most refined taste could procure. This attraction,
incomprehensible to myself, was like that vague perfume the traveller
breathes when approaching some unknown shore which he does not yet
perceive....

But on this occasion these things, instead of producing their usually
beneficial, soothing effect, caused me a kind of uneasiness akin to
remorse, and I soon found the solitude so difficult to endure that I had
some idea of profiting by the interval that remained in order to leave the
convent under some pretext without seeing my sister. But the strength of
mind that, thank heaven, I still possessed prevented me from leaving the
place, and I became absorbed in thoughts I dared not fathom, so utterly
discordant were they with everything around me, and so different from what
they seemed in the light by which I regarded them only an hour before.

At last the door opened, the curtain was drawn aside, and Livia made her
appearance.

“You are late, Gina,” said she. “I was afraid I should not see you to‐
day.”

I stammered some excuse, as she gave me a scrutinizing look with her usual
expression of extreme sweetness.

“You do not look so happy as you did last Saturday, Ginevra. You are
agitated and excited to‐day. Will you not tell me the reason?”

I was tempted to make her a thorough, sincere confession; but the moment I
was about to begin I was struck with the impossibility of speaking in that
angelic place of what seemed elsewhere only natural, excusable, and almost
legitimate.

Seeing I made no reply, she gently said:

“Lorenzo has not yet come home. Of course his absence afflicts you. Be
patient and forbearing, I conjure you, Ginevra.”

Her words caused me a kind of irritation, though I was glad to elude her
previous question, and I hastily replied:

“Livia, you require too much of me. Some day I may become patient and
forbearing, but at present it is impossible.”

“Gina, Gina, do not say so,” said she in the tone in which she used to
correct the faults of my childhood.

“O Livia! your poor sister finds life hard, I assure you. How happy you
are!...”

“Yes, I am happy,” she softly replied.

“Who would have said it, however,” I continued in an agitated tone, “when
Lorenzo came to woo me with so many assurances of affection, so many
promises of happiness?... That all this should prove false and
illusory!... Oh! when I think of it, I no longer have the strength to....”

“Ginevra!” said Livia, suddenly interrupting me in a tone of authority,
“it is useless to talk in that manner. You speak like a child!”

She seldom spoke to me in this way, and I stopped.

“At the time you are speaking of,” she resumed, “do you remember my
telling you one day—it was only a short time before your marriage....”

I hastily interrupted her in my turn.

“I have not forgotten our conversation, Livia. That was the day you told
me I was going to pronounce _the most fearful vow there is in the world_.
But, sister, I was not the only one who made it.”

“No, certainly not. You mean to say that Lorenzo has violated the solemn
vow that bound you together.... Yes, Gina, it is horrible, I acknowledge,
but listen to me; if you continue to think more of your own wrongs than of
God, whom he has offended a thousand times more; if you continue to
complain and dwell on your injuries, the result will be, you will soon
seek likewise to be released from the fidelity you vowed to him. And then
(may God preserve me from ever seeing that day, when I shall be truly
separated from you!) your fall will be speedy, rapid, and terrible. You
will fall as low, perhaps, as you might now rise high.”

She saw me shudder at these words, and continued with her usual mildness:

“Now, my dearest Gina, may God and his angels watch over you!... It is
growing dark. The bell is about to summon me away. I have only time for
one word: _Forget your heart_, I implore you. Believe me, God will some
day satisfy its cravings, if you cease to listen so weakly to them,
longing to have them gratified at all costs. Forget your heart, I say, and
think only of your soul!”

The bell rang while she was speaking. She raised her hand, and made the
sign of the cross in the air. I bowed my head, and when I raised it again
she had disappeared. But she had not spoken in vain. The clouds that
obscured my reason began to disperse, my courage began to revive, and the
jewel within to regain the brilliancy that had been obscured in the depths
of my soul. The course I ought to pursue was set before me with painful
distinctness, but I no longer turned my eyes away from it.

I was not happy when I left the convent. I did not even feel calm or
consoled; but I had come to a decision.

It was so late when I arrived home that the garden was filled with
moonlight. I walked there a long time, absorbed in my reflections, and
sincerely endeavoring to strengthen a resolution whose fulfilment I did
not yet dare to consider. I trembled as I asked myself if it was necessary
to utter the decisive word before another day, or if I could wait till
after the _soirée_ organized by Lando, when it would be no longer possible
to defer it.

I still hesitated as to this point. Though I had come to a decision, I did
not cease to suffer, but I ceased to be weak. I was very far from the
summit, but I resolved to attain it, instead of remaining as far below as
I now stood. A circumstance, insignificant in itself, now occurred to
confirm the change in my mind.

The door of Lorenzo’s studio was open, and, wishing to shorten the way to
my chamber, I entered it, and was proceeding towards the other door when I
found myself face to face with the vestal of which I was the model. The
moon threw so brilliant a light over it as to produce a striking effect. I
stopped to look at it, and, while doing so, it seemed as if this statue of
myself spoke to me in its own way, and in a language similar to that I had
so recently been listening to.

And what was the idea which Lorenzo really intended to express in this
vestal—the finest of his productions?

One of those ideas which, under the inspiration of genius, sometimes
sprang from his soul, and seemed for an instant to show a sense of the
good equal to that he had of the beautiful. This was, alas! only a
transitory gleam of light, but it was sufficient to justify the ambitious
hopes I once felt for a day—hopes so fatally illusory at the very time
they were conceived!

Lorenzo’s idea in choosing the ancient guardians of the sacred fire as his
subjects was to represent under these two figures the woman who was true
to her highest mission, and the woman who was untrue to it; the latter
making use of the holy fire under her charge to kindle a flame that would
end in destruction and woe; the other striving to keep this very fire
alive, diffusing its clear, brilliant, beneficent light, not only over
herself, but over everything around her.

Such was the idea he had not been able to embody, he said, till he had me
for his model. All this was doubtless the dream of an artist; but while I
stood contemplating what had resulted from it, the effect I experienced
was so strange, the thoughts that came to my mind were so vivid, that they
could only have been the whisperings of the voice that for an hour had
spoken more and more clearly to my heart.

The statue, however idealized it might be by the genius of the sculptor,
resembled me sufficiently for me to recognize the likeness. Flooded as it
now was by a brilliant, unearthly light, I looked at it with an attention
I had never done before. I observed its simple, dignified attitude; the
head slightly inclined towards the symbolic flame that rose from the lamp
she bore in her hands with so much ease, and yet with care and vigilance;
and, finally, the mouth and eyes, in which it seemed to me no artist had
ever expressed so clearly the gentleness, firmness, and purity he wished
to depict. It was thus Lorenzo imagined the guardian of the divine fire
which not only burned on the sacred altar, but kindled and fed the noblest
inspirations of genius....

Yes, the conception was a beautiful one, and I felt proud and gratified
that he had found me worthy of being the model to realize it!

All at once I was struck with a kind of terror, as it occurred to me,
Shall this resemblance be merely external? Are not many things wanting in
my nature which this statue seeks to express, and of which its beauty is
only the reflection?...

O my God! I thank thee! Everything becomes an instrument in thy hand. It
was thou, and not this marble, who didst suggest this thought, and it was
through thy grace that, at that moment, quicker than I can express it, and
as clearly as the eye beholds a picture placed suddenly before it, I all
at once saw if Lorenzo were present, under the roof that was his, and
Gilbert were also there—Gilbert, who called himself my friend and not
his—there would exist at my fireside, there would be infused into my life,
a perpetual lie, unmistakable treachery, and constant danger. I saw and
realized that, though he might not apparently have anything to reproach me
for, everything within and around me would henceforth continually reproach
me. I saw if the sacred lamp did not actually fall from my hands, the
purity of its flame would speedily be dimmed, and certainly end by being
wholly extinguished....

All this became clearly visible and palpable, and in the presence of this
voiceless marble, before the image of this pagan priestess, I renewed the
tacit promise I had an hour before made to her who was the living
Christian realization of this ancient ideal of a virtue pure and chaste.



XXXIII.


I went up to my chamber, not only startled at the vividness of the
impression I had received, but decided as to my course. The words
_falsehood_ and _treachery_ that came to my mind produced a powerful
effect on me, and would, perhaps, have had the same effect on every woman
who happened to be in a similar position, if she had the courage to call
things in this way by their right names. It is pleasant and delightful to
inspire and to experience those profound emotions sung by poets and
exalted by writers of fiction, but it is not noble to be false. No poet
has ever said so, no writer of fiction has ventured to insinuate it. Now,
it is this falsity, so essential a feature in all these little dramas of
the heart (real or fictitious), which ought, it seems to me, to disgust
even those who do not act from any higher motive than those of the world.
As for me, the mere thought that it would henceforth be impossible to
speak of Gilbert’s friendship without falsehood, and, at Lorenzo’s return,
that I should not have the same right as before to look him in the
face—this thought, I say, was sufficient to inspire me at this moment with
so much determination that I thought my irresolution at an end. It seemed
as if I should have but little difficulty in accomplishing the task from
which I no longer endeavored to escape. But in the evening, when, at a
late hour, Gilbert arrived, I was somewhat moved at perceiving my outward
calmness and animation made him suppose I acquiesced in his wishes; for,
after looking at me an instant, he seemed suddenly relieved from a lively
apprehension, and his eyes flashed with joy.

There was considerable company in the drawing‐room that evening, and
consequently a good deal of noise. They had a kind of rehearsal of what
was to take place the following evening. My cousins were at the piano with
the baron and Lando. Leslie, at a distance, was gazing at Stella, who,
under the pretext of looking over a volume of Dante, in order to select
something to recite, was seated apart, silent and absorbed. There was no
one on the terrace, and I proceeded in that direction. I felt that
Gilbert’s eyes followed me; but he hesitated about joining me. I likewise
felt some hesitation, but, fearing I might again become irresolute, and
wishing at once to make it impossible to yield to the danger, I looked up,
and motioned for him to follow me. In an instant he was at my side, and,
as I remained silent, he said in an agitated tone:

“I hope you have pardoned me, madame.”

I was terribly moved on my part, but it would not do to manifest it.

“Yes,” I replied, “I forgive you; for you have been sincere, and that is
worth everything else. But, Monsieur de Kergy, I must be sincere likewise.
Let me therefore say to you, leave Naples. You ought to, and it is my
wish.”

He was greatly agitated, but did not utter a word. I continued with a
calmness that astonished me, though my heart beat with frightful rapidity:

“To‐morrow, I know, every one will depend on hearing you speak, and I
also. But do not remain in Naples beyond the following day, if you can
possibly help it. And after you are gone; I am sure you will be glad you
obeyed me.”

He made no reply.

“Who knows?” continued I gently. “The day will come, perhaps, when we can
meet again—when we can be truly friends without deceit, without falseness
in the real sense of the word. What is impossible now may not be always.”

While I was speaking he leaned against the wall with folded arms. He
listened at first with his head bent down; but he now suddenly raised it,
and I saw such a veil of sadness over his eyes and whole face that I had
to make a violent effort to maintain my self‐command.

At last he said:

“You are right. It was folly in me to come; it would be greater folly to
remain. I will obey you, madame. I cannot complain, and I respect you as
much as I....”

He stopped, for I made a deprecatory gesture. What I had to say was said,
and I felt our interview ought not to be prolonged. I was about to leave
the terrace when he detained me.

“A moment more, madame, I beg—only one, and the last; for who knows if you
will grant me another, even to bid you farewell?...”

I stopped.

“Yes,” continued he slowly, “I would like to think, as you say, that I
shall be permitted to see you again some day, and sincerely be your
friend. Time will pass over my head and yours. You will not always be
young and beautiful. Long years will doubtless pass. To enable me to
endure the present, I must look forward to the time when I shall be no
longer young, and can see you again, and resume without fear the title I
ought not to claim, I acknowledge, while there is any danger of profaning
it. I await that day.”

It was by no means with indifference I listened to his agitated, trembling
voice; but I manifested nothing outwardly, and was even able to smile, as
I replied:

“It will not be necessary to wait so long as you suppose, I assure you.
Long before my hair grows white, what there is good and true in your
friendship will be restored to me. For before that day some one, more
beautiful than I (whom it will not be difficult to find), and, moreover,
worthy of you, to whom you can give your whole heart, will have effaced
the remembrance of the passing fancy I have caused without intending it,
but which shall not be prolonged a single instant with my consent.”

I passed by him without looking up or giving him time to reply, and
returned to the drawing‐room. There I seated myself on a sofa in an
obscure corner of the room, or rather, I fell on it, pale, faint, and
exhausted by the effort I had made.

I did not believe a word of what I had just said to Gilbert. My duty was
to send him away, and this duty was accomplished! But I by no means
desired another should so soon efface my image. I said so to allay his
regret and appear indifferent. I was proud of the courage I had
manifested. When I compared myself with Lorenzo, I thought myself
perfectly heroic, and I was about to have reason to think myself a
thousand times more so.

Lando at that moment left the piano, where he had been stationed all the
evening beside Teresina. The latter, it may be remarked _en passant_, had
profited so well by his hints that her toilet had become irreproachable,
and now added singularly to the effect of her beauty. Lando perceived it,
and it was evident he also thought of my cousin’s by no means despicable
dowry among her other attractions, as a possible means of abridging his
exile and returning to Paris before the two years had expired. When,
therefore, I saw him coming with a grave air towards the place where I was
seated, I thought I was about to receive a communication I had long been
prepared for. I did not suspect what he had to say concerned me much more
directly than himself.

“Cousin Ginevra,” said he in a low tone, as he took a seat beside me, “I
have had news from Milan.”

I started involuntarily. He did not notice it, but continued:

“News which proves I was not mistaken the other day when I told you the
beautiful Faustina would take good care to avenge you. Only, I did not
think it would be so soon.”

Brought back so suddenly to the most painful reality of my life, I was the
more startled and confounded at what he said. Lando’s gossip was usually
odious to me; but now, instead of imposing silence on him, I insisted, on
the contrary, that he should conceal nothing from me.

“Well, then,” continued he, “it seems the fair Milanese, notwithstanding
her _belle passion_ for Lorenzo, had never been able to console herself
for being deprived of the duchess’ coronet on which she had depended. So
while neglecting nothing to maintain the ascendency she had regained over
him, she was not wholly indifferent to the homage of a certain potentate
from the Danube who offered to share with her his principality and his
millions. She was still hesitating, it seems, between ambition and love,
when Lorenzo, who had some suspicion, and was on the alert, unexpectedly
came upon his rival. Then there was a violent scene and high words, which
ended in a challenge. They were on the point of fighting when the lady
prevented the affair from going any further by declaring she would give
her hand to the potentate!... So in a short time, I imagine,” continued
Lando, rubbing his hands, “Donna Faustina will take her departure for the
banks of the Danube. You will be delivered for ever from her, and we shall
soon see Lorenzo come home in a terrible humor. But, frankly, it is good
enough for him. This punishment is not the hundredth part of what he
merits when he has a wife like you!”

“O merciful heaven! what a fate is mine! and what a husband I am obliged
to immolate myself to!...”

Such was my first thought on hearing this account, and an hour after, when
I went to my chamber, I had not yet overcome the bitterness and agitation
it caused me. My temptation became stronger and more formidable than ever,
and the desire again sprang up in my heart to retract the sentence I had
so recently pronounced. To see him, hear him, sometimes speak to him, and
meet his sympathetic glance—was all this really forbidden me? Would this
be failing in my duty to the husband who had outraged me so publicly? No,
no, it could not be.... No one yet knew Gilbert was to leave Naples. A
line, a word, from me, would suffice to prevent his departure. The new
life created by his presence would continue as if nothing had happened
that ought to terminate it!... I had already seized my pen and written the
word ... when suddenly there awoke in my memory the words of Livia: “Think
of God, whom he has offended a thousand times more than he has you”; and
afterwards these: “If you seek likewise to be released, your fall will be
speedy, rapid, and terrible.”

The recollection of these words stopped me and made me shudder. I now
perceived what gradations I had passed through within a month. I felt that
Livia was right—should I descend from the height I had just attained, it
would indeed be to fall lower than I was before, and perhaps to the lowest
depths!

My sister in her quiet cell still aided me with her prayers, which
doubtless augmented the increasing light in my soul. I tore up the note I
had begun to write, and, again preparing myself to struggle and suffer
more than ever, I calmly renewed the resolution I had been so near
breaking. It seemed to me this slight victory, though it did not lessen my
sadness, added to my strength, and made the jewel within gleam with a
lustre somewhat brighter than before.




Another General Convention Of The Protestant Episcopal Church.


The late convention of the Protestant Episcopal Church has, we believe,
disappointed everybody. With skilful care to avoid anything which might
cause a rupture, the various factions of this large and respectable
denomination have spoken to each other, and parted. The world is none the
wiser, and we hardly think that _they_ are. High‐Churchmen have maintained
their ground with smooth dignity; Low‐Churchmen have gained some points,
while they have lost others; and Ritualists have hidden themselves in
silence. If neither party is suited, there is the consolation that no one
is pleased; and from this universal negative we presume the conclusion
comes to an universal affirmative that all are pleased. We have long ago
foreseen this result, and they who, arguing from the defection of Bishop
Cummins, expected to hear something decisive in the way of doctrine, have
learned how peace may be maintained by simply abstaining from war. The
Episcopal Church has no fixed creed. Its articles of faith contradict its
offices. Its various members interpret both, so that from the Babel of
conflicting opinions no certain sound can be heard. Thus it has been, and
thus it will be to the end. There is only one thing on which Episcopalians
unite—namely, hostility to the Catholic Church. With various degrees of
ignorance or honesty, they are enemies of the only body which teaches with
authority, whose forms they counterfeit by sad travesties or servile
imitations.

The action of this convention, as far as it concerns the interior
structure of the church, which they profess to have modelled after the
American Constitution, has no particular interest for the world. Some
improvement may have been made in the canons, of which we can be no
judges. Legislation is one of the peculiarities of our day. If it be
harmless, it is looked upon as a safe use of force and nerve which,
expended in another direction, might have done damage. We proceed to
notice a few things which are of importance, and they are the only acts of
the convention which, on the reading of the journal, strike us as of any
consequence.

We are happy to be able to congratulate our friends on the rejection of
the _provincial system_. With them it would have worked very badly,
because a province supposes some central government and a unit in
authority. When a province separates from its parent state, it becomes
independent. If there be no home government, there can be no province,
properly so‐called. The committee very _learnedly_ explains the
constitution of the primitive church, and concludes that it would not
apply to them, and could not without injury be forced upon them.


    “Your committee assume that the terms ‘provincial system’ are used
    in the resolution in their full ecclesiastical and primitive
    sense. In the early church there were: 1. the parish; 2, the
    diocese; 3, the province; 4, the patriarchate. The parish had its
    priest, the diocese its bishop, the province its archbishop, the
    patriarchate its patriarch. Among these, the dominant and most
    active power was the province with its archbishop. Speaking
    generally, we may say that it possessed the powers of this body
    and of the House of Bishops, and many of the powers of our
    diocesan councils. The provinces were disconnected and
    independent, except as, by very slender ties, they were united in
    the patriarchate. Such a system would dismember this church, and
    out of this now compact, now united body create five, or seven, or
    ten separate churches. The ties which may at first unite them will
    grow weaker and weaker. However similar they may be at the moment
    of dismemberment, at that moment the process of divergence will
    begin, and it will go on until the separation will be as great as
    that now existing between York and Canterbury. Those provinces now
    communicate with each other only informally.

    “Any institution of provinces or provincial synods, with powers
    subject at all times to revocation by the General Convention,
    would be useless and illusory. The provinces, if invested with
    irrevocable powers, and discharged from the constant and necessary
    authority and supervision of the General Convention, certainly
    might, and probably would, soon diverge into widely differing
    practices and opinions, engendering ecclesiastical conflicts,
    threatening the unity of our church.”


Nothing could be plainer than this argument. In any Protestant
organization, the least separation makes an independent church. It could
not be otherwise where there is no infallible authority and no divine
government to bind all the members to one head. It must be sad to the
lovers of primitive purity to know how imperfect the constitution of the
early church was. Everything tended to disintegration, and a more perfect
system has been found out by the wisdom of modern days. In the mind of the
committee, the hand of God had nothing to do with the primitive church;
for there is only _one_ author of confusion and disorder. These learned
antiquarians never heard of the See of Rome, and do not know that our Lord
said to Peter, “Thou art the rock, and on this rock will I build my
church.” Viewing them, however, from their own standpoint, we are glad to
note their acuteness, and to congratulate them that they have not
_divided_ themselves.

It appears also that there was some disposition to consider the American
Episcopal Church as a province of the English, and to treat the Archbishop
of Canterbury as a kind of patriarch. This disposition was rebuked by the
convention. The following are among the remarks made in the House of
Deputies which show that the _quasi_ mission of the Bishop of Lichfield
was fruitless:


    “The right reverend gentleman who has taken so strong an interest
    in this subject has made a proposition, and the proposition is
    that we should become one great province, if you please, with the
    Archbishop of Canterbury as metropolitan of these United States
    for the nonce, and that in all these conferences the Archbishop of
    Canterbury, as the great metropolitan or patriarch, is to preside.

    “I know that many are wont to call the Church of England the
    mother church. I hold that she is not. If so, I claim her to be
    nothing but a very poor stepmother. The church in this country
    never was perfected till she got her perfection by the
    consecration of Seabury from the bishops of Scotland; and if we
    acknowledge a mother other than the mother church of Jerusalem
    (which I am not prepared to acknowledge), we must acknowledge
    Scotland, not England.

    “I could say a great deal more on this subject—full of it I am;
    but, under the circumstances, I think I have said enough to
    satisfy the members of this house that they had better let it
    alone, and wait till the bishops tell us what they think of it.
    They are the persons interested. They accepted the first
    invitation without asking us ‘with your leave’ or ‘by your leave.’
    Now, after they have been bluffed, and this church, I would say,
    insulted as it has been by the Dean of Canterbury, and by the
    prearrangement of keeping out the very question which these
    gentlemen, at a large expense of time and money, went to attend
    to, why not leave them first to express their opinion? My word for
    it, from what I know of the self‐respect of the members of that
    house, if you wait for that, you will wait to the end of the term.

    “There are several parties to this movement, of different
    temperaments. One of them is the great apostolic prelate whom we
    have welcomed twice to this convention—the illustrious prelate, of
    whom I speak with the most unbounded admiration as a churchman, as
    a gentleman, as a historian, as a man. In every capacity in which
    I can know human nature, he deserves honor and affection. I do not
    enter into the motives of this movement, but I simply say that he
    is affirmatively moving, in my belief, to gratify what he has
    largely developed in his great nature—the power of organism. He
    does wish, I have no doubt, something like an organic union of the
    two churches of the two great English‐speaking races. That
    movement, to a certain extent, is creditable and desirable, but to
    a certain other extent it is extremely dangerous and utterly
    inadmissible.”


The organic unity of the Anglican with the American Episcopal Church is as
far from perfect as the union of provinces would prove if the _primitive_
system, as stated by the learned committee, were adopted. The independence
of the two churches is as complete as that of the Presbyterian or
Methodist denominations in this country. Neither is bound by the doctrinal
decisions of the other. This being the case, we hardly understand the full
significance of the ceremony by which an “alms‐basin” was presented by the
General Convention to the Archbishop of Canterbury. The Bishop of
Lichfield, explaining his part in the august rite, says:


    “It was my happiness to present that alms‐basin to the Archbishop
    of Canterbury in concert with one whose loss we all lament, who is
    now with God in his rest—Bishop McIlvaine, of Ohio, who, hand‐in‐
    hand with me, each of us holding the alms‐basin by one hand and on
    bended knee, presented that alms‐basin for the Lord’s table in S.
    Paul’s Cathedral, on the fourth of July, on that occasion.”


One of the members of the House of Deputies tells us that


    “This basin was procured from the Messrs. Kirk, of the city of
    Baltimore. The price of it was one thousand dollars, and it is
    said to be the finest piece of work of silver and gold and
    precious stones combined that has ever been made upon our
    continent. It was sent through the hands of the Bishop of
    Lichfield, who presented it on bended knees to the Archbishop of
    Canterbury, to be placed upon the altar of S. Paul’s Cathedral;
    and in this basin the bishops of the Church of England made their
    own offerings first. It is understood that the basin is to be
    preserved by the archbishop and transmitted to his successors, to
    be used in all future times at the consecration of English bishops
    and the opening of the Houses of Convocation, and upon all public
    and great occasions in which the Church of England is interested,
    and to be preserved as a pledge and token of unity and good‐will
    between our own church and our mother Church of England.

    “I may say here, too, that both Houses of Convocation, by
    resolution adopted unanimously, went in their scarlet convocation
    robes from their sittings in the chamber near Westminster Abbey,
    in solemn procession, to the celebration of the Holy Communion in
    S. Paul’s Cathedral, especially to do honor to the American
    Church; and in this procession Bishop McIlvaine and the Lord
    Bishop of Lichfield carried our basin, and it was presented to the
    Archbishop of Canterbury in form.”


Why did these prelates _kneel_ to the archbishop on this occasion, unless
to do him homage? And what function does an “alms‐basin” discharge in the
consecration of bishops and the opening of the Houses of Convocation? We
ask in all sincerity, because our knowledge of ecclesiology is imperfect
in reference to these points.

While we praise the manly spirit of our American friends in not yielding
to the spirit of toadyism before English prelacy, we confess we are
somewhat pained at a seeming want of self‐respect in their attempt to deal
with the “Holy Orthodox Eastern Church.” This body, though having valid
orders, holds all the doctrines condemned by the Thirty‐nine Articles, and
has plainly and openly anathematized Protestantism. Why will the
Episcopalians consent to be snubbed and slapped in the face for the sake
of an intercommunion which is utterly impossible? If _they_ like it, we
ought not to repine; yet, for the sake of our manhood, we protest against
it. The Rev. Dr. Fulton, of Alabama, said:


    “There is a great body of Christian people, constituting one of
    the three great bodies of the Holy Catholic Church, throughout the
    world, which to‐day are not in visible communion, although they
    are in unity of spirit, and hope for a more clearly‐defined bond
    of peace. Hitherto it has only been possible for these various
    bodies, or at least two of them—that is to say, the Anglican
    Church and the Holy Orthodox Eastern Church—to meet each other in
    courtesy. Now, arrangements have been made through the Archbishop
    of Canterbury by which the dead of our communion from England or
    this country can be buried by the Orthodox clergy, and other
    offices of courtesy and kindness can be performed. The Archbishop
    of Syra, representing the Holy Orthodox Eastern Church, lately
    visited the Church of England, and was there received with the
    greatest honor. Prelates of our own church and clergy of lower
    degree have likewise been received by the Eastern clergy. There
    are, in this city, with the approbation of the bishop of the
    diocese clergy of the Holy Orthodox Eastern communion. It is
    believed—in fact, it is known—that they are present now in this
    house; and, as a member of the Russo‐Greek Committee, it was
    suggested to me that, in the general recognition of the clerical
    rank and character which these resolutions imply, these brethren
    should be likewise recognized. It touches not at all the doctrine
    of their churches; it touches not at all the doctrines of their
    church; it touches not at all their attitude toward us; it simply
    recognizes that they are clergy of a church toward which we hope
    that, in the providence of God, we may be drawn in love, without
    any sacrifice of our own principles.”


We doubt not that, when gentlemen meet, they treat each other with
courtesy. Even Roman Catholic, whom Dr. Fulton would not invite to the
convention, are courteous and polite. But this does not mean any
compromise in questions of doctrine. If Dr. Potter approves of the
presence of Rev. Mr. Bjerring in New York, we are quite sure that the
Russian priest never dreams of acknowledging his authority. Is it not very
much beneath the dignity of a large and respectable body to take mere
politeness for any approach to unity in faith or communion? A letter of
the Metropolitan of St. Petersburg was handed round among the deputies as
a curiosity and a wonderful sign of Eastern favor to the Protestant
Episcopal Church. We are not sure if the following is an exact copy of the
letter. If so, it is a gentle rebuke, given as politely as could be done
under the circumstances. We extract the letter and the comments thereon
from a secular paper generally trustworthy:

“The Convention’s Proposition Spurned By Orthodox Catholics.


    “Apropos of the efforts of the Protestant Episcopal Church for a
    closer union and affiliation with the Orthodox Eastern Church, the
    following letter, translated from the _Birzheviga Vedomosty_, a
    Russian journal of a semi‐official ecclesiastical status, will be
    interesting. It is a reply to the petition of the Protestant
    Episcopal Church for a more intimate union with the Russo‐Greek
    Church, and is now for the first time published on this continent:

    “ ‘TO THE WELL‐BELOVED IN CHRIST, AND THE RIGHT REVEREND COMMITTEE
    OF THE HOUSE OF BISHOPS OF THE PROTESTANT EPISCOPAL CHURCH IN THE
    UNITED STATES OF AMERICA:

    “ ‘Your letter, addressed to his Excellency the Procurator
    General, Count Tolstoy, having been presented by him to the
    consideration of the Most Holy Governing Synod of Russia, together
    with the report and the concurrence of the House of Bishops,
    approved by the House of Clerical and Lay Deputies, in reference
    to the establishment upon a true catholic basis of a spiritual
    fraternity between the American and Orthodox Churches, especially
    in the Territory of Alaska, was received by the Most Holy Synod of
    all the Russias with the utmost pleasure, as a new proof of
    respect shown by the representatives of the Episcopal Church, and
    of their estimable purpose concerning the union of the churches.
    The Most Holy Synod, on their part, will make it an object of
    their constant care that a spirit of Christian tolerance and
    fraternal love and esteem, in accordance with the precepts and
    usages of our church, shall continue to pervade all the relations
    existing between the members of the Orthodox Church and those of
    the Protestant Episcopal Church in America, and particularly in
    the Territory of Alaska.

    “ ‘As to the hypothesis of a reciprocal participation in the
    solemn performance of the sacrament of the Eucharist, the Eastern
    Church firmly adheres to the principles and convictions so clearly
    stated in the messages sent in 1723 by the Orthodox patriarchs of
    the East in reply to the Anglican bishops. It considers a previous
    agreement in faith as absolutely indispensable to the practical
    mutual participation in the sacraments, inasmuch as the first is
    the only possible ground‐work or basis for the last. In order to
    attain this most desired end, a thorough study and investigation
    of the differences in the doctrine of both churches would be
    absolutely requisite; and to promote this, a great principle of
    co‐operation will undoubtedly be found in the spirit of peace and
    charity which animates both churches, the Orthodox as well as the
    American, and in those prayers for the peace of the whole world
    and for the union of the holy churches of the Lord which arise to
    the God of truth and mercy from the Orthodox churches, and which
    are most certainly shared in by the American churches.

    “ ‘Having been authorized by the Most Holy Governing Synod, I
    assume the duty of presenting their answer to the House of Bishops
    of the American Episcopal Church, and beg you to accept the
    assurance of the highest esteem of your brother and co‐servant in
    Jesus Christ.

    ISIDORE,

    “ ‘First Presiding Member of the Governing Synod of all the
    Russias, and Metropolitan of Novgorod and St. Petersburg.’

    “The only ecclesiastical representative of the Russian Church in
    this city, the Rev. N. Bjerring, has corroborated the facts set
    forth in this letter, and furthermore stated to the writer, in
    answer to inquiries, that the Orthodox Church seeks not exclusive
    affiliation with the Anglican and American Episcopal Churches, but
    desires to hold friendly relations with all Christian
    denominations; and in this spirit of fraternal love he receives in
    his own house, as personal friends, not only members of his own
    household of faith, but ministers and members of the Lutheran and
    Reformed Churches, Methodists, Baptists, Episcopalians, and Roman
    Catholics, with all of whom he maintains the most cordial
    relations. But he declares that there can be no such thing as
    sacramental union between his church and any other, unless there
    shall have been first complete agreement in dogmas and an
    unconditional acceptance on the part of the affiliating churches
    of the authority and acts of the first seven Œcumenical Councils.
    This is a _conditio sine quâ non_ from which the Russian Church
    cannot move a step nor deviate one line from the dogmatic truth
    handed down to her from the apostolic church; nor can she at the
    same time permit anything to be added to these dogmas.”


The Eastern churches will never recognize the Episcopalians as anything
but a sect of Protestants. They deny the validity of their orders, and
condemn their articles of faith as heretical. Not one of their bishops or
priests would be recognized as possessing any sacerdotal power, or could
ever receive Holy Communion at the hands of the Greeks, whom they are
inclined to receive with so much favor.

The following words of one of their leading agents in England are
sufficiently decisive, though we fear not plain enough to convince our
brethren who are so sensitive about their apostolic succession, which
every one denies but themselves:

“No other Protestant church was ever so full of contradictions, so full of
variegated heresy, as the English Church was and is, and will be to the
end of her existence. With _such an heretical church_ the Orthodox Eastern
Church never would allow her bishops to transact.

“If Rome considered all ordinations by Parker and his successors—_i.e._,
the whole present English episcopate and clergy—to be invalid, null, and
void, and consistently re‐ordained all those converts who wished and were
fit for orders, the Eastern Church can but imitate her proceedings, as
both follow, in this point, the same principles.

“The Anglo‐Catholics are _most decidedly_ no Catholics, but Protestants,
although inclining hopefully towards Catholicism. It is astonishing how
the zealous Intercommunionists dive into the depths of orthodox learning,
rove in the remotest districts, compile the minutest arguments, while they
overlook the _chasm at their feet_. They most ingenuously demand to
dispense with ceremony, and to join hands all at once over _the vast deep_
stretching out between them.”(107)

Very little has been done by this convention in the way of doctrinal
decisions. The House of Bishops having solemnly declared that in baptismal
regeneration, as the term is used in the Prayer‐Book, no _moral change_ is
signified, the effort to drop the term altogether was voted down. Thus, in
harmony with the customs of this church, a term is retained which has no
real significance. Those who object to it can only console themselves by
the conviction that it means nothing.

A former convention had quite plainly denied the real presence of Christ
in the Holy Eucharist, and hence the condemnation of any adoration of the
sacrament is quite natural. We are not certain that the Ritualists will
see anything to startle them. They would hardly hear any voice, however
loud it might be. Yet we think the rest of the world will be satisfied
that no adoration can be paid to the _elements_ of the Protestant
Episcopal communion, for the reason that they are in their very nature and
substance, and that Christ is not in them. An important canon on ritual
was passed bearing chiefly on this subject. As it first received the votes
of the House of Deputies, it condemned “the use of incense; the placing,
carrying, or retaining a crucifix in any part of the place of public
worship; the elevation of the elements in the Holy Communion in such
manner as to expose them to the view of the people, as objects towards
which adoration is to be made; and any act of adoration of or towards the
elements, such as bowings, prostrations, or genuflections.” As amended by
the House of Bishops, and afterwards passed by both houses, the use of
incense and of the crucifix is not forbidden. One deputy explained that
the Greek Church is in the habit of using incense, and that the Lutherans
retain the crucifix. Perhaps these may be among the reasons for the action
of the bishops. We conclude that while the crucifix may be placed in the
church, and incense be used at the will of ministers or their people, no
act of adoration can be allowed towards the Eucharist. The force of this
canon will depend much upon the disposition of the bishop, who can wink at
these observances or fail to know anything of them. The law, however,
obliges him to examine the matter if any two of his presbyters complain,
and, referring the subject to his standing committee, to admonish the
offending minister. And if the minister disregard this admonition, he must
be tried for a breach of his ordination vow. If this canon means anything
at all, it will put a stop to all the practices of the Ritualists by which
they endeavor to imitate the beauty of Catholic worship, and their whole
ceremonial is at once excluded from any Episcopal church. Let us see if
this law will be either respected or obeyed.

The rejection of Rev. Dr. Seymour, elected to the bishopric of Illinois,
is a still further condemnation of any Eucharistic adoration. For chiefly
for this adoration, which he was supposed to favor, was he refused the
vote of the clerical and lay deputies. The majority against him was so
great that hardly any one can doubt of the mind of the convention. He had
been involved in the Confraternity of the Blessed Sacrament, either
directly or indirectly, and this fact alone was sufficient to cause his
rejection. It seems to us pretty evident that the Episcopal Church by her
highest authority has denied both baptismal regeneration and the real
presence of Christ in the Eucharist. Yet this denial will have little
effect, because all Episcopalians will think as they please, and no
doctrinal decision influences their faith. Creeds are with them written on
paper, and have no further value. One would naturally expect the believers
in these rather important doctrines to forsake a church which condemns
them. But few will do so. They will talk of the primitive days and the
hopes of better times, when the “three branches” of the Catholic Church
shall come together. Until that time there is no authority for Anglo‐
Catholics. If the Protestant Episcopal communion should by synod deny the
existence of God, we believe they would still remain in her, bearing their
burden, persecuted by their own church, and with great self‐denial waiting
till the truth should revive in the hopeful mother that bore them. This
new species of self‐abnegation and of moral martyrdom by one’s own church
is the glory of Ritualistic confessorship. They have not learned that the
first duty of a true church is to teach, and that the first step in
holiness is to mortify self‐will.

On the subject of education, the Protestant Episcopal Church has _nearly_
taken a step forward, and we sincerely regret that the step was only half
made. The Committee on Christian Education recommended the organization of
“sisterhoods” and “brotherhoods” to supply teachers. They say:


    “The great want will not be met until some method of organization
    be adopted, such as brotherhoods or sisterhoods, whose members
    make teaching their special work, and who therefore cultivate the
    teaching faculty, and acquire all the branches of useful learning,
    in order to do Christ’s work for the young, under the direction
    and at the call of their bishops and pastors. And while an
    organized work seems to be the only one likely to meet our
    necessities, and while the religious motive is the only one
    powerful enough to draw men and women to such work for the best
    years of their lives, it should be borne in mind that the truths
    of the Gospel, and the Catholic faith, as this church hath
    received the same, have strength and vitality sufficient to
    furnish motive and method to such associations without
    exaggerations or additions in doctrine or practice, and without
    borrowing distinctive dress, nomenclature, or usages from the
    Church of Rome. In some of the schools or colleges at present
    belonging to us, such associations might be developed—teaching
    orders—Brothers of the Christian Doctrine, Sisters of the Holy
    Childhood—composed of men and women of sound judgment, moral
    force, thorough education, patient and winning ways, who would ask
    for no higher work than to train the minds and mould the
    characters of the young in accordance with the gracious teachings
    of the church, and with the sanction of, and in loyal submission
    to, the authority of those who are rulers in the same.”


In accordance with this recommendation, a canon to establish “deaconesses
or sisters” was reported to the convention. It, however, failed to pass,
and the words of the committee stand before the world on their own merits.
Though there are grave difficulties in the establishment of communities
where there is no religious rule or any unity in faith, yet we would like
to see this imitation of Catholic life tried among our Protestant
brethren. It might do good, and gradually lead the earnest and truly self‐
denying soul to the one home of all Christian life and zeal.

It is a disappointment to us, however, that this convention has done
nothing in regard to parochial schools. Some years ago the language of the
Episcopalian bishops led us to think that they realized the full
importance of guarding the young from the dangers of an infidel education.
Colleges and academies will very poorly meet this great evil. The children
most exposed are those who every day go to our public schools, where no
religion can be taught, and where a non‐Christian system of instruction is
equivalent to infidelity. The truth of this assertion needs no
demonstration, for the facts of every day prove it, and the tide of
unbelief is at our very doors.

The report of the Committee on the State of the Church dwells on some
generalities, but yet admits a substantial decline during the three years
past:


    “But there are in these documents some facts that are not cheering
    or satisfactory. In 1871 there were 448 candidates for holy
    orders, and in 1874 but 301—decrease in three years, 147. In 1873
    it is said there were no ordinations in 17 dioceses, and of the
    whole number of candidates only 60 or 70 were able to maintain
    themselves. Thus we have not only the supply of the ministry
    diminished, but the fact revealed that parents of pecuniary
    ability, elevated social position, and great culture, seemingly
    withheld their sons from the Lord’s higher service. We have also
    had our attention called to the fact that, in many instances, the
    young novice is admitted to the diaconate and priesthood with such
    imperfect qualification that we are forced to the conclusion that
    there is great imperfection in our legislation, or they whose
    office and duty call them to decide upon the qualifications of
    candidates are too lenient in their admission of the applicants.”


We do not find any comparative table of communicants, but should be led to
conclude that as the ministry diminishes in numbers, the members would
decline in the same ratio. Perhaps a little more attention to schools and
the training of the young would be advisable. If the Episcopal Church
wishes to hold its own in this age and country, it will have to give more
attention to the dangers of the public schools.

We do not know precisely what authority belongs to the address of the
bishops at the end of the convention. It has not one word in regard to
doctrine, and the allusions to any differences of opinion are so very
general that no party could be offended. We do not even gather the precise
meaning of the writer. We utterly fail to comprehend his idea of “the
_liberty_ of Christian faith,” or understand his notion of freedom in
obedience. The pastoral was evidently written to offend no one, and in
this we think it must have succeeded.

There are some good words on the subject of divorce, but we can hardly
tell how far they go. Those “who put away an uncongenial wife or husband,”
and marry again, taking advantage of the license of the civil courts, are
condemned as adulterers, unless they do so for the cause of fornication.
We do not know how to explain this. Is fornication or sin before marriage
a reason for divorce? Is adultery after marriage considered sufficient to
break the tie of matrimony, so that a new marriage is permitted? If the
bishops mean to say this, we would earnestly recommend them to study the
sacred scriptures of the New Testament. Their halfway protest against
civil divorce is nevertheless something to be thankful for in these days.

Now, having rehearsed all the important points which we have been able to
see in the doings of this General Convention, we would ask any person of
honest mind who really believes in the divinity of Jesus Christ if there
is in the Protestant Episcopal community any trace of the one true church
which he established. It is to be found neither in the unity of faith nor
in any consciousness of sacerdotal gifts. No conception of the fundamental
idea of a church has any place in her councils, and the truth of Christ’s
presence in his adorable sacrament, which is the very life of his elect,
is the constant object of assault. While they, against all facts and the
testimony of all which they pretend to hold as the Catholic Church, assert
the validity of their orders, they prove beyond all cavil that the grace
of the priesthood is not theirs. For God never left that grace, even in
heresy and schism, without the consciousness of its tremendous power. As a
mere Protestant body, it may keep its exterior before the world. It has no
interior life whatever, no heart and no soul, that we might mark it and
distinguish it among the hosts of a divided Christianity. Nevertheless,
there is light enough to guide the sincere to the one faith, and the plea
of invincible ignorance will be a poor excuse for many in the dread day of
account. Let us pray earnestly to God for these souls in the night of
error. “What will it profit them to gain the world, and then to lose their
souls?”




Assunta Howard. Concluded.



VI. Woman’s Influence.


“And so I have you all to myself once more; no interference from cruel
guardians on your side, and none from unreasonable husbands on mine.
Joking apart, Assunta darling, I think God has been very good to me to
give me such a compensation for Harry’s long absence. Every trial seems to
have a blessing in its train, by way of a set‐off. And you are just the
very dearest of blessings.” And Mary Lee moved her chair a little nearer
to her friend, by way of showing her appreciation. Assunta looked up from
her work with a bright smile, as she replied:

“You are not in the least changed from the dear Mary Percival of convent
days—and happy days they were, too—while I feel twenty years older than I
did the day I bade you good‐by at the garden gate. But now you are
mistaken. I am the one blessed, not blessing. For think what it is to me—a
waif—to find awaiting me so kind a welcome and so pleasant a temporary
home. God only knows what would have become of me without you.”

“Oh!” said Mary, “my only fear was that, with so many claimants for the
honor, I should never succeed in carrying off the prize. I am sure, until
it was decided, and I saw your trunks safely landed at my door, I looked
upon Mrs. Sinclair as my deadly enemy.”

“Clara is very kind—much more so than I deserve,” said Assunta, while an
expression of seriousness passed over her face; “but I should not have
liked to accept her hospitality now. I think the present arrangement is
more for the happiness of all parties.”

And the remembrance of a certain evening on board the steamer, when Mr.
Sinclair, a married man, had dared to tell her, his wife’s friend, that
she had first possessed his heart, and that his love for her was still
unchanged, made her shudder now involuntarily. He must indeed have
strangely forgotten himself, when, after that, he added his entreaties to
those of his unsuspecting wife that she would look upon their home as
hers. Assunta felt as if the word love had indeed been profaned by the
lips of George Sinclair. God is love; but she knew that he would not
hesitate to take even that most holy name in vain. Why then scruple to
profane the attribute? However, all this was a secret, known to herself
alone.

“Mrs. Sinclair must have been a lovely bride,” said Mary musingly. “But,
Assunta, why did Mr. Carlisle return at once to Europe? I should think he
would be tired of travelling by this time, and would like to settle down
for a while on his own place. I have heard it is so beautiful.”

“The habit of travelling grows upon one,” replied Assunta. “He only
returned to Maryland to attend to certain matters in regard to his
sister’s property and mine. It was his intention to spend some time longer
in Europe and the East.” Then, to change the subject, she continued: “But,
Mary dear, when does your brother enter the seminary?”

“I do not know,” said Mrs. Lee. “I cannot understand Augustine at all. He
seems just as good and earnest as ever, and yet something troubles him, I
see it plainly. But he is unusually reserved with me; so that I feel a
reluctance to question him. I wish you would ask him about the seminary.
You can do it quite incidentally; and very likely he would tell you all
about it.”

“I certainly will,” said Assunta. “He is your brother; so I almost feel as
if he were mine too.”

“I do not think,” continued Mary, “that he is well. I am afraid his trip
to the East may have done him more harm than good. He always protests that
he is perfectly well, if I ask him; but I am sure he does not look so.”

“I have thought so myself, and I think we must look upon his case as our
next duty.” And Assunta arose, as the clock struck eleven.

The opportunity to take the case in hand came much sooner than the fair
conspirators had anticipated. The next afternoon, while Mrs. Lee had
excused herself for a few hours, in order to pay the expected weekly visit
to her mother‐in‐law, Mr. Percival joined Assunta, as she sat alone in the
cosey library, finishing a garment for a poor child in whom she was
already interested. Assunta noticed more than usual the paleness of the
spiritual face she had always so much admired, and the weariness of its
expression; but, with true feminine tact, she made no comment; only, as he
seated himself beside the table, she looked up with a smile of welcome, as
his sister might have done.

“Hard at work, as usual. I hope I do not interrupt you, Miss Howard?” said
Mr. Percival, with an answering smile.

“Oh! no indeed. I am delighted to see you this evening. We have not had a
good long talk since I came; and yet we have so many topics of mutual
interest.”

Mr. Percival took from his pocket a little box, and, opening it, said:

“Miss Howard, I have ventured to bring you a souvenir of my travels, which
I beg you will accept from Mary’s brother, and because of the
association.”

He placed in her hand a heart‐shaped locket, plain but heavy, in the
centre of which glowed a large crimson ruby, and around it were engraved
the words, “Cor cordium.” Within, on one side, was a miniature painting of
the Sacred Heart of Jesus; on the other side was set a tiny crucifix,
carved from the olive‐wood of Gethsemani by one of the monks of Jerusalem,
and which had been laid upon the altar in the Chapel of the Holy
Sepulchre.

“And I prayed for you in that sacred spot most fervently, you may be
sure,” said Mr. Percival.

Assunta’s eyes were still fixed upon the beautiful treasure which she held
in her hand. Tears were in them, as she raised them at last, saying:

“Words are poor thanks for such a gift as this. You know, Mr. Percival,
how much I shall value it. Indeed, I feel most unworthy to possess
anything so precious; yet I shall accept it, as you said, from the brother
of my dearest friend, who is to me truly a sister in affection.” And
pressing her lips to the crystal which protected the crucifix, she
carefully replaced the locket in its case.

“And so you did not forget those foolish, fanciful remarks I made by
Shelley’s grave. I had not dreamed they would have dwelt in your memory so
long; still less did I imagine they would inspire so beautiful a design as
this, which is, of course, your own.” Then she added after a little pause:
“There is one greater gift even than this that I shall ask of you one of
these days. It is one of your first Masses, when, as a priest, you are
privileged to offer the Holy Sacrifice.”

“Miss Howard,” exclaimed Mr. Percival, with deep emotion, “that is a
subject of which I cannot even think without suffering.”

“Forgive me,” murmured Assunta, surprised beyond measure. “It was indeed
unpardonable in me to pain you by speaking of that which is between
yourself and God alone. My only excuse is that I thought the matter had
long been settled.”

Then followed a silence, so prolonged that Assunta began to wonder what
kept that manly head bowed forward upon the table. Was it confusion, was
it prayer, or had he perhaps fainted? At last he suddenly looked up, and
fixed those fine, earnest eyes of his full upon Assunta’s face; and even
in that moment the thought struck her what pure, true eyes they were.

“Miss Howard, you are the last person on earth to whom I ought to speak on
this subject, and I know not what impels me to do so now. Pray for me; for
my salvation may depend upon it.”

Assunta tried to be calm, as she said gently, while she breathed a silent
prayer for guidance:

“You must think of me as almost a sister.”

Mr. Percival went on:

“Even your image, true and beautiful and holy as it is, and pure as an
angel’s, should never have been allowed to come between me and the God to
whose special service I was inclined. But believe me, Miss Howard, never
for one moment have I cherished a hope that you might be to me other than
you are; only, when I have striven to rise above all human feeling, and to
give myself unreservedly to him who demanded the sacrifice, God help me!
you seemed to fill his place in my soul. Forgive me and pity me! I am
miserably weak.”

After a moment he continued:

“Ah! Miss Howard, you know what I mean. It is only because of my own
weakness that I have found the memory of you an obstacle to my advance
towards the perfection to which I aspired.”

“And to which you will still aspire.” And Assunta’s voice was low and
sweet, as she for the first time broke silence. “I had not dreamed of
this, Mr. Percival, but I hope you will never have occasion to regret the
confidence you have reposed, not in the ideal which has for a moment
passed as a cloud of temptation between your soul and its high calling,
but in one who, though full of faults, may yet offer you her sympathy and
her prayers.”

“God bless you!” escaped from Mr. Percival’s lips.

“I am too young and inexperienced,” continued Assunta, “to give you
counsel; besides, I am a woman; but, with my woman’s intuition, I think I
see how all this has come about.... May I go on?”

“I beg you will; it is the sort of soul‐wound that needs probing.”

Assunta smiled. “I do not think such severe treatment will be
required—only an examination, perhaps, preparatory to healing. You met me
in Rome—forgive me if I speak too freely of myself—surrounded by that
atmosphere of beauty and poetry which steals into the soul, because it
breathes from the very centre of Catholic faith and the glory of the
church militant. But when you met me, I was with those whose hearts were
not open to such influences; and it was very natural that you and I should
feel drawn to each other by the attraction of a common faith and hope. Do
you think I could have said those foolish words, which it seems you have
remembered only too well”—and she glanced at the little case in her
hand—“if I had not felt that you could sympathize with my thoughts,
however poorly they were expressed? Believe me, it was a certain
earnestness of faith in me, which your presence drew out into somewhat too
free expression and which remained in your memory as an attraction; and
the devil has ingeniously made use of that little opening to insinuate
some subtle poison. But his power is at an end, thank God! He has, for me,
overreached his mark. The very fact that you could speak of this to me
proves that the danger is already passing. O my friend! think what a poor,
miserable substitute is even the greatest human happiness for the life to
which God calls you. Think of the reward! Heaven is the price! However, it
is the Holy Spirit, not I, that should speak to your soul. Will you not
give him the opportunity? Will you not, perhaps, go into retreat? Or
rather, please do not listen to me, but go to your director, and open your
heart to him. I can only give you a few words of sympathy and
encouragement. He can speak to you as the voice of God.”

“You do not despise me, then, for having wavered?”

“Do not say that, Mr. Percival,” exclaimed the young girl earnestly. “What
saint is there that has not suffered temptation? Despise you? I envy you,
rather. Think of the vocation God has given you! If it proves to be the
mountain of sacrifice, and you ascend it with the cross upon your
shoulders, will you not be all the better priest from your likeness to Him
who was at once both priest and victim!”

“Miss Howard, pardon me, but you speak as if the lesson of Calvary were
not new to you; as if you, too, knew what it is to suffer—not, as I have
done, through your own weakness—God forbid! That I could never think.”

“We each of us must bear some cross,” said Assunta hastily; and then, to
give a lighter turn to the conversation, she added: “I am sorry that I
should have proved to be yours.”

For the first time Augustine Percival smiled, as he said:

“But if, through you, I win my crown, you will not then regret it?”

“O that crown!” exclaimed Assunta; “let us both keep it ever in sight as
an incentive. The way will not then seem so long or so hard. Mr. Percival,
will you see your director to‐night?”

“I will go to him now. It is what I have neglected only too long. God
bless you, Miss Howard! But dare I now, after all that has passed, ask you
to retain my trifling gift, that you may not forget to pray for me?”

“I shall prize it most highly,” said Assunta. “But I shall not need to be
reminded to commend you very often to the Sacred Heart of our divine Lord,
where you will find strength and consolation. I am sure the least I can do
for you is to pray for you, having been the occasion of your suffering.”

“And of something more than that,” said Mr. Percival.

“And I shall still hope for the other greater gift,” said Assunta in
pleading tones.

“Miss Howard,” replied Mr. Percival, almost with solemnity, “if I,
unworthy as I am, should ever be permitted to offer the Holy Sacrifice, my
first Mass shall be for you, God willing. But I dare not yet look forward
with hope to such a possibility. Once more, God bless you! Pray for me.”
And in a moment more he had left the house.

Assunta attended Mass daily at the cathedral. The next morning, as she was
leaving the church, Mr. Percival joined her; but, without saying a word,
he placed a note in her hand, and at the corner he turned, and took his
way in the opposite direction. In her own room the young girl read these
words:

“To‐day I start for Frederick, where I shall make a retreat with the good
Jesuit fathers. In solitude and prayer I hope that God may make known to
me his will. Pray, that I may have light to see and grace to follow the
inspirations of the Holy Spirit. The words you spoke last night are known
to the loving Heart of Jesus. He will reward you. I can say no more now.
Your brother in Christ,

A. P.”

“Thank God!” exclaimed Assunta.

After breakfast, Mary came to her, as she stood for a moment by the
window, and, putting her arm about her affectionately, said:

“Darling, we need not make any more plans to entrap poor Augustine into a
confession, for I do believe he is all right. He came here for a few
minutes early this morning to say good‐by, as he was going to Frederick.
Of course that must mean a retreat; and a retreat is, of course, the first
step towards the seminary.”

“I am very, _very_ glad,” said Assunta, smiling. “Women are not always as
bright as they think they are, you see.”

Three weeks from that day Augustine Percival sailed for Europe to enter
upon his theological course in Rome. And two faithful hearts daily begged
for him of Almighty God grace and fortitude with that happy confidence
which seems almost a presage of answered prayer.

And five years passed away—long and often weary in the passing, but short
and with abundant blessings in the retrospect—five uneventful years, and
yet leaving a lasting impress upon the individual soul. Assunta’s home was
still with her friend, Mary Lee—an arrangement to which she most
gratefully consented, on condition that she might, from her ample income,
contribute her share towards the ease and comfort of the family. It thus
became a mutual benefit, as well as pleasure; for Capt. Lee’s pay as a
naval officer was small and their only dependence. Assunta had won the
hearts of all, even down to Mary’s two little ones, who came bringing
plenty of love with them, as well as adding much to the care and
solicitude of the young mother and her younger friend.

They saw but little of Mrs. Sinclair during those years. She had become a
thorough woman of the world—a leader of fashion in her own circle. She had
lost much of the simplicity and _naïveté_ of character and manner which
had made her charming in the old Roman days. Her laugh had not the genuine
ring which her own light heart used to give it. She was still
beautiful—very beautiful as queen of the ball‐room. But Mary Lee always
insisted that she had the unmistakable look of one who has an interior
closet somewhere which might reveal a skeleton; and Assunta thought—but
her thoughts she kept to herself—that it was not very difficult to divine
what that skeleton might be. She understood her, and pitied her from her
heart; and she loved her, too, with the old affection. But their life‐
paths, once seemingly parallel, had now diverged so widely that she felt
she could not help her. The consolation Clara sought was very different
from anything her brother’s ward could supply.

And that brother, Mr. Carlisle—did Assunta never think of him? Daily,
before God, she remembered him; but it was not for her peace to allow him
a place in her memory at other times. They were entire strangers now, and
she had long since given up the hope of any return to the old friendship.
He had dropped out of her life, and God alone could fill the place left
vacant by the surrender of this human love. She prayed for him, however,
still, but as one might pray for the dead. Her days glided quietly by,
each one bearing a record of deeds of love and kindness; while the
consciousness of duty fulfilled gave her a peace that it is not in the
power of mere human happiness to bestow. The blessings of the poor
followed her, and the blessing of God rested upon her soul.

Mary sometimes protested against this “waste of life,” as she called it.

“My darling,” she said one day, as she was rocking her baby to sleep in
her arms, “you will be a nun yet.”

“I fear not,” replied Assunta. “I might have wished to enter religion, but
it seems that God does not call me to that life.”

“Then, Assunta, why don’t you marry? It would break my heart to lose you,
darling; but, truly, it grieves me to have you settle yourself down to our
stupid life and ways, and you so young and rich and beautiful. It is
contrary to nature and reason.”

“Be patient with me, dear,” said Assunta. “I do not believe that you want
to be rid of me. Some time we shall know what it all means. I am sorry to
disappoint my friends, but my life is just as I would have it.”

“Well, you are a saint,” said Mary with a sigh; “and as I am the gainer, I
am the last one to complain. But I wish you had a dear little bother of
your own like my Harry,” And the maternal kiss had in it such a strength
of maternal love that the baby‐eyes opened wide again, and refused to
shut.

Mary heard occasionally from her brother; and sometimes she heard _of_ him
in a way that filled her heart with joy. Austere, yet with wonderful
sweetness, full of talent and a hard student, yet with touching humility,
Augustine Percival, by a life of mortification and prayer, which his
studies never interrupted, was preparing himself to do great things for
God. A few words, uttered simply by a true‐hearted Christian woman, had
turned the scale for him; and God will receive so much the more glory.
There will come a day which will reveal many such works, performed through
the perhaps unconsciously‐exercised influence of some noble woman, whose
mission is none the less real because it is accomplished silently and out
of the world’s sight.



VII. Credo.


Five years had passed away, and their close found Mary Lee welcoming back
to her home her long‐absent brother, now a priest. Augustine Percival
returned, the same, and yet changed. There was the same tender, earnest
nature; but upon that nature grace had built up a superstructure of such
strength and virtue that, in most respects, he was a different
man—purified by suffering, sanctified by penance, and now consecrated by
the sacrament of Holy Orders.

It was a happy circle that gathered around the blazing wood‐fire on that
cool October evening—so happy that they were almost subdued, and thought
more than they talked. It was towards the end of the evening that Father
Percival said quite incidentally:

“Mr. Carlisle returned in the steamer with me. I suppose he will soon pay
his respects to the ladies.”

Assunta did not start. Why should she? Had the name of one long since dead
been mentioned, it might have caused an emotion of tenderness; but that
would have been all. Mr. Carlisle was dead to her, and every memory of him
had long been buried. So, though her face became a shade paler, she went
on with her work, and her hand did not tremble.

“Is he well?” asked Mary, continuing the conversation, “and is he as fine‐
looking as he used to be?”

“He is just recovering from a very severe illness,” replied her brother.
“It has told upon him fearfully, so that you will find him much changed.
Still, I hope his native air will restore him to health; and no doubt,
Mary, his good looks will follow. He was already much better when I parted
from him yesterday.” And then Father Percival questioned Mary about her
absent husband and her children, and listened with interest to the young
mother’s enthusiastic description of Harry’s brilliancy and the little
Assunta’s sweetness.

The next evening, as Father Percival was giving the two ladies an account
of his last days in Rome, Mr. Carlisle’s name was announced, and
immediately he himself entered the pleasant drawing‐room. He was indeed
much altered, for the traces of sickness and suffering were only too
visible. There was another change, perceptible to one who had known him
well. In his bearing there seemed to be less pride than of old, and more
dignity; in his face the expression of bitterness had given place to one
more contented, more peaceful. Suffering had evidently done a work in that
proud spirit. But as Mr. Carlisle extended his hand to Assunta, who
greeted him with the frank simplicity so peculiar to her, the same old
smile lighted up his thin, pale face, and he truly seemed her guardian
once more. Assunta was for the moment surprised to see the cordiality with
which Mr. Carlisle took the hand of the young priest, and held it in both
his, as if a brother’s affection were in the pressure, and which was
returned as warmly. A comfortable arm‐chair was placed near the fire for
the guest; and while he seated himself, as if fatigued, he said:

“Augustine, have you kept my secret?”

“Most faithfully. I did not even betray that I had one, as a woman might
have done.” And Father Percival glanced at his sister, who pretended
indignation, but said nothing.

“Then,” said Mr. Carlisle, “I must tell my own story. Assunta, come and
sit by me.” And he pointed to the vacant chair beside him, while Assunta
obeyed at once, the words and manner were so like those of the old days.

“Forgive me,” Mr. Carlisle went on, “if I call you to‐night by the
familiar name. I could not say Miss Howard, and tell you what I have to
tell. And, Mrs. Lee, if I seem to address myself too exclusively to your
friend, I beg you will pardon me, and believe that, if my story interests
you, I am more than glad that you should know all. Assunta, put your hand
here.” And taking her hand in his, he laid it upon his brow. “In that
Roman sickness it has often rested there, and has soothed and healed. Tell
me, child, do you feel no difference now?”

Assunta looked at him wonderingly—still more so when she caught sight of a
meaning smile on Father Percival’s face.

“Mr. Carlisle, you puzzle me,” she said.

Again that peculiar and beautiful smile, as he continued:

“The sign of the cross has been there; do you understand now, my child?
No? Then, in one word, I will explain all. _Credo_—I believe! Not yet?
Assunta, you have, I know, prayed for me. Your prayer has been answered. I
am a Catholic, and, under God, I owe all to Augustine Percival.”

Assunta could not speak. For a moment she looked in his face with those
earnest blue eyes, as if to read there the confirmation of his words, and
then she bowed her head upon her hands in silence. Mr. Carlisle was the
first to break it.

“And so you are not sorry, _petite_, to welcome so old a sinner into the
fold?”

“Sorry!” exclaimed Assunta at last. “Life will not be long enough to thank
God for this happiness.”

“You are so little changed, child, after all these years, that I must look
at myself to realize how the time has gone. But shall I tell you how all
this has come about? Three months ago I was as miserable an unbeliever as
ever lived.”

“Please tell us all,” murmured Assunta.

“All the story of these five years would be long and wearisome. Life to me
has been simply an endurance of existence, because I dared not end it. I
have travelled a great deal. I have _stood_, not _kneeled_, in the Chapel
of the Holy Sepulchre, and have wandered as a sight‐seer through the holy
places in Jerusalem. I have been in almost every part of Europe. Need I
tell you that I have found satisfaction nowhere? And all this time I was
drawn, by a sort of fascination, to read much on Catholic subjects; so I
sneered and cavilled and argued, and read on.

“At last, about four months since, the same uneasy spirit which has made a
very Wandering Jew of me for the last five years possessed me with the
idea of returning home, and I started for Paris. I engaged my passage in
the next steamer for New York; and, though feeling far from well, left for
Havre. I reached the hotel, registered my name, and went to my room for
the night. The steamer was to sail the next morning. I knew nothing more
for three weeks. Fortunately, I had fallen into good hands, or I should
never have been here. They said it was brain‐fever, and my life was
despaired of. Assunta, child, you need not look so pale. You see it is I
myself who have lived to tell it.”

Father Percival here rose, and, excusing himself on the ground of having
his Office to say, left the room. As soon as he was gone Mr. Carlisle
exclaimed:

“There is the noblest man that ever lived. No words can tell what he has
been to me. It seems that, when I was beginning to give some hope of
recovery, Father Percival arrived at the same hotel on his way to America.
The landlord happened to mention the fact of the illness of a fellow‐
countryman, and showed the name upon his books. Father Percival at once
gave up his passage, and remained to perform an act of charity which can
only be rewarded in heaven.”

“You remember, Assunta,” said Mrs. Lee, “Augustine wrote that he was
detained a few weeks by the illness of a friend.”

“Yes,” said Assunta; “but how little we dreamed who the friend was!”

“And a most ungrateful friend he was, too, at first,” said Mr. Carlisle.
“When he came to see me, and I learned his name, and that he had become a
priest, it was nothing but weakness that prevented my driving him from the
room. As it was, I swore a little, I believe. However, with the tenderness
of a woman he nursed me day and night; and even when I was better, there
was still no word about religion, until one day I introduced the subject
myself. Even then he said but little. I was too weak to have much pride,
or that little would not perhaps have made the impression that it did. My
pride has always been the obstacle, and it is not all gone yet, _petite_,”
he added, looking at Assunta, who smiled in answer.

“One night, from what cause I do not know, I had a relapse, and death
seemed very near. Then Father Percival came to me as priest. I can hear
now the solemn tones in which he said: ‘Mr. Carlisle, I will not deceive
you. I hope that you will recover, but you may not. Are you willing to die
as you are now, unbaptized?’ I answered, ‘No.’ ‘Do you, then,’ he said,
‘believe the Catholic Church to be the infallible teacher of truth, and
will you submit to her teaching?’ Here I paused. The question was a
difficult one; the word _submit_ was a hard word. But death was very near,
and at last, with desperate energy, I said: ‘Yes; baptize me!’ He then
knelt beside me, and made for me an act of contrition—for I seemed to be
sinking fast—and in a moment more I was baptized, a Catholic. He then left
me instantly, and went for the parish priest, who came and administered
Extreme Unction to—as they supposed—a dying man. But the sacrament did its
work for life, and not for death. From the moment of receiving it the
scale turned. Of course much that I have told you I have learned since
from Augustine. I was conscious only of the one act—the _submission_.

“And how mean a specimen of a man I have since felt myself to have
been—resisting God year after year with all the strength of human pride
and that most powerful auxiliary of the devil—pride of intellect; and
then, when life was at its last gasp, and everything had slipped from
under me but that one foothold—then to say, ‘Life is going; the world has
already gone. I have lost everything else; now I, a sinner, will
condescend to receive the portion of the saints—God and heaven!’ Do you
think, Assunta, that the angels would have had much cause for rejoicing
over such an addition to their bright company?”

“That is a genuine drop of your old bitterness, Mr. Carlisle,” replied
Assunta, laughing, nevertheless, at his frankness.

“Oh! there is plenty of it left, _petite_. But to go on: when I found that
I was to live, I was determined, before leaving for home, to make my
profession of faith in the church, as a Christian should who is not
ashamed of his colors. Augustine would do nothing official for me after
the baptism, but he was ever the kindest friend, and I love him with a
real David and Jonathan affection. Oh! child, how often have I thought of
you and of how much you would have been amused to see me, Severn Carlisle,
meekly receiving instruction in Catholic doctrine and practice from that
simple French priest. Truly, I needed some one to identify me to myself.
Well, to bring this long story to an end, the day before sailing I made my
profession of faith and received Holy Communion in the quiet little parish
church. And now I am here, the same proud, self‐sufficient man as of old,
I fear, but with a peace of soul that I have never known before.”

“How good God is!” exclaimed Assunta.

“What does your sister say?” asked Mrs. Lee.

“My sister? I do not think she took in the idea. Her thoughts would have
to travel miles before they would approach a religious sentiment. Poor
Clara! I find her much changed. I spent two or three hours with her this
afternoon. She was very gay, even brilliant—too much so, I thought, for
real happiness. She did not imagine how transparent her mask was, and I
would not destroy her illusion. I did not see Sinclair at all. But,”
exclaimed he, looking at his watch, and rising hastily, “it is eleven
o’clock. I ordered the carriage for ten, and no doubt it has been waiting
a long time. I owe you ladies many apologies for my thoughtlessness and
egotism.”

“Mr. Carlisle,” began Assunta, placing her hand in his, as she bade him
good‐night; but the words would not come as readily as the tears.

Mrs. Lee had gone to summon her brother, so the two, so long parted, were
left alone.

“My child,” said Mr. Carlisle in a low voice, “I know all that you would
say, all the sweet sympathy of that tender, unchanged heart. I have much
to say to you, Assunta, but not to‐night—not in the presence of others.”

Then turning to Father Percival, who entered the room, “Augustine,” he
said, “I am going for a few days to my place in the country for rest, and
also that I may see how much it has suffered from my long neglect. Come
and see me there. It will do me good, heart and soul.”

“I will try to arrange my plans so as to give myself that pleasure,”
replied the priest, as he assisted Mr. Carlisle into the carriage.

What strange contradictions there are in human nature! How little can we
account for our varying moods and the motives which influence our actions!
And how often we seem to get at cross‐purposes with life, and only see how
far we have been wrong when a merciful Providence, overruling all, unknots
the tangled thread and straightens the crooked purpose!

Excepting the visit of a few hours paid by Father Percival to his friend,
two months passed by, and nothing was heard of Mr. Carlisle. Those two
months were to Assunta longer, more wearisome, than the five years that
had preceded them. We may talk of hopes that are dead, and may honestly
believe them buried deep down in the grave which duty has prepared and
time has covered. But hope is the hardest thing in this world to kill; and
thank God that it is so! Let but a gleam of sunshine, a breath of the warm
upper air, into that sepulchre, and the hopes that have lain buried there
for years will revive and come forth with renewed vigor. It is much more
difficult to lay them to rest a second time.

Assunta had borne her trial nobly; but, as she sat alone on Christmas Eve,
and her thoughts naturally dwelt upon that happy return, and then the
unaccountable disappearance of Mr. Carlisle, her courage almost failed
her, and her brave heart sank within her, as she thought how dreary the
future looked. She had excused herself from joining the others at a little
family party, and for an hour she had sat idle before the fire—a most
unwonted self‐indulgence for one so conscientious as Assunta Howard.

A ring at the door and a voice in the hall made her start and tremble a
little, as she had not done on that first evening of Father Percival’s
return. She had scarcely recovered herself when Mr. Carlisle entered the
room.

“I have come to account for myself,” were his first words. “I hoped that I
should find you alone to‐night.”

“Mrs. Lee has gone to her mother’s,” was the reply.

“Yes, I knew it. Assunta, what have you thought of me? Still more, what
will you think of me now? I have suffered much in these two months;
perhaps it is ungenerous in me to say this to you. Assunta, never for one
moment have I been unfaithful to the love I told you of so many years ago;
but I had given up the hope of ever possessing yours. Even when the
obstacle you know of had been removed, I thought that I could bear to see
you happy, as I believed you were, in a life in which I had no share. I
felt that it would not be right even to ask you to marry one so much older
than yourself, with broken health and darkened spirits. And your fresh
beauty, still so girlish, so all‐unchanged, confirmed my purpose. Ah!
child, time, that has silvered my hair, has not dimmed the golden aureola
which crowns your dear head. But in the many lonely hours that I have
passed since my return, my courage has grown faint. I have longed for your
sweet presence in my home, until an answering voice has urged me to come
to you. Assunta, once, beneath the shadow of the cross, in the moonlit
Colosseum, I offered you my love, and you put God between us. Again I
urged my suit, and again you erected the same impassable barrier. To‐night
I am so selfish that, even as I have described myself to be, I come to you
a third time with a love which years have but strengthened. My darling,
God no longer comes between us; can I ever hope to win that true, brave
heart?”

With a child‐like simplicity and a true womanliness Assunta put her hand
in his, and said:

“Mr. Carlisle, it has long been yours. ‘Unless he can love you _in God_,’
my mother said. I believe that the condition is now fulfilled.”

“And may God bless the love he sanctions!” said Mr. Carlisle solemnly.
After a silence—for where hearts understand each other there is no need of
many words—Assunta said in her own sweet tones:

“Do you regret now the decision of that night in Rome? Was I a true
prophetess?”

“But we have lost so many years,” said Mr. Carlisle.

“Yes, lost for time, but gained for eternity.”

When Mrs. Lee returned, she greeted the guest with surprise, as well as
pleasure; but both those emotions were lost in a still greater joy when
Mr. Carlisle, drawing Assunta towards him, said:

“Mrs. Lee, this is my Christmas gift—a precious treasure, is it not, to be
entrusted to one so undeserving?”

“Indeed it is a precious treasure,” echoed Mary enthusiastically; “but,
Mr. Carlisle, there is not a man in the world in whose possession I would
like to see it so well as in yours.”

“Bless you, Mrs. Lee, for your kind words! _Petite_, perhaps your taste is
not so much in fault after all.”

“And, Mary,” said Assunta archly, “he may yet recover his good looks, you
know.”

“Yes,” said Mr. Carlisle, “love and happiness are said to be great
beautifiers. I have no objection to trying the experiment.”

One bright morning, soon after Easter, there was a nuptial Mass at the
cathedral, celebrated by Father Percival, and after the ceremony and a
quiet breakfast, Mr. and Mrs. Carlisle drove in their private carriage to
the beautiful country residence which was to be their future home.

Just at sunset, as they entered the long avenue which with many windings
led towards the house, Mr. Carlisle said:

“My darling, we are at home. I have waited, like Jacob, almost seven years
for my Rachel. I cannot say, as he did, that the days have seemed _few_,
though I believe my love has been no less.”

“And suppose,” replied Assunta, with the happy confidence of a loving
wife—“suppose your Rachel should turn out a Lia after all?”

“In that case,” said her husband coolly, “I should insist that the
description of that much‐injured lady had done her great injustice. And I
should consider myself a lucky fellow to have been cheated into the
mistake, and be ready to wager my Lia against all the Rachels in the
world. And now, my precious wife, welcome home!”

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

Ten years later. It is not always a pleasure to look in upon loved friends
after a lapse of ten years. Sickness, sorrow, death, or disgrace may each
do a mighty work in even fewer years, and, at the best, time itself brings
about marked changes. But a glance at Carlisle Hall, on this tenth
anniversary of that happy wedding‐day, will only show that same happiness
ripened into maturity. In a marriage like that of Severn and Assunta
Carlisle, whatever life might bring of joy or sorrow would come to both
alike, and nothing could divide them. Even death itself would but _seem_
to part them, for their union was _in God_. In Assunta the added dignity
of wife‐hood and motherhood had taken nothing from the charm of earlier
years; and, if the beauty of the young girl had faded somewhat, the ever‐
growing grace and purity of soul more than supplied its want, even in her
husband’s eyes. And Mr. Carlisle? Noble by nature, and possessing the
finest qualities of mind and heart, his soul was now developed to the full
stature of its manhood. He was a proud man still, but with a pride which
S. Paul might have commended. He was so proud that he was never ashamed to
kneel beside the poorest villager in the little church. In his pride he
gloried in Jesus Christ, and him crucified. The beautiful church itself
had been erected as a thank‐offering, by Mr. Carlisle and his wife, in the
factory village two miles from their home; and for some years Father
Percival had been parish priest of the Church of the Assumption. And
Carlisle Hall resounded with the merry voices of three children at the end
of those ten years: Severn, the pride of his mother’s heart; Augustine,
Father Percival’s godchild and special favorite, already destined for the
priesthood by the wishes of the senior trio; and the baby, her father’s
darling, to whom he would give the name of Mary, and no other, “to show,”
he said, “how he had progressed in Mariolatry since his first lesson in
Sienna.”

Father Percival had been the only guest at this anniversary‐dinner,
except, indeed, the children, who must appear on this occasion, at no
matter how great a risk of noise and accident. They had now returned to
the nursery, but the others still lingered at the table.

“Father Augustine,” said Assunta—for she had learned to follow the little
ones in their name for the priest they loved so well—“I received a letter
yesterday from dear old Father Joseph. He is just as happy in our marriage
to‐day as he was when he first heard of it, and he blesses it, and us, and
the children so sweetly and kindly. How much I should like to see him
again!”

“I suppose,” said Father Percival, “he looks upon the marriage as a
striking illustration of the wonderful ways and goodness of God, as it
surely is. S. Ignatius ought to send Father Dupont here, to see for
himself the result of his direction, and, I must add, of your generosity
and faithfulness, Mrs. Carlisle.”

“I am so sorry, Severn,” said Assunta after a pause in the conversation,
“that Clara would not come to us to‐day. I think a glimpse of quiet
country life might be a pleasant change for her.”

“I fear,” replied her husband sadly, “that poor Clara has much to suffer
yet. It is my opinion that Sinclair has no intention of returning from
Europe at all. But who could have made her believe, in those sunshiny
days, that she would ever live to be a deserted wife? _Petite_, the
subject is a very painful one. I am going to change it for one of which I
am never weary. Augustine, it is not the custom, I believe, for a man to
toast his wife on such an occasion, but I am going to be an exception to
the rule to‐day. Lord Lytton has in that grand work of his, _My Novel_,
two types of women—the one who exalts, and the one who consoles. He
probably had never seen the combination of the two types in one person. I
now propose—and, my darling, you must drink and not blush—‘Assunta
Carlisle: blessed be the woman who both exalts and consoles!’ And let me
add that a happy man was I—unworthy—when, ten years ago, that woman became
my wife.”




Matter. V.


Although continuous matter cannot be proved to exist, yet its existence,
as every one knows, is still very commonly believed, even by philosophers,
on the ground that it was believed for centuries by all great men, and has
never been conclusively refuted. From some hints which we have given in
our previous article about the difficulties of this ancient doctrine, the
intelligent reader may have already satisfied himself that material
continuity is not merely “a philosophical mystery,” as Goudin confesses,
but a metaphysical absurdity. As, however, this last conclusion, owing to
its paramount importance in metaphysics and in natural philosophy,
deserves a more explicit and complete demonstration than we have yet
given, we propose to develop in the present article a series of arguments,
drawn from different sources, to show _the absolute and intrinsic
impossibility of continuous matter_. The prejudices of our infancy may at
first resist the demonstration, but it is to be hoped that they will
finally yield to reason.

_First argument._—We know, and it is conceded by the advocates of
continuous matter, that a _finite_ being cannot involve in its composition
an _infinite_ multitude of distinct terms; for evidently the infinite
cannot be the constituent of the finite. Now, we have shown in our
preceding article that, if there were a piece of continuous matter, it
should involve in its continuous constitution an infinite multitude of
distinct terms, every one of which should have its own distinct existence
independently of the others. Therefore continuous matter cannot exist.

_Second argument._—A primitive substance cannot absolutely be made up of
other substances. But if there were any continuous matter, a primitive
substance would be made up of other substances. Therefore no continuous
matter can exist. The major of this syllogism is quite evident; for a
primitive substance, if made up of other substances, would be primitive
and non‐primitive at the same time. The minor can be easily proved. For it
is plain that continuous matter, if any such existed, would necessarily
consist of continuous parts, substantially distinct from one another, and
therefore having their own distinct matter and their own distinct
substantial act, and ranking as distinct, complete, and separable
substances, as we have shown in our last article. Now, assuming that
either of these parts is a primitive substance, it is evident that the
primitive substance would be made up of other substances; for such a part,
being continuous, is itself made up of other parts, which are likewise
distinct and complete substances, as we have just remarked. And since a
continuum cannot be resolved into any but continuous parts, the conclusion
cannot be avoided that the primitive material substance would always be
made up of other substances. To elude this argument, the advocates of
continuous matter are compelled to deny that there is any _primitive_
material substance mathematically continuous. But, even so, their position
is not improved. For if there is no primitive material substance
mathematically continuous, the combination of such primitive substances
will never give rise to continuous matter, it being obvious that all the
elementary constituents of continuum must be continuous, as all
philosophers agree. Whence we again conclude that no continuous matter is
possible.

_Third argument._—No continuum can be made up of unextended constituents,
as we have just observed, and as our opponents not only concede, but also
demonstrate most irrefragably in their own treatises. Now, continuous
matter, if any such existed, would be made up of unextended
constituents—that is, of mere mathematical points. Therefore continuous
matter would be a formal contradiction. The minor of our syllogism is
proved thus. All the points which can be designated within the dimensions
of the continuum are _immediately_ united with one another, and therefore
no room is to be found between any two consecutive points; which shows
that in the constitution of the continuum we would have nothing but mere
points. For let there be a continuous plane and a continuous sphere. The
sphere, if perfect, cannot touch the plane, except in a single indivisible
point, as is proved in geometry; nevertheless, the sphere may move along
the plane, and, always touching the plane in a single point, may measure a
linear extension of matter, which, accordingly, would contain nothing but
mathematical points immediately following one another. In other terms, the
extended matter would be made up of indivisible points; and since all
admit that this is impossible, it follows that continuous matter is
impossible. Against this argument the objection is made that it proves too
much; as it would prove the impossibility of measuring space by continuous
movement. But this objection has no good foundation, as we shall show
after concluding the series of our arguments.

_Fourth argument._—All the points that can be designated in a material
continuum would necessarily touch one another in such a manner as to form
a continuous extension; hence their contact would necessarily be
_extensive_. But an _extensive_ contact of indivisible points is
intrinsically impossible. Therefore material continuity is intrinsically
impossible. The major of this syllogism is a mere corollary from the
definition of continuum; for, if there be no contact, the continuum will
be broken, and if the contact be not extensive—that is, such as to allow
each point to extend beyond its neighbor—no continuous extension will
result. The minor of our syllogism can be proved as follows:

The contact of a point with a point is the contact of an indivisible with
another indivisible; and, since the indivisible has no parts, such a
contact cannot be partial, but must needs be total. Accordingly, the
second point, by its contact with the first, will be _totally_ in the
first; the third, by its contact with the second, will be _totally_ in the
second, and consequently in the first; the fourth, by its contact with the
third, will be _totally_ in the third, and consequently in the second and
in the first, and so on. Therefore all the points which are in
mathematical contact will necessarily correspond to the same point in
space. Now, to be all in the same point, and to form a continuous
extension, are contradictories. And thus it is manifest that material
continuity is a mere contradiction.

Some will say that the contact is indeed made in the points, but that the
parts, which touch one another in a common point, are quite distinct. But
this appeal to the parts of the continuum, though much insisted upon by
many ancient philosophers, is of no avail against our argument. For the
existence of these parts cannot be assumed, without presupposing the
continuity of matter. Such parts are, in fact, assumed to be continuous;
and therefore, before we admit their existence, we must inquire whether
and how they can have intrinsic extension and continuity. And dividing
these parts into other parts, and these again into others without end, of
all these parts of parts the same question must be asked—that is, whether
and how they can have intrinsic extension and continuity. Hence one of two
things will follow: either we shall never find the intrinsic reason of
material continuity, or we shall find it only after having exhausted an
infinite division—that is, after having reached, if possible, a term
incapable of further division, viz., a mathematical point. But in the
mathematical point it is impossible to find the intrinsic reason of
material continuity, as we have just shown. And therefore the material
continuity of the parts has no formal reason of its constitution, or, in
other terms, the parts themselves are intrinsically impossible.

Moreover, the very distinction made by our opponents between the points of
contact and the parts which touch one another in those points, is
altogether irrational. For _a parte rei_—that is, considering the
continuum as it is in itself—there is no foundation for the said
distinction, it being evident that in a homogeneous continuum no place is
to be found where we cannot mark out a point. Hence it is irrational to
limit the designability of the points in order to make room for the parts.
In other words, the parts themselves cannot be conceived as continuous
without supposing that all the neighboring points which can be designated
in them form by their contact a continuous extension, which we have proved
to be inadmissible. The aforesaid distinction is therefore one of the
subterfuges resorted to by the advocates of material continuity, to evade
the unanswerable difficulties arising from their sentence; for it is true
indeed, as Goudin remarks, that material continuity is “a philosophic
mystery, against which reason objects more than it can answer,” though not
because in this question “reason proves more than it can understand,” but
because continuous matter is shown to be an absolute impossibility.

_Fifth argument._—It is a known metaphysical principle that “nothing can
possibly become actual, except by the intervention of an act”—_Impossibile
est aliquid fieri in actu nisi per aliquem actum_ (S. Thomas _passim_).
But no act can be imagined by which matter would become actually
continuous. Therefore no actually continuous matter can possibly exist.
The minor of our syllogism is proved thus. Acts are either substantial or
accidental; hence if any act could be conceived as giving actual
continuity to matter, such an act would be either substantial or
accidental—that is, it would give to its matter either its first being or
a mere mode of being. Now, neither the substantial nor the accidental act
can make matter actually continuous. For, first, no substantial act can
give to its matter a being for which the matter has no disposition. But
actuable matter has no disposition for actual continuity, for where there
are no distinct terms requiring continuation, there is no disposition to
actual continuity, as is evident; and it is not less evident that the
matter which is to be actuated by a substantial act involves no distinct
terms, and does not even connote them, but merely implies the privation of
the act giving it its first being, which act is one, not many, and gives
one being, not many, and consequently is incapable of constituting a
number of actual terms actually distinct, as would be required for actual
continuity. To say the contrary would be to deny one of the most
fundamental and universal principles of metaphysics, viz., _Actus est qui
distinguit_, which means that there cannot be distinct terms where there
are no distinct acts.

Moreover, continuity presupposes quantity; hence, if the substantial act
gives actual continuity to its matter, it must be conceded that a certain
quantity exists potentially in the actuable matter, and is reduced to act
by the first actuation of matter. This quantity would therefore rank among
the essentials of the substance, and could not possibly be considered as
an accident; for the immediate result of the first actuation of a term by
its substantial act is not a mere accident, but the very actuality of the
essence of which that act and that term are the principles. Whence it
follows that so long as quantity remains an accident, it is impossible to
make it arise from the substantial act; and, accordingly, no substantial
act can make matter actually continuous.

That actual continuity cannot arise from any accidental act is no less
evident. For the only accidental act which could be supposed to play a
part in the constitution of a material continuum would be some actual
composition. But as composition without components is impossible, and the
components of continuous matter, before such a composition, are not
continuous (since we must now consider continuity as a result of the
composition), our continuous matter would be made up of components
destitute of continuous extension—that is, of mere mathematical points.
But, as this is avowedly impossible, it follows that it is as impossible
to admit that matter becomes actually continuous by the reception of an
accidental act.

_Sixth argument._—In a philosophico‐mathematical work published in England
a few years ago,(108) from which we have already borrowed some plain
arguments concerning other questions on matter, the impossibility of
continuous matter is proved by the following argument: “A compound which
has no first components is a sheer impossibility. Continuous matter, if
admitted, would be a compound which has no first components. Therefore
continuous matter is a sheer impossibility. In this argument the first
proposition is self‐evident; for the components are the material
constituents of the compound; and therefore a compound which has no first
components is a thing which is constituted without its first constituents,
or a pure contradiction. The second proposition also is undeniable. And,
first, there can be no doubt that continuous matter would be a _compound_;
for continuous matter would be extended, and would have, accordingly,
parts distinct from parts; which is the exclusive property of compounds.
Now, that this compound would be _without first components_, can be proved
as follows: If continuous matter has any first components, these
components will either be extended or unextended. If they are supposed to
be _extended_, then they are by no means the _first_ components; since it
is clear that in this case they have distinct parts, and therefore are
themselves made up of other components. If they are supposed to be
_unextended_, then they are by no means the _components_ of continuum;
since all know and admit that no continuum can be made up of unextended
points. And, indeed, unextended points have no parts, and therefore cannot
touch one another partially; whence it follows that either they touch each
other totally, or they do not touch at all. If they do not touch at all,
they do not make a continuum, as is evident. If they touch totally, the
one will occupy exactly the same place which is occupied by the other, and
no material extension will arise. And for this reason geometrical writers
consider that a mathematical line cannot be conceived as made up of
points, but only as the track of a single point in motion. We see, then,
that a material continuum is a compound, of which the first components
cannot be extended, and cannot be unextended. And since it is impossible
to think of a third sort of first components which would be neither
extended nor unextended, we must needs conclude that continuous matter is
a compound which has no first components. And therefore continuous matter
is a mere absurdity” (p. 30).

This argument is, in our opinion, altogether unanswerable. Those
philosophers, in fact, who still venture to fight in favor of continuous
matter, have never been able to solve it. When we urge them to declare
whether they hold the first components of continuous matter to be extended
or unextended, they constantly ignore and elude the question. They simply
answer that the components of material substance are “the matter” and “the
form.” But if the matter which lies under the form has no distinct parts,
it is evident that the substance cannot be continuous. The composition of
matter and form does not, therefore, entail continuity, unless the matter
which is under the form has its own material composition of parts; and it
is with reference to the composition of these parts of matter, not to the
composition of matter and form, that we inquire whether the first
components of continuous matter be extended or unextended. To ignore the
gist of the argument is, on the part of our opponents, an implicit
confession of their inability to cope with it.

_Seventh argument._—Material substance, as consisting of act and potency,
like everything else in creation, is both active and passive, its activity
and passivity being essentially confined, as we have already
explained,(109) to the production and the reception of local movement.
Hence, so long as material substance preserves its essential constitution,
it is impossible to admit that matter is incapable of receiving movement
from natural causes. But continuous matter would be incapable of receiving
movement from natural causes. Therefore it is impossible to admit
continuous matter. To prove the minor of this syllogism, let there be two
little globes of continuous matter, and let them act on one another. Since
no finite velocity can be communicated by an immediate contact of matter
with matter, as shown in a preceding article, it follows that the velocity
must be communicated by virtual contact in accordance with the law of the
inverse squared distances. Hence, since some points of the two globes are
nearer to one another, and others are farther, different points must
acquire different velocities. Now, one and the same piece of matter cannot
move onward with different velocities, as is evident; it will therefore be
unable to move so long as such different velocities are not reduced to a
mean one, which shall be common to the whole mass. Such a reduction of
unequal velocities to a mean one would meet with no difficulty, if the
globes in question were made up of _free_ and _independent_ points of
matter; for in such a case the globes would be compressed, and each point
of matter would act and react according to known mechanical laws, and thus
soon equalize their respective velocities. But in the case of material
continuity the reduction of different velocities to a mean one is by no
means possible. For “in a piece of continuous matter,” to quote again from
the above‐mentioned work of molecular mechanics, “any point which can be
designated is so _invariably_ united with the other points that no impact
and no mutual reaction are conceivable; the obvious consequence of which
is that no work can be done within the continuous particle in order to
equalize the unequal velocities impressed from without. Moreover, in our
case the reduction ought to be rigorously instantaneous; which is another
impossibility. In fact, if distinct points of a continuous piece of matter
were for any short duration of time animated by different velocities, the
continuum would evidently undergo immediate and unavoidable resolution;
which is against the hypothesis. Since, then, the said reduction cannot be
made instantaneously, as we have proved above, nor, indeed, in any other
way, and, on the other hand, our continuous particle cannot move onward
before the different velocities are reduced to one of mean intensity, it
is quite evident that the same continuous particle will never be capable
of moving, whatever be the conditions of the impact. And since what is
true of one particle on account of its supposed continuity is true also of
each of the other particles equally continuous, we must conclude that
bodies made up of particles materially continuous are totally incapable of
receiving any communication of motion.”(110)

This argument, though seemingly proving only the non‐existence of
continuous matter in nature, proves in fact, also, the impossibility of
its existence. For, if a substance could be created possessing intrinsic
extension and continuity, that substance would essentially differ from the
existing matter, and would therefore be anything but matter. Hence not
even in this supposition would continuous matter exist.

_Eighth argument._—The inertia of matter, and its property of acting in a
sphere, might furnish us with a new argument against material continuity.
But we prefer to conclude with a mathematical demonstration drawn from the
weight of matter. The weight of a mass of matter depends on the number of
material terms to which the action of gravity is applied, and it increases
exactly in the same ratio as the number of the elementary terms contained
in the mass. This being the case, let us assume that there is somewhere an
atom of continuous matter. The action of gravity will find in it an
infinite multitude of points of application; for it is of the nature of
continuum to supply matter for an endless division. Hence if we call _g_
the action of gravity on the unit of mass in the unit of time, the action
of the same gravity on any of those infinite points of application will be


    _g_ ρ _dx dy dz_,


ρ being the density of the mass, and _dx_, _dy_, _dz_ the three dimensions
of an infinitesimal portion of it.

Now, since we know that gravity in the unit of time imparts a finite
velocity to every point of matter in the atom, we must admit that the
action exerted on the infinitesimal mass ρ _dx dy dz_ has a finite value;
and therefore, since the volume _dx dy dz_ is an infinitesimal of the
third degree, the density ρ must be an infinite of the third order. But a
continuous mass whose elements have an infinite density has itself an
infinite density; hence, if its volume has finite dimensions, the mass
itself (which is the product of the volume into the density) is
necessarily infinite, and will have _an infinite weight_. Hence the
assumption of continuous matter leads to an absurdity. The assumption is
therefore to be rejected as evidently false.

We will put an end to the series of our proofs by pointing out the
intrinsic and radical reason why matter cannot be continuous. The matter
which is under the form is _a potency_ in the same order of reality in
which its form is _an act_. Now, the only property of a potency is to be
liable to receive some determinations of a certain kind; and the property
of a potency whose form is an active principle of local _motion_ must
consist in its being liable to receive a determination to local
_movement_. Hence, as the matter receives its first being by a form of a
spherical character, and becomes the real central point from which the
actions of the substance proceed, so also the same matter, when already
actuated by its essential form, receives any accidental determination to
local movement; and, inasmuch as it is liable to local movement, it is in
potency to extend through space—that is, to describe in space a continuous
line; and when it actually moves, it actually traces a continuous
line—that is, it extends from place to place, continuously indeed, but
successively; whence it is manifest that its extension is nothing but
_Actus existentis in potentia ut in potentia_ Aristotle would say, viz.,
an actual passage from one potential state to another. Such is the only
extension of which matter is capable. Such an extension is always _in
fieri_, never _in facto esse_; always dynamical, never statical; always
potential and successive, never formal or simultaneous. We can, therefore,
ascribe to matter _potential_ continuity, just as we ascribe to its active
principle a _virtual_ continuity; for the passivity of the matter and the
activity of the form correspond to one another as properties of one and
the same essence; and whatever can be predicated actively or virtually of
a substance on account of its form can be predicated passively or
potentially of the same substance on account of its matter.

These remarks form a complement to our fifth argument, where we proved
that no substantial and no accidental act could make matter _actually_
continuous. For, since matter cannot receive any accidental act, except
the determination to local movement, and since this movement, although
continuous, is essentially successive, it follows that by such a
determination no actual and permanent continuity can arise, but a mere
continuation of local changes. Thus matter, according to its potential
nature, has only a potential extension; or, in other terms, it is not in
itself actually continuous, but is simply ready to extend through space by
continuous movement.

The preceding proofs seem quite sufficient, and more than sufficient, to
uproot the prejudice in favor of material continuity; we must, however,
defend them from the attacks of our opponents, that no reasonable doubt
may remain as to the cogency of our demonstration.

_First objection._—The globe and the plane, of which we have spoken in our
third argument, though destitute of proportional parts suitable for a
statical contact, become proportionate to one another, says Goudin, by the
very movement of the one upon the other; and thus our third argument would
fall to the ground. For a successive contact partakes of the nature of
successive beings. Hence, as time, although having no present, except an
indivisible instant, becomes, through its flowing, extended into
continuous parts, so also the contact of the globe with the plane,
although limited to an indivisible point, can nevertheless, by its
flowing, become extended so as to correspond to the extended parts of the
plane. For, according to mathematicians, a point, though indivisible when
at rest, can by moving describe a divisible line.

To this we answer that a globe and a plane cannot by the movement of the
one on the other acquire proportionate parts. For, although it is true
that a successive contact partakes of the nature of the successive being
which we call movement, it is plain that it does not partake of the nature
of matter. In fact, the material plane is not supposed to become
continuous through the movement of the globe, but is hypothetically
assumed to be continuous before the movement, and even before the
existence, of the said globe. The continuous movement is, of course,
proportionate to a continuous plane; but it is evident that it cannot
originate any proportion between the plane and the globe; because this
would be against the essence of both. No part of the plane can be
spherical, and no part of the globe can be plane; hence, whatever may be
the movement of the one upon the other, they will never touch one another,
except in a single point.

That time, although having no present, except an indivisible point,
becomes extended by flowing on, is perfectly true; but this proves
nothing. For, in the same manner as the act of flowing, by which time
flows, has nothing actual but a single indivisible instant, so also the
act of flowing, by which the contact of the globe with the plane flows,
has no actuality but in an indivisible point of space; and as an
indivisible instant by its flowing draws a line of time without ever
becoming extended in itself, so also an indivisible point by its flowing
draws a line in space without ever becoming extended in itself; and as the
instant of time never becomes proportionate to any finite length of time,
so also the point of contact never becomes proportionate to any finite
line in space.

That a line, therefore, arises from the flowing of a point in the same
manner as time from the flowing of an instant, is a plain truth, and there
was no need of Goudin’s argumentation to make it acceptable. To defeat our
argument, he should have proved that the _actual_ flowing of an instant
takes up a length of time. If this could have been proved, it would have
been easy to conclude that the flowing contact also extends through a
length of space. But the author did not attempt to show that an instant of
time flows through finite lengths of time. It is evident, on the contrary,
that an instant flows through mere instants immediately following one
another. And thus the objection has no weight.

_Second objection._—If a material continuum is impossible, all continuum
is impossible, and thus we are constrained to deny the continuity of both
space and time. For space and time—as, for instance, a cubic‐foot and an
hour—include within their respective limits an infinite multitude of
indivisible points, or indivisible instants, just as would continuous
matter include within its limits an infinite multitude of material points;
for it is clear that space and time cannot be made up of anything but
points and instants. Hence, if, in spite of this, we admit continuous
space and continuous time, we implicitly avow that our first argument
against continuous matter is far from conclusive.

We reply that there is no parity between the continuity of space and time
and the continuity of matter; and that the impossibility of the latter
does not show the impossibility of the former. The continuity of space and
of time is intimately connected with the continuity of local movement.
Movement, though _formally_ continuous, or rather owing to its formal
continuity, is necessarily successive, so that we can never find one part
of the movement coexisting with another part of the same movement; and
consequently there is no danger of finding in such a movement any _actual_
multitude, whilst we should necessarily find it in continuous matter. Time
also, as being nothing else than the actuality or duration of movement, is
entirely successive; and consequently no two parts of time can ever be
found together; which again prevents the danger of an _actual_ multitude
of coexisting instants. As to space, we observe that its continuity is by
no means formal, but only virtual, and that space as such has no parts
into which it can be divided, whatever our imagination may suggest to the
contrary. We indeed consider space as a continuous extension, but such an
extension and continuity is the property of the movement extending through
space, not of space itself. Space is a region _through which movement can
extend in a continuous manner_; hence the space measured, or mensurable,
is styled _continuous_ from the continuity of the movement made, or
possible. We likewise consider the parts of the extension of the movement
made or possible as so many _parts of the space measured or mensurable_.
And thus space is called _continuous_, _extended_, and _divisible into
parts_, merely because the movement by which space is, or can be, measured
is continuous, extended, and divisible into successive parts; but space,
as such, has of itself no _formal_ continuity, no _formal_ extension, and
no _formal_ divisibility, since space, as such, is nothing else than the
virtuality, or extrinsic terminability, of divine immensity, as we may
have occasion hereafter to show.

Hence neither space, nor time, nor movement is made up by composition of
points or of instants; but time and movement owe their continuous
extension to the flowing of a single instant and of a single point, whilst
space, which is only virtually continuous, owes its denomination of
continuous to the possibility of continuous movement through it. But if
there were any continuous matter, its formal extension would arise from
_actual_, _simultaneous_, and _indivisible_ points constituting a _formal
infinite multitude_ within the limits of its extension. Hence there is no
parity between continuous matter and continuous space or time; and the
impossibility of the former does not prove the impossibility of the
latter.

_Third objection._—Accelerated movement is a movement the velocity of
which increases by continuous infinitesimal degrees—that is, by
indivisible momenta of motion. It is therefore possible for a quantity of
movement to arise from the accumulation of indivisibles. Why, then, should
not the quantity of matter arise in a like manner from the accumulation of
indivisible points? That which causes the acceleration of movement is, in
fact, continuous action—that is, a series of real, distinct, and
innumerable instantaneous actions, by which the movement is made to
increase by distinct infinitesimal degrees; which would show that it is
not impossible to make a continuum by means of indivisibles.

We reply, first, that there is no degree of velocity which can be styled
indivisible; for however small may be the acceleration of the movement, it
may become smaller and smaller without end, as we shall presently explain.

But, waiving this, we reply, secondly, that intensive and extensive
quantity are of a very different nature, and, even if it were true that
intensive quantity can arise from an accumulation of indivisibles, the
same would not be the case with extension. The degrees of intensity never
unite by way of composition; for all intensity belongs to some _form_ or
act, whilst all composition of parts regards the _material_ constituents
of things. Hence movement, though increasing or decreasing, by continuous
degrees, is not _composed_ of them; whereas the continuum of matter, if
any such existed, should be _composed_ of its indivisible elements. In
movement the increased velocity is not a multitude of distinct acts, but a
single act, equivalent to all the acts which we may distinguish under the
name of degrees of velocity. Hence such degrees are only virtually
distinct, and do not constitute a formal multitude; whence it follows that
there is no absurdity in the notion of accelerated or retarded movement.
But with a material continuum the case is entirely different; for such a
continuum would be an extensive, not an intensive, quantity, and would
have parts not only mentally or virtually, but entitatively and formally,
distinct, and making an actual infinite multitude within the limits of a
finite bulk.

As to the continuous action which causes the acceleration of movement, it
is not true that it consists of a sum of distinct instantaneous actions.
The action may be considered either _in fieri_ or _in facto esse_. The
action _in fieri_ is the exertion of the agent, and the action _in facto
esse_ is the determination received by the patient. Now, the exertion of
the agent is successive; for its continuity is the continuity of time, and
is therefore _continuation_ rather than _continuity_. Hence nothing exists
of the action _in fieri_, except an instantaneous exertion corresponding
to the moment of time which unites the past with the future. All the past
exertions have ceased to be _in fieri_, and all the future exertions have
still to be made. Accordingly, continuous action is not made up of other
actual actions, and, though passing through different degrees of
intensity, is not an actual multitude.

On the other hand, if we consider the action _in facto esse_—that is, the
determination as received in the patient—we shall find that, although such
a determination is the result of a continued exertion, and exhibits its
totality under the form of velocity, nevertheless this result consists of
intensity, not of continuity, and therefore contains no formal multitude,
but is, as we have said, a simple act equivalent to many. Hence
accelerated movement is one movement, and not many, and a great velocity
is one velocity, and not a formal multitude of lesser velocities. In a
word, there is not the least resemblance between continuous acceleration
and continuous matter.

Although the preceding answer sufficiently shows the flimsiness of the
objection, we may yet observe that actions having an infinitesimal
duration are indeed infinitesimal, but are not _true indivisibles_. For
the expression of an accelerating action, in dynamics, contains three
variable functions—that is, first, the _intensity_ of the action at the
unit of distance in the unit of time; secondly, its _duration_; thirdly,
the _distance_ from the agent to the patient. Hence, in the case of an
action of infinitesimal duration, there still remain two variables, viz.,
the _intensity_ of the power, and the _distance_ from the patient; and
their variation causes a variation of the action in its infinitesimal
duration. Thus it is manifest that actions of infinitesimal duration can
have a greater or a less intensity, and therefore are not _true
indivisibles_ of intensity. If, for instance, two agents by their constant
and continuous action produce in the same length of time different
effects, it is evident that their actions have different intensities in
every infinitesimal instant of time; hence such infinitesimal actions,
though bearing no comparison with finite quantities, bear comparison with
one another, and form definite geometric ratios.

_Fourth objection._—If the contact of one indivisible with another cannot
engender a continuum, we must deny the existence of time and of local
motion. For time is engendered by the flowing of an instant towards the
instant immediately following, and movement is engendered by the flowing
of a point in space towards the point immediately following. If, then,
indivisibles cannot, by their contact, give rise to continuous extension,
neither time nor local motion will acquire continuous extension.

Our answer to this objection is that time and movement are not engendered
by a formal contact of a real instant with the instant following, or of a
real point with the point following. Duration is not a sum of indivisible
instants formally touching one another, nor is the length of space a sum
of indivisible points touching one another. We may have points _in space_,
but not points _of space_; and in like manner we have instants _in
succession_, not instants _of succession_, though in common language we
usually confound the latter with the former. Yet, when we talk of a point
of space, our meaning is not that space is made up of points, but simply
that a point of matter existing in space marks out its own ubication, thus
lending to the space occupied the name of _point_. Hence no movement in
space can be conceived to extend by successive contacts of points, or by
the flowing of a point towards other points immediately following; for
these _points immediately following_ exist only in our imagination. Nor
does a flowing point engender a line of space, but only a line of
movement; and even this latter is not properly _engendered_, but merely
_marked out_ in space; for all possible lines are already virtually
contained in space, and therefore they need no engendering, but simply
marking out by continuous motion.

The same is to be said of the origin of time. Time is not a formal sum of
instants touching one another. The instant just past is no more, hence it
cannot touch the instant which is now; and the instant which is to follow
is not yet, hence it cannot be touched by the instant which is now.
Accordingly, as the movement of a single point marks out a continuous line
in absolute space, so also the flowing of a single instant extends a line
in absolute duration. For, as S. Thomas teaches, in the whole length of
time there is but a single instant _in re_, though this same instant
becomes virtually manifold _in ratione prioris et posterioris_ by shifting
from “before” to “after.” And in the same manner, in the whole length of a
line measured in space by continuous movement, there is but a single point
_in re_ actually shifting its ubication from “here” to “there,” and thus
becoming virtually manifold in its successive positions. And for this
reason both movement and time are always and essentially developing (_in
fieri_), and never exist as developed (_in facto esse_); since of the
former nothing is actual but a point, and of the latter nothing is actual
but an instant.

It is scarcely necessary to repeat that, if there were any continuous
matter, its parts would all be actual and simultaneous. Its continuous
extension would therefore be properly engendered by the contact of
indivisible points, not by the shifting of a point from one end of its
dimensions to another. This sufficiently shows that from the continuity of
movement and of time nothing can be concluded in favor of continuous
matter.

_Fifth objection._—Between two given points in space infinite other points
can be placed. Now, what is possible can be conceived to be done; and thus
we can conceive an infinite multitude between the two points. Accordingly,
an infinite multitude can be contained within limits; and if so,
continuous matter is not impossible, and our first argument has no weight.

We answer that, although an infinite multitude of points can be placed
between any two given points, yet nothing can be inferred therefrom in
favor of continuous matter. For those innumerable points either will touch
one another or not. If they do not touch, they will not make a continuum;
and if they touch, they will, as we have shown, entirely coincide, instead
of forming a continuous extension. It is plain, therefore, that the
distance between the two given points cannot be filled _continuously_,
even by an infinite multitude of other points. And therefore the objection
has no force.

Nor is it true that by the creation of an infinite multitude of points
between two given points such a multitude would be an infinity _within
limits_. For the two given points are limits, or rather terms, of a local
relation, but they are no limits of the multitude, or discrete quantity,
which can be placed between them; for, without altering the position of
those two points, we can increase without end the number of the
intervening points. As volume is not a limit of density, so the distance
of two points is not the limit of the multitude that can be condensed
between them.

_Sixth objection._—All the arguments above given against the continuity of
matter are grounded on a false supposition; for they all take for granted
that _a continuum must be made up of parts_—an assumption which can be
shown to be false. For, first, in the geometric continuum there are no
actual parts; for such a continuum is not made up by composition, but is
created, such as it is, all in one piece. Whence it must be inferred that
the primitive elements of matter, though exempt, as primitive, from
composition of parts, and really simple, may yet possess extension.
Secondly, who can deny that God has the power to create a solid body as
perfectly continuous as a geometric volume? Such a body, though divisible
into any number of parts, would not be a compound; for its parts would be
merely possible, not actual; and therefore it would be simple, and yet
continuous. Thirdly, those who deny the possibility of continuous matter
admit a vacuum existing between simple points of matter. Such a vacuum is
a continuous extension intercepted between real terms, and is nothing else
than the possibility of real extension. But the real extension, which is
possible between real terms, is not, of course, a series of points
touching one another, for such a series, as all admit, is impossible. It
is, therefore, an extension really continuous, not made up of parts, but
only divisible into parts. Hence matter may be continuous and simple at
the same time.(111)

This objection tends to establish the possibility of _simple‐extended_
matter. Yet that simplicity and material extension exclude one another is
an evident truth; in other terms, material continuity, without composition
of parts, is utterly inconceivable. If, therefore, we persist in taking
for granted that a material continuum must be made up of actual parts, we
do not make a gratuitous supposition.

The three reasons adduced in the objection are far from satisfactory. The
first makes an unlawful transition from the geometric extension of volumes
to the physical extension of masses. Such a transition, we say, is
unlawful; for the geometrical extension is only _virtually_ continuous,
and therefore involves no actual multitude of parts; whereas the physical
extension of the mass of matter would be _formally_ and _materially_
continuous, thus involving a formal multitude of actual parts perfectly
distinct from one another, though united to form one continuous piece. The
geometric extension is measured by three linear dimensions, and has no
density. Now, a geometric line is nothing else than the trace of the
movement of a point; and accordingly its continuity arises from the
continuity of the movement itself, which alone is _formally_ continuous;
for the space measured by such a movement has no formal continuity of its
own, as we have already explained, but is styled “continuous” only
inasmuch as it is the region of continuous movement. There is no doubt,
therefore, that geometric extension is merely virtual in its continuity;
and for this reason it is not made up of parts of its own, but simply
corresponds to the parts of the movement by which it can be measured.
Material extension, on the contrary, would be densely filled with actual
matter, and therefore would be made up of actual parts perfectly distinct,
though not separated. To apply, as the objection does, to material
extension, what geometry teaches of the extension of volumes, is therefore
a mere paralogism. It amounts to saying: _Vacuum is free from composition;
therefore the matter also which would fill it is free from composition._

We may add that even geometric extension, if real, involves composition.
For, evidently, we cannot conceive a geometric cube without its eight
vertices, nor can we pretend that a figure requiring eight distinct points
as the terms of its dimensions is free from composition. Now, if an empty
geometric volume cannot be simple, what shall we say of a volume full of
matter? Wherever there is real extension, there are real dimensions, of
which the beginning, and the end, and all the intermediate terms are
really distinct from one another. Hence in a material extension there
should be as many distinct material terms as there are geometric points
within its limits. And if this is _simplicity_, we may well ask what is
_composition_?

The second reason adduced in the objection is a mere _petitio principii_.
For he who says that God can create “a solid body as perfectly continuous
as a geometric volume” assumes that such a continuous body involves no
contradiction; he therefore begs the question. On the other hand, to
affirm that God can create a solid body as perfectly continuous as a
geometric volume, is to affirm that God can create a body of infinite
density—that is, an infinite mass within finite dimensions. For the mass
of a body of matter is the product of its volume into its density; hence,
if its volume be finite, and its density infinite, the mass will be
infinite. Now, a body materially continuous implies infinite density; for
it excludes porosity, and it supplies matter for an endless division.
Hence a continuous mass of matter filling a finite volume would be _an
infinite mass contained within limits_. We think we are not presuming too
much when we say that God cannot create such a metaphysical monstrosity.

“Such a body,” says the objection, “though divisible into any number of
parts, would not be a compound.” This is evidently false; for all that is
divisible into parts has parts, and therefore composition. Nor is it true
that the parts of a continuous body “would be merely possible, not
actual”; for if such parts are not actual, how can the body be actual? No
actual continuum can exist without actual parts. The divisibility of
continuum is not the possibility of actual parts, but the possibility of
their actual separation.

The third reason is based on our admission of a vacuum between material
points. Such a vacuum, it is objected, is a continuous (virtual)
extension, founding the possibility of some other (formal) extension. This
we concede; but when it is argued that this other extension which is
possible between the material terms is the extension of continuous matter,
we deny the consequence. It is only continuous local movement, not
continuous matter, that can formally extend from term to term, as we have
proved. When two real points of matter have a distinct ubication in space,
the interval between them cannot be estimated otherwise than by the extent
of the movement which can be made from one point to the other. We cannot
perceive the distance between two terms, except by drawing, at least
mentally, a line from the one to the other; and for this reason, as we
have remarked elsewhere, the relation of distance is conceived by us as a
quantity measured by movement, not by matter, and representing the
extension of continuous movement, not of continuous matter. Hence a vacuum
intercepted between real points is a _real_, though only _virtual_,
extension; and that other _real_ and _formal_ extension, which is possible
between the same real points, is the extension of local movement. Our
opponent concedes that “the real extension possible between real terms is
not a series of points touching one another; for such a series, as all
admit, is impossible.” Now, this suffices to show that the real extension
possible between such real terms is not the extension of continuous
matter; for such an extension, as we have abundantly proved, would be made
up of nothing but of a series of points touching one another.

Nothing, perhaps, more evidently shows the unquestionable solidity of the
thesis we have undertaken to defend than the necessity felt by our
opponents of admitting in matter _an extended simplicity_ and a
_simplicity divisible into parts_, as witnessed by this last objection,
which we have transcribed from a grave and learned professor of
philosophy. _Extended and simple matter_ is such an absurdity as few would
admit to be a corollary of their own theories; yet it cannot be escaped by
those who consider the _first_ elements of matter as endowed with bulk.
For physical simplicity is an essential attribute of all primitive beings;
and, if primitive elements are nevertheless supposed to be intrinsically
extended, it is plain that their simplicity will be an extended
simplicity.

The main reason why some philosophers still cling to material continuity
is their fear of _actio in distans_. We have already shown that such a
fear, though very common, cannot be justified. We grant that, owing to
popular prejudice and an incorrect notion of things, many are apt to dread
action at a distance as a dangerous shoal; but when they resort to an
“extended and divisible simplicity,” they steer their ship directly
against the reefs.

To Be Continued.




Christmas In The Thirteenth Century.


Few are the hearts that do not feel the benign and joyful influence of
Christmas. It is the one feast that neither the all‐destroying zeal of the
Reformation nor the cold indifferentism of the present age has dared to
abolish or desecrate. To how many is it the sole remaining word that
reminds them of the sacred name of Christ! There _was_ a time when
Christmas was but one of the many holydays that with each succeeding month
recalled to Christian hearts some great event in the life of their divine
Master; but heresy has swept away one by one those sacked days of repose
and prayer. Even in Catholic countries the church has found it necessary
to reduce the number of Days of Obligation, so cold have grown both faith
and devotion.

Wealth and material prosperity—these are the sole ends for which a
heartless world would have us exert all our energies, and it would fain
clog with the sordid love of gain all the higher aspirations of the soul.

But we are forgetting that this is Christmas time—a time for innocent
pleasure, and not for moralizing; so, leaving the present age, with all
its faults, we will ask our readers to transport themselves with us, in
imagination, some six centuries back, and witness how was celebrated in
those Ages of Faith the holy night of the Nativity of our Lord.

The period selected is about the middle of the XIIIth century. Religion
was then in the fullest splendor of its power. It was the light of
civilization, the custodian of all learning. Every art had combined to
render its outward expression worthy of the great and holy mysteries it
taught. Gothic architecture had at this date attained its highest
perfection; painting and sculpture were almost exclusively devoted to the
decoration of God’s temples; poetry and music were united to render
attractive the sublime and rarely‐interrupted Offices of the church. The
liturgical works of the period are mines of poetic and musical riches that
for the most part lie hidden and uncared for in their musty tomes.

Some will doubtless smile when we speak of the Latin poetry of the middle
ages, and certainly those who seek in it the polished and classical verses
of a Horace or a Virgil will be disappointed. They will, however, find
that, despite their somewhat strange Latinity, these productions of a so‐
called barbarous age contain a depth of feeling, a strength and freshness
of expression, quite unknown to the pagan poets, and were as appropriate
to those grand old cathedrals under whose roofs they were to resound as
were the classic odes and songs to the luxurious banquet‐halls of Rome or
the effeminate villas of Naples. In fact, to adequately judge of the
poetry contained in the Offices of the mediæval period, we must place
ourselves amid the surroundings in which they were performed; we must
_not_ view it from the stand‐point of the present age, with its entirely
different ideas of both religious life and religious art.

It will be, then, in an old French cathedral that we shall ask our readers
to spend this Christmas night; for the office, or rather religious drama,
at which we intend to make them assist, is taken from a Roman‐French
missal of the XIIIth century.

The night has closed in. Within the city walls the tortuous and narrow
streets are nearly deserted; but lights gleam from many a diamond pane,
for inside joyous circles are gathered around the glowing logs that
brightly sparkle in the ample chimneys. Old stories are repeated by
venerable grandfathers to merry grandchildren, who in return sing with
silvery voices quaint old carols. Suddenly a well‐known sound fills the
air; from the high cathedral towers burst forth the joyous chimes that
herald the approach of Christ’s natal hour. The notes that ring out so
clearly in the cold December air are those of the familiar Christmas hymn,
_Christe Redemptor omnium_.(112) Soon a hurrying throng begin to fill the
streets, all wending their way towards the same point, through narrow and
winding streets. By gabled house and arched doorway, by mullioned window
and jutting tower, they press forward until they reach the central square,
where rises, in all its splendor, the old cathedral church.

Beautiful and imposing at all times is a Gothic cathedral, but never more
so than when the trembling light of a winter moon throws around it a soft
halo, just enough to make its grand proportions visible amid the
surrounding gloom, while leaving all the finer details wrapt in sombre
mystery. Doubly lofty appear tower and spire, and strangely weird each
fantastic gargoyle, as a stray moonbeam falls athwart its uncouth
countenance.

Let us follow the crowd, and enter beneath the richly‐sculptured doorway.
Dim is the light within, only just sufficient to find your way among the
throng that now begins to fill every part of the vast edifice. The
numerous assemblage of priests and choristers are singing the Office of
Matins, the grand old melodies of S. Gregory resounding beneath the
vaulted roof with that wonderful effect that makes them, when sung by
choir and congregation, the most truly religious music that exists. As the
last solemn notes of the _Te Deum_ die out, a white‐robed chorister‐boy
representing an angel advances into the centre of the choir, and in sweet,
clear accents chants the words of the angelic message, “Nolite timere:
ecce enim evangelizo vobis gaudium magnum, quod erit omni populo, quia
natus est vobis hodie Salvator mundi, in civitate David. Et hoc vobis
signum: Invenietis infantem pannis involutum, et positum in
præsepio”—“Fear not: for behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy,
that shall be to all the people: for this day is born to you a Saviour,
who is Christ the Lord, in the city of David. And this shall be a sign
unto you: You shall find the infant wrapped in swaddling‐clothes, and laid
in a manger.”

Then from the high triforium‐gallery seven pure young voices ring out, as
if from heaven, the words sung by the angel‐host on the first Christmas
night: “Gloria in excelsis Deo, et in terra pax hominibus bonæ
voluntatis.” These familiar words that herald the pious representation of
the holy scenes whose reality centuries ago hallowed this night in the
mountains of Judæa, are listened to by the vast congregation with rapt and
devout attention. In their simple and earnest faith the assistants feel
themselves transported back to the days of Herod and to the village of
Bethlehem, as they behold emerging from the western porch, and slowly
advancing up the nave, a train of shepherds with staves in their hands,
singing, as they proceed in search of their newborn King, the following
hymn. Both words and music are full of beauty, and the cadence is well
suited to a Christmas carol:


    Pax in terris nunciatur,
    In excelsis gloria.

    Terra cœlo fœderatur,
    Mediante gratia.
    Mediatur homo Deus
    Descendit in propria,
    Ut ascendat homo reus
    Ad amissa gaudia.
    Eia! Eia!

    Transeamus, videamus
    Verbum hoc quod factum est
    Transeamus, ut sciamus
    Quod annunciatum est.

    In Judea puer vagit,
    Puer salus populi,

    Quo bellandum se præsagit
    Vetus hostis sæculi.

    Accedamus, accedamus
    Ad præsepe Domini,

    Et dicamus:
    Laus fecundæ Virgini.

    (Peace on earth is announced, and in heaven glory,

    Earth is reconciled through divine grace. The Mediator God‐Man
    descends amongst his own, that guilty man may ascend to lost joys.

    Let us go over, let us see this word that is come to pass.

    Let us go over, that we may learn what has been announced.

    In Judæa an infant cries

    An Infant, the salvation of his people,

    By whom the ancient enemy of the world foresees he must be warred
    upon.

    Let us approach, let us approach the cradle of our Lord,

    And let us sing: Praise to the fruitful Virgin.)


A crib has been arranged at the extreme end of the choir, containing the
figure of the divine Infant and our Blessed Lady. It is surrounded by
women, to whom naturally is given the charge of watching over the Virgin
Mother and her new‐born Babe. Towards this crib the shepherds wend their
way, passing beneath the carved rood‐screen through the open portals of
the choir. Two priests advance to meet them, and greet them with the
following versicle: “Quem quæritis in præsepio, pastores, dicite?”—“Whom
seek ye in this manger, shepherds, tell us?”

They reply: “Salvatorem Christum Dominum infantem pannis involutum
secundum sermonem angelicum”—“Christ our Lord and Saviour, an infant
wrapped in swaddling‐clothes, according to the word of the angel.”

The women around the crib now draw back the curtains that have, until this
moment, kept it concealed from view, and, showing to the shepherds the
divine Infant reclining in the manger, sing these words: “Adest hic
parvulus cum matre sua de quo dudum vaticinando Isaïas dixerat propheta:
Ecce virgo concipiet et pariet filium: euntes dicite quod natus est”—“Here
is the little Child and his Mother of whom of old Isaias prophesied:
Behold, a Virgin shall conceive and bring forth a son; go forth and
announce that he is born.” The shepherds salute the Virgin and Child, and
sing the following charming little carol in honor of the Virgin Mother:


    Salve Virgo singularis;
    Virgo manens, Deum paris,
    Ante sæcla generatum
    Corde patris;

    Adoremus nunc creatum
    Carne matris.

    Nos, Maria, tua prece
    A peccati purga fece;
    Nostri cursum incolatus
    Sic dispone,
    Ut det sua frui natus
    Visione.

    (Hail, O Virgin incomparable! remaining a Virgin, thou hast
    brought forth the Son of God, begotten of his Father before all
    ages.

    Now we adore him, formed of the flesh of his Mother.

    O Mary! purify us from all stain of sin; our destined course on
    earth so dispose, that thy Son may grant us to enjoy his blessed
    vision.)


After this hymn they fall on their knees and adore the divine Babe; then,
turning towards the choir, they with joyful accents exclaim, “Alleluia,
Alleluia. Jam vere scimus Christum natum in terris, de quo canite omnes
cum prophetis dicentes”—“Now we truly know that Christ is born on earth,
let all sing of him with the prophet.” Answering to this invitation, the
choir intone the prophetic words of the introit of the midnight Mass: “The
Lord has said to me, Thou art my Son; this day I have begotten Thee.”

The priests and assistants advance slowly in procession to the foot of the
altar, and the solemn celebration of High Mass commences.

The lessons conveyed by this beautiful and symbolic representation are
happily continued when the reality of the divine mysteries has taken its
place. The priests who represented the shepherds, quitting the crib where
they were the first to do homage to the Child‐God, proceed to occupy the
most exalted places in the choir, and to take the leading parts in the
chants that accompany that Holy Sacrifice in which the same Child‐God once
more descends on earth.

Among the many impressive ceremonies of the Catholic Church, there is none
more touching than the celebration of the midnight Mass. Whether it be in
a vast cathedral or in a modest village church, it never fails to bring
home to the heart, in a wonderful manner, the realization of the two great
mysteries of the Incarnation and the Eucharist, awakening in the soul a
lively devotion towards them. If such be the effect of the sacred rite on
men who have only just quit the bustle and turmoil of life, as they enter
the church, what must it have been on minds prepared by so graphic a
representation of those very mysteries that the Mass not only
commemorates, but actually reproduces in a manner far more perfect, if
less perceptible to the outward senses.

How conspicuous, then, was the wisdom of the church in encouraging the
performance of these pious dramas—not only as affording an innocent
pleasure to the spectators, but as a preparation for the better
understanding of the sacred mysteries that were commemorated in each
succeeding feast; for on the popular mind how far more powerful than the
most eloquent sermon is the effect of any ceremony that appeals directly
to the senses!

At the termination of the Mass the officiating priest, turning towards the
shepherds, intones the following anthem: “Quam vidistis, pastores? dicite,
annunciate nobis in terris quid apparuit”—“Tell us, O shepherds, whom you
have seen? Announce to us who has appeared on earth.” To which they reply:
“Natum vidimus et choros angelorum collandantes Dominum. Alleluia,
alleluia”—“We have seen the Lord, who is born on earth, and the choirs of
angels praising him.”

The office of Lauds, which terminates the night‐office, then commences.
The shepherds, still occupying the places of honor, but divided in two
choirs, sing the poetic paraphrase which on all solemn feasts in those
days took the place of the Benedicamus and Deo Gratias. After which they
all unite in chanting the following antiphon, which forms a fitting
termination to the ceremonies of the night: “Ecce completa sunt omnia quæ
dicta sunt per angelum de Virgine Maria”—“Behold, all things are
accomplished that were announced by the angel concerning the Virgin Mary.”

Such were the pious festivities that six hundred years ago filled with joy
and devotion many a vast congregation in cathedral and church throughout
France on Christmas night. We have described them as far as they can be
gathered from the Office‐books of the period; but how many beautiful
details, handed down by tradition and introduced from time to time, must
necessarily have escaped us at this distant period! We venture to hope,
however, that we have succeeded in giving our readers at least a slight
idea of the deep religious feeling, and at the same time poetic beauty,
that characterized these sacred dramas of the middle ages.




The Civilization Of Ancient Ireland.(113)


The greatest difficulty experienced by students of Irish history, whether
foreigners or to the manner born, arises out of the crudeness of the mass
of fables and myths, contradictions and harsh criticisms, which confuse
and disfigure many histories of the country. Unfortunately, native Irish
historians and annalists have been wont to indulge much too freely in
exaggeration and romance, substituting the airy creations of the poets for
authenticated facts, and dogmatically putting forward the most minute
details of remote, and therefore necessarily indistinct, actions in a
manner to overtax our credulity and weaken our faith even in well‐
established authorities. English writers, on the contrary, from Giraldus
Cambrensis downward, have erred on the other side. Always ignorant of the
Gaelic tongue, and generally of the customs, laws, and religion of the
people whose history they assumed to chronicle, they invariably attempted
to conceal their defective knowledge by ignoring the claims of the Irish
to a distinctive and high order of civilization, not only before the
advent of the Anglo‐Normans, but anterior to the introduction of
Christianity. The want of adaptability of the English mind to historical
composition, even in relation to domestic matters, may account for much of
this unfair method of treating those of a subjugated nation. National and,
of late centuries, sectarian animosity has been, however, the leading
motive of the British historiographers, with one exception, for falsifying
the records of the past, no matter to what country they belong. To have
acknowledged that S. Patrick preached the Gospel to a race possessing
considerable social refinement and mental culture; that, under Providence,
an entire people were converted to Christianity without any material
change in their civil polity or disruption of their general domestic
relations; and that, even in his lifetime, he had the happiness to see his
work completed, and to feel that he would leave behind him a native
priesthood, whose piety and learning were for ages afterwards to edify and
astonish Europe, was to concede the glory and the wisdom of the church in
introducing and perpetuating the faith of her divine Founder at that early
period of her existence.

With the Irish historians, who fully admitted this great central fact in
the annals of their country, it was different. They knew the language,
laws, and habits of their countrymen, but the circumstances by which they
were surrounded rendered it impossible for them to consult freely the
original records then existing, or to compare and collate them with that
scrutiny and care with which documents of such antiquity ought to be
regarded. Thus, Dr. Keating wrote his work in the recesses of the Galtee
Mountains, while hiding from the “Priest‐hunters” of James I.; and the
Abbé McGeoghegan composed his while in Paris, a fugitive from William of
Orange’s penal laws, where at best he could only consult second‐hand
authorities. As for Moore, though illustrious as a poet, his knowledge of
his native country was of the most meagre and inaccurate description, and
his ignorance of its language and antiquities, as he subsequently
confessed, is apparent in every page of his book.

At the time of the Norman invasion, and for two or three centuries
afterwards, the number of Irish MSS. in Ireland, including histories,
annals, genealogies, poems, topographical and otherwise, historical tales,
and legends, was immense. Many of them, fortunately, are still extant,
bearing date from the Xth, XIth, and XIIth centuries; but the greater
portion are either destroyed or hidden in inaccessible places. As the
civil wars progressed, and the ancient nobility were slaughtered or driven
into exile, the cultivation of native literature gradually ceased, and
consequently many of the most valuable national records were ruined or
lost, so that their titles only remain to us; while others, escaping the
general spoliation, became scattered among the libraries of the Continent,
or found their way into careless or hostile hands. At the present day
several are in the British Museum; the Bodleian Library, Oxford; in Paris
and Brussels; St. Gall, in Switzerland; and St. Isidore’s, in Rome. One
hundred and forty are yet preserved in the library of Trinity College,
Dublin; while many of the most valuable are the property of the Royal
Irish Academy and of private collectors.

The decline of learning in Ireland, like so many of her other calamities,
can be dated from the period of the “Reformation,” as its revival may be
said to have been contemporary with the uprising of the people, which led
to the partial emancipation of the Catholics, less than half a century
ago. Then it was that the Irish, breathing something like the air of
freedom, began in earnest to gather up the broken threads of their ancient
history, and to demonstrate to the world that, though long enslaved and
silenced, the spirit of true nationality was as indestructible in their
hearts as was the faith for which they had so long and heroically
suffered. In 1826 appeared O’Conor’s translation of the first part of the
_Annals of the Four Masters_; some years after Dr. Petrie published his
masterly work on the _Round Towers_, and in 1851 Dr. O’Donovan issued the
entire _Annals_, the great vertebræ of Irish chronology, in seven large
volumes, containing more than four thousand pages; the text in Irish
characters, the translation and copious, critical notes in English. Late
in the next year a commission of Irish scholars was appointed by the
government to collect, transcribe, translate, and publish the _Ancient
Laws and Institutes of Ireland_, which, after a great deal of labor and
expense, has now been accomplished. The first volume of this most valuable
work appeared under the title of _Senchus Mor_, in 1865, the second four
years later, and the third, we learn, has recently been issued from the
press in Dublin. Meanwhile, the Celtic and the Archæological Societies,
separately and combined, for many years past have been publishing several
valuable detached works on Ireland, which have attracted much attention in
literary circles in Europe, and quickened at home the popular desire for
productions of a similar character. In 1867 Dr. Todd’s _Wars of the
Gaedhil with the Gaill_, a translation of all the original documents
extant bearing on the wars of the Danes and other Norsemen in Ireland
during the two centuries preceding the battle of Clontarf, A.D. 1014, was
added to the collection of historical records.

But the merit of elevating the study of Irish history to the dignity of a
profession belongs to the Catholic University of Ireland; thus
constituting a claim on the affections of the Irish people in every clime
which will long remain among the foremost of its many distinctions. At its
foundation a chair of Irish History and Archæology was established, and
the late Eugene O’Curry, of all men then living the most fitted for the
position, was selected to fill it. In 1855‐56 Prof. O’Curry delivered
before the students a course of twenty‐one lectures, afterwards published
at the expense of the University under the title of _Lectures on the MS.
Materials of Ancient Irish History_. This work, including a valuable
appendix, embraces six hundred and sixty pages, and contains a full and
most interesting account of all known documents relating to Irish history.
These lectures were followed by a series _On the Manners and Customs of
the Ancient Irish_, delivered during the years 1857‐62, and recently
published in two handsome volumes, with an introduction and explanatory
notes by the editor, W. K. Sullivan, in an additional volume of six
hundred and forty‐four pages. The value of O’Curry’s last work, as well as
of the very profound introduction by Prof. Sullivan, can hardly be over‐
estimated. In them are contained a complete, vivid, and harmonious series
of pictures of the laws, religion, territorial and class divisions,
literature, art, social habits, weapons, dress, and ornaments of the
people of ancient Ireland from the remotest times to the Xth or XIth
century. The style of O’Curry in presenting these instructive historical
tableaux is clear, concise, and sufficiently varied to attract the
attention of the least diligent student; while any of his statements which
may appear to savor of an over‐fondness for the things of antiquity, or
undue reverence for the past, find an efficient corrective in the critical
and exhaustive commentaries of the editor, who, in addition to being a
distinguished chemist, is evidently an excellent philologist and
ethnologist; as familiar with the genius of the continental languages and
antiquities as he is with those of his own country.

With the results of the labor of two such men before him, the student of
Irish history, though unacquainted with Gaelic, and beyond the reach of
the original documents, has now no excuse for not becoming as familiar
with Gaelic historical and archæological lore as with those of the other
races of the Old World. He will be rewarded, also, in his studies, by the
contemplation of a system of civilization without a parallel in the
records of any other nation of which we have a knowledge; equally removed
from the elaborate, artificial life of the Greeks and the oligarchical
paganism of Rome, as it was from the rude barbarism of the Northmen and
the refined sensuality of the East.

Before the commencement of our era the history of the various tribes who
are said by tradition to have visited Ireland as colonists or invaders is,
of course, obscure, and can be traced only through the legend‐tales of the
poets and story‐tellers of more recent but still very remote times. There
is no doubt, however, that about the middle of the first Christian century
the island was peopled by two distinct and to some extent hostile tribes;
one described as a tall, red or golden haired, blue‐eyed, and fair‐
complexioned people; the other dark and small of stature—evidently the
subject race. About this time a revolution, or rather a series of revolts,
by those known by the name of the _Aithech Tuatha_, or rent‐paying tribes
(the _Atticotti_ of continental writers), broke out, and resulted in the
temporary success of the servile race and the annihilation of the greater
part of the nobility. The aristocracy, however, regained their power after
some years of violent and varying struggle, and to prevent the recurrence
of such bloody scenes, as well as to disunite their enemies, they
redistributed them throughout the island, while at the same time they
built a number of duns, or forts within easy supporting distance of each
other, the better to consolidate their authority and ensure the protection
of their families.

The leader of the restored nobles was Tuathal, “the Legitimate,” who,
having been declared King of Ireland, reorganized the government, founded
the Irish Pentarchy, established great national and provincial fairs, and
enacted the greater part, at least, of the body of laws known as the
_Senchas Mor_. He was in fact the first able soldier, as well as law‐
giver, of whom we have any definite and well‐authenticated account in
Gaelic history. As the country at that time, and for centuries after, was
essentially agricultural, we naturally find that the laws of Tuathal and
his successors are mainly devoted to agrarian matters; the divisions,
rights, and duties of the various classes of occupants of the soil being
set forth with a minuteness and exactness rarely to be found in modern
codes. Politically, the island was divided into five subordinate kingdoms,
nearly corresponding with the present four provinces, except that the
fifth, which was called Meath, embraced not only that county, but
Westmeath and a portion of the surrounding territory. Here were situated
Tara, the principal palace of the _Ard‐Rig_, or supreme monarch, and the
mensal land set apart for his use. Sometimes the _Ard‐Rig_ was also King
of Meath, but generally, as in the cases of Con “of the Hundred Battles,”
Nial, “of the Nine Hostages,” and Brian, “Boru,” he was the head of some
of the great northern or southern septs. In theory the sovereignty was
elective, and by the law of Tanistry the king’s successor was designated
during his lifetime; but in practice, when the crown did not descend
hereditarily, it was most frequently the prize of successful warfare. The
same may also be said of the provincial kings. There appears to have been
no such thing known in that age as a Salic law for the exclusion of women
from a participation in the affairs of government; for we find numerous
instances of kingdoms being swayed and armies led into action by the
gentler sex, notably the celebrated Meave, the Queen of Connaught, and the
darling heroine of Irish fiction.

The provincial kingdoms were divided into _Mor Tuaths_, each of which
comprised several _Tuaths_, and these again were sub‐divided into _Bailé
Biatachs Caethramhadhs_, or quarters; _Seisreachs_, or ploughlands; and
_Bailé‐boes_, or cow‐lands, each of the latter containing about sixty
acres. According to a poem of the VIth or VIIth century, there were in
Ireland at that epoch 184 Tuaths; 5,520 Bailé Biatachs; 22,080 Quarters;
66,240 Plough‐lands; and 132,480 Ballyboes—equal to about 7,948,000 acres.
The lowest rank in the nobility was that of _Flath_, or lord of a _Tuath_;
the highest in the commons were the _Bo‐aires_, or farmers who, though
they held lands from the _Flath_, were freemen, entitled to all the rights
and privileges of witnesses, jurors, bails, and local courts. Next beneath
them were the _saer_ and _daer Ceiles_, or free and base tenants. As there
were no towns or villages of any importance, the rules of the agrarian
laws were applied to all classes, and hence skilled workmen, such as
goldsmiths, blacksmiths, dyers, and other mechanics, were, equally with
the smaller tenant farmers, called free _Ceiles_, holding by contract from
the _Flaths_, and paying in labor or kind a determined equivalent. The
base _Ceiles_ were of two kinds—one who held lands by uncertain tenure, or
as tenants at will; and the other, who performed personal service as
mercenary soldiers or laborers upon the mensal lands of the lord. “Though
the free _Ceiles_ were all freemen,” says Sullivan, “and consequently
possessed some political rights, it is evident that the extent of those
rights differed. In some cases they must have been confined to bearing
arms and obtaining a share of the common land. All _Ceiles_, whether free
or base, had certain definite rights in the territory, such as the right
to have a habitation and the usufruct of the land; but besides these were
several other classes, who possessed either very few rights, or occupied
so low a position in the social scale as to have been practically in a
state of complete servitude; these were the _Bothachs_, _Sencleithes_, and
_Fuidirs_.” The _saer_ or free _Bothachs_ were simply occupiers of cabins,
and the _daer Bothachs_ were menials; while the _Sencleithes_ included all
sorts of poor dependents, generally the descendants of strangers,
mercenaries, or prisoners of war. The _Fuidirs_, to whom S. Patrick in his
captivity belonged, were absolutely serfs attached to the land, and in
some respects the property of the chief. It was only a _Flath_, however,
who was entitled to retain those belonging to the three servile classes;
and where the condition grew out of mutual compact, it could be ended by
either at any time. Prisoners of war, malefactors, and non‐paying debtors,
similar to peons, were of course excluded from this privilege. Those
various classes and sub‐divisions did not constitute perpetual castes; on
the contrary, a member of the lowest order, through lapse of time,
undisturbed possession, and the accumulation of property, could ascend,
not only to the highest place in the commons, but enter the charmed circle
of aristocracy itself.

It must not be supposed, however, that the entire ownership of the soil
was vested in the _Mor‐Flaths_, or great chiefs; in fact, they only owned
their proper estate and the mensal lands attached to their office, upon
which were employed their _Ceiles_ and _Fuidirs_, who tilled the farms and
paid rent by supplying their masters’ tables, and by other tributes. In
like manner the subordinate _Flaths_ and _Airés_ held their own proper
lands in fee, paying their superior a tax, or _Bes‐Tigi_, in
acknowledgment of his authority, and exacting labor and service in turn
from their _Bothachs_, _Sencleithes_, and base _Fuidirs_. The remainder of
the land belonged to the freemen of the _Tuath_ in common, subject only to
the dominion of the chief, though on certain conditions the usufruct could
be devised or alienated. “In process of time,” says Sullivan, “estates
were carved out of this public land, as appanages of offices, as rewards
for public services, or by lapsing into prescription. The holders of such
estates were the _Aires_, and as such were in an especial manner the
_Céiles_ of the _Rig_. The king, with the consent of his council, might,
however, grant a portion of it as allodium at once. It is probable that
Magh Aié, now the plains of Boyle, in Roscommon, was public land.” Around
the duns or fortified residences of the chiefs their retainers and menials
built their wattled huts for the sake of convenience and protection, and
thus were formed the nuclei of so many towns and villages still marked on
the map of Ireland, of the names of which _Dun_ forms a part; just as in
later times the early Irish Christians crowded round the churches and
monasteries, and, thus forming new communities, took the names of their
patrons with the prefix _Kil_, derived from _Cill_, church. Another class
of subjects, artisans, farmers, and teachers, were to be found in the
neighborhood of the courts of law and permanent places for elections, who,
forming corporations or guilds, gradually laid the foundation of boroughs
and privileged towns, under the management of _Brugfers_, or magistrates.

There were several degrees of rank among these officials. Some, whose duty
was confined to the regulation of copartnerships in farms and the fixing
of metes and bounds; others who held courts in their own houses,
entertained guests, and presided over the election of the chiefs and their
_Tanistes_. This class belong to the _Airé_ rank, and every freeman had
the right to vote at the assembly of the _Tuath_, and appear as a witness,
juror, or bail in court. The _Brughfer_ of a province held six different
courts, and superintended the choice of the provincial king and his
successor. On these occasions the voters were all of the _Flath_ rank, and
were supposed to represent their clans or _Finés_. This term, though
literally meaning a house or family, was in law used in three different
senses: first, as applied to all relations by consanguinity to the
seventeenth degree, who were entitled to inherit property, as well as
being liable for fines and mulcts; secondly, to the lord and his
dependents; and, thirdly, to all the inhabitants of a _Tuath_, no matter
of what condition. So, also, the word _Cland_, or clan, which, in its
restricted meaning, was applied only to the nobles and their immediate
families, was in its territorial application interpreted to signify all
the people of the same district, who usually assumed the surname of the
chief, though no relationship existed between him and them. There is
therefore no more reason to suppose that an O’Brien or a Murphy of to‐day
is descended from the victor of Clontarf or the traitor of Ferns, than
that his ancestors were _Fuidirs_ under either of those kings. In fact,
family names were only generally introduced into Ireland in the XIth
century.

With few exceptions, the punishment of crime under the ancient laws of the
country was by fine, so that jails and penitentiaries were unknown. This
fine, or _eric_, was paid by the criminal, or by his _Finé_ or clan, to
the party aggrieved or his representative, and upon failure thereof the
culprit was reduced to the condition of a _Fuidir_. The servile classes,
who had no goods, could not, of course, be fined or further degraded; but
their lords were compelled to respond in damages, and in case of injury
done to his defenceless tenants the landlord was entitled to compensation.
In the _Senchus Mor_, “every nice offence bears its comment,” according to
the enormity of the crime and the rank of plaintiff and defendant; so, in
one sense at least, every man in Erinn may be said to have had his price.
The courts in which those _erics_ were levied seemed to have been
organized on a very just plan, and their procedure exhibits marked germs
of our present jury system—or trial by a certain number of neighbors and
equals.

Minor causes were tried in the courts of the _Tuaths_ or _Aires_, but
greater ones were determined at the provincial assemblies, which appear to
have exercised both legislative and judicial functions. The absence of
cities or stationary places of barter was supplied by the institution of
vast provincial fairs, held at stated times and in central localities. The
most famous of these were that of _Tailté_ in Meath, _Ailech_ in Derry,
and _Carman_ at Wexford. The latter, which took place in August of every
third year, was the most extensive, as well as the most ancient; its
origin lying far back in the mythical ages, and its discontinuance dating
so late as the XIth century. For some strange reason these great national
fairs were invariably held in pagan cemeteries, and in ante‐Christian
times were always commenced with games and funeral ceremonies, closing
with horse‐racing, martial and athletic sports. According to the ancient
chronicle, there were three markets at each fair, viz.:

“A market for food and clothes; a market for live‐stock, cows and horses,
etc.; a market of foreigners and exiles, selling gold and silver, etc. The
professors of every art, both the noble arts and the base arts, and non‐
professionals, were there, selling and exhibiting their compositions and
their professional works to kings, and rewards were given for every work
of art that was just or lawful to be sold or exhibited or listened to.”

The most important business of the assembly, however, consisted of the
making of new laws and the revision of old ones for the province for the
three succeeding years; and, as the _Rig_ and his officers were always in
attendance, the hearing and decision of serious causes on appeal from the
inferior courts. In the presence of the sovereign and his court the
greatest order and decorum were enjoined, and whoever was found to disturb
the public peace by violence or fraud was summarily condemned to death;
the offence being in some sort adjudged treason, and not condonable by
_eric_ fine. The time not devoted to law‐making, trials, and traffic was
occupied in amusement and various sorts of pastimes; and if the ancient
people of Erinn had as much relish for fun and frolic as their
descendants, we can well imagine what mirth, sociability and interchange
of opinions must have prevailed among such a light‐hearted multitude,
whose only opportunity for enjoyment and mutual recognition occurred every
third year. An old poem, “which,” says O’Curry, “I believe to have been
contemporary with the last celebration of the feast, if not of even a more
ancient date,” thus enumerates the different classes of persons who
attended on such occasions, and the intellectual wares they brought with
them for the delectation of the gathering:


    “Trumpets, _Cruits_,(114) wide‐mouthed horns,
    _Cusigs Timpanists_, without weariness,
    Poets and petty rhymesters;

    “Fenian tales of Find(115)—an untiring entertainment—
    Destructions, cattle‐preys, courtships,
    Inscribed tablets and books of trees,(116)
    Satires and sharp‐edged runes;

    “Proverbs, maxims, royal precepts,
    And the youthful instruction of Fithal;
    Occult poetry, topographical etymologies,
    The precepts of Cairpri and of Cormac;

    “The Feasts, and the great Feast of Teamar;
    Fairs, with the fair of Emania,
    Annals there are verified,
    Every division into which Erin was divided.”


The Feast of _Teamair_, or Tara, here alluded to as having constituted one
of the subjects of the recitations at _Carman_, was also triennial, but of
a different nature, and involving much higher occupations than those of
the provincial fairs or feasts. It was an assembly of the subordinate
kings and the nobles for elective, legislative, and judicial purposes;
but, though nominally held every three years, was in reality celebrated as
often as a new king was to be crowned, a general public law to be
promulgated, or when some extraordinary occasion demanded the presence of
the chiefs and _Rigs_ before the supreme monarch. Again, many years are
known to have elapsed without an assembly or _Feis_, owing to the
existence of internal dissensions or foreign invasions. This assembly is
said to have owed its origin to _Tuathal_ the Legitimate, and it is
certain that it only ceased to be held when Tara was abandoned as a royal
residence in the VIIth century. The court of the _Ard‐Rig_ on such
occasions was not only attended by the provincial magnates and, in pagan
times, by the chief Druids, but by their followers, poets, doctors, and
historians, with their respective household guards. It was a knowledge of
this custom, doubtless, that led S. Patrick to select the hill of Tara as
the place, and the assembly of the _Feis_ as the fitting occasion, upon
which to disclose to the darkened minds of the whole people the splendid
truths of Christianity.

The palace and adjoining houses of ancient Tara, judging by the extensive
traces of their foundations yet remaining, must have been built on a very
large scale; but as they were constructed entirely of wood, the buildings
proper have long since disappeared. Still, we have accounts, more or less
authentic, that collectively they were able to afford shelter and
accommodation to many thousands of visitors, and that the barracks alone
allowed quarters for twenty‐four thousand soldiers. Of the style of
architecture of the king’s house we have no description, save that it was
rectangular, and that its principal room or hall, which was used for
deliberations as well as for feasts, was profusely ornamented with
carvings in gold, silver, and bronze. Before the introduction of
Christianity all buildings were of wood, some square or rectangular,
others oval or round. Those of the higher classes were made of solid logs,
but the smaller farmers and laborers dwelt in huts made of interlaced
wattles or twigs, the interstices closed by mortar made with wet earth and
straw. Stone structures were unknown before S. Patrick’s time; for, though
lime was used as a wash for the interior and exterior of houses, its
employment as a cement dates from the Christian ages. Hence there are no
pagan ruins to be found in the country. The Round Towers, now proven
beyond doubt to have been church belfries, are the most ancient stone
memorials existing. It may be also remembered that the Druids had no such
places of worship as temples or covered sanctuaries, and whatever rites
they performed must have been celebrated in the open air. Indeed, our
knowledge of those mysterious people and of their equally occult religious
system is merely of a negative character; for, as O’Curry says:


    “We only know that they worshipped idols from such examples as
    that of the idol gods taken into the Druid’s bed, so as to
    influence his visions, as described in Cormac’s _Glossary_, and
    that of the invocation of the idols in the case of the _Teinm
    Laeghdha_; and we know that in certain ceremonies they made use of
    the yew‐tree, the quicken or roan‐tree, and of the black‐thorn, as
    in the instance of the ordeal or test of a woman’s character by
    means of fire made of these sacred woods. That the people of
    ancient Erinn were idolaters is certain, for they certainly adored
    the great idol called _Crom Cruagh_, in the plain called _Magh
    Slecht_, as I showed on a former occasion. But it is remarkable
    that we find no mention of any connection between this idol and
    the Druids, or any other class of priests or special idol‐servers.
    We have only the record of the people, generally, assembling at
    times to do honor to the idol creation. As little, unfortunately,
    do we know of the organization of the order of the Druids, if they
    were indeed an order. They certainly were not connected as such
    with the orders of learned men or profession of teachers, such as
    before explained. The Druids were often, however, engaged in
    teaching, as has been seen; and it would appear that kings and
    chiefs, as well as learned men, were also frequently Druids,
    though how or why I am not in a position to explain with certainty
    at present.... I have refrained from suggesting any theory of my
    own on the subject. This negative conclusion, nevertheless, I will
    venture to draw from the whole: that, notwithstanding the
    singularly positive assertions of many of our own as well as of
    English writers upon the subject, there is no ground whatever for
    believing the Druids to have been the priests of any special
    positive worship; none whatever for imputing to them human
    sacrifices; none whatever for believing that the early people of
    Erinn adored the sun, moon, or stars, nor that they worshipped
    fire; and still less foundation for the ridiculous inventions of
    modern times (inventions of pure ignorance), concerning honors
    paid to brown bulls, red cows, or any other cows, or any of the
    lower animals.”


Next in rank and social importance, if not the equals or superiors of the
Druids, were the _Ollamhs_, or doctors, the _Files_, or poets, and the
_Brehons_ or judges. In the earliest ages these three classes were all
included under the term _Fileadh_, poets, who not only professed
philosophy, such as it then was, but recorded history and chronology in
verse, and expounded the laws so preserved, in the various local courts
and tribunals. A tendency, however, to mystify and confuse the statutes of
Tuathal and his successors, led to the expulsion of the children of song
from the forum, while the offices about the sovereign, when grave matters
were to be considered, fell to the lot of the philosophers. This latter
class had also an especial charge of educational matters, and usually
superintended personally the training of the children of the _Rigs_ and
chiefs. The _Ard‐Rig_, the provincial kings, and the _Flaths_ had their
own philosophers, poets, and judges, with their special duties assigned
them. Of the first, besides making and preserving regular records, “they
were bound by the same laws,” says O’Curry, “to make themselves perfect
masters of that history in all its details, and to teach it to the people
by public recitals, as well as to be legal referees upon all subjects in
dispute concerning history and the genealogies.” No person could be a
_Brehon_ without first becoming an _Ollamh_, and twelve years’ study was
required for that honor. But the poets, like their tribe in every land and
age, were the nobly honored and the most privileged of any order in the
government. They flattered kings and satirized them with impunity, charmed
the masses with the melody of their songs and the fertility of their
imagination; but, while they were generally on the side of popular liberty
in their verses, they were always to be found at the tables of the nobles,
where good cheer and rich largesses awaited them. However, as their poems
were the only vehicles through which the history, traditions, and even
laws of the nation could possibly have been transmitted to us, we owe them
too much to blame their amiable weaknesses. Like the teacher, when the
_File_ travelled about the country he was accompanied by his pupils, and
every hospitality was shown to him and them, partly from love of his
calling, and not seldom through dread of his satires. Many instances are
recorded in popular tales of the dire effects of the poet’s wrath, of
which sickness, loss of property and reputation, were among the least.

In connection with the courts we find two classes of paid advocates, one
the _Ebe_, attorney, and the other the _Aighne_, or counsellor. When it is
remembered that slander and libel were offences severely punished in the
Brehon courts by _eric_ fine, we can admire the grim humor which
discriminated against the attorneys, who, as the wise law‐givers of old
argued, being professional libellers of other men, had no right to exact a
fine when their own characters were assailed.

The custom of fosterage, about which so much unfavorable comment has been
made by modern ill‐informed writers, is fully and clearly explained by
O’Curry, who classes it as a part of the educational system of the
country, and not, as some erroneously suppose, the partial desertion of
children by their parents. In Lecture XVII. he asserts:


    “We have ample proof that this fosterage was not a mere
    indiscriminate custom among all classes of the people, nor in any
    case one merely confined to the bare physical nurture and rearing
    of the child, which in early infancy was committed to the care of
    a nurse and her husband; but that the fosterhood was generally
    that of a whole family or tribe, and that in very many cases it
    became a bond of friendship and alliance between two or more
    tribes, and even provinces. In those cases the fosterers were not
    of the common class, poor people glad to perform their nursing for
    mere pay, and whose care extended to physical rearing only. On the
    contrary, it is even a question, and one not easily settled,
    whether the term nursing, in the modern acceptation of the word,
    should be applied at all to the old Gaelic fosterage, and whether
    the term pupilage would not be more appropriate.... The old Gaelic
    fosterage extended to the training and education, not only of
    children up to the age of fourteen, but sometimes of youths up to
    that of seventeen years.”


One of the chief duties of the foster‐father was the military training of
the young chieftains. This consisted principally of the management of the
horse, either in pairs for the chariot or singly for riding, the use of
the casting spear and sling, and the sword exercise. Of strategy the
ancient Irish soldiers had no idea, and very little of tactics; so that
their battles were hand‐to‐hand combats, and therefore bloody and
generally decisive. Their weapons of bronze or iron, many fine specimens
of which we examined years ago in the museum of the Royal Irish Academy,
still exhibit evidences of high finish and excellent temper. We do not
find any mention of cavalry in the accounts handed down to us of the
various battles fought in the earlier centuries, and very slight allusions
to defensive armor. Ornaments of gold and other precious metals, such as
crowns, collars, torque rings, and shield‐bosses, were worn in great
profusion and variety, not only by nobles and generals, but by ordinary
officers; in fact, so gorgeous are the poets’ descriptions of the
decorations of their favorite heroes that we might be inclined to accuse
them of gross exaggeration had we not also been shown some magnificent
antiques of this description, in a perfect state of preservation, by the
gentlemen of the academy during several visits made to that depository of
Irish antiquities. Some of these valuable decorations are made of native
ore, but by far the greater number were manufactured out of the spoils of
war—the plunder wrested from the adjacent islands and the coast of France
by the numerous expeditions that were fitted out in Ireland in the three
or four centuries preceding S. Patrick’s mission.

The dress of the higher classes was, it seems, equally magnificent, and
each rank was distinguished, not only by the peculiar shape of its
garments, but by the number of colors allowed to be worn. Thus, servants
had one color; farmers, two; officers, three; women, four; chiefs, five;
_ollamhs_ and _files_, six; kings and queens, seven; and, according to the
ancient records, bishops of the Christian Church were afterwards allowed
to use all these combined. Red, brown, and crimson, with their shades and
compounds, were the colors generally used; green, yellow, blue, and black
sometimes, but not frequently. Prof. Sullivan, in that part of his
introduction treating of the various dye‐stuffs used in ancient Ireland,
takes occasion to dissipate some popular errors with regard to national
colors. He says:


    “Garments dyed yellow with saffron are constantly spoken of by
    modern writers as characteristic of the Irish. There is no
    evidence, however, that saffron was at all known by the ancient
    Irish, and _Lenas_ or _Inars_ of a yellow color are only mentioned
    two or three times in the principal tales. From what has been
    shown in the _Lectures_ and in this _Introduction_ about the color
    of the ancient Irish dress, it will be evident that there was no
    national as distinguished from clan color for the _Lena_; a
    saffron‐dyed one, if at all used in ancient times, would be
    peculiar to a single clan.”


The _Lena_ here spoken of was an inner garment which hung down to the
knees like a modern kilt, usually made of linen, and sometimes interwoven
with threads of gold. In addition to this were worn a shirt, or _Leine_; a
cloak (_Brat_); an _Inar_, or jacket; _Triubhas_, or trowsers; a _Bor_, or
conical hat; and _Cuarans_, or shoes made of raw‐hide. The costume of the
women differed little from that of the men, except that they discarded the
_triubhas_, and wore their _lenas_ and _leines_ longer. “They were,
however,” says Sullivan, “distinguished from the men by wearing a veil,
which covered the head. This veil was the _Caille_, which formed an
essential part of the legal contents of a lady’s work‐bag. In a passage
from the laws, quoted in the _Lectures_, it is called ‘a veil of one
color’; as if variegated ones were sometimes used.... The white linen
cloth still worn by nuns represents exactly both the Irish _Caille_ and
the German _Hulla_.” In many other respects, besides the matter of dress,
women were placed on a footing nearly equal to that of men in those remote
times; and if their liberal and respectful treatment may be considered one
of the tests of civilization, the old Gaels were in refinement far in
advance of any other race in pagan Europe, and indeed of many of our own
times. We find women not only taking part in public affairs as rulers and
generals, but as Druidesses, judges, poets, and teachers. At Tara and the
great provincial fairs a separate portion of the grounds was assigned
them, so that they could observe the games and enjoy the amusements
without interruption; while in the homes of the _Rigs_ and chiefs the best
rooms, and sometimes an entire building, called _Grianan_, or sunny house,
was exclusively reserved for their use. Most of the principal places in
the country, such as the locations of the great fairs and the sites of
royal palaces, were named in their honor, as well as the mountains and
rivers and other objects in nature suggestive of symmetry, beauty, and
elegance. We also read in the _Senchus Mor_ several very minute and
stringent laws protecting their rights of person and property, assigning
their dowry before marriage and their separate ownership of property
afterwards. They were, in fact, to a great extent pecuniarily independent
of their husbands; and though polygamy was tolerated and divorce allowed
in pagan times, they were so hedged in by restrictions and conditions that
it is more than probable little advantage was taken of the latitude thus
afforded both parties.

Being almost exclusively an agricultural people, with very little commerce
with the outward world, the food of the ancient Irish was confined to the
natural productions of the soil, flesh‐meat, milk, and fish. Wheat, spelt‐
wheat, barley, and oats were produced in abundance, while cattle were so
plentiful and so general an article of traffic that in the absence of coin
they formed the currency of the country, and in them fines were paid and
taxes levied. Butter, milk, and cheese were luxuries, but vegetables, such
as leeks, onions, and water‐cresses, were to be found growing in the
garden of the lowest _Fuidir_. Beer, likewise, appears to have been the
popular drink. Imported wine and native mead, distilled from honey, were
considered the aristocratic beverages of the period. That large quantities
of the latter were consumed at the triennial feasts there can be no doubt,
judging from the tales of the poets; and it was on occasions when it was
circling round the board that the _Cruits_ (harps), _Timpans_, or violins,
and _Cruiscach_, or pipes, the three principal musical instruments of the
Gaels, came into play. The poets, too, were there to sing their songs of
love and war, and the historians to recite the traditions of the tribes of
Erinn. It is not positively known whether the pagan Irish had a written
language or alphabet. O’Curry is disposed to believe they had, while
Sullivan is of opinion that letters and writing were introduced with
Christianity, and that previous to S. Patrick’s time all teaching in the
ancient schools was oral, and the genealogies and histories were committed
to memory and transmitted from father to son. They both, however, agree
that there was a system of writing known only to the initiated, now called
_Ogham_, which was inscribed on prepared wood, and engraved on monuments
and tombstones, many of which latter, though still well preserved, are
illegible to the best antiquarian scholars. The ancient Gaels, like their
descendants, had a special reverence for their dead, and indulged in
protracted wakes, as well as extensive funerals. In pagan days their
funeral ceremonies were most elaborate, but in Christian times these gave
way to the solemn offices of the church. Each person was buried according
to his rank while living; the corpse was deposited deep in the ground, and
a cairn or mound of earth and stone was erected over the grave to mark the
spot. We have no reason to suppose that they had even the faintest notion
of a future life or of the immortality of the soul, their mythology
limiting the supernatural to celebrated _Tuatha da Danians_, real
personages, who had left the surface to inhabit the bowels of the earth,
and to fairies, the “good people” of the modern peasantry.

Those, then, were the people, computed to have been about three millions
in number in his time, to whom S. Patrick preached the New Law, and whose
complete conversion and subsequent undying attachment to Catholicity have
puzzled as well as confounded the enemies of the church. Though pagans,
they were neither barbarous nor over‐superstitious, and their ready
appreciation and acceptance of God’s mysterious and elaborate Word is the
best proof that their hearts were pure and their minds active and
comprehensive.




Robespierre.


The father of the great revolutionary demagogue was an advocate at Arras,
a peaceful citizen, who had nothing about him in character or manners to
suggest that he was to be the parent of the monster known to history as
the tiger‐man. Nay, so little of ferocity was there about the worthy
advocate that, when his wife died, he nearly went melancholy‐mad for
grief, and in his despair left his native town, and took to wandering
about France, then beyond it to Germany and England, where he finally
died. There are, it is true, some ill‐natured local chronicles extant
which pretend that it was not so much grief as debt that drove the
disconsolate widower into exile; and this harsh and unpoetic version is
supported by the fact of his having, by his flight, abandoned to
loneliness and utter destitution the three little children, two boys and a
girl, whom the wife he so bitterly lamented had left to his paternal care.
Maximilien Marie Isidore, the eldest of the three, was born on the 6th of
April, 1760. The solitary position and the poverty of the deserted
children attracted the compassion of some kind persons of the town, and
notably that of the _curé_ of the parish, who sent Maximilien to school,
where soon, by dint of hard work and intelligence, the boy shot ahead of
all his class fellows, and justified the predictions of friends that he
would make a name for himself in whatever trade or calling he embraced.
The Bishop of Arras, Mgr. de Conzié, was also interested in the little
fellow; his industry and desolate poverty making a claim on the prelate’s
paternal notice. He used his influence with the abbot of the famous Abbey
of Waast to grant Maximilien one of the abbatial _bourses_ at the College
of Louis le Grand, in Paris. The very first steps in life of the future
persecutor of priests and religion were thus guided by the hand of the
church, his poverty enriched, his orphanhood fathered, by her charity. The
Abbé Proyart, then president of Louis le Grand, continued to the poor
provincial student the fostering kindness of those worthy ecclesiastics
who had placed him under his charge. Maximilien was also at this time
largely assisted and most kindly befriended by the Abbé de la Roche, a
canon of Notre Dame, who, all through the period of the young man’s
studies in Paris, kept watch over him, and showed him the most sincere and
delicate affection. When at the age of nineteen, Maximilien left the
college, the Abbé de la Roche used his influence to secure the vacant
_bourse_ for the younger brother, Augustin Robespierre, and succeeded.
Maximilien was called to the bar very soon after leaving Paris, and began
at once to excite attention by his talent as a speaker. The first mention
we find of his forensic success is in 1783, when he was engaged in a case
against the corporation of St. Omer, a small town near Arras, in behalf of
a gentleman who had erected a lightning‐conductor on his house, and been
prosecuted on account of it, and condemned by the corporation. He appealed
to the higher court of Arras. Robespierre pleaded his cause, and won a
triumphant reversal of the first verdict. We find a note of this incident
in the _Memoires de Bachaumont_: “The cause about the _paratonnerre_ has
been before our court three days, and has been pleaded by M. de
Robespierre, a young lawyer of extraordinary merit; he has displayed in
this affair—which was, in fact, the cause of art and science against
prejudice—a degree of eloquence and sagacity that gives the highest idea
of his talents. He had a complete triumph; on the 31st day of May the
court reversed the sentence, and permitted M. de Boisvale to re‐erect his
_paratonnerre_.” Robespierre was just three‐and‐twenty at this date. He is
styled _de_ Robespierre by the writer, and had assumed the _particule
noble_ at a much earlier date; he is entered at college with it, and at
the bar, and was elected to the States‐General as _de_ Robespierre. The
pretentious prefix cost him dear, as we shall see; it afforded a poisoned
shaft to Camille Desmoulins long after the Regenerator of the people had
erased the feudal particle from his signature. But these were sunny days,
when he might use it with impunity, and even to some advantage. The young
advocate was courted and admired, and made welcome in clubs and drawing‐
rooms; he wrote essays and won prizes from learned societies, thus
establishing a literary as well as legal reputation. He even aspired to be
a poet, and addressed sonnets to ladies of fashion at Arras, which gained
him the smiles of the Ariadnes and Arachnes that he sang to, and caused
him to be rallied as a squire of dames. This time of merry dalliance,
however, soon came to an end, and graver ambitions began to open out
before Robespierre. He was elected member of the States‐General. M.
Dumont, the distinguished journalist, gives a lively description of the
figure made by the “avocat, de Robespierre,” in one of the earliest
sittings of that Assembly: “The clergy, for the purpose of surprising the
Tiers Etat into a union of the orders, sent a deputation to invite the
Tiers to a conference on the distresses of the poor. The Tiers saw through
the design, and, not willing to acknowledge the clergy as a separate body,
yet afraid to reject so charitable and popular a proposition, knew not
what answer to make, when one of the deputies, after concurring in the
description of the miseries of the people, rose and addressed the
ecclesiastical deputation: ‘Go tell your colleagues that, if they are so
anxious to relieve the people, they should hasten to unite themselves in
this hall with the friends of the people. Tell them no longer to retard
our proceedings and the public good by contumacious delays, or to try to
carry their point by such stratagems as this. Rather let them, as
ministers of religion, as worthy servants of their Master, renounce the
splendor which surrounds them, the luxury which insults the poor. Dismiss
those insolent lackeys who attend you; sell your gaudy equipages, and
convert those odious superfluities into food for the poor.’ At this
speech, which interpreted so well the passions of the moment, there arose,
not applause—that would have appeared like a bravado—but a confused murmur
of approbation much more flattering. Every one asked who was the speaker.
He was not known, but in a few minutes his name passed from mouth to
mouth; it was one which afterwards made all France tremble—it was
_Robespierre_!”

One is at a loss which to admire most in this brilliant _sortie_, the
skill and power of the speaker in playing on the passions of his hearers,
or the dastardly ingratitude which led him to use the eloquence he owed in
so large a measure to the clergy for the purpose of stigmatizing his best
benefactors. The first time Robespierre’s voice was raised in the tribune
it was to vituperate the men to whom he owed his education, almost, it may
be said, his existence. The reward of this treachery was not delayed; he
electrified his audience, and henceforth became known to fame, though not
yet to infamy. It is only just to Robespierre to admit that when he
entered on his public life, his character was unstained by any of the
vices which it developed later; he was in private life held to be
virtuous, and suspected of no vice beyond the honorable one of ambition.
Probably he would have lived and died amongst his fellow‐citizens without
earning a worse reputation than the rest of them, if this latent ambition
had not led him to seek to rise above them, and if his ability had not
seconded the aspiration. Even in his demagogic career he kept his
reputation for integrity, and gained the surname of the Incorruptible.
Incorruptible by money he certainly was, while the instinct of either
cowardice or sagacity induced him to disavow all personal ambition. Power
was what he thirsted for; wealth and pageant he despised. These
principles, aided by his fiery talent as any orator and his shrewd
knowledge of the times, soon lifted him above all competitors, and made
him a kind of uncrowned monarch long before he became so in reality as
dictator of the republic. It is interesting to note the various decrees he
passed while reigning in the National Assembly. One of the first was the
turning of the Church of S. Geneviève into a Pantheon for the ashes of
great men, and the inauguration of the paganized Christian temple by the
entombing of Mirabeau’s remains there. Then we see him ardent in
endeavoring to carry the abolition of capital punishment—an instance of
that strange paradox so common to Frenchmen, who shrink with morbid
sentimentality from inflicting death on the vilest malefactor by the hand
of justice, while so ready to shed the blood of innocent men without
remorse, nay, with exultation, the moment their passions are roused.

The flight of the royal family to Varennes wrought a sudden and decisive
change in the state of public affairs. Robespierre was just then at the
summit of his reputation as an orator, admired as the most prominent
figure in Mme. Roland’s coterie, which numbered all the cleverest men of
the new school, though the gifted and ill‐starred centre of the group
seems, even in the days of their closest friendship, to have resented
Robespierre’s stubborn independence, which contrasted disagreeably with
the unqualified adulation of his fellow‐devotees.

The abortive attempt of the unfortunate Louis to fly from a position which
had become unbearable had set the match to the train which Robespierre and
his Jacobin faction had so long been preparing. The question, hitherto
whispered in ambiguous words, was now spoken boldly aloud: What was to be
done with the king? Lafayette was for keeping him a prisoner in the
Tuileries, he, meanwhile, acting as a sort of military viceroy; the
Orleanist faction had another solution to offer; the Jacobins and the
Girondists another. There was a stormy sitting at the Assembly. Brissot
proposed that the people should like one man rally round the republican
flag, and sign a petition for the abolition of the king. There arose in
answer to this daring proposition a tempest of applause, terror, anger,
and loyal indignation. The Assembly rejected it, and voted for maintaining
the king. Robespierre rushed out of the hall, tearing his hair and crying
out, “My friends, we are lost! The king is saved!” This was on the 15th of
July. A meeting had been already called of the Jacobin Club for the 17th
on the Champs de Mars for the purpose of expressing the national will. The
club, on hearing the vote of the Assembly, kept up a farce of respect by
issuing a counter‐order. But the sovereign people were hampered by no such
mock scruples; they, in the person of Brissot, drew up a fresh petition,
and invited all classes of their fellow‐citizens to attend at the
appointed day on the Champs de Mars, where the altar of fatherland would
be erected, and where all patriots could sign the petition towards the
freedom of the country. A tragi‐comic incident marked the proceedings at
an early hour. Two men were found hid under the “altar,” and detected in
the act of boring a hole in it with a gimlet; they were forthwith dragged
out and massacred on the spot, though the only evidence of guilt brought
against them at the time, or afterwards, was that one of them had a wooden
leg, and the other a basket of provisions. The mob were like dry powder
that only wanted a spark to make it ignite, destroying and self‐
destructive. The wildest inferences were drawn from the discovery of the
two unlucky eaves‐droppers: they were laying a mine to blow up the
patriots assembled round the altar of fatherland; the absence of all
appliances for this terrible purpose proved nothing; some cried out that
they were spies in the king’s pay; others that they were secreted there as
dupes to be murdered by Lafayette’s creatures as a pretext for beginning
the massacres that followed. We even find Mme. Roland repeating some
absurd notions of this kind; but nothing is too monstrous or too
preposterous for prejudice to swallow. However, let the motives of the two
men have been what they may, their murder was undoubtedly the signal for
that onslaught of the troops which completely destroyed Lafayette’s
tottering popularity, and compelled him to leave Paris for a command on
the frontier. The real odium of the unpremeditated blood‐shedding fell,
like every mistake of the time, on the king. On the 5th of February, 1792,
Robespierre was named Public Accuser, and from this event dates the
explosion of personal rivalry between him and Brissot. He never could
forgive the latter having been chosen to draw up that famous petition of
the Champs de Mars, and for keeping the ascendency which this fact gave
him in the Assembly and in the Jacobin Club. But Robespierre did not long
retain the subordinate position of Public Accuser; he hated the bondage of
having to attend at fixed hours, and some months after his nomination he
resigned and started a newspaper called the _Défenseur_. Blood and terror
were henceforth the watchwords of the journalist‐patriot. He effected a
sham reconciliation with Brissot and all other enemies, and the Judas kiss
of hate and treachery went round.

Roland was named minister at this crisis; a clever and honest man,
moderate, and, above all, the husband of Mme. Roland, his nomination was
hailed with joy by all. Robespierre alone was furious at seeing the
mediocre provincial farmer placed over his head. His jealous vengeance
against Mme. Roland dated from this elevation of her husband. The success
of his journal consoled him, meanwhile, for the delay of larger triumphs,
while it procured him competence and independence, which were all he
required. He lodged with a man named Duplay, a carpenter, who had a wife
and two daughters. One of the latter became branded in connection with the
name of her father’s tenant. Robespierre vindicated his surname of
Incorruptible all through the period of his popular power, inasmuch as he
was inaccessible to the temptation of money or any of the softer bribes
which sometimes beguile hard, ambitious men into acts of mercy or passing
tenderness.

In August, 1792, he suspended his labors as a journalist, and henceforth
devoted his undivided energies and his whole time to the political events
which were thickening around him. The last number of the _Défenseur_
contains an inflammatory appeal which is too significant of the man and
the times to be omitted. It was decided that a convention should be
elected to choose a new form of national government. The issue depended
almost entirely on the character and principles of the members who should
compose it. Robespierre determined at any and every cost to be one of the
elected. It was his supreme opportunity; if he missed it, his career as a
popular leader was broken, and he must sink back into the ranks of obscure
mediocrities who had shot up from the mass of agitators like rockets,
burning bright and fierce for a moment, and then subsiding in darkness. He
had that instinct of genius which enables a man to read the temper of his
time, and to this sanguinary temper he passionately addressed himself in
the closing number of his paper:

“You must _prepare_ the success of this convention by the regeneration of
the spirit of the people. Let us awake—all, all arise, all arm, and the
enemies of liberty will hide themselves in darkness. Let the tocsin of
Paris be re‐echoed in all the departments. Let the people learn at once to
reason and to fight. You are now at war with all your oppressors, and you
will have no peace till you have punished them. Far be from you that
pusillanimous weakness or that cowardly indulgence which the tyrants so
long satiated with the blood of the people now invoke when their own hour
is come! Impunity has produced all their crimes and all your sufferings.
Let them fall under the sword of the law. Clemency towards them would be
real barbarity—an outrage on injured humanity.” This manifesto revealed
the true aim and policy of Robespierre, and just gave the touch that was
necessary to set the wheel revolving. Danton cried amen to it, and all the
faction shouted amen in chorus. “We must dare, and dare again, and dare to
the bitter end!” said Danton, and the word acted like a trumpet‐call to
the bloodhounds of the revolution. The prisons of Paris were at this
moment gorged with aristocrats awaiting their trial. The people shouted,
Try them! The tocsin sounded, the prison‐doors were surrounded. Mock
courts of justice were set up in the courtyards. Quickly, one by one, the
prisoners are called out, questions are rapidly put and answered; the jury
decides: “Let the prisoner be enlarged!” The _gendarmes_ seize him; they
open the gate and “enlarge” him. He falls forward on a mass of glittering
pikes and bayonets, and dies, cut to pieces. Soon the number of the
butchered is so great that the amateur executioners have to pause and
clear the space by piling up the corpses to one side before they resume
their work. Every prison presents the same scene. At La Force a remnant of
the Swiss Guard is called out. “They clasp each other spasmodically, gray
veterans crying, ‘Mercy, gentlemen, mercy!’ But there is no mercy! They
prepare to die like brave men. One of them steps forward. He had on a blue
frock‐coat. He was about thirty. His stature was above the common, his
look noble and martial. ‘I go first,’ he said, ‘since it must be so.
Adieu!’ Then, dashing his hat behind him, ‘Which way?’ cried he to the
brigands. ‘Show it me.’ They open the folding gate. He is announced to the
multitude. He stands a moment motionless, then plunges forth among the
pikes, and dies of a thousand wounds.”(117) The fair and saintly Princesse
de Lamballe fell, butchered by the same pikes; her head paraded through
the streets, her remains profaned by the most unheard‐of indignities. As
it always happens in these storms of human souls, there were tones of a
divine harmony to be heard striking through the hideous din. Old M. de
Sombreuil is dragged out to die. His daughter, a tender girl in the first
blush of maidenhood, rushes out, fearless and bold, clinging to him, and
appeals to the tigers about to shed his blood: “O good friends! he is my
father! He is no aristocrat! We hate aristocrats; tell me how I can prove
it to you?” They fill a bowl full of the hot blood of an aristocrat just
slain, and present it to her, saying: “Drink this, and we will believe
thee and spare thy father.”

She drinks the loathsome draught, and clasps her father amidst the
_Vivats_ of the mob. Alas! it was only a respite that the brave deed had
gained for the beloved old man. He died by those same blood‐stained hands
before the year was out. At the abbey a picture of rest and calm is to be
seen: “Towards _seven_ on Sunday night, we saw two men enter, their hands
bloody, and armed with sabres. A turnkey with a torch lighted them; he
points to the bed of the unfortunate Swiss, Reding. Reding was dying. One
of the men paused; but the other said: _Allons donc!_ (come along!) and
lifted the dying man, and carried him on his back out to the street. He
was massacred there. We looked at one another in silence; we clasped each
other’s hands; we gazed on the pavement of our prison, on which lay the
moonlight, checkered with shadows.... At _three in the morning_ we heard
them breaking in one of the prison‐doors. We thought they were coming to
kill us.... The Abbé Lenfant and the Abbé de Chapt‐Rastignac appeared in
the pulpit of the chapel, which was our prison. They had got in by a door
from the stairs. They said to us that our end was at hand; that we must
compose ourselves and receive their last blessing. An electric movement,
not to be described, threw us all on our knees, and we received it. These
two white‐haired old men blessing us from their place above, death
hovering over our heads—the moment is never to be forgotten.”(118) Half an
hour later the two priests were dragged out and massacred, those whom they
had strengthened with their last words to meet a like fate listening to
their cries.

The massacres began on the 2d and lasted till the 6th, when Robespierre
and Danton were elected to that legislative body called the Deputation of
Paris, composed of twenty‐four members, the first name on the list being
Robespierre, the last Philippe Egalité. It was on this occasion that the
future regicide adopted the surname of Egalité, he being compelled to
choose some appellation not obnoxious to the people.

The great struggle now began between the Jacobins and the Girondists, or
virtually between the leaders of the two factions, the old rivals,
Robespierre and Brissot. All the ultra‐republicans, who were represented
by the Deputation of Paris, grouped themselves on the top benches of the
convention to the left of the president, and were called the Mountain—a
name henceforth identified with its prophet, Robespierre. The question
still was, What was to be done with the king? The Jacobins were for
killing him, the Girondists for putting him aside. The wretched weakness,
vacillation, and cowardliness of the Girondists make them objects of
contempt, without exciting in us the kind of horrified awe inspired by the
monstrous feats of those Titanic fiends, the Jacobins. By what fatality is
it in France that the honest‐meaning party is always the cowardly one that
dares not assert itself, but bows down, cowed by the cynical audacity of
the anarchists? The Girondists might have turned the scales, even at this
crisis, if they had had the courage of their consciences; but they were
cowards. Their policy was to run with the hare and cry with the hounds,
and it met with the fate it deserved. But we must not anticipate. The
Mountain, on the other hand, did not lack the courage of its creed; it
out‐heroded Herod in its fury against the king and all appertaining to the
old order which he represented. Roman history was its Bible, and the
examples there recorded were for ever on its lips. All citizens were
heroes, Cincinnatuses, Catos, Ciceros, etc.; all sovereigns were Neros and
Caligulas. The Girondists turned these fine texts against their rivals by
accusing them of plotting to set up a triumvirate, to be composed of
Robespierre, Marat, and Danton. This was only three weeks after the orgy
of blood which ushered in the reign of Robespierre and of Terror. Danton
mounted the tribune, and made an eloquent defence of Robespierre, who
never spoke impromptu when he could avoid it. Marat then rose—for the
first time in the convention—and was hooted down; but he persisted, and
made them listen while he exposed his revolting doctrines of wholesale
murder and anarchical rule.

So the days passed, in boisterous invective, idle perorations, and savage
threats of one party against another. The Girondists, however, were
worsted in the fight, and the strength of the position remained with
Robespierre and his more bloody and unscrupulous faction, who had from the
starting traced out his plan, and adhered to it without flinching. The
king was foredoomed to the scaffold, but some semblance of legality should
accompany the decree. So strong was the Jacobin influence at this crisis
that those who did not share the murderous design were terrified into
seeming to do so, and, while looking with horror at the regicide in
preparation, were cowed into silent acquiescence. M. Thiers, in his
_History of the Revolution_, says: “Many of the deputies who had come down
with the intention of voting for the king were frightened at the fury of
the people, and, though much touched by the fate of Louis XVI., they were
terrified at the consequences of an acquittal. This fear was greatly
increased at the sight of the Assembly and of the scene it presented. That
scene, dark and terrible, had shaken the hearts of all, and changed the
resolution of Lecointre of Versailles, whose personal bravery cannot be
doubted, and who had not ceased to return to the galleries the menacing
gestures with which they were intimidating the Assembly. Even he, when it
came to the point, hesitated, and dropped from his mouth the terrible and
unexpected word, ‘death.’ Vergniaud, who had appeared most deeply touched
by the fate of the king, and who had declared that ‘nothing could ever
induce him to condemn the unhappy prince’—Vergniaud, at the sight of that
tumultuous scene, pronounced the sentence of death.” It must truly have
been an appalling spectacle, the like of which the civilized world had
never before beheld. Mercier, in his _Sketches of the Revolution_, gives
us an animated and glowing picture of the court during the trial: “The
famous sitting which decided the fate of Louis lasted seventy‐two hours.
One would naturally suppose that the Assembly was a scene of meditation,
silence, and a sort of religious terror. Not at all. The end of the hall
was transformed into a kind of opera‐box, where ladies in _négligée_ were
eating ices and oranges, drinking _liqueurs_, and receiving the
compliments and salutations of comers and goers. The _huissiers_
(bailiffs) on the side of the Mountain acted the part of the openers of
the opera‐boxes. They were employed every instant in turning the key in
the doors of the side galleries, and gallantly escorting the mistresses of
the Duke of Orleans, caparisoned with tri‐colored ribbons. Although every
mark of applause or disapprobation was forbidden, nevertheless, on the
side of the Mountain, the Duchess Dowager,(119) the amazon of the Jacobin
bands, made long ‘ha‐a‐has!’ when she heard the word ‘death’ strongly
twang in her ears.

“The lofty galleries, destined for the people during the days which
preceded this famous trial, were never empty of strangers and people of
every class, who there drank wine and brandy as if it had been a tavern.
Bets were open at all the neighboring coffee‐houses. Listlessness,
impatience, fatigue, were marked on almost every countenance. Each deputy
mounted the tribune in his turn, and every one was asking when his turn
came. Some deputy came, I know not who, sick, and in his morning‐gown and
night‐cap. This phantom caused a great deal of diversion in the Assembly.
The countenances of those who went to the tribune, rendered more funereal
from the pale gleams of the lights, when in a slow and sepulchral voice
they pronounced the word ‘death!’—all these physiognomies which succeeded
one another, their tones, their different keys; d’Orleans hissing and
groaning when he voted the death of his relative; some calculating if they
should have time to dine before they gave their vote; women with pins
pricking cards to count the votes; deputies who had fallen asleep and were
waked up in order to vote; Manuel, the secretary, sliding away a few
votes, in order to save the unhappy king, and on the point of being put to
death in the corridors for his infidelity—these sights can never be
described as they passed. It is impossible to picture what they were, nor
will history be able to reach them.”

Amongst the timid Girondists who dared not vote for acquittal, and shrank
from decreeing the king to death, many hit upon a half‐measure, which was
that of coupling their vote—for death with conditions that practically
negatived it. This cowardly transaction is said to have given rise to some
trickery in the counting of the votes, which enabled the scrutineers to
make the majority of _one_ voice by which the sentence of death was
carried. It was this sham proceeding which prompted Sièyes to say when
recording his vote, “Death—without palaver!”

Robespierre’s figure stands out with vivid and terrible brilliancy against
the background of this picture. He dismissed the question of the king’s
innocence or guilt—that had, he knew right well, nothing whatever to do
with the issue—and proceeded to demand his death on the grounds of urgent
political expediency. “The death of the king was not a question of law,
but of state policy, which, without quibbling about his guilt or
innocence, required his death; the life of one man, if ever so innocent,
must be sacrificed to preserve the lives of millions.” There was honesty
at any rate in this plain speaking, and so it was better than the odious
hypocrisy displayed by the other actors in the tragic farce. On
Robespierre’s descending from the tribune, his brother Augustin, rose and
demanded in the name of the people “that Louis Capet shall be brought to
the bar, to declare his original accomplices, to hear sentence of death
pronounced on him, and to be forthwith conducted to execution.” Wild
confusion covered this extravagant motion, but no notice was taken of it.
The 21st of January was near at hand; even the Mountain could afford to
wait so long.

On the 10th of March, the Revolutionary Tribunal was decreed. A month
later there broke out a violent altercation between Robespierre and some
of the Girondists in the Convention; numbers clamored for the “expulsion
of the twenty‐two” obstreperous Girondists; they were arraigned before the
bar where the king whom they so basely betrayed had lately stood; the
trial lasted four days; even that tribunal, used to dispense with all
proof of guilt in its victims, could not decide on condemning twenty‐two
men at one fell swoop without some shadow of reason, and there was none to
be found. But Robespierre was not going to lose his opportunity for a
quibble; impatient of the delay, he drew up a decree that “whenever any
trial should have lasted three days, the tribunal might declare itself
satisfied with the guilt of the prisoners, might stop the defence, close
the discussions, and send the accused to death!” This abominable document
was read and inscribed on the register of the tribunal the same evening,
the Girondists were at once condemned, and sent to the scaffold next
morning.

To Be Concluded Next Month.




The Better Christmas.


“’Tis not the feast that changes with the ever‐changing times,
But these that lightly vote away the glories of the past—
The joys that dream‐like haunt me with the merry matin chimes
I loved so in my boyhood, and shall doat on to the last.

“There still is much of laughter, and a measure of old cheer:
The ivy wreaths, if scanty, are as verdant as of yore:
And still the same kind greeting for the universal ear:
But, to me, for all their wishing, ’tis a ‘merry’ feast no more!”

I said: and came an answer from the stars to which I sighed—
Those stars that lit the vigil of the favor’d shepherd band.
And ’twas as if again the heavens open’d deep and wide,
And the carol of the angel‐choir new‐flooded all the land

“Good tidings still we bring to all who still have ears to hear;
To all who love His coming—the elect that cannot cease;
And louder rings our anthem, to these watchers, year by year,
Its earnest of the perfect joy—the everlasting peace.

“Art thou, then, of these watchers, if thou canst not read the sign?
The world was at its darkest when the blessed Day‐star(120) shone.
Again ’tis blacker to her beam: and thou must needs repine,
And sicken, so near sunrise, for the moonlight that is gone!”




English And Scotch Scenes.


The home life of England has ever been a favorite topic with American
writers. The first thing that strikes an American travelling through
England is the age of everything he sees, the roots by which every
existing institution, custom, or pleasure is intimately connected with its
real, tangible prototype in the past. He sees, too, how the people live a
thoroughly characteristic life—that which consists in identification with
everything that is national. No one is so unadaptive as the pure‐bred
Briton, and it has truly been said that an Englishman carries his country
with him wherever he goes. You never see an Englishman to advantage except
at home; but, once enthroned amid his local surroundings, there is a
sturdy native dignity in him which none can help admiring. He is no
politician in the mercenary, personal, business‐like sense of the word,
but he takes a pride in following the course of his country’s progress, in
bearing a hand in all reforms, in exercising his right of censure—or, as
some foreigners plainly call it, “grumbling”—and especially in watching
closely over the well‐being of his own county and neighborhood. By this
minute division of labor every county becomes, as it were, a self‐governed
little nation, jealous and tenacious of its rights, keenly alive to its
interests, intensely vigorous, and occasionally aggressive. Political and
social life are closely intermingled, and personal disinterestedness is
almost everywhere the rule. The varied traditions of different
neighborhoods and the strong individuality shown by the different sections
of the country, contribute a picturesque element to modern life, and often
make the most inherently prosaic actions take on a mask of romance.

Elections to Parliament afford a multiplicity of such scenes, and form one
of the greatest periodical excitements that stir up country towns. The
candidate is generally one of the sons of some family well known in the
county, or sometimes the chief proprietor of the neighborhood, if he be
still under fifty. The county constituencies almost always return a member
of this class; the commercial representatives come from the great
manufacturing towns, where they have slowly toiled to make their fortunes,
and risen, by earnest application to business, from the rank of a
vestryman to that of lord mayor. The country town in which the hustings
and polling‐booths are erected is as animated as it would have been at a
great fair of the middle ages or an extraordinary sale of wool, which in
Gloucestershire, Warwickshire, and Worcestershire was a great article of
trade in the XIVth century. Everything in the shape of bunting,
evergreens, allegorical pictures, flaming posters, and unlimited ale has
been done by both sides to enhance their popularity with the electors and
non‐electors. Indeed, the latter are quite as important as the former, for
from their ranks are recruited the bands of music and the array of
stalwart supporters, ready to fight, if required, and to shout at the top
of their lungs, so as to bewilder the voters and claim or surprise their
votes. The canvassing that goes before an English election is neither a
pleasant nor a creditable thing to dwell on; when subjected to the
analysis of uncompromising morality, it resolves itself into deliberate
and organized “humbug”; for it includes every species of flattery under
the sun, not to speak of direct bribery. Very funny incidents sometimes
occur to break the monotony of the usual routine. For instance, in
canvassing a large seaport town, the Liberal candidate bethinks himself of
his yacht—a gem in every way—and organizes a large party, to which are
invited the voting citizens and their wives and daughters. A splendid
luncheon is provided, and each dame and damsel goes home with the
conviction that her smiles have won the heart of the candidate, and that
he has sworn them by a tacit but flattering contract to further his claims
with their all‐powerful husbands and fathers. “_Honi soit qui mal y
pense._” The latter are as proud of the expectant M.P.’s notice of the
female members of their households as the ladies themselves, and the issue
is trembling in the balance, when an announcement goes forth that the
Conservative candidate has had his drag and four horses sent down from
London, and proposes parading the young ladies and the more fearless
married women on the roof of this ultra‐fashionable vehicle. The
invitations are of course more limited than those for the yacht, but
promises of repeating them, until all the free electors’ families have
been included, cheer up the spirits of those not asked the first day. The
Liberal pits his yacht against his rival’s drag, and invites the maids and
matrons to another sail. Apparently, Neptune does not intend to vote for
him, for a slight breeze arises, and the waves roll more than landsmen
find pleasant. The cabin fills rapidly, and faces once rosy and saucy,
turn pale and shrunken; the return against wind and tide is a wretched
journey. The poor candidate, in despair, tries to become nurse and doctor,
as well as consoler; but he, too, feels his cheeks blanch, not at the
lurching of the vessel, but at the fear of the effect of this accident
upon the votes which he was already reckoning up so confidently. As the
forlorn party lands, the drag sweeps by, drawn by its four fiery horses,
the whip cracking, the smart grooms grinning at the windows (in these
carriages, made like a mail‐coach, the servants sit _inside_ and the
master drives, while his guests are packed on the outside seats at the
top), the women huddling under cloaks and umbrellas, but all giggling with
delight at the adventure, neither damped nor dismayed by water that cannot
drown them, and wind that cannot make them sea‐sick. The next day those
who have recovered from their marine excursion are invited to try the
drag, and the Liberal candidate’s chances fall as visibly as the barometer
did yesterday. When the great day comes, the drag has done its work, and
the Conservative is returned by a triumphant majority.

To return to our country town in its holiday attire. No great arts are
resorted to here; the common kind of canvassing will do for these quiet,
agricultural people, and the only day that is worth mentioning is that of
the election itself. The festive look of the place does not portend any
very desperate contest, although there is a free display of the two
opposite colors—blue (Conservative) and yellow (Liberal). The rivals come
down from their neighboring seats in gay carriages full of the ladies of
their families, wearing their respective colors. The horses and postilions
wear bunches of blue or yellow ribbon; even the whip has its conspicuous
knot of color. Brass bands clash forth a whole host of discords; the hired
partisans good‐humoredly shout for one or the other party; an air of great
good‐will prevails. The whole thing looks more like the welcoming home of
a bride than a serious political gathering. The candidates ascend the
hustings, or platform for speeches, and cordially shake hands with one
another. They think it fun to be opposed to each other in public, whereas
in private they are friends, companions, and neighbors; they have had the
same training, the same education, the same associations, the same local
interests, and the question that will decide their election will more
likely be their reputation as farmers and their popularity as landlords
than their political opinions as to the affairs of the nation at large.
Talking of bribery and undue influence in elections, there is a law yet in
force (though, of course, its effect is merely nominal) which forbids any
peer to be present at an election. His presence is, by a legal fiction,
supposed to hamper the freedom of the voters, and the law thus provides
against the appearance of coercion or intimidation. The candidates for the
counties are almost invariably the sons, brothers, or nephews of peers;
but, however near the relationship, no member of the House of Lords is
allowed to infringe on this rule. A contested election, one in which party
spirit runs high and the passions of the people are artfully fanned and
excited on both sides, is a scene worth witnessing once; but the
excitement is of too rough a sort to make one wish for a second edition of
it. A foreigner once said that the two best sights which England had to
offer to a stranger were an Oxford “commemoration” and a contested
election. The latter seldom takes place in the peaceful neighborhoods of
the midland counties, and the only other species of elections, as
distinguished from the festive one which we have just sketched, is, as a
remnant of old‐time indifferentism, a curiosity in its way. There are no
longer what were called “rotten boroughs” and “pocket boroughs,” the
former representing what had once been a populous town or large village,
now reduced to half a dozen ruinous tenements and an old, disused parish
church, but still retaining the right to return one or more members to
Parliament; the second being a village still worthy of the name, but from
time immemorial voting strictly in accordance with the wishes of the “lord
of the manor,” whether peer or commoner. These were also called “close
boroughs.” The Reform Bill of 1830 did away with all such transparent
abuses, but family influence, exerted in a milder form, still remains an
important element in all agricultural counties; and it sometimes happens
that for a whole generation, no one will think it worth his while to
oppose a candidate whose good working qualities are recognized by friend
and foe, and whose personal popularity, joined with his powerful
connections, makes his success almost absolutely certain. Such was the
case in the election at O——, for which the same member has run unopposed
for at least a quarter of a century. The nomination was made by the high
sheriff and the magistrates of the county, assembled in the town‐hall.
This is a portion of a ruined castle or abbey, the Norman windows of which
still assert their identity, though they have been shamefully mutilated
and forced to conform to the ugly, shallow openings called windows in our
days. The inside showed no signs of beauty. It was a huge barn, with grim‐
looking benches or pews at one end, towering amphitheatre‐wise one above
the other. Public business of all kinds was transacted there. The
decoration of the hall is somewhat peculiar, consisting of nothing but
horse‐shoes. From time immemorial the custom of the county has been that
every peer setting foot within the little town should put up a horse‐shoe
in this hall, or give an equivalent in money, which is spent by authority
of the town council in buying a horse‐shoe in his name. There is some
dispute as to when and how the custom originated. The common belief is
that Queen Elizabeth, passing through O——, stopped to get one of her
horses shod, and, in perpetual memory of her royal visit, gave the town
the privilege of exacting the tribute of a horse‐shoe from every peer
setting foot within the county. By an anachronism, which at any rate does
honor to O——’s public spirit, there are horse‐shoes bearing dates far more
remote than the XVIth century, and some one has actually put the Conqueror
himself under contribution, and unblushingly labelled a very antique shoe
with his mighty name and the eventful date, 1066. During the last three
hundred years genuine historical horse‐shoes have abounded; some plain as
the real thing, some gold or silvered, some painted with heraldic devices,
some immense as children’s hoops, some minute as the shoe of a Shetland
pony. Whether the thousand‐year‐old superstition of the connection between
luck and a horse‐shoe, and the belief in the power of the latter against
witches, has anything to do with the custom, we do not know for certain,
but it is not unlikely.

In this remarkable town‐hall were assembled the electors and magistrates
one November morning. All the prominent country “gentlemen” and many
farmers and tradesmen were present, besides a few ladies, come to see the
proceedings. The member who had been re‐elected every time that an
election took place for the previous twenty years was the brother of one
of the great land‐owners of the neighborhood, and a Conservative. No one
thought of opposing him. His friends and constituents mostly appeared in
riding‐boots, some in “pink.”(121) One young magistrate got up and
proposed him formally to the electors in a girlish, awkward speech;
another seconded him in a still briefer address, and the question was
asked: “Has any one any objections to make or any candidate to oppose?” A
squeaky voice at the end of the hall propounded a query in this form:

“Would the honorable member vote for universal suffrage and cry down
church rates?”

A laugh ran through the crowd, and an impatient movement stirred the knot
of magistrates. Year after year some wag of this kind mounted the Radical
hobby, and rode it in this unoffending fashion at the steady‐going
“churchman” and loyal upholder of the constitution who represented the
county in Parliament. The uneasy movement continues, and horses are heard
neighing and pawing outside. Men in red coats take out their watches and
put on long faces. It is nearly twelve o’clock, and the business of the
nation is delaying the “meet.” The hounds are waiting not far off, and
candidate, sheriff, magistrates, and electors are all alike anxious to be
off. The hall is soon cleared and the election quietly over—a very
secondary matter in the consideration of those who have been kept from
kennel and field for two long hours. They rush out with all the zest of
school‐boys let loose to play, and the hunt that day has twice its
ordinary success, or at least its members think so, because the beloved
sport has been intermitted, and requires extra enthusiasm as a peace‐
offering at their hands. So with redoubled vigor the search after foxes
goes on, and not till long after sundown will the candidate, magistrates,
and constituents return to their homes.

Very different are those elections whose surroundings remind us rather of
a clan gathering to the standard of their chief than a modern constituency
crowding to the polling‐booths. The mere description of these election
scenes through Great Britain and Ireland would form an interesting chapter
in contemporaneous history. The political differences need not even be
alluded to; the contrast of outer circumstances is suggestive enough. In
an agricultural neighborhood, such as that round the town of O——, a
certain kind of torpidity exists among the prosperous and contented
farmers. Not a hundred miles from the palace of the people at Westminster
the interest in politics is subordinate to that excited by a cattle‐show
or the prospect of a drought; in a word, there is so little local change
called for which could be beneficial to the county that the passive but
deep‐rooted clinging to old traditions, which is so characteristic of the
genuine Englishman, is in this case rather a matter of course than a
virtue or a meritorious turning away from temptation.

Life is hard to the masses in a city. Sharp ills require sharp remedies,
say the demagogues; and straightway the voters adopt the extremest
doctrine they can find, and fancy it a panacea for all ills. An English
paper recently defined this kind of voter as the man “who has just learned
sufficient to be sure that there can only be one side to a question.” The
Irish elections, proverbial for their storminess, are of another nature;
appealing to our sympathy by the wild earnestness of the voters, and
governed by feelings which, though often misdirected, are yet noble in
their origin. Religion and patriotism are the prime movers of the passions
of Irish constituents; they often look upon their exercise of the
franchise as a protest against tyranny and a confession of faith. And
indeed the “tyranny” is no mere political scarecrow to them. It is very
tangible; it strikes home to them, for its immediate result may be
eviction and starvation. The wild, humorous individuality of the people of
the western baronies of Ireland redeems much that is reprehensible from
vulgarity in the faction fight—a not infrequent concomitant of the
election. There is a rough romance left in these fights, making them the
direct counterparts of the sudden encounters between the clans of the
various kings of Celtic history; and what is best and most palliative is
this: that sordid considerations are almost wholly absent from the voters’
minds. If men must fight, let them do it for anything rather than money;
and, to do these electors justice, we will say that there is less bribery
in all the Irish country districts put together than in one English
manufacturing town. You will say there is intimidation instead; but, even
that is better than bribery, for it is less degrading to a human being to
barter away his vote, in view of the threats of his landlord to turn his
wife and children out of doors, than to sell it for money. But there are
other elections to speak of—those in the Highlands of Scotland.

Education is more universal among the humbler classes in Scotland than in
either of the sister countries, and by nature the Scotchman is more
reflective than the Englishman or Irishman. There is less of collective
life in his country; the land is poor and barren, the northern parts are
broken up by lochs and treacherous estuaries, and many counties include
rocky islands among the billows of the Atlantic. In Inverness‐shire the
elector is far removed from all common external influence. He thinks
slowly and seriously, working out his own problems, answering his own
questions by the aid of his strong native sense. He and many of his
fellow‐voters are shepherds or “keepers.” They inhabit an isolated cottage
in some remote glen—a cottage that is only approached by some faint sheep‐
track. Australia or the Territories of the United States are hardly less
solitary; but, on the other hand, the Scottish Highlands, if solitary, are
not barbarous. In newly‐settled countries, where the population is only
gradually fusing into a national _people_, there is lawlessness to contend
with; the school and the church are yet open to the attack of ruffianly
bands, and dependent on a few respectable though equally rough settlers to
stop the brigandage of their unruly neighbors. An old country, however
sparsely peopled, has the past to guide it; its hermit settlers are the
heirs, not the founders, of a state and a history. So it is with ancient
Scottish shires, and thus you will find their electors sober, silent,
reflective men, conscious of their dignity as clansmen of the old families
whose names are in the records of Scotland from the VIIIth and IXth
centuries; and perfectly aware of their personal, political value as
present electors to the joint Parliament of a great empire. In England
there were serfs, but in Scotland (and in Ireland also) there were
_clansmen_—not slaves, but sons by adoption; freemen with the right to
bear arms; protected, not owned, by the great chiefs of the North. They
were used to a certain degree of power and responsibility, and their
descendants were not intoxicated by a sudden rise to independence, as were
the corresponding classes in England when the franchise was extended to
them.

To continue our description of the local surroundings of the Inverness‐
shire voters—men removed from the ordinary circumstances which make most
elections pretty much the same dull, time‐worn, vulgarized sight—we quote
from a recent article in an English publication: “The nearest neighbors on
one side are beyond a great mountain‐range, while for miles upon miles on
the other there stretch the unpeopled solitudes of a deer‐forest. The
nearest carriage‐road is eight miles off, and that is travelled only three
days in the week by a mail‐cart that carries passengers. The church and
school are at twice the distance; so the children must trust to the
parents for their education, and the father can only occasionally join in
the Sunday gossip, in the parish churchyard, that expands the ideas of
some of his fellow‐parishioners. His cottage is ten miles from the nearest
hovel where they sell whiskey. His work is arduous; he is afoot among his
sheep from the early morning until dusk. In the best of times and in the
height of summer it is but seldom that a stray copy of the county paper
finds its way to the head of the glen. He is thoughtful by nature, as you
may see in his face, which has much the same puzzled expression of
intelligence that you remark in the venerable rams of his flock. No doubt
he thinks much, after a fashion of his own, as he goes ‘daundering’ about
after his straggling sheep, or stretches himself to bask in the hot
sunshine, while he leaves his collies (sheep‐dogs) to look after his
charge.”

This is a very true picture. Of course, in such a situation, it is
impossible for the Highland shepherd to follow the questions that affect
the fate of ministries. He can know nothing of foreign affairs, probably
never heard of the _Alabama_, and would be at sea on the subject of the
Franco‐Prussian war. Mr. Gladstone’s financial schemes are not only
puzzles but _terra incognita_ to his mind. He knows nothing of the
extension of the suffrage in counties, and even local rates are
indifferent to him, as the only one that concerns him is the dog
tax—_concerns_ him, but does not _affect_ him; for his master pays the
tax, and he himself is more or less exempted from extra trouble, according
to the number of sheep‐dogs for which that master chooses to pay. His
interest in the man who represents him in Parliament is therefore either
purely theoretical or, what happens oftener, purely personal. There are
country gentlemen everywhere who, though no newspaper may blow the trumpet
of their fame, are nevertheless known throughout a wide expanse as good
men and true, kind yet just landlords, upright magistrates, and sound
economists. Their names are household words; their memory is always
associated with some generous deed; they are looked up to and honored in
the county. They are generally scions of the old historical families of
the land—of those families to which the Scotchman clings with a proud
affection, and which have been perpetuated by the very institutions that
some coiners of new political creeds find so deleterious to the human
race. The shepherd probably turns his mind to some such man of whom
nothing but good has ever been recorded, and willingly entrusts to his
safe‐keeping the interests of himself, his clan, and his country. Judging
from the particular to the general, he concludes that, since this
candidate has always been a kind master and a good landlord to his own
folks, he is likely to be a conscientious law‐maker and an earnest
protector of the nation’s liberties. Questions of detail may fairly be
trusted to him; the main thing is that no widow or orphan has ever had any
complaint to make of him.

This is the aspect on the voter’s side. Let us see what it is on that of
the candidate. There is no question here of bill‐sticking, of distributing
cockades, or of having bands of music and hired groups of partisans in
your wake. Canvassing means “posting long distances in dog‐carts, seeking
relays at widely‐separated inns, where the stable establishments are kept
on a peace footing, except during the tourist season. In winter the roads
are carried across formidable ferries, where, if you bribe the boatman to
imprudence, your business being urgent, you are not unlikely to meet the
fate of Lord Ullin’s daughter.” But this is not all; for when you have
braved the floods, and arrive famished and half‐frozen at some out‐of‐the‐
way hamlet whence the scattered cottages may be gained, there is yet the
ordeal of the interviews before you. The Scottish hermit can hardly be
expected to forego or shorten such a rare opportunity of contact with the
outside world. He will tax your ingenuity with the shrewdest, perhaps
politically inconvenient, questions; and never doing anything in a hurry
himself, he will resent his visitor’s seeming to be pressed for time. No
hasty and transparent condescensions will do for him. He will not be
satisfied, like the comfortable trader of the towns, with the candidate’s
kissing his youngest born and promising his eldest son a rocking‐horse.
Smiles and hand‐shakings are cheap gifts; but he wants no gifts, only
pledges. He wishes to be met as an intelligent being, a man who, if worth
winning, must be worth convincing. He expects a straightforward, if short,
explanation of your general opinions; and though the sense of his own
dignity as a voter is great, he does not forget that political does not
entail social equality. Grave and earnest, he will resent flippancy as an
insult to his understanding; and a joke that would win over a dozen votes
in a small commercial town will very probably lose you _his_ vote, and his
good opinion too.

But there are also other constituents to be called upon. The numerous
islands on the east coast of Scotland afford a still larger field for the
danger and romance of canvassing. The islanders are very sensitive, and
feel terribly hurt at the insinuation that their home lies out of the
world. If their votes are necessary, is the courtesy to ask for them
superfluous? They lead hazardous, daring lives themselves, and do not
understand how any man can shrink from the danger that may be incurred in
nearing their rocky island. If he does, what is he worth? they will argue;
for the natural man readily judges of his fellow‐man’s mental qualities by
his physical endurance. Then (we quote again the graphic sketch above
referred to), “that island canvass means chartering some crank little
screw, beating out into the fogs among the swells and the breakers, taking
flying shots at low reefs of inhabited rock, enveloped in mists and
unprovided with lighthouses. Landing‐places are almost as scarce as light‐
towers, and you may have to bob about under the ‘lee of the land’ in
impatient expectation of establishing communications with it. When you do
get to shore, you must be hospitably _fêted_ by the minister and the
schoolmaster, the doctor and the principal tacksmen, until what with sea‐
squeamishness and the strong spirits, it becomes simply heroic to preserve
the charm of your manners. Moreover, you had better not make your visit at
all than cut it uncivilly short. Our friend the shepherd may have made up
his mind to support you; but you may rely upon it that he will promise
nothing until you have set yourself down for a solemn ‘crack’ with him.”
The day of the election itself is a suitable ending to this romantic
episode in the life of an ordinary, drudging M.P. When a Highlander sets
about a thing, he never gives in before it is accomplished. Honor binds
him to redeem a promise, whether made to another or to himself; pride
compels him to prove himself superior to circumstances, almost to nature
herself; and he doggedly goes on his way, undeterred by any wayside
temptation to turn into smoother and pleasanter paths. So the voters
“climb over mountains and plod over snow‐fields, wade mountain streams,
navigate lochs in crank cobles, and cross raging estuaries in rickety,
flat‐bottomed ferry‐boats; so that, should the winds and the weather
interfere too seriously with the exercise of the electors’ political
rights, the polling of a great Highland constituency may possibly have a
gloomily dramatic finale.”(122)

While we are on the subject of Scotland, we may mention the various
occasions on which national gatherings draw together thousands of
picturesquely‐clad men and women. The games are the most characteristic of
these meetings. They take place in various places, mostly during the
months of August and September. They are generally held under the
patronage and supervision of some great family of the neighborhood.
Something of old clan feeling is revived. The men often march in in
bodies, preceded by their pipers, and wearing their individual tartan,
with distinctive badges. The villages for fifty miles around send their
group of representatives and their athletes and champions in the games.
Vehicles of primitive build with rough, wiry little ponies bring in their
load of farmers and petty freeholders. The country‐houses and shooting‐
boxes fill with guests from England; and in the neighborhood of Balmoral,
to which we more particularly allude, there is of course the additional
attraction of royal countenance and patronage. The queen and the royal
family sometimes become the guests of their subjects on these occasions,
and an almost German simplicity reigns for a few days among those to whom
etiquette must be so sore a chain. The princes wear the Highland dress,
and the queen (that is, before her widowhood) something of tartan in her
plain toilet. The national sports, such as throwing the hammer, lifting
heavy weights and supporting them on the outstretched hand, etc., require
both strength and dexterity, and the champions who contend in these games
are generally “professionals.” Sometimes, however, some village athlete
ambitiously enters the lists against the trained champions, and
occasionally bears off a prize. A competition of pipers is often a feature
of the day, and these worthies make a brave appearance in their velvet
jackets covered with a breast‐plate of medals, severally won in various
contests. The shrill, clarion‐like tones of the bagpipes are not agreeable
to the untrained ear, but to the Highlanders, whose national associations
are proudly entwined with this wild, primitive music of the hills, they
are naturally sweeter than the most sublime strains of the old masters. No
one, even though not Highland‐bred, can listen to the pipes, playing a
pibroch among the echoes of the mountains, without feeling that the soul
of the people is in it; that the spirits of “the Flood and the Fell” which
Walter Scott so graphically introduces in his _Lay of the Last Minstrel_
might have used just such tones for their fateful, wailing speech; and no
one having more than common ties binding him to Scottish traditions and
Scottish homes can think of the wild dirges or stirring war‐calls of the
pipes without sympathy and loving regret. Not quite so inspiring, however,
is this music when the piper marches round a small dining‐room, and plays
the distinctive tune of the host’s clan to the guests assembled over their
wine and dessert. The narrow space makes the music harsh and grating, just
as a confined room takes from the Tyrolese _jodel_ all its romance, and
turns the sounds into the caricature of a loud roulade. The games often
last for three days, and a sort of encampment springs up by magic to
supply the deficiencies of the crowded inns of the neighborhood. At the
end of that time there is a ball given at one of the principal country‐
seats, and a torch‐light dance for the people. The queen and the royal
family accompany their host and hostess, and are content with a hasty
dinner, served with a delightful relaxation from etiquette; for this is
their holiday from political anxieties and social duties, and the more
informal this assembly, the better it pleases them. The ball‐room is not
very large, and its simple decorations are in keeping with the character
of the feast and the style of the lodge or cottage in which it is given.
There are flowers in abundance, flags and evergreen garlands, Highland
badges and emblems, and stags’ heads with branching antlers—the trophies
of the host’s skill in stalking the red deer. Outside the house is a wide
space, destined for the torch‐light dance. Great iron holders and pans
lifted on rude tripods contain the torches and the resinous fluid which,
when set on fire, burns steadily for many hours. To and fro flit the
kilted Highlanders, with their jewelled dirks or daggers, and their hairy
sporrans decorated with silver plates the size of large coins. The
champions of the games are there, the rival pipers, the mountain
shepherds, the gillies or game‐keepers, all the household servants and
those of the guests; the women wearing tartan ribbons of different clans,
and Scotch flowers, blue‐bell, heather or bog‐myrtle, in their caps or
bodices. The pipes strike up the music of the sword‐dance; a noted dancer
comes forward, and lays two naked swords of ordinary length on the ground,
crossing them at right angles. Within the four narrow spaces between the
points of this cross he then begins a series of marvellous steps, leaping
high in the air, shuffling, crossing his feet, and invariably alighting in
the right spot, within a few inches of the swords, always in these four
interstices, but never touching nor even grazing the blades. If he were to
touch one ever so lightly, and but for an instant, his reputation would be
gone. Another succeeds him, and so on, till all the famous dancers have
exhibited their skill. No novice appears; they take care never to dance in
public till they are perfect in this feat. Scotch reels for the most part
take up the rest of the night, and are danced by four people, two men and
two women, the former standing back to back, and their partners opposite.
Various figures follow each other, the figure eight being the most
frequent. This is managed by the four dancers locking arms and giving a
swing round, then passing on to the next person; arms are locked again,
and another turn given, and so on till the four have changed places, and
in doing so have described the figure eight. Of course, in this dance, it
is the men who show to most advantage, as they perform a series of regular
steps, snapping their fingers meanwhile, and, as soon as they get excited
and enter into the spirit of the national dance, uttering a peculiar sort
of cry. The women mostly walk and jump through their evolutions. The less
characteristic dancing in the ball‐room, but in which reels are also
mingled with quadrille and waltz, ceases about two o’clock in the morning,
and the musicians are at liberty to join the fun outside. The Highlanders
sometimes take possession of the deserted ball‐room, and continue their
own revels there till daybreak, when the torches flicker out and the spell
is broken. Another national dance is the strathspey, which we never had
the good fortune to see performed.

In winter curling is the favorite game; it is played on the ice with heavy
round stones, about eight or nine inches in diameter, and three to three
and a half inches thick. These stones are neither rolled nor thrown at the
line and mark, but propelled, by the strength of wrist of the player,
along the surface of the ice, and aimed to displace the stones already set
up by the opposite side. Whichever side, at the end of the game, has most
stones near the line which serves as a mark, is declared by the umpire to
be the winner. Miniature curling‐boards are very common in Scotch country‐
houses, with stones two or three inches in diameter; it is an amusing game
on a rainy day, and, though so small, no little skill is required to guide
these stones aright.

The same house to which we have taken the reader to be present at the
torch‐light dance is a very pretty specimen of Scotch hunting‐lodges.
Built at various times, it consists of several cottages, once detached,
but now irregularly connected by picturesque galleries, verandas, and
staircases. One part has much the appearance of a Swiss _châlet_; another
that of a river‐side villa on the Thames, with its glass doors opening on
to a lawn, and its rustic porch smothered in climbing roses. Though so
straggling, it is a very comfortable house. Nothing is wanting—billiard‐
room, smoking‐room, boudoir, and innumerable pigeonholes for guests—a
charming house for persons of sporting tastes; the halls carpeted with
deer‐skins, and the walls hung with antlers, bearing each the date of the
death of the stag to which they belonged; equally charming to the delicate
London beauty wearied with her social triumphs, for here she finds the
thousand elegances of a _rococo_ drawing‐room, the luxurious arm‐chairs,
the rare china, the velvet screen hung with miniatures, and little gilt
brackets, each supporting a tiny cup or a porcelain shepherdess—in a word,
every pretty refinement of the latest fashion. The neighborhood is famous
for stalking—that is, following the red deer through moor and forest
alone, with your rifle and your slight bag containing some biscuits and a
pocket‐flask. You may have to trudge over miles and miles of heather,
watching every turn of the breeze, lest it betray your whereabouts to your
beautiful victim; making immense _détours_ to reach him from some
convenient cover; creeping along on all fours, or even flat on the ground;
often taking a long, cold bath in the mountain burn (stream), wading
through it, or waiting in it, so as not to let him scent your trail. If
for no other reason, this sport is superior to any because it demands
solitude; though it is hard to discover why one should not be privileged
to take a twelve hours’ walk or saunter without the pretext of the rifle
slung at one’s back, and also without incurring the charge of
eccentricity. A forest in Scotland is treeless; the term is applied to a
wide expanse of mountain, covered knee‐deep with heather, and perhaps here
and there with a few stunted bushes or clumps of graceful birches. Here
the red deer feeds in herds, and you sometimes come across six or seven of
these “monarchs of the glen.” The sportsman, however, seldom pursues or
kills more than one in a day. A moor is much the same in appearance as a
forest, but that term is reserved for those tracts of heather‐land where
the grouse and the black‐cock abide. These are often rented to Englishmen,
the forests seldom; so that the Southron, if he have a taste for deer‐
stalking, generally depends for his chance of indulging it on the
hospitality of some Scottish friend.

This neighborhood is full of romantic glens and hollows where mountain
streams gurgle through narrow channels of rock, where tiny waterfalls
splash under bridges mossy with old age, and where real forests of pine
and birch and rowan, or mountain ash, make a variegated network across the
blue horizon. In one little gorge tradition says that a hunted partisan of
Charles Edward took refuge after the fatal battle of Culloden, in 1745,
and lived there concealed for several weeks. The particular place where he
hid was under a projecting ledge or table of rock, overhanging the brown,
foaming waters of the mimic torrent, which, though not large in volume,
might yet have strength enough to dash you in pieces, if you fell into the
narrow bed bristling with sharp, rocky points and irregular boulders,
round which the water boils and hisses, as if chafing at its imprisonment.
The rocks incline their jagged sides so far forward over the stream as
almost to meet in an arch above it, and the chasm can be easily, almost
safely, leaped. Indeed, the rift is invisible from the road, which passes
within a few yards of it. Its sides are fringed with heather, and are
undistinguishable, except when one is standing close upon them.

The North of England, with its mountains and its lakes, its solitary tarns
(pools or smaller lakes) and its becks, has a family likeness to Scotch
scenery. Its people, too, are akin to the Lowland Scotch in their
taciturnity, their hardy, physical nature, and their language; yet to
those who know both well the difference is very perceptible. In olden
times Lancashire and Yorkshire, lying to the west of the Lake country,
were emphatically the land of the church, one vast net‐work of beautiful
abbeys with their immense possessions. Even after the Reformation these
two counties remained the stronghold of Catholicity, and to this day they
contain more Catholics (exclusive of the large modern towns and their
population) than any other part of England. The favorite sport of
Lancashire is otter‐hunting.

A certain breed of hounds, having very long bodies and short legs, is kept
for the purpose; the streams abound in otters, and the hunt is very
exciting. The gentlemen wear preternaturally thick boots, covering even
the thighs, as they often have to wade in after the otter, whose teeth are
so sharp that they can take off a hound’s leg at one bite. These animals
dive dexterously under the banks, and generally lead the hunt a pretty
chase; but, never having seen this sport ourselves, it is difficult to
describe it graphically. The dialect of this part of the country is almost
as much a language as Provençal; the people have their own literature, and
one of their poets (a humorous one) has been styled, _par excellence_, the
“Lancashire Poet.” Lancashire people are desperately clannish, quite
despise the southern English, and obstinately adhere to their own customs,
as something immeasurably more dignified than the finical fashions of the
Southron. The gentlemen all talk the dialect when speaking with their
farmers, game‐keepers, or servants, and speak it with genuine gusto too. A
Lancashire kitchen is a heart‐warming sight; it is emphatically _the_ room
of a farm, an inn, or any middle‐class dwelling. The fire blazes in the
depths of a cavernous chimney, with settles on each side, on which two men
can sit abreast, while from the low roof hang endless strings of fine
onions and dozens of hams and flitches of bacon. At another part of the
ceiling is fixed an immense rack, over which hangs the oatmeal cake in
large sheets, of which any one is at liberty to break off a piece for his
supper unrebuked and without question of repayment. Hospitality is a
cardinal virtue here, but it is not that voluble, fussy hospitality which
worries its recipient and makes him feel the obligation; you are welcome
to go in and sit down, eat and drink, warm and dry yourself at the hearth,
and go out again, without being assailed by impertinent questions or bored
by long domestic revelations. A Lancashire host respects your mind while
he refreshes your body, and silently makes you at home. Those kitchens of
the north are the very type of comfort, with their vast corner‐cupboards,
their cleanliness—you might literally eat off the brick floors; they are
always paved with brick—their long oat‐cake racks and tempting meat, all
home‐cured, hung from the ceiling. The temptation may be too great for you
some night, if you happen to return to your lodgings, very hungry, at the
late hour of twelve—that is dissipation in Lancashire—for you may wander
in, and see no harm in hunting in the cupboard for eggs and flour, and in
slicing off whatever will conveniently detach itself from a hanging
flitch, in order to flavor some appetizing sauce of which you possess the
secret. Perhaps the midnight raid ends fatally, and you stumble over the
pots and pans, or find the embers hardly hot enough to cook the sauce, or
give it up at last in despair, with a ridiculous foreboding of what the
landlady will say to‐morrow morning when she contemplates the ragged
appearance of the best flitch! Let us hope that you will honestly own your
delinquencies, and not affirm that “it must have been the mice, ma’am!” It
will be the easier as you happen to know the house well, and its inmates
long ago agreed to overlook your little eccentricities with regard to
sauces!

Among the principal country festivities which draw large parties to the
neighboring houses in many parts of England, are the local cattle‐shows.
The breeding of cattle is a topic of almost as universal interest in
England as fox‐hunting, especially among country gentlemen. The secret of
this apparent interest lies rather in the intense pride with which they
naturally regard everything connected with their homes, than in downright
personal liking for fat oxen and prize pigs. Not even the farmers who
exhibit the cattle can outmatch the ladies of the neighborhood in their
solicitude for the honor of the county, and, besides this, the gentlemen
themselves sometimes enter the lists, and exhibit some choice specimen,
thus giving their households special reasons for pride and anxiety. Most
of the houses fill with guests for the occasion, and, despite the lateness
of the season (the shows are generally late in the autumn, the one to
which we refer taking place in November), the weather is usually
propitious. Let us take a peep in at the window of yonder large Tudor
house, with its cedars, sentinel‐like, guarding the approaches to the
hall‐door, and an old gabled, ivied ruin overlooking the gay mosaic of the
_parterre_. There is plenty of water here—ponds where huge old beeches
droop over the banks and moor‐fowl _swish_ through the rushes on the
margin, and ponds fringed with late roses, and lifting up in their midst
islands with rustic arbors and a wilderness of creeping plants. Within the
house is the usual amount of family portraits and antique carved
furniture, with a more than ordinary display of hot‐house flowers. A
little earlier in the season you would find in the drawing‐room two
immense marble vases, in each of which blossoms a queenly azalea, snowy or
ruddy, as the case may be. On the tables lie islands of moss, relieving
and framing three or four star‐shaped, blood‐red cactus‐blooms. Round the
high chimney‐piece, where a wood‐fire burns merrily (a luxury in England),
is assembled a family party, neither stiff nor yet free, and picturesque,
if nothing else; for the girls are dressed in the square‐cut bodices and
pale‐hued, brocaded overskirts of a more picturesque age. Perhaps they are
discussing art matters or weaving personal romances.... No, for here, as
elsewhere, you cannot take the bit in your mouth; it is the only penalty
of decorous country life in old England. They are talking of to‐morrow’s
agricultural fair, the annual cattle show, which takes place in the
country town. There is a large party in the house for it; it is the event
of the week. Most country ladies pretend to be, and some are, poultry
fanciers; so there is an additional department allotted to the prize
poultry. The carriages draw up in a wide field near the tents and sheds,
where a view of the race‐course can be had. The men circulate among the
cattle; the “judges” sit in a tribune provided for them. It is difficult
to get up any enthusiasm about this kind of thing, but the adjuncts are
quite as enjoyable as are most outdoor pleasures that you cannot enjoy
alone. The last day of the fair closes with a dinner, when the prize
beasts and their owners are commented upon and the general political
situation discussed. One of the farmers is a born orator; at least he
delights in the sound of his own flowery periods. He quotes Shakespeare
and Tennyson, and feels sure he has made a hit. As all professions are
represented, there is room for all kinds of toasts, and under the veil of
sociability the opportunities for speaking home‐truths are not neglected.
Around the hall are galleries that serve for spectators, both male and
female, and from this point many a ludicrous incident is revealed to you
that escapes the “grave and reverend seigniors” below. This is what a
spectator once saw: The dinner takes place once a year, and it is
impossible to have nothing but trained waiters. Many of the gentlemen on
this occasion brought their own servants with them; but even this was not
sufficient, and the supplementary waiters were “legion.” The dinner was
not as orderly as it might be. There was a great deal of hurrying and
skurrying, orders angrily given and awkwardly executed, wine liberally
spilt before reaching its destination, etc. Suddenly some one gave an
order from the far end of the hall, and an unlucky bumpkin, eager to show
his agility, made a dart forward, but came to an abrupt stand‐still in the
middle of a lake of soup that spread warm and moist about his feet. In his
haste he had stepped into the soup‐tureen, which another waiter, in clumsy
hurry, had momentarily deposited in this conspicuous place. The braying of
the band, whose conductor was naturally not a little exhilarated by the
copious “refreshment” distributed during the day, drowned these “asides”;
but we cannot help thinking that the position of a spectator, alive to
these incidents behind the scenes, was preferable to that of the unhappy
actors and speakers, nailed for four or five hours to the table, and
condemned to drink the execrable wine usually furnished on such occasions.

With this we will close this somewhat lengthy sketch of some of the
incidents of rural life in the old mother‐country—a subject so dear to
Washington Irving, so attractive to Longfellow, and so heart‐stirring to
many who, on this side of the Atlantic, have not yet lost in the turmoil
of business or the hurry of politics the fond, poetic remembrance of the
land of their forefathers. It is a restful picture; the soul grows young
again in the contemplation of that healthy, even placid home‐life,
diversified by so many local interests, and disturbed by so few dangerous
excitements. In such an atmosphere it is no wonder if scholars, poets, and
gentlemen develop quietly, as the fruit ripens on the sunny garden wall;
nor is it strange to find these men, so accomplished and so learned,
filling the unobtrusive and secluded walks of life, as well as the
councils of the nation, the cabinet, the bar, and the Parliament. Happy is
the nation that attains to a green old age; happy the country that keeps
all that is poetic in the past, without relinquishing the practical and
the useful in the present. It is a good thing to be able to look back
proudly on a long line of doughty forefathers, but better still to be able
to look forward as proudly to a goodly line of worthy descendants.




The Future Of The Russian Church.


By The Rev. Cæsarius Tondini, Barnabite.



I.


“How much happier is Russia than are many Catholic countries!”

It is thus that a German author, of the Baltic provinces, a Protestant,
and a subject of the czar, broke in upon the concert of complaints on the
condition of the Russians to which we had for a long period been
habituated. It is true that Augustus Wilhelm Hupel wrote towards the close
of the last century; but the state of things which drew from him this cry
of admiration continues even at this present time. Let us add that a
considerable number of writers, especially Protestants, share the
sentiments of Hupel; in fact, a certain government not long ago ranged
itself on the side of this author’s opinions, and undertook to procure for
its subjects, whether they would or not, the same happiness as that which
the Russian people enjoy. This fact is a more than sufficient inducement
for us conscientiously to study the cause of this happiness—a study to
which the following pages will be devoted.

Happily, the writer of the Baltic provinces expresses himself with
remarkable precision. “The monarch,” says Hupel, in speaking of the synod
which governs the Russian Church—“the monarch himself selects the members
of this ecclesiastical tribunal, and can also summarily dismiss those who
do not please him. It follows, therefore, that the members of the synod
entirely depend upon the will of the czar. Not only can they do nothing of
which he does not approve, but, by virtue of this arrangement, _it is the
czar himself who is the real head of the church of his empire_. Of what
lofty wisdom, then, is not this institution a proof! How much happier is
Russia than are many Catholic countries!”(123) It is evident, therefore,
that the object of admiration and envy is the concentration of civil and
religious power in the sovereign’s hands; the synod of St. Petersburg
being the institution which secures and perpetuates the concentration of
this double power.

The czar to whom Russia is indebted for the synod is Peter I., surnamed
the Great (1689‐1725), than whom few sovereigns have been the object of
more enthusiastic admiration. The things which he undertook and in which
he succeeded, for promoting the civilization of Russia, are truly
surprising, his laws being, in our opinion, the most splendid monument he
has created in his own memory. Frequently, in glancing through the
_Complete Collection of the Laws of the Russian Empire_,(124) while taking
into account the number, the variety, and extent of the subjects embraced
by the genius of Peter, the circumstances under which he had to work, and
the thankless elements which he contrived to manage, we have experienced
sincere admiration; but, side by side with his great qualities, in what
ignoble and monstrous vices did he not indulge! If we were to quote
certain judgments passed by his contemporaries, it would be easy to
understand the disgust with which the _History of Peter the Great_, by
Voltaire, fills every sincere and virtuous man. Great qualities do not
excuse great vices, especially in the case of Peter, who on many occasions
proved by his conduct that he was capable of self‐restraint, had he only
chosen to exercise it. This czar, whose leading characteristics were a
spirit of determination and an energetic will, can neither be excused for
his debauches nor his cruelties. The reforms originated by him naturally
bear the impress of the despotic character of their author. In the present
day it is openly said, even in Russia, that Peter acted, “as if there were
no possible limits to his power, setting himself determinedly to gain his
end, without in the least troubling himself about the nature of the
means.”(125) We may add that the religious convictions of the czar were,
to say the least, an enigma. And this is the man who gave to the Russian
Church the organization which she retains to this day.

Unhappily for the people, when a man rises from among them and
accomplishes unheard‐of undertakings, the prestige of his name eclipses
the light in which justice would regard his actions. If flattery erects to
him its altars, and if religious or political passions find it to their
interest to exalt him, this man, though in his grave, continues no less to
exercise a powerful influence; and all his qualities, even his bad ones,
receive a species of consecration. A century and a half have elapsed since
the death of Peter the Great, and yet it may be said with truth that he
still rules Russia. It is no common thing to find a series of sovereigns,
all of whom draw their inspiration from the same idea; and yet all the
czars, with the single exception of Peter II., who only reigned three
years (1727‐1730), perpetuated, with regard to the Russian Church, the
idea of the originator of the synod.

That the czars, however, should have made it their rule to walk in the
footsteps of Peter, and that in their ukases they should recall his memory
with enthusiastic eulogies, it is easy to conceive; and also that
Protestants, especially those of Germany, should never weary in their
praises of his religious reforms; these praises being, in the first place,
the payment of a debt of gratitude to the czar, and, in the second, an
homage rendered to the Protestant side of the reforms themselves. But the
most painful part of the matter is that Peter and his successors should
have found, in that very church which they were oppressing, not only
docile instruments of their will, but also the warmest encouragements to
prosecute their work. Theophanes Prokopovitch, Bishop of Pskoff, of whom
we will speak further, wrote treatises to prove that “the czars have
received from on high the power to govern the church; only it is not
permitted that they should officiate in it.”(126) Plato Levchin,
Metropolitan of Moscow, while he was still tutor to the Czarowitz Paul,
afterwards Paul I., prepared for his use a catechism which has been held
in great esteem by Protestants. In the epistle dedicatory he thus
addresses his pupil: “I bear in mind a saying of your highness—saying
worthy of eternal remembrance. We were one day reading this passage in the
Gospel: _Take heed that you say not among yourselves: We have Abraham for
our father_ (S. Matt. iii. 9); when, upon my remarking that the Jews
vainly gloried in having Abraham for their father, whose faith and works
they failed to imitate, your highness deigned to reply: ‘And I also should
glory in vain that I descend from the great Peter, did I not intend to
imitate his works.’ That these and other similarly excellent dispositions
of your highness may increase with your years, behold this is what the
church of God, prostrate before the altar, supplicates, and will never
cease to supplicate, of the divine mercy, from the profoundest depths of
her heart.”(127)

There is nothing surprising in the fact that lessons such as these,
explained and developed in the body of the catechism, should have borne
their fruit. The pupil of Plato, having become czar, was the first who
introduced into official edicts the title of Head of the Church(128) for
himself and his successors, and more emphatically than perhaps any one of
the others he established as a principle the supremacy of the czar over
the church.(129)

We forbear to quote other examples. If it be true that nations never stop
short at a theory, the same thing is true also of sovereigns; and, when
Nicholas I. acted as every one knows he did act, he was but carrying out
the doctrine accepted and _taught_ in the Russian Church. As for the
people, it would have been indeed surprising had they not shared in the
doctrine of the church, and still more so had they attempted any
opposition to it. In fact, as might be supposed, there was no lack of
writers who set themselves to make the people appreciate the advantages of
every description which they enjoyed under the religious autocracy of the
czars.

This state of things could not, however, last indefinitely; and it was the
Emperor Nicholas himself who, by some of his measures, contributed to
hasten its end. At the commencement of his reign it was desired to exclude
the foreign element from teaching, and to substitute for it the national
only. Professors were lacking; and, to form these, the government thought
it well to send out young men at its own expense to learn in the _German_
universities that which they would subsequently have to teach the
Russians. Besides, for many years past Russia has entered into active and
frequent relations with the rest of Europe; the regulations which bound
Russians, if not to the glebe, at least to the soil of their country, have
been relaxed; travelling has been facilitated; travellers have been able
with less difficulty to penetrate into the country, and its own
inhabitants to go abroad and observe what is passing in the rest of the
world.

And what has resulted from all this? Many things; and, first of all, the
following: “The future propagators of learning and civilization,” says the
Père Gagarin, in a remarkable pamphlet,(130) “were sent to Berlin, where
they lost no time in becoming fervent disciples of the Hegelian ideas. It
was in vain that serious warnings reached St. Petersburg of the fatal
direction these young men were pursuing. For reasons which perhaps some
future day may explain the warnings were wholly unheeded; and in a short
time the chairs of the principal universities were filled by these
dangerous enthusiasts, whose newly‐imported ideas made rapid progress.
School‐masters, professors, journalists, the writers who had been formed
in the universities, successively became the apostles of the doctrines
which they had adopted. Neither censures, nor the watchfulness of the
custom‐house, nor the active surveillance of an ubiquitous and anxious
police, availed to put a stop to the propagation of revolutionary notions,
protected as they were by eccentric formulas, unintelligible to all who
were not in the secret of the sect. It was not until 1848 that the eyes of
the government began to be opened; but it had no efficacious remedy at
hand. It multiplied regulations, of which the object was to hinder the
diffusion of modern science and ideas; but was destitute of salutary
principles to offer as a substitute for the unhealthy teaching of which it
now recognized the dangers. The system of national education, which had so
miserably failed, had been based upon ‘orthodoxy,’ autocracy, and
nationality, and was now resulting in the triumph of German ideas, in the
atheism of Feuerbach, and in radicalism and communism of the most
unbridled description.”

That we may not unjustly charge the Emperor Nicholas with being _solely_
responsible for these results, it must also be said that other Russians,
who had at any rate travelled at their own expense, and foreigners who had
come to settle in Russia, assisted in propagating the same doctrines. If
books are not printed without some reasonable hope that they will be read,
and if the number of publications in which certain ideas are particularly
developed proves the favor with which they are received, it would be only
too easy to make a statistical statement of alarming significance, showing
the favor with which the most revolutionary doctrines are received by the
Russians. Books printed in the Russian language are evidently addressed to
Russians only, this language not having hitherto acquired a place in that
part of education which is called the study of modern languages; and we
can prove the existence of numerous publications in the Russian language,
appearing some in London, some in Berlin, some at Leipsic, some at Geneva,
and elsewhere also, in which the most communistic doctrines find their
apology. Amongst others we may notice the publication at Zurich of a
periodical review entitled _V’pered!_ (Forward!), which wars against all
belief in the supernatural and against every kind of authority. It matters
little that the writings of which we speak themselves penetrate with
difficulty into Russia; it is not to be supposed that the fact of having,
when abroad, read this review or anything similar closes to Russians the
return to their country. The book remains outside; but its teaching enters
with them.

Let us now return to the consideration of the Russian Church. The radical
ideas of which we have been speaking are plainly incompatible with the
religious autocracy of the czars; and nevertheless Russia offers us the
spectacle of men imbued with these ideas, and even manifesting them openly
without, who suddenly recover their orthodoxy as soon as they recross the
frontier of their country.

Under pain of deserving the reproach of cowardly hypocrisy, these Russians
cannot support the existing state of things, liberty of conscience being
too intimately allied with their principles. The reader will judge whether
it is not wholly immoral that men who have ceased to believe in anything
should, in order to escape legal consequences, present themselves in the
“orthodox” churches for confession and communion!... Now, as far as we are
aware, none of the pains and penalties against those who, being born of
“orthodox” parents, fail to practise the state religion, or to fulfil
their duty of annual confession and communion, have hitherto been
abolished; still less are the penalties abolished to which all are liable
who propagate doctrines contrary to those of the official church.

But the Russian atheists and rationalists of every shade of opinion are
not the only persons who have a supreme interest in requiring, together
with liberty of conscience, the abolition of the penalties to which they
would be liable if the same rigor were observed towards them as towards
those Russians who have become Catholics. For the czars, not satisfied
with calling themselves and with being the head of the “orthodox” church,
have also arrogated to themselves the right of direction with regard to
all the religious sects of the empire.

When Paul I. declared that “the supreme authority, confided to the
autocrat by God, extends also over the ecclesiastical state, and that the
clergy are bound to obey the czar _as the head chosen by God himself_ in
all things, _religious_ as well as civil,”(131) he was not addressing
himself to the “orthodox” but to the Catholic subjects of the empire. It
is in employing similar language, and by virtue of the same general
principle, that the czars have defined the position of Protestants,
Armenians, Jews, and Mahometans. However accommodating one may suppose the
Russian subjects belonging to these different religions to be, we cannot
understand why, at least in heart, they do not protest against the strange
pretension that in religious matters they are bound to obey the “orthodox”
czars. Neither can we suppose that, if they hold their errors in good
faith, and believe themselves in possession of “religious truth,” they do
not experience some desire to communicate their treasure to others, and do
not suffer in obeying the articles of the penal code which forbid their so
doing.(132) What can be, upon this subject, the sentiments of the ten
millions of Russians belonging to the various sects formed in the bosom of
the Russian Church itself, their name itself indicates; they are called
collectively _Raskolniks_—that is to say, _schismatics_. Thus we need not
say what must be the thoughts and desires of the Catholic subjects of the
czar. There remain only the “orthodox”; but it is they who form the
majority of the Russian subjects. It would be too much to expect to find
in them the partisans of a more extended liberty of conscience than that
which is permitted by the Code. “The dominant religion of the empire,”
says the Code, “is the orthodox. Liberty of worship is awarded not only to
the members of other Christian confessions, but also to Jews, Mahometans,
and pagans.... _The dominant church alone has the right to make
proselytes._”(133) We will not stop to consider the motives which induce
the “orthodox” Russians to oppose themselves to a more extended liberty of
conscience,(134) but will rather proceed to examine whether, apart from
what we have here said, it be not urgent, even in the interests of
orthodoxy itself, that some changes should be introduced into the present
organization of the Russian Church. We may be able to show that, by a
singular disposition of Providence, the interests of the orthodox _faith_
are intimately allied to those of the Catholic Church in Russia.



II.


If we are to believe Russian theologians, the Russian Church, with its
czar, realizes in a certain measure the ideal of a church sustained by a
powerful sovereign, which to many persons is the most desirable state of
things possible. We may call to mind the saying of the Count de Maistre on
the Holy Roman Empire, which was neither holy, nor Roman, nor an empire;
in fact, the testimony of history leaves us in doubt as to whether this
institution has served more to protect or to afflict the Catholic Church.
Prosperity or reverses, it is true, alike turn to the advantage of those
dear to God; but scarcely will any one take upon himself to maintain that,
because reverses are useful to the church, they must be purposely procured
for her. And therefore, whatever may be, for a longer or shorter time, the
probable advantages of this institution, it is best, if we mistake not, to
leave its revival to the providence of God. But if such is the teaching of
history with regard to an emperor, guardian of the faith and protector of
the Catholic Church, history condemns with a far more powerful eloquence
the strange protection with which the czars have overshadowed their
communion. In the _Spiritual Regulation_ may be seen the passage in which
Peter the Great is designated the “guardian of orthodoxy and of all things
relating to good order in the holy church.”(135) The successors of Peter
continued to declare themselves invested with the same mission, and this
passage of the _Spiritual Regulation_ was also inserted in the Russian
Code.(136)

To be the guardian of orthodoxy, and of all which concerns good order in
the holy church, is in fact the _first duty_ of a Christian monarch. We
will examine briefly the manner in which the czars have acquitted
themselves of this duty.

Any reader who, without being repelled by the subject and form of the
_Spiritual Regulation_, would impose upon himself the trouble of perusing
them, text and notes, to the end, would have no difficulty in
understanding with what good reason Protestants can and must look upon
Peter as one of themselves. The Protestant tendencies of the _Spiritual
Regulation_ are evident. The reader will also observe the precautions, all
in favor of the Protestants, there taken for the preaching of the divine
Word. The priests, the monks, and the bishops of the Orthodox Church,
treated as they were by Peter, were made to appear simply contemptible. In
the same way, the favor publicly shown by him to the Protestants of
Germany, the importance he accorded to them, and the boundless confidence
he placed in their co‐operation with him for the civilization of Russia,
and finally the ridicule he cast upon holy things in his infamous
orgies—all this can hardly be reconciled with the idea of the fulfilment
of his first duty as a Christian prince.

In the notes to the _Spiritual Regulation_ we may also perceive, in more
places than one, the manner in which Catherine II. understood and
exercised her mission as _Head of the Greek Church_; for thus she entitled
herself in writing to Voltaire. No sincerely orthodox Russian could read
the correspondence of Catherine with Voltaire without blushing. If
Protestants may fairly claim Peter I. as their own, unbelievers have a
full right to do the same with regard to Catherine, and glory in it, as in
fact they do. In various passages of these letters (which we have perused)
she ridicules not only the ceremonies but also the _sacraments_ of her
church. If to this we add the favor shown by her to the infidel
philosophers of the _Encyclopédie_, the free access which their
productions found at St. Petersburg, the atmosphere of impiety with which
she surrounded herself, and the state of her own morals, so plainly
indicative of an unbelieving soul, our estimate will not appear
exaggerated. It would in truth have been miraculous if, under such
tutelage, orthodoxy could have retained its hold upon the minds of those
who knew how to read, write, and think; and thus the unbelief that
prevails among the higher classes in Russia is the heritage of Catherine
II. If, on the other hand, she showed herself zealous for the maintenance
of faith among the lower orders, it was because she predicted the same
results from their unbelief as she did from any desire they might evince
for knowledge. “It is not for Russians,” she wrote to the Governor of
Moscow, “that I am founding schools; it is for Europe, where we must not
lose ground in public opinion. From the day that our peasants shall have a
desire for instruction, neither you nor I will remain in our places.”

Under the successors of Catherine II. Russian orthodoxy underwent various
phases, according to the degree of orthodoxy professed by the czars and
the vicissitudes of their interior and exterior policy. Paul I. was so
convinced that he was the real head of the church that he one day proposed
to say Mass.(137) On the other hand, it is certain that he contemplated
the reunion of the Russian with the Catholic Church.(138) This monarch,
however, was incapable of commanding respect, or of helping a return to
the faith, either by his intelligence or his moral qualities; and thus
incredulity continued its ravages in Russia.

In the life of Alexander I. a period is distinguishable in which the czar
had an evident leaning towards Protestantism; and his historians do not
fail to remark the influence obtained over him by the Protestant, Mme. de
Krudener. If we are not mistaken, those who so actively busied themselves
in founding a Bible society in Russia had no intention of favoring
orthodoxy.

It was also under the reign of the same czar that appeared the first
edition (1823) of the catechism of Mgr. Philaret, destined to take the
place of that by Mgr. Plato, then used for religious instruction in the
schools. Now, in 1823 Mgr. Philaret was far from being so orthodox in his
writings as he subsequently became; and the first edition of his catechism
differs materially from the later ones. “The Emperor Alexander,” writes an
author well deserving of confidence, “was an orthodox Christian, _not in
the sense of his church_, but in that of the rigorous conformity of his
belief to the fundamental doctrine of all Christian churches; which is the
redemption of mankind by the death of Jesus Christ, by means of
faith.”(139) What a stone to cast at a czar, the guardian of orthodoxy!
Notwithstanding all this, Alexander, towards the close of his life, must
have had continuous relations with Pope Pius VII.; some affirm even that
he died a Catholic.(140)

As we have seen, it was at the commencement of the reign of the Emperor
Nicholas that, at the expense of the government, the Russian youth were
sent for education to the University of Berlin. Then came the formidable
revulsion of orthodoxy, which, announced by the revision of the catechism
of Mgr. Philaret, manifested itself by the sanguinary “conversions” in
Lithuania, in 1839. The tidings were received in Europe by a general cry
of indignation; and the remembrance has not yet faded away.(141) By a
strange coincidence Nicholas, to whom is due the glory of having completed
the gigantic undertaking vainly attempted by all his predecessors, of the
codification of all the Russian laws, had desired that in the Code the
following article should be inserted: “The dominant church alone possesses
the right of leading those who do not belong to her to embrace her faith.
This faith, however, is produced by divine grace in the soul, by
instruction, by gentleness, and especially by good examples. Therefore is
it that the dominant church does not allow herself to make use of any
coercive means, how small soever, to convert to orthodoxy those who follow
other confessions and other beliefs, and, after the example and the
preaching of the apostles, she in no wise threatens those who will not be
converted from their belief to hers.” All this is to be found in the
Russian Code of 1832, of 1842, and of 1857, and continues to have the
force of law _at this present time_!(142) We will say nothing here of the
reign of the present emperor, but will merely observe that the powerful
reaction which took place almost immediately after the death of Nicholas,
and which compelled the government to enter upon the way of reforms, was
the inevitable consequence of that emperor’s conduct. It is only just that
the historians of Alexander II., in passing judgment upon his hesitations
and self‐contradictions in religious affairs, should bear in mind the
difficulty of the part bequeathed to him by Nicholas.

But neither the ten millions of _Raskolniks_ which Russia can count at
this day, nor yet the numerous unbelievers and rationalists of every shade
which she contains, protest as eloquently against the protection afforded
by the czars to orthodoxy and the church as the impotence to which the
czars have reduced that church itself for exercising any influence over
the enlightened classes. All who have written upon Russia agree in
acknowledging and deploring the degradation of the orthodox clergy.(143)

Lest we should trust ourselves, with regard to a point so delicate for us,
to any exaggerated or inexact accounts, we have been careful to be guided
in our statements by writers offering every security, not only for
competence and impartiality, but also for their sympathy with the orthodox
clergy. The author of _La Tolérance et le schisme Religieux en Russie_,
known under the name of Schédo‐Ferroti, appears to us to unite all these
qualities in a high degree. “Having,” he writes, “in the capacity of an
old engineering officer, traversed Russia in all directions, taking, on
foot and with the circumferentor in my hand, journeys of four and five
hundred kilometres; and travelling in this way for the space of six months
at a time, stopping at every village which I happened to find on my way, I
habitually addressed myself to the priest for any information I desired to
obtain, and, early taking into consideration the moral and political
importance of these men, I set myself to study them with particular
attention.... I do not exaggerate in saying that I have made the
acquaintance of many more than two hundred Russian priests. I may say that
I met with specimens of all the varieties, from the young priest but
yesterday arrived in the parish to the old man bowed down beneath a load
of moral and physical sufferings; from the priest of the regiment to the
ascetic fanatic; from the ex‐professor of the seminary, nominated to the
cure of some rich church in the capital, where he parades his rhetoric and
complacently displays his erudition, to the humble village priest scarcely
able to decipher his Breviary.”(144)

This is enough, as to the competence of M. Schédo‐Ferroti; and with regard
to his impartiality on the point we are considering, it appears in every
page, as will be proved by our quotations. For the rest, the author is a
Protestant, and argues warmly in favor of religious liberty for every
worship and for every sect.

With regard to his sympathy for the orthodox clergy, it would be difficult
to find a more devoted advocate. “It is,” he writes, “with satisfaction
that I can say that I always found better than I had expected, better than
I had any right to expect, considering the situation and the social
position in which he found himself, the man whom I had set myself to
study.”(145)

Let us add, moreover, that M. Schédo‐Ferroti is by no means tender towards
the Catholic clergy, over whom, according to him, the orthodox Russian
clergy have the advantage in not being “tainted with hypocrisy.”(146) This
is an additional reason for our choice of this author.

We will now see what he says respecting the social influence of the
Russian “popes,” quoting only a few lines: “Oppressed and disregarded by
his superiors, the pope loses three‐fourths of his means of action, for he
sees himself cast off by the upper class, tolerated by the middle class,
and turned into ridicule by the common people.... Judging from
appearances, and noticing that everywhere, even in the receptions given by
dignitaries of the church, the pope occupies the _lowest_ place, the
masses have contracted the habit of never assigning him any other.”(147)

Such are the Russian clergy who are in contact with the people—the clergy
whose office it is to instruct the Russians in orthodoxy, and to maintain
them in it. Now, this was not by any means the social position of the
clergy when Peter I. instituted the synod. On the contrary, the _Spiritual
Regulation_ shows us this czar, alarmed at the excessive influence which
the clergy at that time possessed, painting in sombre colors the dangers
resulting therefrom to the country, and finding therein his best pretext
for establishing the synod. It is the institutions of the czars which have
created for the clergy the melancholy situation in which they find
themselves at the present day, which have deprived them of all moral
influence, and have reduced them to be “cast off by the higher orders,
scarcely tolerated by the middle classes, and turned into ridicule by the
common people.” That which retains these classes, notwithstanding the
contempt in which they hold their popes, in an outward profession of
orthodoxy, is the _Penal Code_. Can it be believed that, without the
injunctions enforced by this Code, the people would confess to priests
whom they so utterly despise?

To resume: There are historical facts still living in the memory of the
Russian people which show them their czars making small account,
personally, of orthodoxy, at the very time when, by laws of great
severity, they compel its observance by the people. They see the higher
ranks sceptical or unbelieving, revolutionary ideas in favor with a great
number of their fellow‐countrymen; the _Raskolniks_, who in the time of
Peter the Great were scarcely sufficient to form themselves into sects,
now so powerful by their numbers and their political importance that they
have already forced the government and the synod into making some
considerable concessions; they see the clergy reduced, thanks to the
institutions of Peter, which have been continued and completed by his
successors, to mere agents of the police, tools in the hands of power, and
forming a caste so despised that rarely is a pope admitted further than
the antechamber of any house belonging to a member of the upper classes,
and powerless to exercise any influence whatever, even upon the lower
orders; this is a true portrait of the Russian Church of to‐day—the
Russian Church such as the czars have made it.(148)

And to‐morrow?

This to‐morrow, now drawing near, will still more clearly reveal what the
czars have made of orthodoxy and of the church of which they call
themselves the guardians. The day must soon come when, by the intrinsic
force of things, the regulations of which we have been speaking will
disappear from the Russian Code, and when nothing will force the Russians
any longer to keep up any relations with a clergy whom they scorn, nor to
practise the religion of which they are the teachers and representatives.
That will be the day to which Catherine II. looked forward with so much
dread—the day when the Russian people will “know how to read and write,
and will feel a desire for instruction.” What will happen then in Russia
has been shown to us, on a small scale, in what has taken place before our
eyes in more than one Catholic country, where the clergy, strong in the
support of the laws, lived without anxiety about the future, until
political revolutions, coming suddenly to change the relations between
church and state, placed them without any preparation face to face with
unbelief. We say, however, _on a small scale_, for if the Catholic clergy
could not foresee the first outbreak of unbelief, they required but a
little space of time in which to moderate or check its progress. Neither
in Spain nor Italy can unbelief boast of having greatly diminished the
number of Catholics; one might say rather that the new legislation has but
served to open an easy way out to those who were such only in name, and
has thus delivered the church from them. Information obtained from
undoubtedly authentic sources proves that the churches are no less filled
by the faithful, and the sacraments no less frequented, than before. This
is a state of things, which it will be difficult to find in Russia; and we
will mention the reason why.

And in the first place, if it is just to acknowledge that, in some
provinces of the countries we have just named, abuses may have crept in
among the clergy, still they were neither so serious nor so general as
people have been pleased to represent them. Their principal source was to
be found in the too great number of ecclesiastics, of whom some had
entered holy orders without a true vocation. But, precisely by reason of
the large number of priests, there are very many good ones to be found,
and enough of these to suffice amply for the needs of the faithful. Their
virtues, which contrast with the manner of life habitual to the apostles
of irreligion, thus formed a first entrenchment against unbelief.

Will it be the same in Russia?

We are far from wishing to disparage the Russian clergy. Their defects
neither destroy nor excuse any which may be met with among Catholic
priests; we will even admit that the great majority of the Russian popes
lead exemplary lives. But is it known what is the gain to unbelief, in
Russia, from even a very small minority of bad popes? In Russia each
parish has only just so many priests as are absolutely necessary to carry
on the worship; and with scarcely any exceptions, especially in the
country, no parish has more than one priest. If, then, this priest lose
the faith, unbelief will have free course in his parish. The reader would
here perhaps remind us of the monks, who are still numerous in Russia, and
ask whether these could not come to the assistance of the secular clergy.
Any Russian would smile, were such a question put to him; but we will
confine ourselves to remarking, in the first place, that the monks who
have received holy orders (_hiero‐moines_) are very rare, and, secondly,
that never would any Russian parish desire the intervention of a monk.
Stations, retreats, spiritual exercises, general communions, all these
expressions do not, so far as we know, possess even any equivalents in the
Russian language to this day, unless, indeed, in the Catholic books in
that tongue which the government of St. Petersburg has recently caused to
be printed, in order, it might seem, that more prayers might ascend to
heaven in the Russian language, and fewer in Polish. In any case, the
interference of monks in the management of parishes would be a far bolder
innovation even than the “correction” of the liturgical books, which
gained for Russia the ten millions of sectaries she can reckon at the
present day. And this comparison reminds us that on the self‐same day
whereon orthodoxy shall lose the support of the Penal Code, the Russian
popes will not only have to defend it against unbelief, but also against
the various Russian sects, some of which surpass in their diabolical
superstitions and abominable mysteries all that has been related of the
Gnostics and Manicheans. And, moreover, it must not be forgotten that the
Russian popes, however exemplary they may be, and however full of zeal for
orthodoxy, are married priests. Thus one quality is wanting to them, of
which the prestige is far from being superfluous.

We will not ask how it happens that the Russian clergy, if truly virtuous,
are “cast off by the higher classes, barely tolerated by the middle class,
and turned into ridicule by the lower orders of the people,” when goodness
and virtue rarely, if ever, fail to give their possessor an ascendency,
especially over the masses, which is independent of either rank or
learning. At the same time, we do not intend to place any reliance on the
statements we find in Russian writings on this subject; the falsehoods and
exaggerations which are so frequent, even in Catholic countries, with
regard to priests, make it a duty to receive with mistrust the accusations
of the Russians against their clergy. But, we repeat, the Russian clergy
who are in contact with the people are married, and this fact deprives
them of a quality which is far from being unnecessary.

Here we may perhaps be reminded of the Protestant ministers, especially
the Anglican, “so respectable,” we are assured, “so surrounded with
confidence and esteem, and at the same time a married clergy.”

We have made it our rule to avoid all recrimination, and therefore accept
on trust all that we are told of the excellence of the Protestant
ministers; but we ask, in our turn, how is it possible to establish a
parallel between their mission and that of the “orthodox” clergy?
Protestantism, of whatever form, recognizes no other judge than individual
reason, on many questions touching upon morals, while, on the other hand,
the “orthodox” church possesses an authority which decides upon them in
the sense least favorable to natural inclinations. It is only some few
forms of Protestantism that impose any particular mode of worship; whereas
the orthodox communion does not on this point allow freedom of choice to
its members. Protestantism has banished expiatory works; the orthodox
church requires prolonged fasts and abstinences. Protestantism sends us to
God for the humble confession of our sins, but the orthodox church
commands that they should be confessed to a priest, in order to obtain, by
this painful act of humiliation, the pardon of God. If Protestantism
points to Jesus Christ as our model, it nevertheless circumscribes the
sphere in which we are allowed to imitate him; while the orthodox church
fixes no limit to the imitation of our divine Example. Virginity, poverty,
and obedience are for Protestantism that which the cross was to the
Gentiles—“foolishness”; but the orthodox church recognizes in them the
counsels of perfection bequeathed by Christ himself to those who desire
most closely to resemble him.

We will not pursue the parallel further.

To Be Continued.




The Leap For Life.


AN EPISODE IN THE CAREER OF PRES. MACMAHON.

I.

        In Algeria, with Bugeaud,
        Harassed by a crafty foe,
Were the French, in eighteen hundred thirty‐one;
        Swarthy Arabs prowled about
        Camp and outpost and redoubt
        Crouching here and crawling there,
        Lurking, gliding everywhere,
Tiger‐hearted, under stars and under sun,
        Seeking by some stealthy chance
        Vengeance on the troops of France—
        Vengeance fierce and fell, to sate
        Savage rage and savage hate
        For the deeds of desolation harshly done.

II.

                  On a rugged plateau,
Forty miles from headquarters of Marshal Bugeaud,
Lay an outpost, besieged by the merciless foe.
Day by day close and closer the Arab lines drew
    Round the hard‐beset French.

                  To dash out and flash through,
Like a wind‐driven flame, they would dare, though a host
Hot from Hades stood there. But abandon the post?
Nay, they dare not do that; they were soldiers of France,
And dishonor should stain neither sabre nor lance;
They could bravely meet death, though like Hydra it came
Horror‐headed and dire, but no shadow of shame
For a trust left to perish when danger drew nigh
Should e’er dim the flag waving free to the sky.
But soon came a terror more dread to the soul
Than war’s wild thunder‐crash when its battle‐clouds roll,
And the heavens are shrouded from light, while a glare,
As of hell, breaks in hot, lurid streams on the air!
        It was Famine, grim‐visaged and gaunt,
        To the camp most appalling of foes—
        Slow to strike, slow to kill, but full sure
        As the swift headsman’s deadliest blows.
        O’er the ramparts it sullenly strode,
        Glided darkly by tent and by wall,
        Spreading awe wheresoever it went,
        And the gloom of dismay over all;
Blighting valor that ne’er in war’s red front had quailed,
Blanching cheeks that no tempest of strife e’er had paled.

III.

Then a council was held, and the commandant said
Direst peril was near; they must summon swift aid
From the Marshal, or all would be lost ere the sun
Of to‐morrow went down in the west. Was there one
Who, to save the command and the honor of France,
Would ride forth with despatches? He ceased, and a glance
At the bronzed faces near showed that spirits to dare
Any desperate deed under heaven were there.
But the first to arise and respond was a youth
Whose brow bore nature’s signet of courage and truth,
In whose eye valor shone calm and clear as a star
When the winds are at rest and the clouds fade afar.
Who was he that stood forth with such resolute air?
Young Lieutenant MacMahon, bold, free, _débonnaire_,
Never knight looked more gallant with shield and with spear,
Never war‐nurtured chieftain less conscious of fear.
In his mien was the heroic flash of the Gaul,
With the fire of the Celt giving grandeur to all;
And he said, head erect, face with ardor aglow,
“I will ride with despatches to Marshal Bugeaud!”

IV.

        It is night, and a stillness profound
        Folds the camp; Arabs stealthily creep
        Here and there in the moonlight beyond,
        With ears eagerly bent for a sound
        From the garrison, watchful and weak;
        O’er the tents welcome night‐breezes sweep,
        Bringing balm unto brow and to cheek
        Of men scorched by a pitiless sun
        To a hue almost swarthy and deep
        As the hue of the foe they would shun.

V.

        Stretching dimly afar,
Between slopes that are rugged and bare,
Half obscure under moonbeam and star,
Half revealed in the soft, misty air,
Runs a rude, broken way that will lead
Gallant rider and sure‐footed steed
Westward forth to the camp of Bugeaud,
Forty miles over high land and low;
But the steed must be trusty and fleet,
And the bridle hand steady and keen
That shall guide him by rock and ravine,
Where each stride of the galloping feet
Must span dangers that slumber unseen;
And beyond, scarce a league to the west,
Yawns a treacherous chasm, dark and deep,
Where death lurks like a serpent asleep,
And the rider must ride at his best,
And his steed take the terrible leap
Like a winged creature cleaving the air,
Else a grim, ghastly corpse shall be there,
With perchance a steed stark on its breast,
And the moon shall look down with a stare
Where they lie in perpetual rest.

VI.

Now the silence is broken by neigh and by champ
And the clatter of hoofs, and away from the camp
Rides MacMahon, as gallant, as light, and as free
As the bridegroom who goes to his marriage may be.
With prance and with gallop and gay caracole
His swift steed bounds along, as if spurning control;
But the bridle‐hand guides him unerring and true,
And each stroke of the hoofs is thew answering thew.
Through the moonlight they go, fading slowly from sight,
Till both rider and steed sink away in the night.
But they go not unheard, and they speed not unseen;
Dark eyes furtively watch, flashing fiercely and keen
From dim ambush around; then like spectres arise
White‐robed figures that follow; the rider descries
Them on slope and in hollow, and knows they pursue.
But he fears not their craft or the deeds they may do,
For his brave steed is eager and strong, and the pace
Growing faster and faster each stride of the chase.
Now the slopes right and left seem alive with the foe
Gliding ghost‐like along, but still stealthy and low,
As wild creatures that crouch in a jungle; they think
To entrap him when back from the terrible brink
Of the chasm he returns, for his steed cannot leap
The dread gulf, and the rider will halt when its steep
Ragged walls ope before him, with death lying deep
In the darkness below; they will seize him, and take
From his heart, by fell torture of fagot and stake,
Every secret it holds; then his life‐blood may flow,
But he never shall ride to the camp of Bugeaud.

VII.

Still unflinching and free through the moonlight he goes,
And each pulse with the hot flush of eagerness glows.
Now a glance at the path where his gallant steed flies,
Now a gleam at the weird, spectral forms that arise
On the dim, rugged slopes, then still onward and on,
Till he nears the abyss, and its gaping jaws yawn
On his sight; but the rider well knows it is there,
And his speed is soon cautiously checked to prepare
For the desperate leap; he must now put to proof
The true mettle beneath, for the slip of a hoof
Or a swerve on the brink will dash both into doom,
Where the sad stars shall watch o’er a cavernous tomb.
Girth and bridle and stirrup are felt, to be sure
That no flaw shall bring peril—and all is secure;
Then with eyes fixed before, and brow bent to the wind,
And one thought of the foe and his comrades behind,
And a low, earnest prayer that all heaven must heed,
He slacks bridle, plies spur, and gives head to his steed.
With a bound it responds, ears set back, nostrils wide,
And the rush of a thunder‐bred storm in its stride!
Now the brink! now the leap! they are over! Hurrah!
Horse and rider are safe, and dash wildly away;
Not a slip, not a flinch, swift and sure as the flight
Of an eagle in mid‐air they sweep through the night,
While the baffled foe glare in bewildered amaze
At the fast‐flying prey speeding far from their gaze;
And the soft stars grow dim in the dawn’s early glow
When MacMahon rides into the camp of Bugeaud.




The Year Of Our Lord 1874.


A general glance at the movements of the past year will scarcely prove
encouraging, even to the most devout believer in the glory and the destiny
of the golden century drawing so rapidly to its close. Our own nation,
which—with steam, electricity, railroads, the newspaper as it stands to‐
day in all its power and pride (_vide_ the current number of the New York
_Herald_), and other great material developments of the age—may consider
itself at will as either the mightiest product or the _enfant gâté_ of the
century, has not too great matter for self‐congratulation. Our national
year, that dawned on disaster, has struggled through a painful life only
to close in gloom, with perhaps a faint though uncertain glimmer afar off
of better times to come. The “Christian” statesmen who have had the
country and its management all to themselves these many years past have
left behind them a bitter legacy. The great scandals—for even scandals in
these days have a greatness of their own—which at length broke up the
ranks of the “Christian” statesmen were sufficiently touched upon last
year, and are only called to mind here as tending in great measure to
explain the year of national distress we have just passed through.

All through the winter months the poverty and misery of the masses in New
York and other of our chief cities were unexampled in our history; nor was
the revival of business during the spring, summer, and fall seasons of
such a nature as to warrant the hope of being able to stave off a similar
calamity in the early months of the coming year. The real cause of the
distress is known to all—the general stagnation of business in 1873,
resulting chiefly from the panic of the previous year, which in turn
resulted from the corruption in high places of the national, State, and
municipal guardians of the public trusts. Public confidence was shattered;
business was at a standstill, the masses consequently idle, while a
general reduction in the rate of wages begot strikes among such as were
not idle. In this connection it may be well to call to mind what was
generally observed at the time: the significant absence of the Irish and
Catholic body from the seditious meetings; yet on that body fell the
burden of the distress. What the disciples of the “Christian” school of
statesmen, who gave cause for the sedition by their corruption and
dishonesty, would be pleased to term their “foreign” faith, “foreign”
education, obedience to the trained body‐guard, the priesthood, of a
“foreign” potentate, the Pope, alone prevented their falling in with the
ranks of sedition. Yet the preaching and practice of the “foreign” faith,
we are constantly assured, is the greatest danger to the republic.

The trials of the severe season, however, brought out into startling
prominence one great fact: the willingness and resources of the public to
encounter an unexpected demand of this kind. New York, for instance, was
overrun with public charities and associations for the relief of the poor,
the unfortunate, the maimed, the halt, the blind, the fatherless children,
helpless women, and so forth. In short, there was scarcely a department of
human misery which had not its corresponding asylum, aided in most
instances by the State, erected often and paid solely by the State, as
well as a variety of others set on foot and kept a‐going by private
philanthropy or charity. Money from public and private resources had been
pouring into these asylums for long years past, without any startling
demand being made upon them in return. Now was the time to prove the
utility of those institutions, of which we were so justly proud. What was
their actual condition? They were for the greater part found practically
with exchequers already exhausted, without anything like adequate results
being shown. An inquiry as to where all the money had gone succeeded in
tracing considerable sums as far as the pockets of the directors, their
wives, families, and friends, generally, after which all traces
mysteriously disappeared. The good old maxim that “charity begins at home”
would seem to have impressed itself as a necessary truth on the minds of
the dispensers of our public charities, and it seems to have been carried
out severely to the letter. One consolation was afforded the public,
however. For some time past its conscience had been offended by the
granting of certain sums—small enough indeed, in comparison with the
necessities of the cases—out of the public funds to those social offences
known as “sectarian” charities—sectarian charities!—and these sums, such
as they were, had within the year been very judiciously and properly
withdrawn, in accordance with the spirit of the Constitution, as expounded
by the men from whose ranks sprang the Christians of the _Crédit Mobilier_
school. It was no small satisfaction to see, in the time of trial, that
the public was justified in withdrawing from such institutions the State
appropriations, on the ground that they were not distributed as in purely
State asylums. How the “sectarian” charities contrasted with the others in
the administration and distribution of their funds may be left to the
records of the year to tell, as unfolded in the columns of the daily
press. Whether a general remodelling of our public institutions, in view
of the flagrant mismanagement exhibited last year, be not desirable, is
left to the consideration of those most concerned in the matter—the public
themselves. As they stand they are an eyesore to honest men, a standing
breach of public confidence, and a gross violation of the public contract,
to say nothing of what they may be in the eye of a heaven that seems to be
getting farther and farther remote from the earth, whereon God once was
pleased to walk with the father of mankind.

Our class of statesmen found an easy solution of what Mr. Disraeli
esteemed the most difficult problem of politics—the feeding of a people by
the government—by an increase of money; and an increase of money is the
simplest thing in the world, when money is only so much paper stamped by
the government with promise to pay at no very precise date. All that the
government had to do in order to ease matters was to draw an unlimited
number of I O U’s on itself—itself being practically bankrupt for the time
being, but relying on the prospect of something eventually “turning up” to
its advantage.

The sad conflicts in Arkansas and Louisiana, the hostility between black
and white, come in the same order. In this case, in Louisiana at least,
the President and his advisers did not show themselves as well as in the
quashing of the bill for inflation of the currency. While the party that
had recourse to an absolute revolution in the State and in the face of the
nation cannot but be condemned, inasmuch as the approaching elections
might have peacefully served their purposes to the same end, much more is
the government to be condemned which in the first instance gave its
sanction and support to a great and standing wrong. Fortunately, but
little blood was spilt; yet one drop in such cases is an indication of the
neighborhood of a deluge. All hope for the dispersion of this impending
deluge rests now chiefly with the party which was returned to power at the
November elections.

If the year leaves us with so much to lament, so many vexed problems to
solve, so many rocks ahead in our national course, and with only a half‐
confidence in the crew who are in charge of the ship of state to guide it
over the unrevealed dangers of unknown seas, what shall be said of Europe,
with its divided nationalities, ambitions, and policies, and only danger
as a unit?

The general arming of the nations that began almost half a century ago,
but was hurried into feverish activity since the Franco‐German war, may
now be said to be completed. Russia within half a dozen years will, if
peace so far favors her, have three millions of soldiers in the field;
France almost as many; Germany, by the enrolment of the Landsturm, has
made itself a nation of soldiers; Austria, Italy, and the rest all follow
in due order. All Europe is at this moment armed to the teeth, solely to
preserve peace. One is irresistibly reminded of an old verse about a
strong man armed keeping his house.

A set of fanatics assembled in London to sympathize with the Prussian
government in its “struggle” with its Catholic subjects—that is to say,
with the wholesale imprisonment of the Catholic bishops and clergy, the
suppression of Catholic religious societies, the fining of Catholic ladies
for presenting addresses of condolence to the imprisoned ecclesiastics.
The meeting of sympathy called forth a very remarkable letter of gratitude
from the German emperor, and occasioned a general jubilee on the part of
the German official press. So far, so good. In the meanwhile a French
bishop, thinking, probably, that it is hard for a man whose sole crime
consists in the fact of his being a Catholic bishop to be imprisoned for
that offence, ventures to deliver a mild opinion on the matter in a
pastoral to his flock. Straightway comes out a Prussian official paper
with an editorial that for solemnity and massiveness might have been
written by the Emperor himself, warning, not the French bishop, but all
France, that if it cannot restrain itself from that shocking habit it has
acquired of using intemperate language against a neighboring and unusually
friendly power, Germany, painful as the task may be to its feelings of
humanity, will positively be compelled to take its own measures for its
own defence. France immediately takes the hint, eats the leek with all
becoming meekness, and a circular couched in the language of the Academy
is despatched to the bishops generally, the plain English of which would
be to hold their tongues on all German matters, unless, of course, they
have something pleasant to say. That may be a very easy task for the
bishops, but there still remain those _bêtes‐noirs_ of offending
governments, the gentlemen of the press; and gentlemen of the press, in
France as everywhere else, are unhappily distinguished not so much,
perhaps, for having opinions of their own, as for giving vent to those
opinions, and setting them down in indelible ink. M. Veuillot, the editor
of _L’Univers_, is just one of these unfortunate beings. M. Veuillot has a
rather strong way of putting things when it pleases him, and M. Veuillot
is hardly the man to take a diplomatic hint. The sad duty becomes
incumbent on his government, therefore, to give M. Veuillot and his paper
a vacation of a couple of months. The vacation was called suspension. It
was duly explained that the German government had had nothing whatever to
do with the matter, though, strange to say, the French government had
never thought of suspending M. Veuillot for hammering away at itself.

Belgium and Italy were threatened in like manner for allowing their
subjects freedom of opinion in so important a matter. Even England was
warned, but the warning had small effect.

It was whispered, though the correspondence never came to light, that at
one period during the past year some sharply‐worded notes passed between
the German government and our own. What the cause of the sharply‐worded
notes may have been remains a diplomatic secret. The only thing
significant about the matter is that the whisper took shape about a month
after the arrest and imprisonment of Archbishop Ledochowski, who had the
immortal honor of being the first of the German bishops to surrender the
liberty of his person for his faith in this strife. That imprisonment
called forth an unanimous condemnation from the American press—not the
sectarian press of any creed—that did it honor, and led one to hope that
such a thing as principle still existed on the earth, and that genuine
homespun American love of liberty was not a meaningless thing.

To the charge of necessary disloyalty to the ecclesiastical laws of
Prussia, Catholics will perforce plead guilty—the same Catholics who
before the passing of those laws never dreamed of or were accused of
disloyalty to the state. Those laws are an insult to the age and to all
time. There is not a line of them that does not betray the steel of the
executioner, red almost with the blood of his victim. The spirit of
Brennus is abroad. The scales of justice show a sadly uneven balance; but
the sword of the barbarian tossed in ends all disputes and argument.

Our modern Brennus has struck his blows so rapidly and truly that the
world still stares at him in dazed wonder. Success has waited on his
footsteps, and men who worship success are not yet sufficiently masters of
themselves to measure that success aright. They are afraid to question the
actions of a man who seems to strike with the inerrancy of fate. Prince
Bismarck had certainly the world on his side; and if the world begins now
to fall away from him and recoil, to recover its senses a little, and to
question the right and wrong of his actions, he has none but himself to
blame.

The signs of the past year tell us that the recoil is beginning to set in.
The elections early in the year went against the government. The Catholics
gained a large majority on their former number even in Prussia itself.
Alsace‐Lorraine returned its members simply to protest against annexation,
while the socialists were strengthened also. The government still holds a
strong majority, it is true; but the falling away from its standard within
four years of its mightiest triumphs was so significant of what was likely
to ensue should the government persevere in its policy, that the first
thing taken into consideration immediately after the elections was the
restricting of the franchise to such voters as it was felt would return a
safe and sure majority for the government. Next to this came measures for
the restriction of the liberty of the press, which by the efforts of the
Catholic party were defeated.

The obvious question will force itself on the mind: Why should a
government so strong and mighty, so beloved of the people, as we are
always assured, tremble at the popular voice and at the criticism of a
newspaper? The answer is easy. The army bill followed. The government
required a peace‐effective voted once for all of four hundred and one
thousand men. That army was to stand, and, once the bill was passed,
parliament was to have no further voice in the matter, whether in regard
to payment of the bills or in regulating the number of men. That was to
pass completely out of its hands.

For once even the “blustering majority” did not save the government. The
terrible danger of the scheme was obvious. The mere presence of so
tremendous a standing army was a standing menace not only to the country
and its liberties, but to its neighbors. It did not breathe the spirit of
peace and rest in the government, and of proper regard for a country
already worn and disturbed by three harassing wars occurring in quick
succession; while the taking out of the hands of the Houses the control
over so large an item of the public funds as was embraced in the bill, was
a blow at their privileges to which not even faith in absolutism could
blind them. A storm was at once raised. The government staked its
existence on the measure. Marshal Moltke rose up in the House, and made a
speech in defence of it that will be remembered. He spoke of the alarm
caused by Germany to its neighbors. He told them that what they had gained
in a few months it would take them fifty years to keep and secure. It was
necessary that, though they might not draw the sword, their hand should be
for ever on the hilt. He assured them that, after all, wars undertaken and
carried through by regular armies were the swiftest and therefore the
cheapest. An important consideration that last. As a final argument the
veteran told them that “a standing army was a necessity of the times, and
he could not but ask the House to devote the figure of four hundred and
one thousand rank‐and‐file as a peace‐footing once for all.” A peace‐
footing! But even the marshal’s seductive eloquence could not move them.

Prince Bismarck fell sick and retired to Varzin. The Emperor’s birthday
came round, and the generals of his empire came to congratulate him. He
assured them that he would dissolve parliament rather than alter the bill.
But his imperial majesty forgot that there were more kingdoms than Prussia
concerned in his measures now, and that the dissolution that once before
served the King of Prussia sufficiently well might, in the disturbed state
of affairs, prove a dangerous experiment to the Emperor of Germany.
Finally, as is known, somewhat better counsels prevailed, and a compromise
was effected, which limited the figure to three hundred and eighty‐five
thousand men for seven years. This was a severe check to the government,
while it was a lesson to the people to distrust rulers who, in the light
of their own schemes, considered the empire as a mere instrument,
forgetting wholly that they were for the empire, not the empire for them.

There are many matters in the internal history of Germany during the past
year that deserve to be dwelt upon particularly and at length, but a few
of which only can be glanced at here. The desire to expand and strengthen
itself abroad is natural, and it is strange that the government organs
should be so anxious to disavow so praiseworthy an object, provided the
motives that urge it are good. It is strange, at the same time, to see how
it continues its repressive emigration laws; how anxious so mighty an
empire is to keep all its children at home, where they may be serviceable
in the Landsturm; and how anxious those children are to get away and come
out to us here, leaving behind them and surrendering forever all the glory
and the promise of the newly‐founded empire. It is strange, also, to note
to what little tricks so great a government can descend in its self‐
imposed conflict with its Catholic subjects; as, for instance, the forged
Papal decree respecting the future election of the Sovereign Pontiff that
found its way into the columns of the Cologne _Gazette_ at so opportune a
moment as the eve of the German elections. Simultaneously with its
appearance we were reminded of the significant declaration of Prince
Bismarck in the German parliament, June 9, 1873: “If the message is
brought to us that a new Pope has been elected, we shall certainly be
entitled to investigate whether he has been duly, properly, and
legitimately elected”; that is to say, whether the veto of the head of the
Holy Roman Empire—who of course is the Emperor William—and of the other
powers possessing a veto whom the German government might influence, has
been exercised. “Only if we are satisfied on these heads will he be able
to claim in Germany the rights belonging to a Roman Pope.”

Out of consideration for Prince Bismarck we pass over those fierce
parliamentary storms where his keen opponents, Von Windthorst and Von
Mallinkrodt, twitted the Chancellor himself with having been actually
guilty of the disloyalty to Prussia and the German soil which he falsely
attributed to the Catholics. The prince, amid thunders of applause,
charged them with malicious lying; but the charge, though momentarily
effective, was not a happy one, as the disclosures of Gen. Della Marmora
subsequently showed. Italy was threatened in consequence of Della
Marmora’s indiscretion, but the threat proved ineffectual. The general
said his say, and the lie was stamped on its author. Prince Bismarck’s
popularity was on the wane, if not in Germany itself, certainly in a very
large circle outside of Germany where he had hitherto been worshipped as
one who with some justice described himself as “the best‐hated man in
Europe.” Then, fortunately for himself, as fortunately as a scene in a
drama, came the _Deus ex machinâ_ in the pistol of Kullmann to relieve him
from his momentary misfortunes. Prince Bismarck was not the man to miss so
fine an opportunity of turning to account the insane attempt of the son of
a madman on his life, and we were flooded with the time‐honored taunts of
means to ends because a man of notoriously bad and violent character, who
happened to have been present at some Catholic meetings, committed the
wicked and utterly unjustifiable act of firing a pistol at the Chancellor.
There are some two hundred million Catholics in the world; there are in
Germany fourteen or fifteen, in Prussia alone eight millions, of the same
creed. Of all these millions one man, of wicked antecedents and insane
descent, is found to commit an act abhorrent to the Catholic conscience
all the world over, and at once the universal conscience of that mighty
multitude is with a benignant generosity centred in the person of this
wretch, who, whether, as many believed, a dupe of the government tools or
a dupe of his own disordered intellect, was equally a wretch. Why not turn
the argument the other way? Why not wonder at the sublime patience of the
people who see the sacred persons of their bishops and priests dragged
from the altar‐steps, stripped of their goods, and buried in fortresses,
for the crime of violating laws that were made to be violated, without
moving a hand to prevent such constant outrages, because the teachings of
those disloyal priests and bishops, of that arch‐foe to German
nationality, the Pope, never cease to forbid armed resistance to the most
oppressive laws that were ever framed? Two or three officials have been
sent alone among a vast multitude of Catholics to drag before their very
eyes the priest whose Mass they have just attended, from the altar of
Christ to a prison—for what possible purpose but to provoke bloodshed and
insurrection? Happily, the people were still by the efforts of the clergy
restrained from putting themselves at the mercy of a government that knows
no mercy; but who shall say how long that patience will endure? And this
is the government whose sole aim is the unity and consolidation of Germany
and the happiness of every section of its people!

As the Von Arnim case is still pending, it is useless to conjecture what
the documents may contain whose possession prompted Prince Bismarck to
arrest and confine in a common prison the man who next after himself stood
the foremost in the German nation. The arrest to the world at large showed
more forcibly than anything that has yet taken place to what lengths the
chief of the Prussian government can go; how easily he can trample under
foot every tradition of civilization and every feeling of humanity to
crush a foe or sweep from his path a possible danger to himself. It is
probable that the documents turn chiefly on his foreign policy, and would
stamp in indelible characters that policy, which it needs no writing to
tell us threatens not only the church, but the peace of Europe, and,
through Europe, of the world, perhaps for centuries to come. Such
disclosures would in the eyes of outraged Germany and Europe necessitate
his deprivation of a power he has so fatally abused.

France struggles on still without a government; that is to say, without a
government of which six weeks of existence could be safely predicated. The
changes in the ministry have been changes of men rather than of measures.
The various parties are still at daggers‐drawn and rather on the increase
than otherwise. The Count of Chambord seems for the present to have
retired from the contest—a wise and patriotic example, which if all could
follow, the country might be allowed breathing time and some fair chance
of arriving at a sound judgment as to what was the exact government it
wanted—a problem which the French nation has seemed incapable of solving
since the first Revolution. The Bonapartists have profited by the
withdrawal of the Count, and displayed an earnestness, boldness, and
activity which have been crowned with some success, but marked by the
disregard of the nation and its submergence in the family name and fame
that seem the chief characteristics of “the Napoleonic idea.” The coming
of age of the son of the late emperor was marked by a theatrical display
and oracular speeches worthy of the Second Empire at its zenith. There
have been the usual “scenes” in the French Assembly. The “intervals of ten
minutes” and “intervals of a quarter of an hour” have been alarmingly
frequent, and after some sittings the air bristled with challenges from
warlike deputies, which afforded excellent material for the illustrated
journals; but, on the whole, few more dangerous weapons than the peaceful
pocket‐handkerchief were drawn, and the pocket‐handkerchief, as all public
orators know, is a vast relief in trying moments. M. Thiers has preferred
the Apennines to the tribune, and has happily spoken more in Italy than in
the Chambers. M. Gambetta, for a man of his calibre, has been singularly
well behaved on the whole, and we have not had so many of those journeys
to the disaffected districts of which at one time he threatened to be so
fond. Sad to say, it is the soldier‐president who has thus far kept the
disorderly parties from flying at each other’s throats by the sheer force
of the army, on which he silently leans all the while. France is
practically in the hands of a military dictator. She is happy in her
dictator—that is all. Marshal MacMahon, on succeeding M. Thiers, promised
to answer for order, and he has kept his word. More than that, he has,
wisely for France, however sad it may be to say so, made the Assembly keep
its word and abide by the _septennate_ which it conferred on him. He has
used his vast power with a singular discretion, a patriotism unexampled
almost in the face of opportunities that would turn the head of many a
greater man, and an honest single‐mindedness that has clearly nothing else
than the good of the whole country in view. The last symbol of a now
ineffectual protection, and indeed for a long time an insincere one, of
the Holy Father, has been withdrawn in the _Orénoque_. It is better so. It
is better, perhaps, since matters have been pushed so far, that the Holy
Father stand absolutely alone, powerless and defenceless, in the eyes of
earth and heaven. The power of God alone can now restore to him what is
his by right. To‐day among all the European governments there is none so
poor as to do him reverence. England has recently withdrawn even its
shadow of a diplomatic representative, which possibly marks the beginning
of the “little more energy in foreign policy and little less in domestic
legislation” that Mr. Disraeli advised while still in opposition.

In all other respects except politics France has every reason to be
congratulated. The earnest turning of the people’s heart to God, the
desertion of whom called down such terrible punishments, seems in no
degree to diminish. The seasons have been propitious, and the vintage of
1874 has been of unexampled excellence and productiveness. The exports of
the year were marvellously increased, and God’s blessings would seem to be
raining down again on this sorely‐tried land and people. All that is
needed is a good and firm government, of which, however, as yet, there
seems no immediate prospect. France is as open as ever to surprises; and
it is absolutely impossible to forecast its political future.

England has experienced a peaceful revolution similar to our own, and one
almost as astonishing in its suddenness, though, as in our case, there
were not wanting indications of the change in parties which has taken
place, as will be found duly noted by those who care to look at THE
CATHOLIC WORLD’S review for 1873. On January 22 Mr. Gladstone issued his
memorable “prolix narrative,” announcing, to the surprise of all men, the
immediate dissolution of Parliament. The sudden and, under the
circumstances, unexampled action of the premier looked remarkably like a
desire to take time by the forelock, and by the suddenness of the attack
shatter and utterly discomfit the slowly‐gathering forces of the
opposition. If such were the real intention, it was miserably
miscalculated and singularly ill‐advised. The country was as much outraged
as shocked, and showed its appreciation of Mr. Gladstone’s skill at a
_coup_ by returning a very handsome Conservative majority, so that Mr.
Disraeli, happy man! found himself, to his own surprise, no less than Mr.
Gladstone’s, within three weeks of the dissolution, at the head of a
strong government and party, with his old rival deep in the shade. The
result of the English elections may prove a lesson to popular leaders for
the future not to presume too much on their popularity, not to jeopardize
a powerful party, and throw an empire into sudden confusion by what looks
too much like a freak that it is hoped may win by “a fluke.”

The most significant lesson of the elections, perhaps, was the
instantaneous triumph of the Home Rule party in Ireland, while as yet it
was to all appearance in its infancy, and almost beneath the rational
notice of the English press. It had only provoked derision and calumny. We
were constantly told that it had no hold on the heart of the people, that
it claimed no men of note, that the nobility and gentry held aloof from
it, and so forth.

The “wild adherents” of the “wild folly” have taught even the London
_Times_ to respect them; and much reason had they to be pledged to their
wild folly, if the words of a man whose opinion is certainly of some value
on the subject have any weight: “Ireland at this moment is governed by
laws of coercion and stringent severity that do not exist in any other
quarter of the globe.” Those words were spoken on the 4th of February,
1874. The speaker was Mr. Disraeli, the present Prime Minister of England.
The laws that provoked the observation of so eminent an English statesman
still prevail in Ireland. The appeal for amnesty for the unfortunate
remnant of the Irish political prisoners has, since those words were
spoken, been refused by Mr. Disraeli. And yet the Irish calendars for this
year, as for many a year past, were the cleanest in the world and the
freest from crime of all kinds. Such is the nation governed at this moment
by laws such as Mr. Disraeli has described. The result of such government
can scarcely recommend its dispensers to the nation governed, and yet
their appeal for control of their own affairs, which the English
Parliament confessedly does not understand, and, if it did understand,
has, as it acknowledges, too much business on its hands properly to attend
to, is a wild folly!

The chief piece of English legislation during the year has been what was
embodied in “the bill to put down ritualism”—that is to say, the
regulation of divine worship as understood in the church established by
act of Parliament. Ritualism, or the “Romanizing tendency,” as it is
strangely termed, in the Anglican Church, has been put down, as far as an
act of Parliament can put it down. Our ritualists on this side were put
down also, for their bishops followed that authority in their church known
as the British Parliament, composed respectively of Anglicans, Dissenters,
Jews, Quakers, and other sects, with, worst of all, a strong contingent of
Roman Catholics. That hydra‐head of the Anglican Church regulated for it
to a nicety, pronounced upon its devotions, practices, sacraments,
vestments, ornaments, postures of the body, bendings of the knee,
elevations of the hands, prostrations, crossings, and so forth, as calmly
and in as business‐like a fashion as though it were sitting on an income
tax; and the church that we are so solemnly assured by learned men like
Bishop Coxe, if it dates not exactly from the Ist, certainly dates from
somewhere in the neighborhood of the IVth, century, with a subsequent
lamentable gap up to the XVIth, when the Apostle Henry and others of that
ilk came to renovate and restore it to its pristine purity, bowed meekly
to the infallible decision of the business‐like assembly of Jews,
infidels, Quakers, Dissenters, Anglicans, and Roman Catholics. What would
S. Peter and S. Paul think of it all?

Something far more serious than this, and of far deeper import to the
nation, was the long and persistent strike of the agricultural laborers,
which was carried on on a most extensive scale, and with a union that was
not thought to exist in the successor of the Saxon hind. Once the ball of
disaffection is set rolling, it is very hard to say where it will stop. It
is clear that the unions have at last permeated the entire body of the
English laboring‐classes. The trades‐unions are too often cousins‐german
to the secret societies. The mass of the English agricultural classes, in
common with the vast majority of the English laboring‐classes and
artisans, have no religion at all. The disaffection with the present order
of things in England, though less pronounced than in most modern European
nations, has been long gathering, is rapidly spreading, and is beyond all
doubt of a nature to excite considerable alarm. Loss of religion, it is
needless to say, leaves the minds and hearts of men open to all evil, and
it would be beyond stupidity to shut one’s eyes to the very plain fact
that the spirit of evil and of general disaffection is particularly active
all the world over just at present. Banish religion, banish the guiding
hand of God from your objective laws and from the heart and sight of your
people, and the people will look on the powers that be, of whatsoever
nature, as oppressors, on the rich as despoilers of the poor, on the
employers as their tyrants.

A most important movement, and one that we welcome with all our hearts, is
the bold step taken at last by the English hierarchy in founding a
Catholic university in England. The want has long been felt in that
country of a centre of Catholic intellect, culture, and thought, to vie
with those seats of learning which the piety of their Catholic forefathers
had left as priceless heirlooms to their Catholic children, but which,
with all holy places and all holy things, had by the national apostasy
become perverted from the purpose of their pious founders, and fallen by a
too easy lapse from centres of false faith to centres of no faith at all.
In England and Ireland, as with us, the means of providing higher
education for students desirous of attaining it have been hitherto
necessarily and lamentably deficient. The Catholic University in Ireland
and this later one in England give promise that, with proper encouragement
from the wealthy and intelligent laity, this long‐felt want will be at
length adequately supplied. These are days when the Catholic laity, to
whom now all positions, or at least very important ones, are fairly open,
are in duty bound to take their stand as becomes loyal children of a
mother universally assailed. The laity can penetrate where the clergy have
no voice. They are, as S. Peter called them, and as they have so signally
proved themselves in Germany, “a kingly priesthood.” But to take a stand
similar to that taken by the noble German phalanx, that “thundering
legion” in the service of the pagan empire, they must be equal to their
adversaries in culture, refinement, and address, all which come more by
education than from nature. Many a great mind has retired within a narrow
circle for which it was certainly not born, and its efforts rendered half
nugatory by lack of that early association and training which a great
university, an intellectual focus of the brightest minds in the galaxy of
letters, is intended to and does supply. We look, then, with as much hope
as expectancy to this step on the part of the English hierarchy, who have
saved their children from the allurements of a Satanic culture by
supplying them with men of recognized intellectual standing and
acknowledged faith in Christ and in his church. Our only hope is that in
our own country we soon may rival them.

Some mention will probably be looked for here of the controversy, as it is
called, which has sprung up in consequence of a recent pamphlet written by
Mr. Gladstone; but there is little need of such mention, inasmuch as Mr.
Gladstone seems to have been sufficiently answered by the very men whom
his pamphlet was intended chiefly to affect—the Protestants of England.
Whether so intended or not, it was beyond all doubt an attempt altogether
unworthy the high character of the distinguished author to rouse the
rancor of the English Protestants against their Catholic fellow‐subjects.
Could we altogether rid ourselves of the respect with which Mr. Gladstone,
take him all in all, has hitherto inspired us, as a man whose heart was as
large and loyal as his intellect, and that intellect inspired with
reverence for God and holy things, his latest exploit could only be
described as a vulgar “No Popery” appeal to the worst classes and most
degraded passions of English society, delivered in bad taste and worse
faith, and, to crown the list of offences, as a political mistake, which
has already failed in its object of establishing him, as Earl Russell once
was, and as men of the Newdegate and Whalley type would be, as the English
“No Popery” champion and leader, while it effectually alienates from him
once for all a large and influential body of supporters on whom he has
often counted, and on whom there was no reason to believe that a genuine
change of front on his part might not have led him to count again. That
his pamphlet is all this is true; that Mr. Gladstone intended it to be all
this there is too much reason to believe, but of that he himself alone can
tell. If the leader of the English Liberal party is pleased to be patted
on the back by the men in Germany who patted on the back the orators of
Exeter Hall who met to sympathize with the German persecution of Germans
whose only crime was their Catholic faith, and whose only stain was and is
their readiness to sacrifice life, lands, and liberty in defence of that
faith, he is welcome to his ill‐earned applause and doubtful honor.

The space already given to the important topics touched upon leaves little
room for comment on others. And indeed the story, as far as the Catholic
Church and general politics are concerned, is much the same all the world
over. Austria has followed in the wake of Prussia, though its
ecclesiastical laws do not seem to have been carried out with the brutal
thoroughness of its neighbor. Italy continues in its downward course. The
state of its finances is appalling, and yet it plies whip and spur with
reckless speed into chaos. Brigandage, in the south chiefly, grows worse
and worse. Civil marriage there, as in Prussia, is the law established. A
new phase of the secret societies crops out from time to time. It has
tried the scheme of popular election of the _curés_ as did Switzerland and
Germany, with a like result in all cases—an absurd _fiasco_. It has made
great strides in the way of popular education, with the result pictured by
the special correspondent of the London _Times_: “The property that is
taken from some of the Capuchin convents in Tuscany, and sold at auction,
is bought back at the auction by ‘pious benefactors,’ who recall the
scattered fraternity to their deserted and desecrated homes, and restore
monachism on conditions more favorable than those on which it stood before
its suppression. The central government and the municipalities in Italy
strain every nerve to supply the people with a free and good education,
but their schools have to strive hard to withstand the competition which
is raised against them by the Scolopii in Florence, the Barnabites in
Milan, and the Ignorantins in Turin.... There are now Waldensian,
Methodist, and other evangelical churches and schools in Rome, as in other
Italian cities, but their success is not very encouraging, even in the
opinion of their candid promoters.” And we may add, for the benefit of the
ardent but foolish supporters of the Van Meter and such like schemes, a
further extract from the same correspondent: “Attempts to allow the people
to elect their parish priests without the permission of, and even in
direct opposition to, the bishop of the diocese have been made in some
Mantuan rural districts and elsewhere, but hitherto with no extensive or
decisive results; and the Gavazzi, Passaglia, Andrea, and others, who
would have ventured on a reforming movement within the church itself, have
met with no support whatever, either on the part of the government
authorities or of public opinion.”

The celebration of the twenty‐eighth anniversary of the elevation of our
Holy Father, Pope Pius IX., to the chair of Peter, was general throughout
Christendom, but desecrated in Rome by the infamous action of the usurping
government in clearing the streets of the crowds who were peacefully
returning from the _Te Deum_ in S. Peter’s. Violent arrests were made on
no pretext whatever, some of the persons arrested being English and
American Protestant ladies. On the evening following, and with the
connivance of the present Roman authorities, a hideous crowd assembled at
midnight to howl cries of hate and blasphemy under the windows of the
Sovereign Pontiff. Not religion alone, but common humanity, seems to have
been banished from Rome by the entrance of Victor Emanuel. Our constant
prayer should be that the great Pontiff, whose conspicuous virtues, and
sufferings so patiently borne for Christ’s sake, may be preserved to his
children long to witness with his own eyes the end of the blasphemy,
violence, and imposture which now beset him on all sides.

Switzerland has almost out Prussiaed Prussia in its assault on the
Catholic Church. So much for the freedom of the typical republic! It has
changed its constitution into despotism, driving away the Catholic voters
from the polls by intimidation and violence. Even Loyson has felt himself
compelled to cry out against its excesses, and resigned his curacy at
Geneva. The constitution which it has now adopted, it rejected only two
years since. It completely subjects religion to the state, and renders it
impossible for a Catholic priest to remain in his native country and
practise the duties of his office. Civil marriage here again is the order
of the day. Marriages, it used to be said, were made in heaven. Their
birthplace has been transferred to the office and celestial presence of
his eminence the town‐clerk.

In Spain the struggle has assumed a fiercer and more determined character
than ever. Castelar, who is already and very deservedly forgotten, was
president at the opening of the year. His success in that _rôle_ was what
might have been expected, and what has fully justified the opinion held of
him throughout in these pages. He was defeated on reading his message to
the Cortes in January—a message of despair. General Pavia cleared the
Cortes and took possession with his troops. The movement was so well
planned that no rising took place. Indeed, it was hard to say for what or
for whom a rising should have been made. There was no government; almost
all the prominent men had been tried in turn and failed, and the last was
the least capable of all. Serrano came to the front again; the whole
movement was probably his. Cartagena, which had so long held out against a
bombardment by sea and land, was taken soon after, and there remained no
foe in the field but Don Carlos, who had profited by the diversion at
Cartagena. Bilbao was seriously threatened by the Carlist forces, and
would have proved, if taken, an important prize to them. Serrano hastened
to its relief with all the available forces of the country, and, aided by
Marshal Concha, succeeded in raising the siege without inflicting any
material loss on the enemy. Marshal Concha he left to prosecute the
campaign, and for the first time since their last rising the Carlists
found themselves sore beset. A bullet at Estella, however, ended the
checkered career of the most dangerous opponent they had yet encountered,
and victory after victory of more or less importance has, with an
occasional reverse, continued to crown their arms. More than once have we
been assured of their annihilation, only to see them appear with renewed
strength, and add another victory to their crown. Through the influence of
Germany the European powers with the exception of Russia, have recognized
a republic which does not exist, and does not promise to exist, in Spain.
At one time Prussia threatened to interfere immediately, and may at any
time renew the attempt. The reason for this interference is obvious. A
Prussianized Spain would serve as a double‐barrelled gun, covering at once
Rome and France. Whereas the success of Don Carlos is the success of a
Catholic sovereign and a Bourbon; consequently a friend to France,
whatever may be the government in that country. Russia’s refusal to join
in its schemes was, however, a little too significant to ignore, and love,
which was never at fever‐point between what are now the rival powers in
Europe, was not increased by this rebuff. In the meanwhile Spain is
suffering terribly in blood, in commerce, in everything that makes the
life of a nation, by this prolonged struggle, which it was our hope to see
concluded ere this by the victory of the only man who can promise the
Spaniards a safe and vigorous government, and who has proved himself
possessed of all the qualities of king, general, and, as far as we are
able to judge, truly Christian leader—Don Carlos.

In Mexico, Brazil, Venezuela, and other of the South American states, the
struggle between church and state in Europe has been repeated, even to the
seizure of property, the expulsion of priests and nuns, the imprisonment
of bishops and priests. One little republic alone, that of Equador, has
set a noble example to the world of loyalty to the Catholic faith and to
the Apostolic See by devoting a large sum out of the public funds to the
aid of the Holy Father. The secret societies have seemingly as strong a
hold in South America as in Italy, and the boldness with which they act is
manifested by the severity of the sentences passed on the Bishops of
Olinda and Para, the Archbishops of Caracas and Venezuela, and the aged
Bishop of Merida. Those are still Catholic states, and it is to be hoped
that all true Catholics there will exert themselves and use the lawful
power that is in their hands to put a stop to the scenes of outrage and
brutal violence that are constantly on the increase.

It is time that civilized governments, or those that claim the title,
should unite to put a stop to the horrible periodical massacres of
Christians in China, of which the details reach us from time to time,
particularly during the past year. It is a shame upon all nations that
peaceful women should be outraged and brutally cut to pieces, as are the
Catholic nuns in that country. The European powers and our own could, if
they chose, put a stop to this infamous practice—for practice it is. And
our own government might well take the initiative in the matter. We
welcome the Chinese into this country. They come in swarms; they find home
and labor, and reward for their labor. They live among us, and leave us,
unmolested to the last. Their very idolatry is allowed; and yet at almost
stated intervals their countrymen rise up and horribly mutilate and murder
our dearest and best.

Of actual wars during the year there have been happily few. The defeat of
the Ashantees, and the burning of their capital city by the British
forces, adds, it is to be presumed, a new lustre to the glories of
England. The Dutch retaliated for their defeat of the year previous in
Acheen by in turn defeating the Achinese. Russia is securing its footsteps
as it advances into Asia. An invasion of Formosa by the Japanese, who are
becoming more and more amenable to European customs, ended strangely by a
payment of indemnity on the part of China and the departure safe home of
the Japanese. The usual chronic revolutions might be recorded of one or
more of the South American states, but beyond this there is nothing very
sanguinary to record.

An event that will long be memorable, and which excited very general
interest outside, was the departure for the first time of a body of
pilgrims from this country to Lourdes and Rome, under the guidance of the
Rt. Rev. Bishop of Fort Wayne and the Rev. P. F. Dealy, S. J. They were
received with special marks of affection by the Holy Father, who declared
that in this country he was more Pope than in any other.

An event that excited extraordinary commotion and a general display of a
strange splenetic hate on the part of the English press was the quiet
conversion to the Catholic faith of the Marquis of Ripon, who, in addition
to his hereditary title and established character as an English statesman,
added that of Grand Master of the Freemasons in England. Among other
conversions was that of the Queen Dowager of Bavaria.

We are not in the position to compare the statistics of the past year’s
capital crimes or suicides with those of former years; but whether they be
greater or less, they are alarmingly great. Suicide and murder were
startlingly frequent during the year; and as far as passing glances at the
reports in the newspapers would justify an opinion, they seem in most
cases to have resulted from wicked and immoral lives. For a time masked
burglary threatened to become the fashionable crime of the year. A
speedier sentence and a more honest dispensing of the law than often
prevails would more materially, perhaps, than any other means tend to
diminish the long annual list of offences against life and property.
Education, to be sure, is a great thing, and there will be an opportunity
in the coming year of seeing how the new law of compulsory education for
all children will work in the State of New York. The question is too large
a one to enter into here. As has been shown over and over again,
compulsory education with us means practically a compulsory Protestant
education; for Protestantism, if not actually taught, is done so at least
negatively, for many of the class‐books teem with Protestantism from cover
to cover. That, however, is a matter within the power of remedy to a great
extent. The compulsory education of Prussia that is so much extolled
allowed the Catholic priest and the Protestant minister to teach their
respective religions at stated hours, in opposite corners of the schools,
even though they had Sunday‐schools as well. But our only safeguard is our
own schools for our own children, and it is gratifying to note the zeal
with which both clergy and laity have combined during the past year to
establish Catholic schools all over the country. That is the first thing
to be done. Let us first have our own schools, and then we may fairly see
about the management of our own moneys.

Only a few of the distinguished dead who have gone out with the year can
be mentioned. The church in the United States has lost five venerable
servants and pioneers of faith, in Bishops Melcher of Green Bay, O’Gorman,
of Omaha, Whelan of Wheeling, McFarland of Hartford, and Bacon of
Portland. The College of Cardinals has lost three of its members: Cardinal
Barnabo, the great Prefect of the Propaganda, to whom the church in this
country is greatly indebted; Cardinals Falcinelli and Tarquini. The
Christian Brothers lost their venerable superior, Brother Philippe, whose
funeral was attended by the chief notabilities of Paris, together with a
vast crowd of people of all ranks and conditions in life, so much so that
as the white flag was the suspicious color just then, and as that flag has
the misfortune under its present holder of being connected with religion,
the keen‐scented gentry of the press discovered in this last tribute to a
man who had spent his life in doing good a Chambordist demonstration. The
death of Mgr. de Merode was a great loss to the Holy Father, as well as to
a multitude of friends. An interesting comparison might be made between
the purposes to which he devoted his vast wealth and those of a man still
more wealthy who died within the year—the Baron Mayer de Rothschild. His
admiring chronicler in the leading English journal informs us that the
baron, who, in addition to his other admirable qualities, was a silent
member in the English Parliament, spared no expense to erect in his own
palace a museum “adorned with all that is beautiful.” “He applied himself
systematically to breeding race‐horses,” in compensation for which
exceptional virtue the same glowing chronicler assures us that “when he
won, a year ago, the Dudley, the Oaks, and the St. Leger, all the world
felt that a piece of good and useful work had been performed.” Well, well!
Did not our own Sumner leave life this very year amid general regret,
sighing only that his book was not completed? Had that been finished, he
would not have cared. And, thinking thus, went out one who is a part of
our history, and whose name, though it did not fulfil all its earlier
promise, was great among us. Ex‐President Fillmore died almost unnoticed.
Certain news of the death of Dr. Livingstone in 1873 arrived during the
year. Art has lost Kaulbach, who devoted his undoubted genius to attacking
the church, and Foley. One of the men of a century died in Guizot.
Merivale and Michelet are lost to history, Shirley Brooks to light
literature. Strauss, the infidel, perhaps, has learnt at last the truth of
an awkward verse in S. James. Not only Germany, but the Catholic cause all
the world over, has sustained a sad and in a sense irreparable loss in the
great and chivalrous leader of the Catholic centre in the German
parliament, Herr von Mallinkrodt, whom divine Providence was pleased to
call away in the height of a career of great usefulness to the church and
to society. He was a foe whom Prince Bismarck dreaded and had reason to
dread—one of those men whom no weak point escapes, no side issue can
divert, no opponent cow. Adam Black and the monstrosity known as the
Siamese Twins died during the year.

And now the glance at the outline of the general year and some of its
chief incidents is completed. With every succeeding year we look forward
with more anxiety than confidence into the future. There are terrible
forces, long concealed, nearer the social surface than they ever were
before, and they come up now, as a consequence probably, just when the
general bond that ought to hold the human family together is at the
loosest; when men are ready to burst all bounds and call everything in
question; and when the lights of the age can only tell man that he is
nothing more than a fortuitous cohesion of irresponsible atoms, begotten
of void only to fall back into it. The only bond that can bind the human
family together is “the one law, one faith, one baptism,” preached
nineteen centuries ago in Judæa by the lips of the Son of God. And it is
just that faith that is now being as fiercely assailed as it ever has been
within the Christian era. There is not merely an arming of material forces
going on silently. There is a clash of faith, of intellect, of moral
principles, of all that guides and constitutes the inner and the greater
life of man; and of the double collision, the material and the spiritual,
that seems to hang over us and make heavy with foreboding the air of all
the world. Though supernatural faith may not doubt as to the issue, human
weakness cannot but tremble and grow faint at the prospect.




New Publications.


    ORIENTAL AND LINGUISTIC STUDIES. Second Series. By W. D. Whitney,
    Professor of Sanscrit and Comparative Philology in Yale College.
    New York: Scribner, Armstrong & Co. 1874.


Yale College well deserves the name of university in common with its great
rival, Harvard. The advance it has made within the last twenty‐five years
is something really remarkable, and, to the great honor of its governing
body, this advance has kept pace in linguistic studies with the
improvement in the departments of mathematics and physics. One of the
functions of a university is the production of really learned and solid
books for the instruction of readers generally, as well as students in
particular branches. The volume before us is a specimen of this class.
Whatever we may think of some of Prof. Whitney’s theories and opinions, we
must acknowledge the evidence of study, labor, and great care to present
the results of learning and thought on important and interesting subjects,
which his works exhibit.

The contents of the present volume are somewhat varied and miscellaneous.
One of the topics treated of, which deserves special attention, is the
spelling and pronunciation of the English language. The variations of
spelling are not so numerous and important as are those of pronunciation,
but in this latter respect our language is certainly in a state which is
most unsatisfactory and vexatious, and becoming every day worse. We are
not an advocate of any revolutionary project in regard to phonetic
spelling, but we do most earnestly desire a fixed and uniform standard,
and still more a rule of uniformity in pronunciation. Mr. Whitney’s
researches into this subject are extremely curious, valuable, and often
amusing, and he shows a very peculiar and ingenious facility of describing
and expressing the various oddities and extravagances of individual or
provincial usage. The question at once suggests itself whether there are
any practicable means of fixing a standard of spelling and pronunciation.
If it were question of a language spoken by one nation only, we can see
very easily that an academy might be established which should settle all
these matters by authority. An Englishman might assert the right of
England to determine all usages in respect to the English language, and
the corresponding obligation of all English‐speaking peoples to conform to
an authoritative standard furnished by an academy in England. Americans
might not be satisfied with this. The further question arises, therefore,
whether it be possible that English and American scholars should do
something concurrently in this direction.

Mr. Whitney has given in some other papers, with a condensed but clear
exposition, historical and philosophical views of India and China which
will probably have more interest to the great body of readers than any
other portions of his volume. In respect to one very important aspect of
these topics, the missionary aspect, he shows impartiality and manifest
effort to conform his statements and judgments to historical facts and a
real rather than a fanciful standard. There is no attempt to claim for
Protestant missions greater success than they have had, and a very fair
tribute of praise is given to the celebrated Catholic missionaries who
have labored in that arduous field. Yet, like other Protestants, Mr.
Whitney shows himself not well informed about the practical results at
which Catholic missionaries aim, and which, in so far as that is possible,
they accomplish, in making their converts solidly pious and virtuous
Christians.

Among the other topics treated of in this volume, the most important are
Müller’s _Chips from a German Workshop_, Cox’s _Aryan Mythology_, and the
“Lunar Zodiac of India, Arabia, and China.” We have not examined these and
previous essays of the learned author, in which the formation of languages
and mythologies is treated of, with sufficient attention to be enabled to
understand clearly his fundamental theory of the origin and history of
religion. We therefore abstain from any attempt at a critical judgment;
and, in regard to Mr. Whitney’s own special department of _Sanscrit_, very
few critics can safely venture on that ground. Thorough and solid studies
in these recondite branches of knowledge must lead to results advantageous
to religion as well as to merely human science. We rejoice, therefore, in
the noble and in many respects successful efforts of Mr. Whitney and his
associates to promote the cause of high education in this country. We
trust that their example may be emulated by those who have the principal
charge of the higher education of our Catholic youth. The English bishops
have already inaugurated the University College of Kensington with a
faculty worthy of Oxford or Cambridge. When will the first steps be taken
for a similar institution among ourselves?


    THE KING’S HIGHWAY; OR, THE CATHOLIC CHURCH THE WAY OF SALVATION,
    AS REVEALED IN THE HOLY SCRIPTURES. By the Rev. Augustine F.
    Hewit, of the Congregation of S. Paul. New York: The Catholic
    Publication Society. 1874.


This work of Rev. Father Hewit supplies a want we have often felt in
instructing converts to the church. There are many sincere persons looking
for light, and dissatisfied with the religious sect in which they were
born, who have no idea of the church, nor the office it holds in the plan
of redemption. The denomination to which they belong has never been of any
use to them, and has, in fact, disclaimed all power to guide or help them.
It requires often some time to overcome their prejudice against any kind
of instrumentality between their souls and God. They believe in the Sacred
Scriptures, which they have never deeply studied, but which they hold to
be the oracles of divine truth. In their opposition to the Catholic faith
they have been fighting against the only thing which can fill up the
desire of their hearts, and bring into blessed harmony all they know of
God and all they seek from his hands. To such this book will be as a
messenger from heaven. It will remove their doubts, and from the inspired
writings will prove to them the error of Protestant theories, and show how
Christ our Redeemer is only to be found in his church, “which is his
body,” which “he filleth all in all.” Written in the clear, graceful, and
forcible style which distinguishes all the works of the author, it brings
forth an argument which no honest mind can resist. It points out “the
King’s highway,” so plainly that “the wayfaring man, though a fool, cannot
fail to find it.” The first chapters are devoted to a refutation of the
false theories of Calvinism and Lutheranism. By the plain language of the
Bible they are shown to be opposed to the divine Word, contradictory of
each other, and hostile to the very nature and attributes of God. The true
doctrine of redemption is then set forth from the Scriptures, with the
office of faith and the prerequisites of justification. The whole system
of salvation, as the mercy of Jesus Christ has revealed it, arises in its
beauty and fulness before the eyes of the sincere, and the Catholic Church
opens its door to the weary and heavy‐laden, that they may enter in to
praise God and find rest to their souls. We have nowhere seen a more clear
and effective demonstration of our divine religion from the Scriptures. We
have only to pray that it may have a large circulation among the honest
inquirers after truth in this day of darkness and infidelity. Protestants
of the old class profess a great reverence for the Bible, which is to them
a kind of rule of faith. The diligent reading of this work will convince
them that they cannot follow the Scriptures and remain where they are;
that Catholics alone can understand and obey the written Word of God.
Neither can they abide in the creed of their fathers amid the errors and
disorganizing influences of this day. They must go forward and keep the
truth they have already received by embracing all to which it leads, or
lose what they have in the misery of doubt and unbelief. The day of grace
for dogmatic Protestants is well‐nigh gone.

We have only to add the earnest wish that Catholics generally would read
this book and profit by the instruction it contains. There are very many
among us who might lead others to the truth, if they were better informed
as to the grounds of their faith, and the points of controversy which
separate the conflicting Christian sects from the church. Idleness and
ignorance will be a fearful burden to bear before the Judge of all. The
talent hidden in the ground will be demanded with interest, and the
unprofitable servant will have to answer for light unimproved and grace
unfruitful. The souls we could have saved will rise up against us in the
day of our greatest need. “Unto whomsoever much is given, of him much
shall be required.”

T. S. P.


    THREE ESSAYS ON RELIGION. By John Stuart Mill. New York: Henry
    Holt & Co. 1874.


What John Stuart Mill was, and what his life was, our readers have been
already informed in a review of his _Autobiography_. The prince of modern
English sophists and sceptics, he was as miserable and hopeless in life
and death as the victim of an atheistical education might be expected to
be; as miserable as a man outwardly prosperous, enjoying the resources of
a cultivated mind, and exempted by the moral force of his character from
the consequences of gross crimes, could well become. These three _Essays_
are essays of the unhappy sceptic to reduce his readers to the same
miserable condition. Their scope is to overturn, not revealed religion
alone, but all theism; to destroy the belief in God; and to substitute the
most dreary atheism, fatalism, and nihilism for the glorious, elevating,
consoling faith of the Christian, and the imperfect but yet, in itself,
ennobling philosophy of the higher class of rationalists. It is a very bad
sign for our age, and a worse omen for the future, that men can profess
atheism without incurring public odium and disgrace, and that respectable
publishers find it for their interest to flood the market with the deadly
literature which is worse than that of France during the age of Bayle and
Voltaire. A large class of book‐sellers may always be found, not
scrupulous or over‐sensitive in their consciences about right and wrong in
morals, when money is to be made. We suppose, however, that those of them
who expect to make fortunes and transmit them to their children would like
to have the good order of society continue. What can such gentlemen be
thinking of when they help to lay the train under the foundations of order
and social morality? We know of a man who helped to run his own bank, in
which he had many thousands of dollars invested, by demanding specie for a
hundred‐dollar bill during a panic. Old John Bunyan tells of a certain
person living in the town of Mansoul whose name was Mr. Penny wise‐pound‐
foolish. Every one who helps on the spread of atheism, materialism,
impiety in any shape, even if he makes money or fame by it, is helping to
run his own bank. Moreover, he is helping to train the generation of those
who will cut the throats of the whole class he belongs to. We are just now
very wisely, though somewhat tardily, bringing the odious Mormon criminals
to justice, by a kind of blind Christian instinct which still survives in
our public opinion. What is the consistency or use of this, if we are
going to look on apathetically and see the next generation all over our
country turned into atheists? Practical atheism is worse than the most
hideous and revolting form of Mormonism. Why mend a broken spar when
mutineers are scuttling the ship from stem to stern? Would it not be well
for those conductors of the press who have some principles and some belief
in them, for the clergy, and for all who have access in some form to the
ear of a portion of the public, to be a little more alive to the danger
from the spread of atheism, and a little more active in counteracting it?

Pardon, gentlemen, for disturbing your nap. You are very drowsy, but is it
not time for you to wake up?


    EAGLE AND DOVE. From the French of Mademoiselle Fleuriot, by Emily
    Bowles. New York: P. O. Shea. 1874.


This is a story of Breton life and of the events of the siege and the
Commune of Paris. It is superior to the common run of stories in artistic
merit, its characters and scenes have a peculiar and romantic interest,
and its religious and moral tone is up to the highest mark.


    THE WORKS OF AURELIUS AUGUSTINE, Etc. Vol. XI. Tractates on the
    Gospel of S. John, Vol. II.; Vol. XII. Anti‐Pelagian works, Vol.
    II. Edinburgh: J. & J. Clark. 1874. (New York: Sold by The
    Catholic Publication Society.)


Two more volumes of the splendid edition of S. Augustine’s works are here
presented, and deserve a warm welcome. It is difficult to see how they
will serve the cause of the Church of England, but that is the affair of
the editors, not ours. Of course they are mighty weapons for High‐
Churchmen against their Low and Broad Church antagonists. But they tell
equally against these same High‐Churchmen in favor of the Catholic Church.
The treatise against Vincentius Victor, in Vol. XII., is crowded with
denunciations of the Donatists, who are the prototypes of Anglicans,
except in one respect, viz., that the former had valid orders.


    RHYMES AND JINGLES. (Illustrated.) By Mary Mapes Dodge, author of
    _Hans Brinker_, etc. New York: Scribner, Armstrong & Co. 1875.


This is a very pretty book for a Christmas present. The rhymes are nice,
and such as will please, amuse, sometimes instruct folk of the nursery.
The illustrations are numerous and well executed, some are funny, some
remarkably beautiful. Any little boy or girl who has not already been
surfeited with toys and books may be made happy by such a gift. Merry
little people, a merry Christmas to you!


    LIBRARY OF THE SACRED HEART. Baltimore: J. Murphy & Co. 1874.


This is something towards supplying a great need among Catholic
publications. There are numerous and beautiful series of books issued by
the sectarian press, but comparatively few by Catholic publishers. Any one
who has had to procure Catholic libraries knows this want. Such series are
great aids in supplying Sunday‐school or household libraries. We welcome
the above, and trust it will be followed by others of the same kind. Much
credit is due to the publishers for their selection and the neat
appearance of the volumes. The selection comprises six small and choice
spiritual works. _God our Father_ and the _Happiness of Heaven_, by the
same author, have been noticed with high praise in our columns. The others
also are standard works. We recommend this “Library of the Sacred Heart,”
and hope it will be appreciated. It is contained in a neat and tasteful
box, appropriately ornamented with pious emblems of the Sacred Heart.


    BRIC‐A‐BRAC SERIES—NO. IV.: PERSONAL REMINISCENCES BY BARHAM,
    HARNESS, AND HODDER. New York: Scribner, Armstrong & Co. 1874.


This is quite up to the mark of the foregoing volumes, and full of very
agreeable anecdotes, criticisms, and literary chit‐chat.

ANNOUNCEMENT.—We shall begin, next month the publication of a new serial
story, entitled _Are you my Wife?_ by the author of _Paris before the War,
Number Thirteen, A Daughter of S. Dominic, Pius VI._, etc., etc.





THE CATHOLIC WORLD. VOL. XX., NO. 119.—FEBRUARY, 1875.




Church Authority And Personal Responsibility:


A Letter Prom Aubrey De Vere To Sara Coleridge On The Catholic Philosophy
Of The “Rule Of Faith,” Considered Especially With Reference To The
Transcendental System Of S. T. Coleridge.(149)

A letter to me, printed in the _Memoir of Sara Coleridge_, and dated
October 19, 1851, contains the following passage: “Viewing the Romish
system as you do, my dear friend, I cannot regret that you think, as you
do, of the compatibility of my father’s scheme of philosophy therewith,
assured, as I feel, that he had done that Papal system too much justice to
believe in it as a divine institution” (vol. ii. p. 401). From my youth I
had been an ardent student of Coleridge’s philosophy, to the illustration
of which his daughter, indifferent to her own literary fame, so faithfully
devoted her great powers. That philosophy had largely inspired F. D.
Maurice’s remarkable work, _The Kingdom of Christ_; and I believed firmly
that it was, at least as compared with the empirical philosophy of the
last century, in harmony with Catholic teaching, rightly understood; and
that the objections made against that teaching were such as a
transcendentalist must regard as proceeding, not from any intuitions or
ideas of the “reason,” but from the cavils of that notional understanding
called by Coleridge “the faculty judging according to sense.” I have
lately found a letter written by me to my lamented friend less than a
fortnight after her letter quoted above, and about a fortnight before I
made my submission to the Catholic Church. It may interest some of those
who have read Sara Coleridge’s letters, and who are enquirers as to the
method proper for reaching solid conclusions in the domain of truth not
scientific and discovered by man, but religious, and revealed to him.

It was my object to show that the Catholic “rule of faith” does not
oppose, but alone adequately vindicates, some great principles with which
it has been contrasted, _e.g._, personal action, the dependence of
individual souls on divine grace, religious freedom, zeal for truth, the
interior character of genuine piety, and the value of “internal
evidences.” That “rule” has been stigmatized as a bondage. This is the
illusion of those who, regarding the church from without, and under the
influence of modern and national traditions, see but a part of her system,
and have not compared it with other parts. The Catholic law of belief I
endeavored to set forth as the only one consistent with a sound philosophy
when treating of things supernatural, and as such beyond the method of
induction and experiment, while it is also both primitive and Scriptural.
I wished to show that it is the only means by which we can possess the
revealed truth with certainty and at once in its fulness and its purity;
and to illustrate it as not alone our gate of access to truth “spiritually
discerned,” but the nurse and the protectress of our whole spiritual life,
with all its redeemed affections; as opposed, not to personal action and
responsibility, or to a will free and strong, because loyal, but to an
unintelligent pride and to a feeble self‐will, the slave of individual
caprice; as the antagonist, not of what is transcendent and supernatural
in religion, but of a religious philosophy in which the philosophy exalts
itself against the religion, “running after” revelation to “_take somewhat
of it_,” but not inheriting its blessing.

Twenty‐three years have passed since my letter was written; and year after
year has deepened in me the convictions which it expresses, or rather
which it indicates in a fragmentary way, and possibly not with a technical
accuracy. In the church I have found an ever‐deepening peace, a freedom
ever widening, a genuine and a fruitful method for theological thought,
and a truth which brightens more and more into the perfect day. External
to her fold, it is but too probable that I should long since have drifted
into unbelief, though a reluctant and perhaps unconscious unbelief.

After some preliminary matter, referring to our earlier discussions, the
